AN ANSWER to a popish Pamphlet, of late newly forbished, and the second time
Printed, Entitled: Certain articles, or forcible reasons discovering the
palpable absurdities, and most notorious errors of the Protestants religion.

By Anthony Wotton.

Papist.

Palpauimus quasi coeci parietem, et quasi absque oculis attrectauimus,
impegimus meridie, quasi in tenebris. As blind men we have gropte the wall,
and as without eyes we have handled it, we have stumbled at noone days, as in
darkness. Isa. 59. Protestant.

If you were blind, ye should not have sin; but now ye say we see,
therefore your sin remains. John. 9. 41. Papist.

Domine aperi oculos istorum vt videant. O Lord open the eyes of these men,
that they may see. 4. Reg. 6. Protestant.

Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Acts. 7. 60. Imprinted at London by
G. Eld, for William Timme, dwelling in Paternoster row, at the sign of the
Flovver de Luce and crown, near Cheapeside. 1605.

To the Right Honorable Edward Lord Denny, Baron of Waltham.
R. Honorable:

MAy it please your good Lordship, to accept of this poor treatise, not in any
part of satisfaction for so honorable an offer of your undeserved kindness, but
as a Bill of my hand, for the acknowledgment of so great a debt; To promise
payment of such a sum, were to deceive with false hope, to imagine it may be
made by such means as this, would argue a misco^ceipt both of your Lordships
due, and my ability. All that remains is by this, or some such l^ke deed, to
profess my sensiblenes of your great favor, and my own bond, with a
continual desire of some better opportunity to show my thankfulness. Which if
it please your Lordship to take in good part, your honorable kindness, and my
debt by it shall receive such increase, as shall bind me always to the best
duty I can perform, even to call upon God for an enlargement of all his graces
and blessings on your Lordship, and all yours, to your present, and everlasting
comfort through Jesus Christ; to whose gracious protection I commend your Honor
now and ever. Tower hill. May 23. 1605.

Your Lordships in all Christian duty. Anthony Wotton.

To the Reader.
I Had dispatched my answer to these Popish Articles, with purpose to have
published it, January 9. 1600. But it pleased God to disapoynt me of that
purpose, by the unlooked for overthrow of my Honorable Lord the Earl of
Essex, since that time I have kept it by me, the rather because the Pamphlet
has been since that time sufficiently answered, by two learned men: Now at the
last the importunity of some friends has drawn from me a certain Consent, for
the Printing of it, in these 2. respects. First because it seems to them that
it may serve, as part of an answer, to diverse points lately set out against
Master Perkins reformed Catholic: til^ a more particular refutation thereof
be ready; secondly, because the Papists have of late new for bished and
reprinted these Articles, with some answers and arguments, which were not in
the former treatise, and therefore remain as yet unanswered. The book it
self, with the Author, and reasons of the publishing thereof; I committ to thy
Christian censure, beseeching God to give a blessing to it, for the maintayning
of his own holy truth, the instructing and establishing of his children, and
the conuincing and confounding of his enemies, to his divine Majesty's glory,
in Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Tower Hill. May 23. 1605.

Thine assured in Christ. Anthony Wotton.

The Coppie of a Letter, written by a Catholic to a Worshipful Protestant
Gentle man, his especial friend, concerning certain reasons, why the
Protestants religion is false and absurd.
Papists.
Loving and reloued friend, I have recei^^ed A
your courteous letter, wherein you greatly wonder, that I wondered so much in
our last discourse, that any man in England, endu^d with a good judgment,
conjoined with a religious conscience, could either accept or affect the
Protestants new coined Gospel. You request me to set B
down briefly such reasons as induced me thereunto; the which suite I could
not deny; for both religion and affection urged me to satisfy so just a
desire. For I must confess I love you as a man, and as an honest civil
Gentleman, and most gladly* I would have occasion to love you as a Catholic
Gentleman: for it is great pity, that such a multitude of detessable errors,
and heinous heresies, should lodge in so rarely qualified a soul.

I have penned them after an unaccustomed manner, following C
the fashion of Schools in most of them, after a syllogisticall Why not in all?
method: to the intent that if you should show them to your Ministers which
swarm about you, they might not have such free scope, and liberty to range
abroad with their idle discourses (as they use to take) vailing their confused
conceits with a multitude of affected phrases, thereby more easily to deceive
the simple, and to loath the learned.

Wherefore I beseech you, if any such itching spirit, shall D
attempt an answer, to entreat him to perform it briefly, orderly, and
seriously. This I request, for that I perceive, that Protestants cannot answer
with brevity; because their religion lacks both certainty, and
perspicuitie: and extreme hard, or impossible it is, to reply without
prolixitie, where there is no truth, nor verity.

And therefore I request you, as you love me, to will them to consider well,
before they answer ill; and not to reply with rashness, least they retreat
with deliberation, to their utter shame and confusion. And that you may
perceive, how my wonder rather deserved approbation, then admiration, and for
that order is a favorite of memory: I thought good to reduce all my reasons
unto two heads. Wit, and Will, Knowledge and affection, faith and good life;
because the nature of heresy has ever been such, as did not only inueagle
the wit with errors but also seduce the will, with occasions of inordinate
affections: I say then, that no excellent good wit, lincked with a religious
conscience, can either accept, or affect the Protestants new coined Gospel,
for good wits, and judgments, assisted with Gods grace, may easily perceive
the truth: yea, by the force of their very natural faculties, they may judge
credibly of the truth once proposed, and without great difficulty, discern
the absurdity of an untrue religion: virtuous and well inclined affections,
which are the bases of quiet, secure, and religious consciences, abhor, and
detest such principles, as either dishonor God, abase man's nature are occasion
of sin, favor iniquity* or in any sort diminish devotion, or piety. And
therefore all these insequent articles shall stand upon these two foundations,
to wit that the Protestants religion debarreth the wit from right
understanding the true faith, and the will from following of any virtue or
godliness.

Protestant.
THe occasion of his writing* as he professes, is the satisfying of a friends
request, for the saving of his own credit: how he has acquitted himself
herein, let all that will, first read, and then judge.

The Protestants allow no Gospel, but one only, which is no newer then the
promise of God in the old Testament: Genesis 3. 15. and 12. 3. Gal. 3. 8. Act. 11.
26.
Neither do they challenge to themselves the name of Protestants, but of
Christians. The fittest title for Heretics is Antichristians, which
notwithstanding they forbear, on the Papists behalf, because they would not
offend those, that are weak amongst them, Papists indeed they call them,
because of their dependence on the Pope. The name of Catholics, being
unjustly challenged, they justly deny: both because in the Creed the church of
Christ has that title, of which the popish church is not so much as a ^ound
member: And also because the Donatists heresy restraining the church to their
congregation in Africa, gave occasion to the church of Christ, to term
themselves* by the name of Catholic, or universal, in opposition to the
Heretics conceit.

As for the name of Protestants, it was given upon occasion Sleydan* lib. 6.
of Protestation, made by the Duke of Saxony, and other Princes and Cities of
Germany against a certain decree at Spires published by the Emperor Charles
the 5. and is not a title affected by them, or any way arising from their
doctrine; yet do they not disclaim it as Antichristian, or unlawful, because
it is not so in it self, nor likely to breed any error, or offense in the
church of God.

The manner of his penning is unaccustomed but yet such, as that reverend, and
learned Divine Doctor Fulke, a good while since required of all Papists* and
such in deed, as is most fit, for handling all controversies.

But it should seem, this writer is not much acquainted with this course; his
Syllogismes are so loosely tied, and his conclusions so far from the
question, but for the better understanding of this course, give me leave, as
briefly as I can, to teach the reader the use, and nature of a Syllogism. All
axioms, or sentences delivered for true, are either acknowledged to be so,
denied, or else doubted of. If there be doubt made of the truth, it is called
a question, therefore some reason must be brought for the clearing, and proning
of it: whereupon trial is to be made whether this proof be sufficient or no,
which is by a syllogism. Now a syllogism is a joining together of diverse
Axioms, wherein the question is so disposed with the Argument, that it is
necessarily concluded upon the Antecedent, so that if both the former Axioms
be true, the conclusion is true also. If either of them b^ false, the question
rests as yet unproven: The parts of a syllogism are two; the Antecedent, and
the Consequent; the Antecedent is the former part, that disposes the question,
and the Argument together; and it has two parts, the Proposition or Mayor,
wherein the whole question, or at least the latter part of it, is disposed with
the Argument, the Assumption, or M^^or, which is assumed, or taken out of the
Proposition. The consequent, or conclusion is the latter part, which
comprehends the parts of the question, and concludes it; A syllogism is
simple or compound. Simple, where the latter part of the question is disposed
in the proposition, the former part in the Assumption. A simple syllogism is
either contract, or explicate. A contract syllogism (so called because it is
seldom, or never, found with the parts distinctlie set down) is when the
Argument by way of example, is so joined to a particular question, that it is
the former part of the Antecedent, the Assumption being affirmative. As some
confidence is a virtue, as Constancy; some confidence is not a virtue, as
Audaciousnesse; the question is whether some confidence be a virtue or no.
First it is proved that some confidence is a virtue: The whole syllogism
stands thus.

Constancy is a virtue.
Constancy is confidence: therefore
Some confidence is a virtue.
Secondly it is proved, that some confidence is not a virtue. Audaciousnesse is
not a virtue.
Audaciousnesse is confidence: therefore
Some confidence is not a virtue.


In these syllogismes the questions are particular, some confidence: and the
Argument, by way of example, in the former, is Constancy; in the latter,
Audaciousnesse. Constancy in the one, and Audaciousnes in the other, are made
the former parts of the Antecedent; the Assumption in each is affirmative.

In an explicate syllogism the proposition is general, or proper, and the
conclusion like the Assumption, or weaker That part which is negative.
part. There are two kinds of it: the former, where the argument is always the
latter part of each Axiom, one of them being negative.

Example.
The doctrine of Justification by works does not take away boasting,

But the true* doctrine of Justification does take away boasting: therefore:

The doctrine of justification by works is not the true doctrine Romans 3. 27.
28.
of justification.

Here the matter to be proved is, that the doctrine of Justification by works,
is not the true doctrine of Justification. The Argument to prove it is, It
takes not away boasting. The Argument is in the latter part of the proposition,
and Assumption and the Proposition is negative. Therefore the syllogism is
truly formed according to this former kind.

The Latter, when the Argument is the former part of the Proposition, and the
latter part of the Assumption being affirmative.

Example.
Whosoever buildes his faith upon his private and singular exposition Art. 2.
part. 1.
of scripture, is an Infidel. But all Protestants in England build their faith
upon their own private, and singular exposition of scripture. Therefore all
Protestants in England are Infidels.

The point is, that all the Protestants in England are Infidels. The argument
to prove it, They build their faith upon their own private, and singular
exposition of scripture. The syllogism is of the second kind, because the
Argument is set in the former part of the proposition, and in the latter part
of the assumption, which is also affirmative.

A Compound Syllogism is a Syllogism, wherein the whole question is one part
of the Proposition being affirmative, and compound, and the argument the other
part. To gainesay, in a compound Syllogism, is to make a special
contradiction.

A compound Syllogism is either Connexine, or Disjunctive.

A Connexiue Syllogism is when the Proposition is Connexiue: and it is of two
kinds; whereof the former assumes the former part of the question, and denies
the latter.

Example.
If David lost his faith, then faith once had, may* be lost. Art. 6. par. 2. in
my answer.


But David lost his faith.

Therefore faith once had, may be lost.

It is affirmed that faith once had* may be lost; the proof is, David lost his
faith, the Syllogism is of the former kind, because the proposition is
Connexiue, or Condicionall, the former part thereof avouched in the as^umption,
and the latter concluded in the consequent, or conclusion.

The latter gaine-sayes the latter part of the question, that it may gainsay
the former.

Example.
If the Protestants have any faith, the world was without faith Art. 1. par. 1.
1500. years.

But the world was not without faith 1500. years.

Therefore the Protestants, have no faith.

This Papist affirms that the Protestants have no faith: to prove it he brings
this argument, that the world was not without faith 1500. years. The
Syllogism is of the later kind; because the latter part of the proposition is
gainesaid in the assumption, and the former in the conclusion.

A Disjunctive Syllogism is, when the Proposition is Disjunctive, whereof also
there are two kinds. The former gainsayes one, and concludes the rest.

Example.
All Protestants build their faith upon their own private exposition Art 2.
par. 1.
of the scripture, or upon the Churches exposition.

But they build not upon the Churches exposition.

Therefore they build upon their own private exposition.

The point is, that the Protestants build their faith upon their own private
exposition of scripture, the proof is, that they build it not upon the
Churches exposition. The Syllogism is of the former kind; because in the
proposition the one part is severed from the other, the one whereof is
gainesaid in the assumption, and the other, affirmed in the conclusion.

The Latter, when all parts of the Proposition being affirmative, one is
assumed, and the rest gainesaid.

It is hard to find examples of this latter kind, but I will frame one thus.

Example.
The Pope builds his faith either upon his own singular exposition, or upon
the Churches.

But he does build upon his own exposition.

Therefore not upon the Churches.

To prove that the Pope builds not his faith upon the Churches exposition, I
allege this argument, he builds upon his own. My Syllogism is of the second
kind* because the proposition being wholly affirmative, assumes the one, and
gainesayes the other. It was very necessary that I should deliver the Rules of
a Syllogism, because without them my course of answering cannot be thoroughly
understood. If they seem hard to any man, a little pains* and use will make
them easy, and pleasant.

His request of breuity I have satisfied, as near as I could. It is easier to
tie a knot, then to untie it, and one man has greater dexterity, in uttering
shortly that which he has conceived, then another. For my part, I had rather,
any man had answered, that can do it with shortness, then my self; rather my
self, then no body, but I hope this Papist will stand to his own ground, in
his Preface, and since he holds it hard, or impossible to reply without
prolixitie, where there is no truth, nor verity, he will acknowledge truth,
where he cannot but acknowledge shortness. His threatenings and reproaches, I
do willingly, and wittingly pass over, as the heat of an angry disputer; and
withal I protest to him, and all men, that I have answered (according to my
small skill) briefly, orderly, and seriously; not least I should seem ignorant
by silence, in saying nothing as he presumes in the end of his letter, but as I
think, and believe in my conscience; For what am I, the meanest of many, and
most unknown, not to the Papists only, but to our own Church also, that I
should fear the suspicion of ignorance, by silence, when so many famous
divines sit still, and say nothing? If he, that has answered the first part,
had thought it worth his pains, and found leisure to refute the second, I
cannot say I should have wholly saved my labor (for it is not unknown to
some, that I had finished all the 12. before his answer to the five first came
forth) but sure I should have been eased of some pains which I have taken
since, especially in writing the abridgement: and avoided all danger of further
trouble. But the Lord who has given me strength, and will to dispatch this,
will (I doubt not) assist me in the defense of his truth for ever: To whose
gracious blessing I commend the success of this, and all other my endeavors,
in Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior.

Amen.
THE FIRST ARTICLE, concerning Knowledge and Faith.
THe Protestants have no faith nor religion.

Answer.
For the better understanding of this Article, we are to know, that the
question is not, Whether the Protestants have any faith or Religion in their
hearts, but whether they make profession of any, by their doctrine.

Papist.
The Protestants have no faith, no hope, no charity, no A. Conclusion.
repentance, no justification, no Church, no Altar, no Sacrifice, no Priest, no
religion, no Christ.

The reason is: for if they have, then the world was without B. Proposition.
them for 1000. years (as they themselves must needs confess, videl. All
that time, their Church was eclipsed) or for 1500. as we will prove by the
testimony of all records of antiquity; as Histories, Councels, monuments of
ancient fathers.

Whereby it plainly appears, that the Synagogue of C. Proof of the
Assumption. Proposition
the Jews was more constant in continuance, and more ample for place, then the
Church of Christ; for they have had their synagogue visible in diverse countries
ever since Christ's death and passion even until this day.

Which is the very path to lead men into Athiesme, as D. Proof of the
Assumption.
Isai. 60. 11.
Mat. 16. 18.
Mat. 28. 20.
though Christ were as yet not come into the world whose admirable promises are
not accomplished, whose assistance has failed in preserving his Church unto
the worlds end, whose presence was absent many hundred years, before the
consummation; and consequently they open the gap to all Machiuillians, who say
that our Savior was one of the deceivers of the world, promising so much
concerning his Church, and performing so little.

Protestant.
How can it be truly said, that the Protestants have no A.
faith, no hope, no charity, no repentance, no justification, no church, no
altar, no sacrifice, no Priest, no religion, no Christ, when as they
acknowledge Jesus Christ the natural son of God, and of the blessed Virgin
Mary, to be the Redeemer of mankind, their Altar, Sacrifice, and Priest: when
as they believe in him for salvation, both of soul, and body? If he mean we
believe not these points truly, and so have them not in truth, true charity
should have persuaded him to speak plainly, and not to make no difference
between Protestants, Mahometans, and Infidels. It is, at the best, rather
hyperbolicall Rhetoric, then Logical divinity, whereof there is promise, and
show made in this treatise. To this figure belongs the heaping up of all those
particulars, no faith, no hope, etc. whereas the two points set down in the
title being proved, all the rest must needs follow; yet this shift is not the
worst: For besides this he mingles truth and falsehood together; Altar,
Sacrifice propitiatory, and Priest, except Christ himself, we profess we
have none; but what does Chafe with Wheat? save only that it serves to fill
up the measure, and make a show, not for disproofe, but disgrace of our
profession. But let us see his proof.

If the Protestants (says he) have any faith, hope, charity, repentance,
Church, Altar, Sacrifice, Priest, religion, Christ, then the world was without
them for 1000. years, or rather 1500.

But the world was not without them for 1000. or 1500. years.

Therefore the Protestants have no faith, hope, charity, etc. B.


I deny the consequence of your proposition; First because To the proposition.
the Protestants may have some faith, hope, charity, etc. Though they have not
the same that the world then had; as the Greek and Ethiopian Churches have
some faith at this day, howsoever they differ both from the Protestants and the
Papists in diverse points of Religion. Secondly, because the Protestants
profess the same faith, and Religion, which the Church of Christ always held,
till it was by little and little suppressed, and driven out of sight by
Antichrist; as it appears (that I may name only those books that are extant
in English) by Bishop Jewel, Doctor Fulke, Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Bilson,
Doctor Reynolds, the Lord Plessy, Doctor Willet, and diverse other Protestant
divines.

Our confession makes nothing for them, because if the church were eclipsed for
1000. years, it was in the world; else how could it be eclipsed? unless the
Sun and the Moon cease to be in the world, when they are in the eclipse.

The proof they offer (and yet they do but offer it) is insufficient; for it
follows not, that if these few records, we have of the East and West churches,
make no mention of the Faith and Religion we profess, then they were not at
all in the world. You will say, show us where they were held; nay prove you
they were held no where; for we now are answers not replyers: and what if it
could not be showed? yet we know by the Articles of our Creed, that there has
been always a true church, in which (say we) this Religion that we now
profess, must of necessity have been held* and with us it is no
inconvenience to have the true church hid: this it stands you upon to disprove;
which when you attempt to do, by any particular records, you shall (God
willing) have particular answers; yet we are content, for auowing the
substance of our doctrine, to stand to the records of Antiquity, in these
parts of the world, where we gladly, and thankfully acknowledge, that the truth
of God, was (for the most part) faithfully preserved, at the least, for the
first 500. years.

But the world (says he) was not without them for 1000. or 1500. years.

No, nor for 1000. minutes, nor for one minute. Therefore To the Assumption.
your proof in this point, might have bin spared, especially being no better,
then it is.

If the world (says he) was without faith for 1000, years, then Proof of the
Assumption.
was the Jews Synagogue more constant for continuance, and more ample for
largnesse, then the Church of Christ.

But the Jews Synagogue was not more constant, or ample.

Therefore the world was not with out faith etc. for 1000. years.

If your words express your meaning in good english, then in your Proposition
you compare the Church of the Jews, which was before Christ, with the church
of Christians, since christ: If your purpose be (as it should seem by your
proof it is) to make a comparison betwixt the Jews Synagogue, and the
Christian Churches, as they have been since Christ, you should have said in
steed of, was, has been.

This consequence proves nothing, because no man can To the proposition.
be sure, that there shall not be above 1500. years from hence, to the end of
the world; in which this doctrine, we now profess, shall continue: the Jews
also being converted to our Religion; or barred of the exercise of their own
superstition: and if that should come to pass, the Jewish Synagogue could have
no cause of boasting. But I will not strive about this consequence. Let us come
to the assumption.

But the Jews Synagogue (says he) has not been (namely since the coming of
Christ) more ample, or constant.

We easily grant you this assumption, confessing a perpetual To the
Assumption.
continuance of Christ's Church, from the beginning of the world to the end
thereof, and believing that the number of them which have professed the truth
of Christ's Gospel has been greater, then the multitude of the Jews, since
our saviors coming.

If the Jews Synagogue (says he) has been more constant Proofs of the
Assumption.
and ample, then Christi admirable promises are not accomplished.

I deny your consequence* for neither the Prophets, nor our savior Christ
compare this bastard Synagogue of the Jews; with the church of christ, but
that, which was indeed the church of God. For this, that now is, has neither
promise, nor allowance from God; but that church, in comparison whereof the
Lord magnifies the church of christ, after his coming, had many and excellent
promises vouchsaft it by God, which yet are much inferior to those, that were
promised, and are performed to the christian church.

If the comparison must be with the Church of the Jews before Christ, the
visible continuance of the Jewish Synagogue since Christ, is alleged by you to
no purpose. Let us take your proposition in the best sense, and answer
severally to the 3. parts of the consequence.

If the Jews Synagogue (say you) has been more ample and constant, then
Christ's admirable promises are not accomplished.

The promises of God made to the church of Christ in D
the Prophets, are either of the outward estate thereof, as that To the proof
of the Assumption.
it should be universal, for all nations not the Jews only; that it should be
maintained by Kings, Queens etc. Or of the inward, to which we must refer
the peace, the glory, and the continuance for ever. As for the perpetual
visibility, and famousnesse in the world, there is neither mention, nor
signification of any such matter in the Prophets: and namely not in this place,
unless perhaps it may be from hence concluded, that there shall be more years
from the first coming of Christ to his second, then there were in the
continuance of the Jewish Synagogue under the law: which (I think) no sober
Divine will affirm, howsoever it shall fall out in the event.

Then (says he) Christ's assistance has failed, Our Savior Mat. 16. 18. makes
no promise of the continual visibilitie of his Church, but only promises
that the Devil shall not prevail against any true member thereof, to break
of his continuance in the state of salvation, who has once with Peter, by a
true faith confessed the Lord Jesus.

Then Christ's presence (says he) was absent, many hundred years, before the
final consummation.

There is no more promised Mat. 28. 20. but that our Savior F.
will be with them, that believe, and namely with his ministers, till the end of
the world, whenever, and wheresoever they be. But we easily grant a
perpetual continuance of the church, though we deny a necessity of
visiblenesse. Therefore neither Atheists, nor Machiauillians have. G.
any advantage against the church, by our doctrine, but by the Papists rather;
who teach them to understand our saviors promises carnally, and falsely.

Article. 2. The learned Protestants are infidels.
Answer.
The title is only of the learned, and of them al; the proof of the unlearned
also, but of them only, that are in England.

Whosoever builds his faith upon his own private, and singular A.
exposition of scripture is an infidel.

But all Protestants in England build their faith upon their own private
exposition of scripture: Ergo, all the protestants of England are Infidels.

The Mayor cannot be denied; because faith must be B. C.
infallible, and impossible to be either erroneous, or chaungeable. But faith
which is builded upon private exposition of scripture, is subject to error and
change; and consequently, upon better advise and consideration, may be altered.

The Minor I prove; for either they build their faith upon D.
their own private opinion, in expounding of scripture, the exposition of the
church, the Fathers, or councels, but not upon these three, ergo upon their
own private exposition.

Some Protestants allow the fathers, and their expositions, so far forth, as
they agree with Gods word, and no further: E.
but this is nothing else, but to delude the world, for what mean they when
they say they will allow them so far ^orth as they agree with the scriptures?
mean they perhaps, that if the fathers bring scriptures to prove any point of
religion now in controversy, to allow that point as true? if so, why then
reject they August. lib. de cura agenda pro mortuis.
Saint Augustine and other fathers, who bring scripture to prove prayer for the
dead? yea and all controversies almost in religion, the fathers prove by
scriptures, when they dispute upon them.

Or perhaps they mean to admit the fathers, when they allege scripture, but
such, as every protestant shall allow of, F.
so it be conformable to their fancies, and fit their new coined Gospel: and,
in this sense, who sees not, that every paltry companion will make himself
not only the true Expositor of christ's word: but also will prefer his
exposition, before all ancient fathers, when they dance not after his pipe,
and consent not with his heresies.

Protestant.
First upon your proposition, thus I conclude A.


Whosoever builds his faith upon his own private and singular exposition of
scripture, is an Infidel

But the Pope builds his faith upon his own private, and singular exposition
of scripture.

Therefore the Pope is an Infidel.

Secondly I answer to your Syllogism.

The Mayor, (you say) cannot be denied; And I say it cannot be proved; unless
you can show, either that no private, and singular exposition of scripture can
be true, or that a man is therefore an Infidel, because he builds his faith
upon a private and singular exposition, though it be true. For, I take it, you
will not wrangle with me, because I speak generally of a private and singular
exposition. The reason of your mislike being, not that a man should take his
own exposition, but that he should ground upon any private and singular
exposition. Indeed no man is an Infidel, that builds his faith upon a true
exposition of Scripture, whether it be public, or private, because the truth
of belief, depends not upon the publicknes of an exposition, but upon the
soundness thereof.

If faith (says he) must be infallible, and impossible to be either Proof of
the proposition.
erroneous or changeable, and faith built upon private exposition be subject to
error, and change; Then he, that builds his faith upon his own private
exposition, is an Infidel.

But faith must be infallible, and impossible to be erroneous, or changeable:
And faith built upon private exposition is subject to error and change.

Therefore he, that builds his faith upon his own private exposition, is an
Infidel.

His reason may be diversely concluded, but I have taken C.
the shortest course, and yet I have set down the full force of it; which
indeed is in the later part of the Assumption ( viz.) That faith built upon
private exposition is subject to error, and change.

No faith built upon a true exposition of Scripture, though To the assumption.
never so private, is subject to error, or change. For truth is, in its nature,
unchangeable, and void of error; and we dispute now, not of the event, whereby
it may, and does come to pass, that true doctrine is changed, but of the
nature of that ^octrine, which is true. I am sure no Papist will deny, but a
true Catholic in profession, may become an heretic, yea an Apostata, as
Iul^^n did; and yet that faith of his, which he forsook, was true, and
unchangeable.

But all Protestants in England (says he) build their faith Principal
Assu^ption.
upon their own private exposition of Scripture.

Then belike not upon Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. as sometime D. To the
assumption.
you charge us: upon whom indeed we build not, but only upon the true
exposition of the Scriptures, being examined according to those places, and
points, which natural reason, enlightened by the spirit of God, cannot but
acknowledge

In which respect the Popish interpreters, do ordinarily refuse former
expositions, and deliver their own opinions, submitted to the judgment of the
Church, which no Protestant ever misliked, so they take not Antichrist for
Christ.

But what is it you call private exposition? do we leave every man to his own
fancy, in expounding the scriptures? How can that be, when as we have certain
rules, according unto which all expositions must be framed. The Analogy of
faith, conference of like places, examining the originals, with diverse other,
and namely, the consent of former divines; to which though we may not tie our
selves, because they might, and have erred: yet we allow no man liberty to
refuse their interpretations, but only where evident reason, taken from the
Scriptures themselves, necessarily requires it. Indeed we think it
unreasonable, that a man should, hand over head, receive whatsoever is
delivered unto him, upon the credit of 1. Ioa. 4. 1.
men; especially since we have a charge given us, to try the spirits, and
means appointed us, for the trial.

Not only some, but all learned Protestants; for ought I E.
know, or (I think) he can prove, allow the Fathers, and their expositions,
so far forth, as they agree with Gods word. And do any Papists allow them
further? If they do, they allow false expositions of Scripture. For such are
all, that agree not with the word of God.

But how can we be said to delude the world, when we profess that we allow
them no farther, then they agree with Gods word, and mean as we profess? yet
it is not our meaning to allow every point, that some of the Fathers endeavor
to prove by Scripture. Neither will any Papist, that knows the writings of
the Fathers, give them such allowance. Nay it is ordinary with them in their
controversies, to acknowledge, that diverse texts brought by the Fathers in
maine points of religion, are not rightly alleged. Look what they prove by
scriptures, that we gladly receive, not because they say it, but because the
truth of God approves it.

But then, we make our selves judges of the Fathers writings. If we do, there
is more reason that every man should be made a judge of a man's writing, then
any man of Gods. But we do not; for we desire not to have any interpretation of
Scripture allowed of, contrary to the exposition of the Fathers; but (as I said
before) where evident reason taken from the Scriptures themselves does
necessarily require it: As for our private exposition, it is nothing else but a
persuasion, that every man must have of the interpretation delivered, according
to the course of Scriptures generally, and particularly to the context of the
place expounded. Which to deny Christians, is to bring them into slavery, not
obedience, to deprive them of the spirit of God, yea more, to spoil them of
all use of reason, by which enlightened by the holy Ghost, the truth of God may
be, and is to be discerned.

Art. 3. All Protestants, who are ignorant of the Greek, and Latin tongues,
are Infidels.
Here is Latin put for Hebrew, either by the Printers fault, or the Authors
craft; who perhaps, by this slight* would bring their vulgar Latin
translation into credit, and thereby iustle out the original Hebrew; but we
will lay the blame upon the Printer, and so let it pass.

Papist.
Whosoever relyeth his faith upon the Ministers credit, and A. B.
fidelity, has no faith at all.

But all those in England, who are ignorant of the Greek, and Hebrew tongues,
rely their faith upon the Ministers credit. Ergo, All those in England, who
are ignorant of the Greek, and Hebrew tongues, have no faith at all.

The Mayor is manifest: because they themselves confess C. Calu. lib. 4.
instit. cap. 9. 3. Luther. lib. de council. page 54. and lib de council. par. 1.
q. D. b Wherein he desires the lords of the Council, to procure speedily a
new translation, because that, which now is in use in England is full of
errors. E c ^n the conference at Hamp^o^ Court.
that every man may err, and does err; neither have they any warrant why the
Ministers do not err, since they constantly do defend, that whole general
Councills, yea and the universal Catholic church may err, and has erred.

The Minor I prove: for all such Protestants ground their faith upon the Bible
translated into English; the which translation they know not whether it be true
or false: whether the Minister Tindall for example erred or no, either upon
ignorance, as ( b) Broughton one of the greatest Linguists among the Precisions
affirms, in an Epistle dedicated to the Lords of the Council, or upon malice;
to induce the people to Protestancy, and to cause them to leave the Catholic
religion: as Gregory Martin, in his discovery, most pregnantly proves.

( c) And for that all the old translations are false, and the Geneuians the
worst, the Ministers are now in moulding a new one; the which will have as
great immunitie from falsitie, as the former were void of verity, that is,
both be subject to semblable uncertainty.

These errors, I say they know not and consequently cannot discern a true
translation from a false: and therefore must needs rely their faith upon the
silly Ministers faithless fidelity; which conuinceth, that they have no
faith at all.

Protestants.
I^ there be any force in this reason, it overthrows Papists, A.
as well as Protestants: because the very same thing may be concluded of them;
in this sort:

Whosoever builds his faith upon a man's credit and fidelity, has no faith at
all.

But every Papist builds his faith upon a man's credit:

Therefore no Papist has faith.

The difference between my Proposition, and his, stands only in one word; He
disables the Minister in particular: I every man generally, and perticularly;
but I keep his sense whole, and entire. For the reason, that he gives in the
proof of his Mayor, does show, that therefore ministers are not to be
credited, because being men they may err. And indeed whatsoever imperfection
is in any Minister, he has it, not as he is a minister, but as he is a man;
and therefore if his proposition be true mine is,

The assumption needs no other proof but that, first Fathers, Councils, and
Church are men, without any special privilege of not erring, 2. that at the
least, the particular teachers, which tell the Papists that such, and such
Councills have allowed these books for scripture, are men that may err; 3.
And indeed what ground has any learned Papist, that there have been such
Councils, but the authority of men? 4. Whereupon can any unlearned Papist rely
for the interpretation of the decrees of the Councils, being written in Greek
or Latin (as all are) but the credit of men? 5. Nay more then that, who can
tell what the signification of the Hebrew, and Greek words is, even in the
Bible, but by the report of men? So that it may more truly be said of the
Papists, then of the Protestants, that they build their faith upon the credit
of men: yea the Papists do properly, and wholly rely upon men, viz. the Pope,
and his Priests; because they believe, not by their ministry, as Christians,
but by their authority, like Pythagoreans. B.


But shortly to make an answer to his reason, if by relying upon the
ministers credit he mean that they have no To the Assumption.
ground to build upon, but that, I deny his Assumption. For the unlearned
Protestant rests upon the witness of Gods spirit, which persuades him of the
general truth contained in the translation, and directs him to, and in the
trial of particulars. If to the credit of the minister, he add the witness To
the Proposition.
of the spirit, I say the Proposition is false, for he has true faith, that
relies on the Credit of the minister being directed by the spirit of God, so to
do; If this seem strange to any papist, let him remember, that popish faith
requires no less revelation, then the belief of Protestants; for, according
to their doctrine, no man is persuaded of the truth of the scripture, either
for the text, or the interpretation, but by the especial grace of the spirit,
using (as they say) the argument of the Churches authority, to beget faith in
the heart: only we say, the spirit uses not the authority, but the ministry of
the Church, to persuade withal. They affirm that men believe, because of the
Churches authority, the spirit directing and inclining them, to rest thereupon.
Our opinion is that the credit of the minister relies on his doctrine: They
teach that the credit of the doctrine arises from the minister. And yet they
cannot, but confess that every minister, and all (except the Pope) may err,
in matters of greatest substance.

We confess in deed that men may err both in possibility, C.
and event. But that the whole catholic Church may err, no Protestant ever
taught, or thought. For we profess, that the holy men departed are triumphant
members of the catholic church, who are exempted from all danger of being
deceived: That part of the catholic church, which is militant* may, and does
err, but never wholly in matters of substance; for then we know, it might come
to pass, that, at some time, there should be no church at all upon the earth,
whence a present dissolutio^ of the world should follow, since D.
it is continued for the elect, and, churches sake. The Protestants, you say,
ground their faith upon the Bible translated into English. And the Papists say
I build theirs upon the bible translated into latin, or simply upon the word
of him. that preaches unto them. They are bound upon pain of damnation, to
believe, that the Pope is Christ's vicar, and cannot err; But how shall I know,
that the Pope teaches this doctrine? upon what ground is this belief built?
upon the credit of him, that tells them so? But it is scripture: how shall I
know that? He, that tells me so, may be deceived, But the Pope cannot: First
you beg the question; for you have not proved that the pope cannot err:
The^, how shall I know that the Pope teaches this doctrine? Alas, I am a poor
ignorant man, and understand not either Latin, or Italian, in which the Popes
judgment is set down. But, put case I did, what proof can I have, that the
Pope delivered this for his judgment? How can I be s^^e he was rightly chosen?
I might add a number of these doubts, of none whereof you can resolve me, but
only by urging me to rest upon the authority of men. Now then, let any man
weigh the^e things in the balance of reason, and try* whether is lighter*
Protestants cannot tell whether Master Tindals translation of the Scripture
be true, or no, neither can they discern a true translation, from a fa^se,
and therefore must needs rely their faith upon the silly Ministers, faithless
fidelity, which conuinceth, that they have no faith at all. Papist; cannot
tell whether the Latin translation of the scr^pture be true or no, neither can
they discern a true translation from a false, and therefore they must need;
build their faith upon a silly Priests, or Friars faithless fidelity, which
con^inceth, that they have no faith at all. H^therto are all things equal
betwixt us. Now consider some differences. First we profess that Master
T^^dall might, and did err, and therefore we labor every day to amend our
translations. They acknowledge theirs to be faulty, but they accurse them to
the pit o^ Hell, that will not, for all that rest upon it. Secondly we submit
our translations* to be examined by any learned Papists, according to the
Hebrew, and Greek They prefer theirs before the Hebrewe, and Greek.
Thirdly, we bind no man's conscience to agree to our translation, upon pain of
damnation, because it asks yet some better correction. They tie all men to
take every title of theirs for the certain word of God, and yet daily they
alter it. As it appears by the diverse editions of Sixtus, 5. and Clemens. 8.
two Popes, neither of which could err, and yet either disagrees from the
other. But for the further avowing of our english translation, I desire all men
to observe these few points.

First that these parts of scripture, which are worst translated, as the
Psalms, are most agreeable to the popish Latin.

Secondly that our best translation comes a great deal nearer to the
interpretation of the learned Papists, a* Vatablus, Pagninus, Isidorus Clarius,
and Arias Montan^s, then the popish Latin does.

Thirdly that, in all this variety of translations, no one point of Doctrine,
is overthrown, by any new exposition.

Fourthly that no papist is able to find, in any of our translations, so many
errors, from the sense of the Holy Ghost, as Isidorus, Clarius, a learned
Papist, has amended All these 8000. faults remain still in their vulgar
translation.
in their popish Latin. viz. to the number of 8000, places, every one of which
as he professes changes the meaning of the text.

Lastly I offer our worst translation, to be compared with the Rhemists, and
affirm, that, in any reasonable man's judgment, it will appear, that we have
dealt more faithfully, and plainly then they; who seem to have bin afraid of
nothing more, then that the text of Scripture should be easily understood,
Master Broughtons skill in the Tongues, he that commends not either knows
not, or enuies. His misl^ke of Master Tindalls translation I will condemn when
I see it disproued. As for Gregory Martine, Doctor Fulke long since stopped up
the mouth of his slanders, that none of all you Papists hitherto could open it
again.

E. It passes my small skill in Logic to see how this new addicion is
applied to prove the old Article. For it agreeeth not, either with the Mayor or
Minor of his Syllogism. For that all the old translations are false, the
Ministers are are now in moulding a new. Therefore whosoever relyeth his faith
on the silly Ministers faithless fidility is an Infidel. Therefore all those
in England, who are ignorant, of the Greek, and Hebrew, are Infidells.

That clause of the Geneua translation savors of malice more then reason; for
though that translation, were the best by many degrees (as it may be, for ought
that was said at the conference, where the notes, not the text were condemned)
yet might the Ministers have just occasion to amend them all. He, that so
peremptorily condemns the labors of many grave, and learned Divines, before
he see them, shows more obstinate prejudice, then either judgment, or
conscience.

But who will help me to understand this strange sentence? The translation in
hand will have as great immunitie from falsitie, as the former were void of
verity, that is, If I shall make reason of it; as much as the former were
void of verity, so great immunitie will this have from falsitie. This
exposition will admit no conclusion but to the Authors great disgrace. For if I
assume thus, But the former were wholly void of verity; then must the
conclusion be, Therefore this translation will be altogether free from
falsitie. If otherwise; But the former were not void of verity; Then indeed I
may conclude, Therefore this will not be free from falsitie. But here the
Assumption makes as much against him, as the conclusion does for him.

The comparison of equality being so little to his purpose, who can make the
exposition of it serve his turn, that both shall be subject to like uncertainty?
Indeed, who can make reason of the sentence?

Art. 4. The Protestants know not what they believe.
Answer.
Glosta in extrau. 102, 22. de verborum signif. c. quum inter non^ullos.
Such Papists, as you are, care not what they say, so it be Ad bonum Ecclesiae,
for the behoof of your Lord God the Pope.

Papist.
The Protestants know not what they believe, nor why A.
they believe. That they know not why they believe, I have showed before: for
the ground of their belief is not the authority of Scripture, of Councills,
of Doctors, nor of the Church: but their own fancy. And that they know B.
Proof of the article. 1.
not what they believe is manifest; because they have no rule, whereby to know
what is matter of faith, and what is not.

Some say the sphere of their faith is extended solely, and C. 2.
wholly to the word of God, set down in holy writ: what there is delivered,
that they believe, what there is concealed, lies without the circumference of
their belief. Alas poor ignorance! what heretic believes not so much?
Certainly few or none; so that, by this means, all damned heretics, which
believe the Scriptures, believe alike: and they believe as much, as our
Protestants and ours, no more then they: But the Protestant will reply, that
he believes the Scripture, in a true sense, truly expounded; and all other
heretics in an erroneous sense, and falsely interpreted. And they will say as
much of their religion, and belief, and hold your exposition heretical, and
theirs orthodoxall. Again, are you not bound to believe the Canticles or Song
of Solomon, as a part of your faith? and where find you in the scripture;
delivered, that such a book is Gods word, and as such an one ought by faith to
be believed. That Sunday should be kept holy day, and Saturday the Jews
Sabbath profaned, in Gods word is not revealed; and yet by Protestants
believed. Moreover, to believe whatsoever is contained in the Scripture, is a
general, confused, folded, implicit says: when we demand what a man is bound
to believe, we ask what he is obliged to believe expressly, distinctly,
explicitly. To believe all the Scripture distinctly, and explicitly, cannot be
performed by all Protestants, since it supposes a perfect and distinct
knowledge of all the scripture, whereunto, never mortal man attained, the
Apostles (perhaps) excepted.

Some will limit their belief to their creed, saying that nothing D.
ought to be believed, which is not in the Apostles creed. But then I would
demand of them, whether we ought to believe that the Scripture is the word of
God? That Baptism is a Sacrament? That in the Eucharist is the body of Christ
by faith? to what article should these be reduced, seeing they are not
contained in the creed? or how shall we know infalliblie, how these be matters
of faith, since they are not contained in the creed.

Others deny some articles of their creed also, for the Protestants E.
deny three, and the Puritans five.

1. The first is, the Catholic Church. Credo ecclesiam sancta^ 1. F.
Catholicam I believe the holy catholic church; the which in very deed they do
not believe; because catholic is universal, and so the church of Christ,
which we are bound to believe, must be universal for all ( a) time,
comprehending all Mat. 16. Psalm. 60. Psalm. 2.
ages ( b) and universal for place, comprehending all Nations: but that
church, which the Protestants believe, was interrupted all the ages betwixt the
Apostles and Luther, which was 1400. years: or in very deed was never seen
before Luthers days: therefore that church they believe, cannot be catholic.
Neither is it universal in place, being contained within the narrow bounds of
England, which is accounted but as a corner of the world; for the Lutherans in
Germany, the Hugenots in France, and the Gui^es in Flaunders, d^est their
religion almost as much, as the catholics; neither ^ill they join issue with
them in diverse essential points. And therefore the Protestants church, which
they believe, can no more be called catholic, or universal, then England the
universal world, or Kent the kingdom of England, or a pr^^ed bow a whole
tree, or a dead finger a man, or a rotten tooth the whole head. 2. ^.


2. The second article is the communion of Saints, the which they many ways
deny. First by not believing that Christ has instituted seven sacraments;
wherein the Saints of his church communicate; and specially the true and real
presence of our savior Christ in the Eucharist; by which all the faithful
receauers, participating of one and the self same body, 1. Cor. 10. 17.
are made one body: as all the parts of a man's body are made one living thing
by participating of one soul.

Secondly they deny the communion of the Church militant H. Ge^. ^8. 16. Apoc.
1. 14
and triumphant, by exclayming ( a) against invocation of Saints: by which holy
exercise those blessed Saints in heaven, and we in earth communicate, we by
prayer glorifying them, and they by mediation obtaining our requests.

Thirdly they deny the Communion of the church militant I. 1. Cor. 3. 15. and
15. ^9
and the souls () in purgatory; bereauing them of that christian charity,
which charitable compassion, and merciful pity requires; and by mutual
affection, the members of one body help one another.

The third Article is remission of sins, for they acknowledge 3. K.
no such effect in the Sacrament of Baptism: but only account it as an
external sign or seal, of a prereceaued grace, or favor of God by his
eternal predestination: against the express word of God: which therefore
calls this sacrament the ( c) Lauer of regeneration, for that in it the Tit.
3.
soul, dead by sin, is newly regenerated, by grace. L. John. 20


Moreover they allow not the sacrament of penance, wherein al actual ( d)
sins committed after Baptism are cancelled. And that, which exceeds all in
absurdity, is to deny, that our sins are perfectly forgiven, but only not
imputed, and as it were vayled, or covered with the passion of Christ: all the
botches, and biles, the silth and abomination of sin still remaining, and as
it were exhaling a most pestiferous sent, in the sight of God. For let them
shift ^^emselues, as they list, and skarfe their soars, according to their
fancies, yet no veil, or mantle can cover the deformity of sin, from the eyes
of Gods perfect understanding, from which nothing can be concealed.

The Puritans, in effect deny, that Christ is the son of 4. m. Ioh. 8. v. 24.
Ioh. 16. v. 13. And D. Bucley co^tendeth to prove it in h^s answer to this
article, albeit he understand not the reason here alleged, for if he did, he
were too absurd to deni^ it. If you understood his answer, you would never
say so for shame.
God: for they peremptorily affirm, that Christ is God of himself and not God
of God. So that he received not his divinity from his father, the which
position flatly takes away the nature of a son: for the nature of a son
is, to receive his substance of his father; and it implies contradiction, that
the son receaueth his person of his father, and not his substance, and
essence: for the substance of God is essential to every person in Trinity.

5. N.
Finally they deny the Descension of Christ into Hell, and desperately defend,
that he suffered the pains of Hell, upon the cross; whereby they blaspheme
most horribly that sacred humanity; as if christ had despaired of his
salvation; as if God had hated him, and he hated God: as if he had bin
afflicted, and tormented with anguish of mind for his offenses, for which he
was deprived of the sight of God, and eternally to be deprived: all which
horrible punishments a^^ included in the pains of hell: Isai. 66. v. 24. Mar.
9. 48. Mat. 25. v. 41.
and whosoever ascribes them to Christ, blasphemeth more horribly, then
Arrius, who denied him to be God: for less absurdity it were, to deny him to
be God, then to make God the enemy of God.

Protestant.
How you have proved, that the ground of our belief is A.
not the authority of the scripture, of Councills, of Doctors, or of the
Church, let them judge that have weighed your accusation against my defense.
And yet for the last three, we never meant to strive. For we build our faith
upon no authoririty, but that of the scripture. Councills, and Doctors we
reverence, and use, as special helps for the understanding of scripture, but
authority over our faith we give to none, but the holy Ghost* the author of
scripture.

Your reason to prove we know not what we believe, is this. B.


They, that have no rule, to know what is matter of faith, and what is not,
know not what they believe.

But the Protestants have no rule, whereby to know what is matter of faith, and
what is not.

Ergo the Protestants know not what they believe.

He may truly be said, not to know what he believes, that To the Proposition.
either is ignorant of the particular points, he holds, or at least
understands them not: such as all unlearned Papists are, by their fides
implicitae, their Colliers faith, which teaches them to believe as the Church
does, but never instructs them, either in all the several matters of belief,
or in the understanding of those, which they know the Church maintains. And
therefore every unlearned Papist believes he knows not what. But there is no
reason, why a man should be said not to know what he believes: because he has
no rule to know what is matter of faith; it may come to pass hereby, that he
shall believe something, that is not to be believed, or not believe something,
that is to be believed, but that he should not know what he believes, by this
reason it cannot be proved.

But the Protestants have no rule, to know what is matter of faith.

No more then Lawyers have, to know what is Law; I To the assumption.
marvel to what use these men think the Scriptures serve? David made
account, that the Scriptures, which the Church then had; were a perfect
direction to al men, both for belief and practice. And can we now want a rule,
when it has pleased God to add twice so much unto the Scriptures, as then was
written? Assuredly they that have the Scriptures, cannot want a Rule to know
what is matter of faith, though by abusing the Rule, they may take that for
matter of faith, which is not. C.


They, that extend the sphere of their faith solely, and wholly to the word of
God, set down in holy writ, have no rule, to know what is matter of faith, and
what is not.

But some Protestants extend the sphere of their faith solely, and wholly to
the word of God set down, etc.

Therefore the Protestants have no rule to know, etc.

Either your syllogism is false, if the conclusion be general, or else it
concludes only thus much, that some Protestants, have no rule, to know what is
matter of faith and what is not. If you will make your Assumption general, it
is false, because you confess afterward, that some Protestants limit their
faith by the Creed, as being a diverse rule, from the scripture.

I deny your Proposition, as injurious to the scripture, by laying upon it, an
imputation of insufficiency, concerning matters of faith.

They, that extend the sphere of their faith (say you) no further then all
damned Heretics that believe the scripture, have no rule, to know what is
matter of faith.

But they, that extend their faith solely and wholly to the word of God, extend
it no further, then all damned Heretics, that believe the scripture.

Therefore they, that extend their faith solely, and wholly to the word of God
set down in holy writ, have no rule, to know what is matter of faith.

The proposition is false: for all such Heretics have the true rule, to know
what is matter of faith, though ignorantly, or maliciously they abuse it, to
the defense of heresy.

But some Protestants extend their faith, solely and wholly to the word of God
set down in holy writ. Not only some, but all Protestants acknowledge the
sufficiency of the scripture, in matter of faith, holding themselves not bound
to believe any point of religion, that cannot be warranted out of the
Scripture, either expressly, or by necessary consequence.

They, that have no rule (say you) to know, that the song of Solomon is Gods
word, and that as such an one it ought to be believed by faith, have no rule to
know, what is matter of faith, and what is not.

But they that extend their faith solely, and wholly to the word of God set
down in holy writ, have no rule to know that the song of Solomon is Gods word.

Therefore they, that extend their faith, solely and wholly to the word of
God, have no rule to know what is matter of Faith.

This Proposition may prove, that they have not a sufficient rule, but not,
that they have no rule.

I deny your assumption: For they, that rest only upon the scripture, as the
ground of faith, are not barred of the testimony of the spirit, in matters that
must needs be held, for the warranting of the scriptures.*

The first motive to the taking of that book, for the word of God, is the
constant judgment of the Jewish church, before Christ, and the general
approbation thereof, by the christian church since.

The certain persuasion of this belief comes, from the s^irit of God,
seconding this outward testimony of men, by his own witness in our hearts.

If this seem an inconvenience to any man, I entreat him to consider, what
rule the Papists have, in this case. The authority of the Church they will say.

But what rule have I to know, whether it be a matter of faith, or not, to
believe that whatsoever the church says, is a matter of faith, is so indeed?
Will you appeal to the scripture? what rule have you to know that this is
scripture? The voice of the church: What is this, but to trifle? I must believe
that the scripture is scripture, because the church tells me so. I must believe
that the report of the church is true, because the scripture says so: But for
your better satisfaction in this point, I refer you to my answer, in the 2.
and 5. articles of this former part.

I cannot well conceive, to what purpose, this last clause is added; if to
prove the Article, That the Protestants know not what they believe, it is
insufficient: They that know not what they are bound to believe, expressly,
distinctly, explicitly, know not what they believe. For no more is proved by
this reason, But that they know not every particular; which they are bound to
believe. And if this be a disgrace to Protestants, and their profession, how
shall Papists and popery escape without reproach; when as there is no rule
among the^, to teach what they ought to believe, expressly, distinctly, etc. And
as all Protestants cannot believe all the Scripture, distinctly, explicitly;
no more can all Papists so believe, what the Church delivers, to be believed:
and therefore was their fides implicita devised. Neither is it proved, that the
Protestants have no rule to know what is matter of faith, what is not; because
they know not expressly, distinctly, explicitly, what they are bound to
believe. For a man may have a rule, though he know not how to use it; as it
also falls out (ordinarily) with unlearned Papists, in the rule, that they
follow, to this same purpose.

If the Creed (say you) be not the limit of belief, the Protestants have no
rule, to know what is matter of faith.

I think the Protestant is yet unborn, that makes the D.
Creed the rule of his belief, further then to acknowledge, that whatsoever
is contained in the Creed, is of necessity to be believed: which I trow no
Papist will deny. But if it were granted, that all Protestants do so; yet it
were not proved, that the Protestants have no rule, whereby to know what is
matter of faith, but that they have an imperfect rule. To be short, who knows
not, that the Protestants make the whole Scriptures, the rule of their belief,
holding themselves bound in conscience to acknowledge, all things contained
therein, to be the most true word of God; and that, out of the Scriptures,
there is nothing necessarily to be believed for salvation. Whereas the Papists
disable the written word of God, to establish the fancies of mortal men:
joining the unwritten traditions of, I know not whom, in equal authority,
with the written word of the Almighty God.

But the Creed (say you) is not the limit of faith.

That the Creed is no perfect rule of our belief, we are so far from
denying, that we make this reason one of the grounds, whereupon we build our
persuasion, that, because of the imperfectness thereof, it was not penned by
the Apostles: whereas if it had been, it would have been perfect, and
Canonical Scripture, such as yet, it never was acknowledged to be; Howsoever
we willingly grant, that there is nothing in it, but sound, and agreeable to
the word of God in the Scripture. So much the more wrong has this slanderer
done us, to charge any of us with the denial, of any one Article thereof:
especially since no heretics were ever charged with the denial of Scripture,
because they ^isinterpreted it. And yet by this Authors judgment, the Creed is
not so bare, as here he would feign make it. For, in the second part of this
Article, he teaches us, that by believing the communion of Saints, we believe,
first That there are seven Sacraments: Secondly, that Christ is bodily
present, in the Eucharist: Thirdly, that we must pray to the Saints: Fourthly,
that we must pray for the souls in Purgatory. In the fourth he tells us, that
by believing the Article of remission of sins, we believe, that Baptism
takes away the being of sin.

They that deny some Articles of their Creed (say you) have E.
no rule to know, what is matter of faith.

They that deny all the Articles of their Creed, have indeed no rule (supposing
that there is no other rule but the Creed) but so much of the Creed, as they
deny not, they have still for a rule, to know what is matter of faith.

But the Protestants (say you) deny three Articles of their Creed, and the
Puritants five.

He, that makes difference between the Protestants, and Look in my answer to
the next Article.
Puritans, in matters of faith, does it either ignorantly, or maliciously, But
to the several points.

They that believe (say you) that to be the Catholic F.
Church, which was interrupted 1400. years, and is contained within the narrow
bounds of England, deny the Catholic Church.

The Article ( I believe the holy Catholic Church) does not teach us, how to
know which is the true Church; but enioynes us to believe, that there is a
Catholic church; which we gladly acknowledge, ( viz.) that there always has
been, is, and shall be, a holy church of Christ, which, since his breaking
down of the partition wall, is no longer tied (...) place, Jerusalem, Rome
etc. but is spread (...) the face of the whole earth. Neither can you (...)
think, that the catholicknesse of the Church requir^^ continual being in all
places at once; for then there (...) as any catholic church in the world, nor
I suppose (...). At the least, have you forgotten that (according (...) our
own doctrine) the church shall be hidden in the (...) all the time of
Antichrists tyranny? Then this will be (...) ^incible argument against the
church, It is not universal (...) ^lace, therefore it is not the Holy
Catholic Church: (...) the force of your reason is very feeble in the first
(...) it, wherein the strength of it consists.

But admit we (...) deceived, in taking that church to be universal for time
and place, which is not universal; yet, as long as we confe^, (...) there is
such a Church, we cannot be justly charged, to (...) that article of our Creed.

But the Protestant (...) you) believe that to be the Catholic Church, which
was (...) 1400. years. Therefore they deny the article of bele^^^ (...)
Catholic Church.

But they do not (...) ^peares, by the answer to the first Article; besides,
^^^ Protestants do not hold, that the church in England is (...) ^atholick
church: but only, that it is a part of the (...) church: which reaches to all
times and places. And (...) word as I said in the first article, we deny not to
the (...), the necessity of catholicknes, but of visiblenes. (...) our church
is not so narrow, as you would bear the (...) in hand; as the Harmony of
Confessions will prove to (...) man, that will but vouchsafe to read it. For
howsoever, (...) some churches of Germany and us, there be some (...) in
matters of importance; yet neither are they such (...) ^rectly overthrow the
foundation; And both the French (...) Flemish churches agree with ^s, in all
substantial points (...) doctrine.

They, that believe not ((...)) that Christ has instituted* G.
seven sacraments, do some (...) the communion of saints,

When it is proved, that there were (...) instituted by Christ, I will grant
this propo^ (...) then, any man may make as good a reason, of (...), 700. or
7000.

By true, and real presence, which no Protestant ever denied, you mean the
bodily, and carnal presence, which (besides the Papists) no man ever confessed.
Therefore to this Argument the former answer suffices, and so to both the
other: But for the further confirmation of this bodily presence, because it is
the Papists darling, there is some show of proof added: Being many we are one
bread, and body all, that participate 1. Cor. ^^. 17.
of one body, as themselves in the Rhemish Testament translate the text; by
which he would persuade the simple that they, that believe not the bodily
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, deny that the faithful are one body. But
first it is to be observed that the Apostle does not say, They are made one
body by participating, but That they which participate, are one body, Secondly
we must understand, that the faithful are not one body Carnally, but
Spiritually; To the which it is sufficient, that Christ be Spiritually
received; and therefore the Apostle calls it Bread.

Thirdly who knows not, that all that can receive, any benefit by the
Sacrament of our Savior Christ's body, and blood, are before members of his
mystical body? Else all they, that dye before they receive that Sacrament, are
out of Christ's body, and so incapable of salvation. And if this be an effect of
that Sacrament, since it is of it self, always alike effectual, it must
needs be, that every time we receive it, we are made one body with Christ: yea
although we have not committed any deadly sin, since the last receiving of
it. But this is absurd, that he, that is the member of Christ already, should
now, by receiving, become the member of Christ.

Indeed he may be confirmed, and strengthened for his better continuance in
Christ's body, which grace all that worthily receive the sacrament, obtain of
God, every one in their measure: but it is impossible that he should every time
of receiving, be made a member of Christ's spiritual body, being already one,
when he comes to receive.

They (say you) that deny the Church militant and triumphant, H.
by exclaiming against invocation of Saints, and prayers for the souls in
purgatory, deny the article of believing the communion of saints:

But the Protestants deny the Communion of the Church militant, and triumphant,
by exclaiming against invocation of saints and prayers for the souls in
purgatory.

Ergo, they deny the communion of saints.

If the communion of saints, believed in the Creed, belong to the catholic
Church, in the same Creed, How can it implie any fellowship with those, that
are departed, whether they be in heaven or in purgatory? For by the catholic
Church our papists understand not the church triumphant, but militant only; for
they hold, that the catholic church, mentioned in the Creed, must always be
visible and famous. And what an unworthy wrong is it to Christ, and his saints
in Heaven, for any man to imagine, that the Reprobate in earth, of whom there
is no small store, in the outward congregations, do communicate with the elect
departed in the privileges, which Christ has purchased, by his precious
blood, for his own members? But the best is, malice it self, dare not charge
us with simple denying all communion betwixt the Saints in Heaven, and them in
earth, but only with the denial of it, in some few points. One whereof, viz.
Invocation of saints, this papist would prove by scripture. The Genesis 48. 16.
Apoc. 1. 4.
Aagell, that delivered me from all evils, bless these children. Grace, and
peace from him, that is, was, and that is to come, and from the seven spirits,
which are in the sight of his throne. Jacob and John pray that we may be
protected, and blessed of God by the ministry of the Angels; therefore the
communion of Saints signifies, that the Saints in Heaven pray for us, and we
must pray to them.

Need I to write one word in answer to this reason? but I am desirous that all
men should see the weakness of this proof. First it is doubted by very good
writers, ancient, and latter, whether Jacob mean Christ, or some special
Angel: whether the seven spirits signify the holy Ghost or the armies of
Angels.

Secondly no Papist, that ever I read, confounds Angels with Saints, or
interprets the communion of saints, by the ministry of Angels.

Thirdly these consequences are feeble, first, The Angels are ministering
spirits. Therefore the saints departed pray for us. secondly, The Angels
protect us, and are ministers of Grace, and peace from God to us: therefore by
mediation they obtain our requests, Thirdly what strength is there in this
conclusion. The Angels pray for us; Therefore we are bound to glorify the^, by
praying to them; that is to dis^onour God; by honoring them. For I demand,
whether we may, at any time, pray to God without their mediation, or not? If we
may not, then the Lords prayer is taught us in vain, because that cannot
belong to any Angel, or saint. If we may; I ask why not at one time, as well as
at another? Why not in one matter, as well as in an other? Urge not your carnal
comparison betwixt God, and earthly Princes; for both it is as forcible for one
time, and matter, as another, and thereby you rob God of the glory, and thanks
he should receive of us, for the granting of our requests; and us of the
comfort, we might have, by the feeling persuasion of Gods love, in hearing our
prayers, and satisfiing our desires.

If the Prince receive my petition at my own hands, and yield unto it, I have
reason to persuade my self of his love to me, and to give all thanks to him
for his princely bounty: If any, besides my self, commend my suite to him, and
it be obtained, I am perhaps never a whit beholding to him; because, it may be,
he knows not me, nor cares what I am; but only does some favorite of his own
that kindness. Now let any reasonable man judge, whether all the poor
recompense, I can make, all the thankfulness, I can show, be not due to the
party, by whose graciousnesse with the Prince, I attained to that, I sought
for; so that if I content him, in some measure, though I never honor: nor love
the Prince, one jot the more: yet I do as much, as justly can be required of
me. Yea, if I would enforce my self to be thankful to the Prince, both he
might disdain my presumption, and he, that preferred my suite, be offended,
with my unthankfulness, that would not give him all the thanks, that procured
all the favor.

They (say you) that deny the communion of the church militant, and the souls
in purgatory, deny the communion of saints, some way.

Then belike there be saints in purgatory, and the members of the Church
militant are Saints. But why say you nothing of the saints in heaven? Is there
no communion betwixt the^ and those in purgatory? yet are they al members of
one body: and I pray you what communion is there betwixt these three kinds of
Saints? What do the saints in purgatory in requital of the triumphant, and
militant Saints kindness? What nothing at all? Why then, what necessity is
there to enforce any such duty on our parts toward the Saints in Heaven? We,
as you say, do not only pray, but offer up a bodily, and spiritual sacrifice,
for them in purgatory, to God: what reason is there then, they should not pray
to us as well as we pray to the Saints triumphant, who do but half so much
for us, and the less half too?

As for the places in the Margin, no blast, be it never so great, can kindle
the fire of purgatory, by any heat, that 1. Cor. 3. 13. 15.
will arise from them; the former is concerning the trial of doctrine, by the
fire of Gods word; Some men's works shall burn, therefore there are some in
purgatory burning. Some, What? works, says the Apostle, not men. If any man's
work ver. 15.
burn, he shall loose his labor, but himself shall be saved, yet as it were
by fire. Therefore there are some Saints burning in the fire of purgatory; but
that neither all men's works are spoken of, nor any assay is to be made by
purging fire, nor these places meant of purgatory, it may appear by these
reasons.

1. There are not any two places, in all the new testament, of any one point,
so full of controversy for interpretation as these.

Therefore are they unfit, and insufficient to prove so doubtful a matter, as
this of purgatory.

2. Besides the former of them is wholly Allegorical, Theologia symbolic a non
est argum entatiua.
Foundation, Maister-builder, Gould, silver, Wood, Hay, Straw; and therefore by
the rules of disputation in divinity, altogether unmeet for proof of
doctrine, in matters of controversy.

3. The fire of Purgatory purges all bad works, this here medles with nothing,
but false doctrine, as it is manifest.

1. Because the Apostle speaks of builders only, such as himself, and
Apollos verse. 6.

2. The reward, that shall be received verse. 14. is to be given, according to the
labor of the Minister. verse. 8.

3. The People, what good works soever they have, are in this place
considered, but as the building, or Husbandry. verse. 9.

4. The fire of Purgatory does not burn the work, but the soul of the
worker, but this fire shall burn the work, not the workman. verse. 1. 3. 14.
15.

5. The fire of Purgatory does not consume, but purify, this fire does not
purify, but consume verse. 15.

6. All men's works must be tried by this fire. verse. 12. 13. but not by the
fire of Purgatory; for that belongs to them only, that have not made
satisfaction for their sins, or not bin absolved from them by the Sacrament
of penance.

Since it is, for the most part, agreed upon, that the fire, verse. 13. does not
signify Purgatory, what reason shall persuade us, that this does? verse. 15.

The other place has troubled all the Divines, that ever 1. Cor. 15. 29.
writ upon it, both for the Grammar, and the sense of it. It shall be therefore
sufficient for me to answer, that till the Popish interpretation be better
proved, we have no reason to seek for the fire of Purgatory, in the Baptism
of or for the dead; especially since no ancient writer has so expounded it.
Neither can it serve Saint Paul's purpose, being so understood. For how can the
Resurrection of the body be proved, by praying for the souls in Purgatory?
But oh the heat of Popish charity! that can abide to let so many souls fry
in Purgatory, whereas multiplying of Masses would quench the fire, and free the
poor wretches; or at least their holy father the Pope, may deliver as many as
pleases him by plenarie indulgences; and yet these men cry out upon us for
want of charity, because we will not help them by prayer, for whom we are
sure that all the prayers, that can be made, are either needless or
bootelesse: Are these the reasons that must persuade men of Judgment? etc.

They that acknowledge not remission of sins, as an effect in K.
the Sacrament of Baptism, deny the Article of remission of sins.

Then it should seem the meaning of the Article is: that we believe the
remission of sins, as an effect of Baptism: I marvel how many popish
Priests would give a man this exposition, that should ask them the meaning of
this Article of the Creed? There is more reason to say, I believe that
remission of sins is a privilege belonging to the holy Catholic church,
which our Savior Christ has purchased with his blood. But if the meaning be
of Baptism, then we have found in the Creed that Baptism is a Sacrament,
which a little before was denied, to show the insufficiency of the Creed, to be
the rule, and limit of our belief. He that confesses, that Jesus Christ has
paid the ransom for the sins of his church, by his blood, and procured the
pardon of them, cannot justly be charged with denying this article of
remission, howsoever he do err in judging of the force, and use of baptism.

But the Protestants (say you) acknowledge not remission of sins, as an
effect, of the Sacrament of Baptism,

The Protestants acknowledge the same effect, in the sacrament of baptism,
which the church of God acknowledged, and received in the sacrament of
circumcision; that the Patriarchs, and fathers of Christ's church, before his
coming received the forgiveness of sins, no Christian can doubt; that
either they had it by the effect of the sacrament, or that your sacrament has
another effect, in substance, then theirs had, no Papist can prove; at least,
this man has not proved. But, shortly to deliver our opinion; we believe and
profess, that every one, who is effectually baptized, has received
forgiveness of all his sins, original actual; past, to come, and if you
will, mortal, and venial; for the guilt, and for the punishment, for the
eternal, and temporal punishment. But we deny, first, that al, which have
Baptismum Fluminis, the baptism of water, have also Baptismum Flaminis the
baptism of the spirit. Secondly that none have forgiveness, but they, which
are baptized. Thirdly that every man that is baptized, receaues forgiveness of
sins, which may thus appear, because many a man baptized is everlastingly
damned; but no man, that has his sins forgeuen him, is damned. If you say
they were forgiven, but now are not, you destroy the nature of forgiveness*
which depends not upon any condition to come. If it do, then can it not be
truly affirmed, that a man by Baptism receaues forgiveness absolutely of
those sins, which are past, and yet that is your doctrine. If you answer,
that all sins before baptism are absolutely pardoned; then it may come to
pass, that a damned man may have more sins forgiven him, then one that is
saved; that a man may have 10000. sins forgiven him, and be damned, for all
that; for some one, Which is evident in the example of a man baptized, in the
end of his life; who yet, after baptism, committs some deadly sin without
repentance: as if, in his going from the Font he fall out with some man, and
presently kill, and be killed, not having any thought of receiving absolution,
by the sacrament of penance. Therefore baptism is not always accompanied with
remission of sins. Now that some obtain forgiveness of sin, that never
are baptized, the Papists themselves grant, in two cases at the least: For
they teach, that votum baptismi, the purpose to be baptized is sufficient, when
the thing it self cannot be had, and that martyrdom is instead of Baptism.
Both these cases are without warrant of scripture, if we hold a necessity of
Baptism absolutely to justification, as they do; but yet this they teach, be
it true, or false; Baptism is indeed the Lauer of Regeneration, because all
they that are baptized, and none but they, are regenerate: But we understand
not by baptism, the outward washing only, but the inward especially; whereof
that is nothing but a sign, and a seal: yet such a sign, and seal, as by
the grace of Gods spirit, confirms the Christian soul in the true belief of
remission of sins. Many are saved, that never were baptized; many have been
baptized, that never shall be saved: therefore baptism is in effect and force,
the Lauer of regeneration, to those only, that are saved, to all other it is
the sign without the thing; by reason, that they receive not grace, as well as
water.

They (says he) that allow not the sacrament of penance, etc. L.
deny the remission of sins.

The Sacrament of Penance is a fancy of men. Our Savior, John 20. 23.
ordaines no such Sacrament, but only promises, that the work of the
Ministry shall be effectual, to the remitting, and reteining of sins: and
indeed there is no sacrament of ordinary use in the Church, which Christ
himself did not either receive, or give. If you will say that Penance could
not belong to him, because he never sinned after Baptism; I will affirm, with
as good reason, that no more did Baptism, because he never sinned at all; for
Baptism, as you here teach, is the Lauer of Regeneration, for that in it, the
soul dead by sin, is newly regenerated by Grace. But Christ's soul was
never dead, neither indeed does the Sacrament of penance serve for any purpose
to him, who is washed from all his sins, by the blood of Jesus Christ, as all
truly baptized are.

What Protestant ever denied that our sins are perfectly forgiven, or what
Papist can better tell what it is, to have sins forgiven, then the holy Ghost
in Scripture? who affirms, that reconciliation with God is made, by having
sins not imputed. But what* says our Savior Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Romans 4. 7. 8.
Luc. 22. 34 Acts. 7. 60.
Christ: Father forgive them. How does Stephen in other words, make the same
prayer in the like case? Lord lay not this sin to their charge. But you say,
the botches and Biles still remain. What botches? These are words without
matter: when the Prince pardons any cr^me, what remains after the pardon? Is
not original corruption pardoned in Baptism? yet by your Doctors confession
it remains, though it be not, as they falsely teach, Very and proprij nominis
pecca^um, that is, truly, and properly sin: yet the botch is there still, as
appears by the continual running, more or less, in the life of every
Christian.

Therefore we do not seek to cover our sin with any veil, but profess,
that it is truly, properly, and perfectly pardoned. But we deny (that which
this man seems not to understand) that by forgiveness of sins, original,
and actual sin is wholly, and at once destroyed in us; the strength of it is
abated, yea the deadly wound is given to it, so that it shall never recover:
but yet (weak though it be, and drawing on to the very point of death) it is
the same thing it was before. Therefore whatsoever can belong to the
forgiveness of sins, concerning the nature thereof, we acknowledge and
profess* but we cannot (contrary to all experience and warrant of Scripture,
yea to the very nature Nom. 7. 23.
of a pardon) fancy to our selves an absolute deliverance from* the being of
sin.

These 2. points, are no doctrines peculiar to those, whom M.
this Author calls Puritans (who dissent not from their brethren, but only in
some matters of discipline, and ceremony) howsoever some few make doubt of the
latter. But because the former of these 2. is a matter of especial importance
charged as a great heresy upon Calvin by Bellarmine, and our english Rhemists,
I will answer distinctly to every part of this man's accusation.

The Papists flatly do all Protestants wrong; first by Chalenging all, save
Puritans, of their own error. secondly by avouching so heinous a crime of them
in part, as is altogether false; for we all with one mouth, and heart
affirm, that Christ is the true, and natural son of God, having (whatsoever
he has, as he is the son) from God the father, and no whit of it, from
himself. But let us examine his proof.

They (says he) that affirm, that Christ is God of him self, and not God of
God, deny, in effect, that he is the Son of God, by denying, that he
received his Divinity from his father.

Indeed if it were all one thing to be God, and to be the Son, the
proposition were true; but he that has learned, that the Father, and the
Son, being on^ God, are 2. disstinct Persons, knows, that the Godhead
belongs not to the nature of the Son. because then the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, not only might be, but needs must be the Son, a^ having the whole
Godhead.

What he would prove by these 2. places of John it is not certain, but that
he cannot prove the point in question, it is more then certain. I ask no more
of any man, but to Ioa. ^. 24.
read them; Therefore I said to you, that you shall dye in your sins; For if
you believe not, that I am he, you shall dye in your sins. But when the
spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you Ioa. 16. 3.
all truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but what things sosoeuer he
shall hear, he shall speak, and the things, that are to c^^e, he shall show
you.

Now let any reasonable man judge whether it can be gathered out of these
places, that Christ is not God of himself, but God of God. But it may be the
penner, or the Printer mistoke the number of the verses, and put. 24. for. 25.
and 13. for. 14. or. 15. Let us make the best of it. They said therefore Ioa.
8. 25.
unto him, Who art thou. Jesus said to them. The beginning, who also spoke unto
you. I will not strive about the diverse reading, only it is to be noted, that
this Papist, either ignorantly or craftily, quotes Cyrill in the margin,
whereas we have no Commentary of his, upon that place, but the defect thereof
is supplied by Iodocus Clichthoueus a Popish Bishop, whom this man blushes not
to allege in Cyrills name. Nothing can be drawn from hence, save only that
Christ is God, which we deny not; except we perhaps may prove hereby, that
he is God of himself, because he is the beginning. He shall glorify me,
because he shall receive Ioa 16. 14. 15.
of mine, and shall show to you. All things, whatsoever the father has, are
mine. Therefore I said that he shall receive of mine, and show to you. Who can
wring any word, for proof that Christ received his Godhead from his father,
out of this text? If you urge, That all, whatsoever the father has, is his:
What proves that? save only that he is God equal with his father, (viz) the
same God with his father, which is confessed.

This Proposition (says* he) That Christ received not his divinity from his
father, flatly takes away the nature of a Son.

Then the distinction of the persons is thus to be conceived: that the Father
is God one way, by having his divinity of himself: the Son another way, by
h^uing his Divinity from his father; and the Holy Ghost a third way, by having
his divinity both from the father and the son; and so we shall have as
truly, and distinctly. 3. Gods, as we have. 3. persons. To the proof.

The nature of a son (says he) is to receive his substance from his father.
What (...) substance? then there is never a Son ^^ the world^ (...) we grant
that the Father creats the soul, as he (...) the body.

But if we (...) ^ake the supernatural generation of the son of God, (...)
^gree precisely with the natural generation of men* (...) must needs hold,
that as the humane Son is a (...) ^an, from his Father, so the Son of God,
in respect^ (...) substance received from his heavenly Father, is (...) God
from his father. And surely, that he is dist^^^ from his Father, by the nature
of his being a Son, (...) cannot be doubted: but that, by the nature of his
(...) God, he is distinct from God his Father, it may (...) hand be granted;
because it necessarily impl^^ a multiplying, or plurality of Gods.

Neither is the^ (...) Contradiction in granting, that our Savior Ch^^^
^^ceaued his person of his Father, and not his subst^^^ and essence; For by
substance and essence you do (...) the nature of his being a Son, which we
grant (...) from the father wholly, but his divine nature, wh^^ (...) much
differing from that, as that the Father, the So^^^ (...) the Holy Ghost, being
all three one in substa^^^ (...) three distinct persons, or subsistences. (...).


For what though^ (...) substance of God be essential to every person in (...)
It does not follow thereupon, that it is of the (...) of the person. It is
indeed thus essential, that (...) ^^son is God* but not that the Godhead is
the (...) every person: for then (as I have often said) (...) must be but one
person, as the Godhead i^ ^^e, (...) Gods, as there are diverse persons.

The protestants (says (...)) ^^emptorily affirm, that Christ is. God of
himself, and not G^^ (...) God.

That, Christ is God* (...) ^^^selfe we affirm constantly, and certainly: but
this peremptorine^^ (...) that Synagogue, which thunde* ^ out (...)dently, and
ordinarily against all men, tha^ (...) otherwise, then it teaches, th^^gh (...)
so (...)ly.

We deny not that the Holy council of Nice ^^ly taught, that our Savior
Christ is God of God, ve^^ (...) of very God; but we say, that they meant not,
as yo^^ ^^pists do, who make our Savior, as it were an under God, receiving
his Godhead of another, and not having ^^ ^^ himself. How unfitly this must
needs serve those ^^^ed, and godly fathers, for the proof of our Saviors
^qualitie with God the father, who sees not? when (...) Arrius might readily
have answered, that he must (...) be inferior to God the Father; because he
had his Godhead of himself, Christ of him; As for the word whi^^ they urged,
(...).
concerning the same nature of both it d^^ not signify, nor intend, that
Christ received his Godhead of the Father, but that he was the same God with
his Father. So that he being of God, was the same God with him, of whom he was;
Which cannot possibly b^^ ^f the one be God of himself, and the other God of
him* ^^at is God of himself. For to be of himself, and not to be of himself,
but of another, are things quite contrary, which cannot be true of God, as he
is God. But you will ask, perchance, whether the son be inferiou^ ^o the
Father, touching his person* because he has that (...) No truly; for the
generation being eternal* (...) the Father having no pre-eminence of being,
before (...) but as the nature of relation necessarily (...) is neither
inferioritie, nor superiority betwixt (...)

Yet may the Father truly be said to be the first (...) and the fountain of
the Trinity, and if you will (...)tie, also, in this sense, because either
person being of (...) truly God.

According to which meaning, Our savior is God of God, Deu^ ^^ deo perennis.
Deus ex vtroque m^s^us. Prudentius in hymno ante somnum.
that is, the second person, being truly God, is of the father being truly
God: though in respect of his Godhead, he is not of the Father, but of
himself, as I will prove by the reasons following.

1. He, that is Ieho^ah, is God of himself, not of another.

But Christ is Ieho^ah.

Therefore Christ is God of himself, not of another.

2. If all that is the fathers, is Christ's also, then Christ is God of
himself, for the father is God of himself.

But all that is the fathers is Christ's.

Therefore Christ is God of himself.

3. If Christ receive his Godhead of his father, as he does his person, then
must he be a distinct God, as he is a distinct person.

But he must not be a distinct God.

Therefore he receaues not his Godhead of his father.

4. If Christ receive his Godhead, then may the Godhead be distinguished, by
being begotten, and unbegotten.

But the Godhead may not be so distinguished; for that is proper to the person.

Therefore Christ receaues not his Godhead from his Father; but has it of
himself.

5. It is somewhat yet for a man to belike himself.

The first of these 5. points. was charged upon us, as an error N.
in 2. respects. because both we deny that interpretation of the Article,
which the Papists have devised, and also refuse the doctrine of visible
famousnes, which they would thrust upon the church. This last point is
altogether of the same kind; which I note the rather; because both this, and
that, are delivered in such a phrase, as the scripture knows not. To believe
the Catholic church, to descend into hell, are speeches, with which the
scriptures are not acquainted: and this is another reason, why learned Divines
the rather persuade themselves, that this Creed was not of the Apostles
penning. Yet do not we deny the truth of either of these articles, b^t only
that erroneous interpretation, which the Papists make of them. Of the former I
have already spoken; now let us shortly examine the latter. First we say the
english word Hell does not express the Greek (...), or the Latin Inferi,
though we cannot rest upon the Latin whatsoever it signifies, since it is but
a translation. Hell, in English, is restrained to the place of the damned, so
that no english man understands by Hell, either purgatory, or limbus patrum, or
infantum: but (...), and Inferi do signify indifferently the state, and place
of the dead as Master Brough^on has sufficiently proved Neither need it breed
a doubt in any man, that descending, or going down is mentioned, because it is
out of doubt, that the heathen* (from whom this speech is taken) place their
elysium, or paradise, under the earth, as well as their Tartarus, or Hell, that
lying on the right hand, this on the left as it appears in Virgill Aen^id. 6.

Hac iter elysium nobis, at laeua malorum,
Exercet poenas, et ad impia tartara mittit.
Secondly it is to be known, that diverse Creeds have not this article in them;
which proves that it was thought either to be comprised in some of the other,
or else not to be any matter of faith.

Thirdly it must be observed, that some of the ancient writers, have understood
it of our Saviors buryall, as Ruffinus, and Athanasius, he in plain terms
auouching that it was not to be found in the Roman Creed, and that the
meaning of it seemed to be nothing else, but that he was interred, or laid in
his grave. Athanasius indeed has the words; but that he takes them to
signify his burial, may appear; for that he leaves out all other mention of
that article of his burial.

Fourthly it must be remembered, that the maintayners of Christ's going really
into hell, agree not about the matter, whether he went into the place of the
damned, or only into the suburbs of it, in limbum patrum, or Infantum; nor
about the end.

Fiftely we have great reason to refuse this sense which has no ground of
Scripture, whereupon it can be built, as diverse of our writers have plainly
showed, and as I could, and would prove, if it agreed with this course of
writing.

Sixthly we affirm, that if we shall follow the nature of the word (...), we
cannot expound it of the place, of the damned, unless it be apparent that the
matter necessarily requires it, which also is to be said of the Hebrew Sheoll,
commonly in the Bible translated (...), as Bucer, Carlisle, and Broughton have
showed by particular induction.

Seauenthly we must note this man's dealing, that makes choice of the wo^st
interpretation as he account it; whereas he cannot be ignorant, both that there
are diverse other, and that many Protestants do m^slike this, which he brings:
as if he would make the world believe, that we allow not of this piece of the
Creed, but only in that sense: howbeit many of our divines, do rather expound
it of our Saviors subjection to death, or of the truth of his death, fully
signified, not only by his burial, but by his being altogether in the state
of the dead, his body, and soul being severed, and severally so disposed of,
as all other dead men's bodies, and s^ules are; without any special signifying
of the place, whether his soul went. But howsoever we dissent from our
brethren, in the meaning of this Article, we allow the doctrine as good, and
sound. For we believe, that our Savior Christ, being by imputation a sinner,
though of himself most holy and pure, suffered in his soul the wrath of God,
due to us sinners, and for our sins in such sort and measure, as God had
appointed, and as without sin, in a finite time it could be suffered.

As for those horrible plasphemies, which are said to be included in the
pains of hell, we neither avouch them all of our Savior Christ, nor
acknowledge that they nessarily accompany the wrath of God, as in handling the
particulars it will appear.

Christ (says he) bare the wrath of God. Therefore he despaired of his
salvation.

The consequence is false: for he knew that God loved his person, being his
son, and therefore that this wrath should not be perpetual; though the
present sense of it wrung from him that lamentable exclamation, My God my God,
why have thou forsaken me? and also that by the, power of his Godhead, he was
to free himself from continuing in death, which, but for these reasons, he
must needs have endured, and which for a time he did taste, the Godhead as it
were withdrawing it self, that the manhood might suffer.

Christ (says he) suffered the wrath of God; therefore God hated him, and he
God.

Of the latter clause I shall need to say nothing, having before restrained
Christ's sufferings to that manner of torment, which is without sin. Neither is
that hatred of God, an effect of his wrath in the damned, in whom it is
natural: but by his wrath against them, that malice of theirs accidentally is
increased. Which I speak upon this supposition, that the damned shall continue
in sin, as well as in punishment.

The former point, if we hold the former distinction advisedly, contaynes at
all no blasphemy against our savior: his person was, of it self, most
tenderly beloved of God his father, though being considered as a sinner, (such
as by imputation he was in the sight of God) for a time, in that respect he
was to God for us, as every one of us is in himself to God.

Christ suffered (says he) the wrath of God; therefore he was tormented with
anguish of mind for his offenses, for which etc.

The consequence should have bin. Therefore he was tormented with anguish of
mind for those offenses, for which he suffered the wrath of God, But those were
not his* but ours. Ours I say, truly, and properly; h^s only by imputation. And
it is no blasphemy to hold, that Christ so, as he was a sinner, and punished
for sin, had also anguish of mind for sin; not for his own (there was no
suspicion, or likeness of sin in him) but for ours, which by his consent,
was charged on him; for the time, he saw the angry countenance of God against
him, and he knew that our sins had deserved the continuance of it for ever.
But the comforts I spoke of before, vpheld him from all danger of despayring,
and delivered him from that perpetuity of torment, in which otherwise, having
taken upon him our Person, he should have remained. Now this so being, we need
not fear these thunderbolts of horrible blasphemy; although we believe that
Christ our savior did, for a time, endure in his soul the wrath of God, which
was due to our sins. Neither do we hereby make God the enemy of God, nor of
the humanity of Jesus Christ, which he ever most entirely loved, but only
avouch, that God truly hated, and punished our sins, in his own son, with
such a kind, and measure of his wrath, as being true, and just, was every way
without sin, and finite in regard of the time. so that I take the Doctrine to
be void of blasphemy; howsoever the meaning of the Article be conceived.

Article. 5. The Protestants have no mean to determine Controversies, and
abolish heresies.
Protestant.
No more then they have a rule; to know what is matter of Faith.

Papist.
As the Protestants neither know what they believe, nor A.
why they believe: so have they no means in their church to settle them in
unity of belief, nor to determine controversies; nor to abolish heresies, as
has the catholic church: for our savior Christ by his divine providence did
foresee that heresies were to arise in his church, as his Apostle S. Paul does
warn us: 1. Cor* 11 Proof that the church cannot ^r^e. Mat. 18. 17 Ephesians. 4. 11.
Ioh. 14. 17 Luke 10. 16 Proof of the principal proposition. Act* ^5.
the which, as plagues, were to infect his flock and therefore he not only
forewarned us of them, but also gave us means, how to prevent and extinguish
them. 1. ^ He willed us to hear his Church, if we would not be accounted, as
Ethnicks, and Publicans. 2. He ordained Pastors, and Doctors, least we should
be carried away with every blast of vain doctrine. 3. He promised unto the
church the assistance, of the holy Ghost, in such sort, as they which would not
hear her, would not hear him. The catholics therefore believing certainly,
that the Church cannot err, that the general Councils cannot deliver false
doctrine, that the Pastors, and ancient fathers, with joint consent, cannot
teach untruths; when heresies spring up, presently with the voice of the
Church, pluck them up by the roots: In the first Nicene counsel was condemned
Arrius. in the counsel of Constantinople Macedonius. In the counsel of
Ephesus, Nestorius. In the counsel of Calcedon Eutiches. vide Aug. lib. 2.
retract. ca. 50
and so ever has practiced, and after this manner, overthrown all encounters,
false opinions, and errors which the Diuill, by his ministers, ever planted,
or established in the world: and so they have bin freed from all braules, and
quarrels in matters of religion.

But the Protestants, admitting the sole scripture, as Vmpere, Principal
proposition and Assumption.
and judge, in matters of Controversy, and allowing no infallible interpreter
thereof, but remitting all to every man's private spirit, and singular
exposition; cannot possibly, without error, wind themselves out of the
Labyrinth of so many Controversies, wherewith they are now inueagled, and
intricated. And the irreconciliable iarres, betwixt them, and the Puritans, in
essential points of faith, give s^fficient testimony* that they will never
have an end, holding those grounds of opinion, which they obstinately defend. B.


And albeit they go about to bleare the peoples brains, I have heard of
blearing the peoples eyes, but never till now, of blearing their brains.
which, I know not, what unity, and conformity in matters of faith, and in the
substance of religion; and that their disagreement only consists in points of
Ceremonies, and trifles of small importance; yet, in very deed, they differ in
many essential points of religion. And although this shift will, perhaps;
serve, to cast a mist over the confused conceits of simple souls, and silly
fooles^, yet no wiseman will ever believe them: I pray you, tell me, is not the
Kings supremacy a matter of faith, and a chief point of religion? And do not
Calvin. 7. Amos.
Calvin the puritanicall Patriarch, what he thought of King Henry the eight for
assuming of such a pre-eminence unto him: read the Annals of Scotland, and you
shall find the presumptuous presbytery, every foot opposing themselves against
our Kings authority, as though he had nothing to do with the Kirk. Look into
the carriage of our precisians at home, and you shall find them, in show to
profess it, but in deeds, and effects really to deny it. For if they approve
his supremacy, with what face can they resist his ordinances, in matters of
religion? why wear they not vestments, Surplisses, the Cap, and Tippet? why
refuse they to baptize with the sign of the Cross? why subscribe they not to
the the book of common prayer? why obey they not the ecclesiastical Canons,
established by his Majesty's authority? No other reason of this obstinate
repugnancie can be yielded, then that in very truth, they do not, in
Conscience, allow of his supremacy.

2. Is not the authority* of Bishops, their power to create ministers, their
degree in dignity above ordinary Curats, and Pastors, a matter o^ faith, and so
nearly touches the government of the Church, that if this heretical order be
abolished, Perhaps he would have said hierarchicall.
the whole form of Christ's Church is presently confounded?

3. The observation of feasts, and holy days, infringed by Puritans,
maintained by protestants, is it but a Ceremony? were not the obstinate
impugning thereof a sufficient reason to censure them, for Heretics? did not
the Council of Nice condemn the Quartodecimani for Heretics, who would only
have observed their Easter day upon the 14. day of the month of March? What if
they had called our Precisians to the bar, who will have it wholly abolished?
Question^es they would have branded them, in a far deeper degree of Heresy,
then the Quartodecimani.

4 Is not the observation of Lent, and other fasting days, a matter of more
moment, then trifles, or then things indifferent? Did not S. Epiphanius ce^sure
Aerius of Heresy, for denying these prescript times for fasting? For albeit
they be not precisely set down in scriptures, and therein commanded to be
observed; yet they, being either ordained by the Apostles, or instituted by the
church, which had authority to appoint fastes, at least as well as the
puritan presbytery; without doubt he, that calls this holy institution
either doctrine of Diuils, or torture of consciences, or restraint of
Euangelical liberty, ought by the judgment of all true protestants, to be
condemned for a pagon, and infidel: who will not submit his soul to the
censure of the Church.

5. The Puritans blasphemously pronounce, and ignorantly defend, that Christ
suffered the pains of hell, upon the cross; and that in this passionful agony,
and agonizing grief did principally consist the satisfaction of Christ, for
the redemption of man, from those eternal torments of hell, And think you
this is a trifle, a rite, or ceremony? This faith the Puritans profess; this
blasphemy the Protestants detest.

The descension of Christ to hell is (no doubt) but a trifle, a ceremony, a
matter of small importance. It is but an article of our creed; and yet this
article the puritanes really deny; the which al Protestants steadfastly believe.

That the second person in Trinity received his divinity from his father, is
but a trifle, a point not much material to our belief; and yet, if this be
denied, the mystery of the holy trinity can not be believed; for it
absolutely takes away the nature of a son, and consequently the admirable
procession of the second person, and so overthrows all the mystery of the
Trinity. This principal part of Christianity, Protestants approve and
Puritans improve.

I omit here many more petty differences, in matters of faith; the which were
sufficient to make them condemn one another, not only in accidents, and
ceremonies, but also in the substance, and principal parts of religion. As in
that the Precisians deny, that in Baptism our sins be remitted, but only
take it for a seal of that grace, God gave them by his eternal election. The
Protestants confess, that in the sacrament we are washed by Gods spirit from
original sin.

The Puritans condemn the Communion book, as irreligious, and erroneous. The
Protestants commend it as orthodoxall and religious. The Protestants use the
cross in baptism, as a holy sign fit for the profession of Christ's faith,
and religion: The Puritanes exclaim against it, as a humane invention, and a
point of superstition.

The Protestants defend, that imposition of hands, in confirmation, is a sign
of the favor, and goodness of God toward them: The Puritans avouch, that this
is a flat lie, and that they testify therein, that God does that, he never did.

The Protestants in fine will use Vestments, Music, Organes, surplisses, and
diverse other ceremonies, in divine service, and administration of sacraments:
all which the puritanes condemn, as will worship, and not being commanded by
God, to be superstitious. All these (I say) I omit, and many more, which are
to be seen in the Puritanes supplication to the Parliament, where 32.
differences are assigned; and only have thought good to advertise every
discreet Protestant, to consider the* 7. precedent differences. For there is
never a one of them, which the Puritan defends not to be a matter of faith;
and the Protestant is bound in conscience to condemn him, for obstinatly
maintayning the contrary, to be an heretic: and the reason is evident; for
the rule, and square the Protestants, and Puritanes both hold to know an
heresy, is this; whatsoever is contrary to Gods word is an heresy, if it be
obstinately defended: but all the aforesaid 7. points in controversy, are by
the one part proved contrary to Gods word, and by the other avouched to be
grounded upon the same. Therefore we may well conclude, that if one error in
faith with obstinacy defended, suffices to make an heretic, what shall we
judge of the Puritan, who so mainely defends so many? Surely this I will
aver, that they differ in substance of religion, and not only in accidents, and
ceremonies.

And finally, they have no argument to prove, that they C.
have the true Church, true religion, true faith; which al heretics, that ever
were, will not bring to condemn the Church of Christ, as well as they. For
example they aledge scriptures, so did the Arrians: they contemn councills;
the Arrians did not regard them. They challenge to themselves the true
interpretation: the same did all heretics to this day. And to conclude, they
call themselves the little flock of Christ, to whom God has revealed his truth,
and illuminated them from above: all which the Donatists, with as good reason,
and better arguments, did arrogate unto themselves. The same I say of the
Pelagians, Nestorians, Eutychians, with all the rabble of other damned heretics.

And to conclude these articles of faith, I say, that if the D
principles of the Protestants religion be true, S. Paul himself exhorts us
to infidelity; which I prove thus:

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that, which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts us to infidelity.

But S. Paul does exhort us to doubt of our salvation, which we are bound to
believe by faith, according to the Protestants religion. Ergo.

S. Paul exhorts us to infidelity.

The Mayor is plain, for to doubt of matters in faith, is manifest
infidelity: because whosoever doubts, whether God has revealed that, which
indeed he has revealed, being sufficiently proposed, as revealed; virtuallie
doubts, whether God says truth, or lies.

The Minor is proved by the testimony of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 2.


Cum timore, and tremore salutem vestram operamini. With fear and trembling,
work your salvation. All fear, whether it be filial fear, or servile fear,
includes both, the one of sin, the other of punishment.

Protestant.
A very good comparison, whether it be of likeness, or A.
equality: for the one is even as true as the other. As we know not what to
believe, or why: So we have no mean in our Church, to settle us in unity of
belief, etc. If we shall join issue in this point, upon the former trial,
the matter is already answered. For all those accusations, and evidences being
false, what truth can there be in this? and yet the last clause makes me grant
him the conclusion: We have no such means, as the Popish Church has. But what
will he infer hereupon? That therefore we have none at all. What? because we
will not acknowledge the Popes Sovereign authority, in making what he list an
Article of faith: Have we no means to end controuessies? As good never a whit,
as never the better. Is it not more for the glory of God, and good of the
Church, that there should be continual disagreement about matters of Religion,
then that all should believe and maintain false doctrine? Were not Christ as
good have a troubled church, as none at all? Honorable war is better then
dishonorable peace, in the judgment of any wise Statesman: And can it be
more glorious to God, to have quietness in the church with heresy, yea with
Antichristianisme, then truth with contention? So then this proposition, that
we have no such means, as the Papists have, to end controversies, neither
disproues, nor disgraces our church. But it is worth the doing, to take a view
of this rhetorical declamation, rather then Logical disputation, which was
promised; by stripping it out of this braucry, and setting it naked, before the
light of true reason: Thus then he disputes;

They (says he) that admit the sole Scripture, as Vmpere and Principal
proposition.
Judge, in matters of controversy, allowing no infallible interpreter thereof,
have no means to end controversies, and abolish heresies.

Controversies may be ended, and heresies abolisht, either To the principal
proposition.
by conuincing those that maintain them, of error, or by commanding them to
forbear all meddling therein: The former, being the more proper, and orderly
course, may be performed by the Ministers of the word, without any infallible
interpreter of the Scripture. For it is very possible, to understand the true
meaning thereof, in most places, and so to prove it, by the Analogy of faith,
grounded upon evident Textes, and by the examining of the Texts that are in
question, that a reasonable man shall not be able to with-hould his assent,
without manifest blindness, if not wilfulness. If you ask me, what shall
become of other places, that are very hard: I answer. that we need not these,
for the confirming of any point of doctrine, as if without them, it could not
sufficiently be done. Further I say, that he, which mainteines any point that
he is not able to auow, by any, but some such places (as this Author does
Purgatory) is no way to be allowed or borne with. The other means of
enioyning silence and quietness, is partly in the censures of the Church, but
principally in the authority of the Magistrate: whom God has made Sovereign
governor, for the outward peace, and prosperity of his church. This in order
must follow the former; yet so, as that if the Magistrate command, before
conuincing, he must be obeyed, by forbearance of any further proceedings,
unless the charge be directly contrary to the commandment of God: in which
case, we must answer with the Apostles, Whether it be right, in the sight of
God, Act. 4. 18. and 5. 40.
to obey you, rather then God, judge you.

But the Protestants (says he) admit the sole Scripture, as Principal
assumptio^.
vmpere, etc.

What course is to be held, for the interpretation of Scripture; To the
principal assumptio^.
I have partly showed already, in the 2. and 3. and in this 5. article, and it
shall appear more fully, in the particular examining of this discourse,
according as it is set down.

They (says he) that certainly believe the Church cannot Proof of the
principal Proposition.
err, have means to settle themselves in unity of belief, to end
controversies, and abolish heresies: and contrariwise, they, that do not
believe it, have none.

When it is proved, that the Church cannot err, then the To the proof of the
principal proposition.
proposition shall be granted: but till then, it deserves no allowance; and if it
be granted: yet what heretical church may not have the same quietness, upon
the same persuasion? Indeed one of the three points, even that, which the
Papists stand most upon, viz. their outward quiet estate, may in part, ensue
upon this belief, though it be most erroneous. For this persuasion that the
Church cannot err, is sufficient to stay all controversies, when the Church
has showed her opinion of them. And yet it is with them only sufficient, that
acknowledge this false privilege of the church: and therefore it follows but in
part: because you must first persuade those that contend, of the truth of this
assertion, ere you ca^ work by it, upon their consciences. So that although
this means (supposing the truth of it) be in it self effectual: yet it
cannot breed this effect in all, that at any time contend about religion, but
in those only, that believe it. For example; put case that some of the Church,
being persuaded, that the Church has not authority to rob the people of the
Cup, should call this privilege of erring into question. How will your Church
take up this controversy? will she urge the conclusion, I cannot err? or
will she procure her Bishops, Abbots, Cardinals, etc. to avouch as much of her.
What is this, but Ask my fellow, if I be a thief. Yes, it is somewhat
worse: for it is all one, as if he that is arraigned for felony, should say, I
tell you, I am not a thief: were he not worthy to be acquitted, trow you? And
such would your proof be, in this question. But if the Church in this case,
could bring out a Charter, and plead that for this privilege: her adversaries
must needs be converted, or at least might be confounded: and so perhaps the
Controversy ended. Yet not by the Churches, but by the scriptures authority:
which, as I must hereafter show, is the means, that God has appointed, for
that purpose; but it may perhaps be 1. Proof that the Church can not err.
Proposition. To that proposition.
proved, that the Church cannot err. Let us hear the reasons.

If they, that will not hear the Church, must be accounted as Ethnicks, and
Publicans, the Church cannot err: for if the Church could err, then were
there no reason, why he, that would not hear her, should be so accounted of.

When the Pope sendes his Legates with pardons a begging about the Country,
commanding them to preach to the people, of the virtue, and efficacy of those
indulgences: Are they not as Ethnickes, or Publicans, or worse, that shall
refuse to hear their sermons? and may I hereupon reasonably conclude, that
therefore they, that preach them, cannot err? Why shall I not say the like, of
any Popish Priest, moncke, or friar, being authorized by the Church of Rome to
preach? who can refuse to hear them, and not be guilty of contempt, against
your Church Apostolic? yet (I hope) these may err. Whereupon I conclude,
that therefore your proposion is false, if they, that will not hear the Church
must be accounted as Ethnicks, the Church cannot err.

But he, that will not hear the Church is to be counted as an Assumptio^
Ethnic.

What? simply, if he do not hear the church? nay, rather To the assumption.
if, in that case set down by our savior, he do not hear her: Now the case
is this, If one brother, or christian sin against another, he, that is
offended, must rebuke the other in private betwixt them alone. 2. If this
prevail not with him, he must the second time rebuke him and that before one,
or two witnesses, 3. If this will not serve, he must complain of him to the
Governors of the Church, 4. If their censure will do no good with him, he is
to be accounted no member of the church after excommunication. Let us now draw
an argument from this place, and see what it makes for the churches infinite
authority. He, that, being thus proceeded withal, obeyes not the just censure
of the Governors of the church, to the confessing of his sin, and satisfying
of his brother, and the congregation, is to be accounted an Ethnicke. Therefore
whatsoever the church says must be believed, or therefore the Church cannot
err. Who sees not the weakness of this reason? He, that obeys not the church
in a just censure, is no longer any member of the Church; Therefore he that
simply in all things obeies her not, acknowledging that she cannot err, is an
Infidel.

Here it would be further considered, that by the Church in this place, neither
a general council, nor the Pope is meant, but the Governors of several
congregations, or the whole congregations themselves, whether they be more, or
fewer, so they be a church: that is of necessity more then one. Therefore
whatsoever can be gathered out of this text, for the churches privilege, and
sovereignty, belongs to the Pastors, and Rulers of several churches. If then
by this scripture it be proved that the church cannot err, it is proved that
the pastors, and governors of several charges cannot err. How then is this
the special privilege of the Pope? But indeed this is a great question, and
(I think) not easy by any Papist to be decided: whether the privilege of not
erring, belong to the Pope, or to the church. If it were given to Peter, and
his successors, why is it made common to them, with the rest of the church? If
it appertain to the whole church, why is it appropriated to the Pope? If it
rest in the Pope, what becomes of it, Sede vacant, when there is no Pope? At
such times be like the church may err; yea and at other times too. For if it
be proper to the Pope not to err, then all beside the Pope may err: and so it
may come to pass, that there shall be no church in the world: because the Pope
alone, if he be never so great a head, is but a head: whereas to the being of a
church, a body also is necessary and not a head only.

The 2. part of the proof of the principal proposition. To the second part of
the proof of the principal proposition. The 2. proof that the church cannot
err. To the second proof that the church can not err.
They, that do not believe the Church cannot err, have no means to settle
themselves in unity of belief.

The truth of this Proposition will be more fitly examined when we come to his
Refutation of the scriptures sufficiency, in the mean while let us see, what
these other proofs are, that follow.

If God ordained Pastors, and Doctors, least the Church should be carried away,
with every blast of vain doctrine, then the Church cannot err.

What Church mean you? not the Pope? for he has not this privilege, as he is
a Pastor, or Doctor, but as he is Peter's successor: nor the congregation: for
the people both may, and do err. What then? These Pastors, and Doctors? But
they are not all Popes. I trow, that they should be exempted, from possibility
of erring.

It was indeed Gods purpose in giving Pastors, and Doctors that his children,
which only are the Church, should be instructed, and established in all truth:
and accordingly it comes to pass in matters of substance, and foundation: but
this is done by little and little, as the Apostle witnesses in this place,
knowledge being not perfect all at once, but first beginning, as in children,
then by degrees receiving a continual increase, till we come to the measure of
the age of the fullness of Christ: which is never found in any, while we
remain 1. Cor. 13. 9.
in this vale of ignorance, where we do but see in part.

If this reason prove any thing, it makes as well for every Pastor, and Doctor,
in his several charge, as for the Pope, in his pretended general. For it
cannot be doubted, but that the whole succession of the ministry is here
signified, under the title of Pastors, and Doctors in several Congregations;
such as this, or these of the Ephesians were.

Neither can w^ from Gods purpose, conclude the necessity of the event, since
we find the contrary in daily experience; and know by scripture, that not
these, or those means, but only in general means of salvation are provided for
them, whom God has chosen to eternal life, though ordinarily the word be the
means.

The Princes end in making, and appointing judges is, that true justice may be
administered to the people. Nay more then that, it is also Gods purpose, in this
his own ordinance: yet it does not follow hereupon, that the Judges, or
Magistrates cannot, or will not err.

But if Christ have promised the Church the assistance of the The 3. proof
that the church cannot err. To the 3. proof that the church cannot err.
holy Ghost, in such sort, that they that will not hear her, will not hear
him, then the Church cannot err.

If this promise of Christ be general, that whosoever will not hear the
church, in all points will not hear him, then the consequence is good.

But that we deny: because it is restrained to the scripture, according to
which if the church speak not, we may not at any hand, give ear unto her. You
will say, she never speaks but agreeably to the Scriptures. That is the
question; which we must see how you prove in your assumption. Io^. 14. 17. Luc.
10. 16.


The Father shall give you (says Christ to his Apostles) another comforter,
even the spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive etc. If Christ
promised to his Apostles, the spirit of truth, then the church cannot err.

First our Savior in this place, enforces not upon this gift of the spirit,
any necessity of hearing whatsoever the Church shall deliver, but only makes
this promise, by way of comfort.

Secondly, this promise is made, not to the church in general, but to the
Apostles in particular.

Thirdly is is made not only to them all jointly, but also to every one of
them severally. So that if by this place any thing can be concluded for the
Church at this day; every particular Pastor, or Minister, may claim this
privilege of not erring, and being heard, whatsoever he teach: which being most
absurd, and impious; that charge to hear, and penalty for not hearing,
belongs simply to the Apostles only, and to every one of them, whom the spirit
of God infalliblie kept from erring: To all others, so far forth, as that,
which they teach, is agreeable to the word, which the Lord by his Apostles has
left, and commended to his Church. Therefore howsoever the persuasion that the
Church cannot err, may sometimes breed an outward quietness, in the Church:
yet it has no force to establish men in the unity of true belief: since it
may both deceive, and be deceived; not to end controversies, because all
believe it not; nor to abolish Heresies, which, many times it may favor.

But what is it, that he adds, concerning general Councills, and ancient
Fathers? Have they some privilege, the Church has not? Or is it his meaning to
exemplify that in particular, which before he wrote in general, of the
impossibility, that the church should err? If it be, then all he says of
these (for he brings no new reason) is already answered, in trying the Churches
title, to that feigned prerogative. But cannot general Councils deliver false,
doctrine? How chance then; that some wholly, others in part, have bin, and are
at this day rejected by the Pope? what say you to the three Councilles, that
make the Pope subject to the Councills; Pisa, Constance, and Basil? What to
that of Florence under Charlemaigne? which condemned worshipping of Images, and
the second Council of Nice, for allowing it? Bellarmine says, they are not
simply necessary, and that more heresies have been abolisht without them, then
by them. Nazianzen wholly mislikt them: the Council of Trent, and that of Nice
ended not the Controversies.

Now, if neither the Church have it in general, nor especially* General
Councills; how should the Pastors, and ancient Fathers come by it? For, that
which is added of their teaching on truth with joint consent, is but to bleare
the eyes of the ignorant. Can there be more joint consent, then in general
Councills? may they err, when they seek the truth, with grave, and serious
advise, in great multitudes, and can they not be deceived when they enquire
after it, privately in their several studies? who knows not, that the error
of some one man renowned for learning, and Godliness, draws whole Churches
after it many times? especially since custom like a tyrant, rules over the
wits, and wills even of learned men: who ofttimes think it more discretion,
to retain a small error with quietness, then to restore the truth with great
trouble, and hazard.

But where shall a man find this joint consent, you imagine? I dare be bold
to say, in very few points of controversy at this day, if in any. Yet say it
were ea^ilie to be found, in the writings, that now are extant: Alas! what a
small number of books have we, in respect of those, that have bin written?
What gappes are there in the course of succession? What maymes in often copying
out books by writing? What mistaking in translations? many greek copies being
lost, and the latin translation of them only remaining.

And who can tell what Indices Purgatori^ have been devised, and enjoined
before this last assembly of Trent? especially since* Canons have been foisted
into ancient Councills, by Popes of Rome, for the establishing of their
lawless tyranny.

Therefore, though we refuse not to make trial of our doctrine, by the Fathers
writings, namely those that are indeed ancient, in the first 600. years,
before the kingdom of Anthichrist: Yet we receive them, as witnesses of the
truth, not Judges; and use them, as we use old Coins, not for an assay, to
try by them, the pureness of met^all: but for a standard, to show what moneis
were current in several ages, and places. Where they speak according to
Scripture, we acknowledge the good graces of God in them, to their deserved
Commendation: Where they write of themselves, we observe examples of man's
frailety, and ignorance, to which we make no doubt, but all writers, since the
Apostles, and except them, have bin, are, and shall be subject.

To what trial then shall we be take our cause? To what else but to the
Scriptures of God? Would a man think, there should be any professed Christian
found, that would mislike of this course? And yet our Papists do.

They cannot abide to hear, that the sole Scripture should be vmpere, and
judge, in matters of controversy: Belike they have found a better: Even the
Pope, to whom they attribute more, whatsoever they talk of the Church,
Councills, and Fathers, then to all three together; save that by Church perhaps
they mean the Pope, Whom they make the head, and husband of it, being not
afraid blasphemously to write, that all the names that are given to Christ, as
he is over the Church, belong to the Pope, as well as to Christ; though at the
second hand, as being Christ's; or rather (as they say) Gods vicar. Perhaps
they will say, as good do so, as remit all to every man's private spirit, and
singular exposition. Surely much about one: and yet, by this later it may come
to pass, that though many err, yet many also may hold the truth: Whereas by
the former, if one be deceived, all must lie in ignorance, and error; since no
man may so much as say unto him, why d^st thou so? But that we permit not the
interpretation of scripture to every man's private fancy, I showed in handling
the 2. Article. Yet this inconvenience lies upon us, that we can not possibly
wind our selves, out of the labirinth of so many controversies, wherewith we
are now inueigled, and intricated. When we lack help, we will send for their
Pope; or, if need be, make one of our own: As yet things are not in so
desperate an estate, that we should be enforced to seek any such remedy. For
the Irreconciliable iarres, betwixt us, are neither, as he slanders us, in any
essential point of faith; nor such as hinder us, from agreeing in that
doctrine, which is according to the word of God established amongst us, and
published in the Book of Articles 1562.

That the Protestants, and the Puritans, (as the Papists B.
term them) differ in essential points of faith, he undertakes to prove by
this reason.

They, that differ about the Kings supremacy, the Bishops authority, the
observation of feasts, etc. differ in essential points of faith. But the
Protestants and Puritans differ in these. Therefore they differ in essential
points of faith.

If, by essential points of faith, all matters of truth in divinity be
signified, we grant his conclusion; adding further, that the church was never
yet so happy, as to be without difference of opinions amongst divines, in any
one age, since the beginning of christian Religion. If he mean, by these
words, such things as are necessarily to be believed to salvation, or to the
profession of christianity, I deny his Proposition in all, or the most part of
it, as, in handling the particulars it shall appear. That the Protestants hold
the kings supremacy to be an essential point of faith, so that he which
doubts of it, cannot be either in truth, or in profession a christian:
neither the confession of our church; no the writings of any of our divines
prove. Indeed seditious Papists would bear the world in hand, that their
traitorous Priests, and Jesuits, have been executed for religion, and not for
treason, in denying the Kings supremacy: but neither Protestant, nor Puritan
ever yet believed them. Both which do constantly, and jointly auowe, that
although it be not a heresy of so high a nature; yet it is a wicked error,
against the truth of Gods word, and an opinion not to be tolerated in any
Christian, or civil state.

There is no dissent betwixt the Protestant and the Puritan, about the Kings
supremacy, but the difference that is, arises from the diverse conceit, each
part has of the things, by his Majesty enjoined; as it shall appear in due
place.

Calvin does not so much as charge Henry the eight with assuming the
Soueraignety he speaks of; but only lays the fault upon certain men; who in
an inconsiderate zeal, as he says, ascribed such a power to him, as by the
word of God is not warrantable. Wherein, these two points made him mislike the
matter. First, that he was called Supreme head of the Church; which title
being taken from the Pope, and given to the King, seemed to inuest that whole
power in the Kings person, which the Pope had usurped over the church.
Secondly, Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, affirmed at Ratisbon, that it
was lawful for the King, to forbid eating of flesh upon this, or that day, to
forbid Priests to marry, to take from the people the use of the Cup in the
Supper of the Lord: The later two whereof are simply unlawful, the first only
so far as it concerns putting religion in such abstinence: of which anon.
And, in that sense only, did Calvin deny the Kings supremacy, in this point,
taking it to be all one with the Popes. What opposition the Presbytery of
Scotland has made against the King: I neither know, nor have now leisure to
seek. But, if they have done any thing, whereby it may justly be suspected,
that they think the king has nothing to do with the kirk, they have gone
beyond their bounds, and shall never have either approbation, or excuse by my
defense.

As for the Ministers and people, which do not yield to subscription, and
conformity, I must needs labor to clear them of this imputation. To which
purpose, I desire it may first be observed, that they acknowledge both by word
and writing, and that ex animo, not like you Papists, with I know not what
aequiuocations, that the Kings Majesty, under God, is the only supreme
Governor of this Realm, and of all other his Highness dominions, and
countries, as well in all spiritual, or Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as
temporal; and that no foreign Prince, person, state, or Potentate, has, or
ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or
authority Ecclesiastical, or spiritual, within his Majesty's said Realms,
dominions, and countries, according as the statute, agreeablie to the law of
God, requires.

Secondly they profess, with the rest of their Fathers, and brethren
Protestants, that his Majesty has authority to command, or forbid, in all
matters whatsoever, necessary, or indifferent: and that, in both these, he is
to be obeyed, upon conscience. Of his authority in matters commanded by God,
we are wholly of one mind. About the matters in question, there are these two
differences. Whether they be indifferent or no: whether, supposing them to be
indifferent, they may be commanded, and done, in case they be thought to
nourish superstition in many, and to be an occasion of stumbling, and
destruction to many a one, for whom Christ has dyed. And these are the
reasons, why they dare not (as they say) approve some things in our church, by
subscription, and practice: otherwise professing not only a willingness, but
a desire to yield, if they might satisfy their own consciences in these
doubts. So that indeed they no way deny the Kings supremacy, either by
attributing that to any foreign pote^tate, or prelate, or any presbytery at
home, which lawfully belo^gs unto him, or by denying his authority in things
indifferent.

Concerning the authority of Bishops, it is not an essential

Essential points of faith are matters of doctrine, wherein not observing, you
mean, not thinking it lawful, to observe or appoint holy days, I say it is
no esse^tiall point of faith to doubt of, or deny this authority; though the
Puritans (generally) hold such denial to be an error.

If it be your meaning, to charge the Puritans with neglecting the observation
of such days, I dare be bold to say, that all Puritans do more religiously
observe them, then any Papist does the Lords day, or Sunday; which I auowe both
of Ministers and people.

That it is unlawful for the church, or magistrate to appoint fasts for the
religious humbling of men, upon just occasions, it is a foul error for any man
to hold, but not against any essential point of faith, required to the being
of a christian, either in truth or profession.

Both Protestants and Puritans agree (generally) about this point: as for the
weekly fish days, Le^t, and the 4. ember weeks, our church, and state
disclaim the appointing of them, for any use of religion, and keep them only
as means, to provide for the increase of cattle, and mainteinance of
shipping, Mariners, Fishermen, and Fishmongers.

Neither is this doctrine of Christ's sufferings any essential

Of this I say, as of the former; that, taking it in such a sense, as this
Papist does, it is no essential point of faith; but in the true meaning of the
article, it is; for it belongs to to the truth of Christian Religion, as a
substantial point, to hold, that our Savior Christ was wholly in the estate
of the dead, both for soul, and body.

Of this matter also there is diversity of opinion, betwixt Protestants, and
Protestants, Puritans, and Puritans, and therefore it is fondly, and falsely set
down, as a point of dissent betwixt protestants, and Puritans.

The like answer is to be made to this also, save only,

And surely (saving other men's better judgment) I am of opinion, that those
Clauses of Athanasius Creed, which seem to shut all men out of heaven, that
believe not those articles of the Creed, are to be understood of some of them
only, or of the Contrary to the truth. The holy, and learned man spoke
according to the occasion, the heresy of Arrius having made a maine difference
betwixt the true, and false Christians. But of these three last points, see The
fourth Article.

Thus much of the maine differences, which this Papist Neither do the
protestants believe any other thing of it, or ascribe any other virtue to it.

The Puritanes do not Condemn the communion book, as irreligious, but
acknowledge it lawful to be used, and both have used it heretofore, and are
ready to use it again, howsoever they desire to be forborne in the use of
some things in it, which (to them) seem unwarrantable.

They entreat to be spared for the Cross in Baptism, And, whereas diverse of
late have yielded to it, the ground of their yielding is, that it is no
significant Ceremony, but only a sign betwixt man, and man, and so
indifferent as they think.

That there are some differences betwixt us, we deny not, nor that this is one
of them, concerning the sign in Confirmation. But this is far from being an
essential point of faith.

And so is this of using Vestiments, Music etc. wherein also there are diverse
opinions, on either side: but, I think, there is no man condemns all these, as
will worship, and superstitious. Yea there are some, called Puritans, that take
none of them all, to be either will worship, or superstitious; and yet they
hold them unlawful. In a word, there is not any difference, to my knowledge,
betwixt us, which may either deprive us of salvation by the death of Christ, or
bar us from living brotherly, and christianly as members of one, and the same
Church.

And thus we have heard the strong arguments of this popish replyer. Who, it
should seem, not resting much upon his own proof, in the end of this first
part, looks to hear some reasons from us, whereby we may approve our selves,
to be the true Church. But that has bin often done by our Divines, so far, as
we profess of our selves. For none of us ever undertook to prove, that we are
the true Church, as the Papists dream of the Church. We are, by the blessing,
and grace of God, a part, or member of the true Church of Christ, not the,
whole church. Yea we acknowledge, that diverse particular churches may refuse
communion with us. and yet both they; and we, remain members of the same true
church: though not without some fault, either on both sides, or at least the
one. But the papists so take to themselves the name of the church, that they
condemn all for schismatickes yea for Heretics, that acknowledge not
themselves to be members of the catholic Romish church, in subjection to the
Pope of Rome.

The sum of our proof is, that we profess that religion, which our savior
Christ has commended unto us, in the scriptures; of which, it should seem,
this man was not ignorant. For, in this very place, he excepts against this
reason; because it is no other, then that, which all heretics will bring to
condemn the church of Christ, This answer is insufficient: unless we shall
grant that our savior brings no good Mat. 4. 4. 7.
reason against the Diuill, in alleging scripture, because Satan himself in
his temptation, replies against him by scripture. Who knows not, that in all
controversies, reasons must be drawn from the arts of which the controversy
is: as for example, what Lawyer will offer to defend a bad cause, but he will
quote law, for his purpose? and shall this either bar him, that pleads against
him, from alleging his books, or make his plea of no force? nay rather any man
of mean discretion, will readily distinguish, and say, the one makes a show of
law but the other has law indeed; so is it in these points of controversy.
The Papists, and other heretics pretend, that the scriptures make for them,
but this may not prejudice the authority thereof, in deciding matters of
controversy: neither shall any true christian need to be ashamed of seeking to
ground his faith upon the scriptures, because Heretics abuse them to their
wicked purposes: no more then our savior was to allege them, though the
Diuill had drawn them to abett his horrible temptation. Nay, if the Papists
were not too wilful, they would, in diverse points, acknowledge the voice of
God in scriptures, it being plain, as these allegations of our Savior Christ.
And, if they had bin then in the Diuils steed, they would not have taken those
places for satisfaction, but would have come upon our savior with a second
reply, of (...) and (...), and have charged him with falsifying the text, for
putting in Only. Therefore we acknowledge this to be our only hold, that by
the Scriptures we are proved to be the Church of God. Let the Arrians comtemne
Councills; We believe, and profess, that they are excellent means allowed by
God, for maintaining, and searching out the truth; only we refuse to match them
in Authority, and account, with the infallible truth of the almighty God Will
any absurd, and base flatterer affirm, that he despises Magistracy, and
Princes who denies, that they have an absolute and infinite Authority?

But, I think, it would shrewdly trouble you to prove, that the Arrians
contemned Councills. Sure it is not likely, since themselves, within the
compass of 30. years, held 10. Councills, at the least, for the establishing
of their wicked heresy. True it is, that they rejected the council of Nice,
wherein their heresy was justly and holyly condemned; but that therefore they
regarded not Councills at all, it is not proved. But consider, I pray you, with
what conscience, or rather with what malice, you write. The Arrians are blamed
by you, for not regarding Councils; we are charged to contemn them. Where as
you know, in your own conscience, that we receive both that Council which the
Arrians refused, and all the other general, and particular councills, save
those, that (as we are persuaded) conteyne in them apparaunt falsehood, and
impiety. If it be a fault not to receive all, who shall excuse you Papists,
that have wholly rejected seven general Councills held at Antioch, Millaine,
Ariminum, Ephesus the second, two at Constantinople against Images, and one at
Pisa: and in part six other, at Sardis, at Syrmium, at Constantinople, in
Tr^llo, at Frankeford, at Constance, at Basil. how justly all, or some of
these are rejected, I dispute not, once it is evident they are rejected,
neither have we any reason to regard your shifting defenses, concerning the
Popes authority, in whom, for sooth, it lies, to allow or disallowe of
Councils. For this is but to beg the question. Therefore, to make short, we
willingly and reverently embrace all Councils and all Canons, and articles of
all Councills, so far forth, as they agree with the word of God; not because of
their authority, but by reason of the truth of those things, which according to
the scriptures, is in them declared, and commended to all christians.

Neither do we hereby challenge to our selves the true interpretation of
scriptures, as if it were appropriated unto us. That is your Popish Heresy.
Nay we acknowledge, with thanks to God, and their just commendation, that the
ancient writers have brought great light to the true understanding of
scriptures. Yea that many Papists have interpreted some texts of scripture
soundly, and religiously. Moreover we confess, that all, and every one of our
writers, either has, or may have failed in his expositions. I speak the last
doubtfully, because some have written but little, and my self have not
examined all.

If any Heretics avow the truth of al their own interpretations, what should
this prejudice our cause? Who submitt whatsoever our expositions to be compared
with the scriptures, and to be received, or refused, as they shall be found to
agree, or disagree with, or from the word of God. I would add hereunto the
general consent of the ancient writers; but that it is a longer, and more
uncertain course, to try whether they be suitable unto their own writings,
then whether they be framed according to the holy Ghosts meaning. For the maine
doubt must needs accompany that trial. viz. who shall be Judge, whether we, or
the Papists rightly understand, and expound the fathers wrytings? If any man
shall say their Books, and Commentaries are plain, and easy; I dare boldly
say of him, that either he never read, what they write, or cares not, what
himself says. It will not serve the turn, to bring some plain
interpretations out of them, for so can we allege very many texts out of the
Scripture. But he, that is desirous to judge truly of the meaning of any
writer, must not snatch up a sentence here, and there, but advisedly consider
both his manner of writing in other places, and the signification of diverse
phrases, and custom of speech, in those times, wherein he writ, the occasion of
those particular words, he would understand, and diverse other such points.
Which will prove (as ere while I said) more troublesome, and less certain,
then to search every corner of the text, for the true meaning of the scripture.
And here, let us remember, that we are sure the scripture agrees with it self,
in every place, and point: that any other writers do so, who can be assured? So
that, many times, we shall beat our brains to reconcile those speeches, which
indeed are very certain contrarieties Since that this difficulty remains in
understanding the fathers writings, which is the only doubt in the scripture,
what madness were it, to leave beating of the text, wherein we know the
certain truth is to be found; and to run riot in the wilde-feilds of men's
inventions, where perhaps there is nothing to be had but error. Let us use the
help of Ancient writers to find the meaning of the holy Ghost; but not rest
upon their authority therein. If they prove their interpretations by reason,
let it be waighed, that it may persuade us to think, as they do. If there be
none, let us labor to find some for their interpretation. If that will be not,
let us see what other reason we can have, of any other exposition. If it please
God to show us any, Let us crave pardon of the Fathers to dissent from them: if
none, Let us rather trust them, then our selves, where there is nothing, but
conjecture, without difference of likelihood.

We are far from bragging of any such special illumination, as the Donatists
challenged to themselves. For we say not, that the Church of God is only in our
assemblies or the spirit tied to us. Who knows not, that this is a stale
popish devise, to shutt up the holy Ghost in the Popes breast; so that neither
all Councills, without him, can be any thing worth, and he, of himself,
without any of them, is alsufficient. A little flock we are in deed, if we
be compared with the huge swarms of Infidells, Papists, and other
h^retickes. Yea, as many of us, as belong to the election of God, are of that
small flock, to which Luke. 12. 32.
it is God^ good pleasure to give A kingdom. To be of any other Little flock,
we account it no commendation; Nay rather we desire, and pray, that it would
please God to enlarge the bounds of his Church, and to increase the number of
true professors. But we are not ashamed of our small number: though the Papists
twight us with all, in comparison of their huge multitudes.

Therefore, whereas this Papist likens us to the Donatists, Pelagians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, with all the rabble of other damned heretics, we
acknowledge it is our portion to be rayled on, with our Master Christ; and so
shake of this froth of a malicious stomach, with that speech of the
Archangell, The Lord rebuke thee.

Now for a Conclusion, that the end might be suitable to the beginning, he
labors to disgrace the principles of our Religion; by affirming, as truly,
as he has done all the rest, that if our principles be true, then Saint Paul
exhorts men to infidelity. How many of our principles, think you, he
overthrows by this reason? But poor one, if it were never so true, and being
false, as it is, not that neither.

Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that, which we are bound to believe by faith,
exhorts us to infidelity.

The proof of this might well have bin spared, and the strength, you wast^n^^,
reserved for the assumption: which has more need o^ your help, then it seems,
your are aware of.

But Saint Paul does exhort us to doubt of our salvation, which we are bound
to believe by faith, according to the Protestants doctrine.

Because it makes for the better understanding of this Reason, I will in few
words set down what we teach, concerning this point. Namely, that it behooues
every Christian to labor for the perfection, as of other graces, so of the
assurance, that comes by faith also. Which stands in a full persuasion of the
love of God in Jesus Christ, and the continuance thereof, to his everlasting
salvation. In deed this is not the proper nature of faith, which rather is that
grace; whereby we cast our selves upon Christ, to be saved by him. But it is an
effect of faith, which every Christian must strive to have grounded in him
self: so that, if he have it not, he fails in one duty to God. But we may not
imagine, that whosoever has not this feeling assurance of Gods love to him,
either is without faith, or shall be damned, for the want of this persuasion. Nay
we make no question, but that both faith it self, and this effect of it, is in all, or the most part, very far from perfection, every one having his measure
allotted unto him, according to the good pleasure of God; who sees how much is
necessary for every one, in regard of the inward, and outward trialls, which
he shall have in this life. This must we endeavor by all good means to
establish, and augment; and hereunto belongs that exhortation of the Apostles,
With fear and trembling work your salvation.

There are two kinds of men, whom it does concern. First those, that vainly
deceive themselves with an opinion of of faith, whereas they have none. Let him,
that thinks he stands take heed least he fall.

Then they, that in deed do truly believe: who, because their faith is
imperfect, must labor daily for the perfecting thereof; which they shall never
attain to, if they be careless, and do not continually stand in fear of
falling, by reason of their own infirmity.

So that this exhortation does not forbid stri^ing to perfection, but inioyne
the means of attaining thereto: which is, daily to stand in fear of our
corruption, because we are not perfect in faith. Blessed is the man that
fears always: fear to Pro. 28. 14
sin is no way against faith; because faith has received no promise of full
freedom from sin. Fear of punishment Romans 6. 23.
is necessarily annexed to the former, because the wages of sin is death.
Whereof we may taste, in our own feeling, by reason of our weak faith, if we
do not work our salvation with fear and trembling.

What his meaning should be, in his last sentence, I cannot guess. For, I
think, he will not say, that this filial fear comprehends in it servile
fear also; because then the distinction will scarce be current: unless he
expound himself, as I said before, that the fear of punishment follows upon
the fear of sin; in which respect we need not doubt to grant, that the
Apostle exhorts us to both kinds of fear: and yet so, as that he no way
persuades to infidelity, though the Protestants principle be, that we are
bound to believe by faith that we shall be saved.

Papist.
Articles concerning good life, and piety.

Protestant.
I may not forget to put the Reader in mind, that diverse of these Articles, as
the 1. 2. 4. 5. are not points held by the Protestants, but matters charged
upon their doctrine by the Papists, and that quite contrary to their direct
protestation. So that, if any such thing fall out upon our opinions, we may
profess, with a good conscience, that we are deceived, by the error of our
judgment, not carried away by any desire to err. For proof hereof, we offer
our selves to be judged by all men of any indifferency, according to our
answers, and reasons, which we have made, and now do make, in our just, and
necessary defense.

Article. 1.
Papist.
The Protestants are bound in Conscience, never to ask God forgiveness of
their sins.

Protestant.
The Protestants will rather abjure any point of doctrine, upon which this may
follow, then, to maintain their doctrine, for bear the p^rformance of this
duty: but neither of both these need, as our answer will show.

The principal syllogism for the proof of this article, omitted, I know not
upon what reason, by this Author, is thus to be concluded.

Whosoever sins grievously, in asking God forgiveness of his sins, is
bound in conscience never to ask it.

But the Protestants sin grievously, in asking God forgiveness of their
sins.

Therefore the Protestants are bound in conscience, never to ask God
forgiveness of their sins.

Instead of this syllogism, we have the proof of the assumption.

Papist.
Whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiven A. B. Bucer. in
lib. de con. art. de ^ustifi Calum in a^^d. council ^es. 6. and lib. 3. iustit
c. 2 ^ 16. 17. and 18 Kem^^ in exam. con. Tru^. ^est. 6
him* sins most grievously, in asking God pardon for them.

But all true Protestants are assured by faith, that their sins are forgiven
them. Ergo.

All true Protestants sin greiuously, in asking pardon of God for them.

The Mayor is evident: for who; but an Infidel, or a mad man would demand of
God the creation of the world, which he is assured by faith, that God has
already created? or Christ's incarnation, which already is performed? or the
institution of sacraments, which already is effected? In like manner, who, but
an Infidel, or mad man, will demand pardon of his sins, which he believes
already by faith, that God has forgeuen? For it is a sign that he doubts of
that, which he is bound by faith to believe; which doubting faith is flat
infidelity. D.


Moreover, whatsoever we demand, that we hope to obtain: Nam quod videt quis,
quid ^perat^d Romans 6.
but no man hops to obtain that, he already possesses: as no man will
demand of God his own soul, or body, because already he pos^esseth them.

The Minor is undoubted; because this is that lively faith, whereby the
Protestants are justified: by this they apprehend Christ, by this they apply
his merits, and Passion unto them; and, without this, no man can attain unto
Salvation.

Hereupon I will infer, that no Protestant can, with a safe conscience, say
the Lords prayer. Because he cannot pray, as he ought without true faith, and
call God his father; and, if he have true faith, he cannot, without note of
infidelity, utter this petition, forgive us our sins: for that most
assuredly he believes, and protests, in the first ingresse of that prayer,
that he is the son of God; and consequently believes by faith, that his
sins are forgiven him.

Protestant.
The best is, we are not charged with denying, that a man is bound to ask God
forgiveness of sins, but only, that we do it against that duty, to which in
conscience we are bound. Therefore, if this cauil were a true challenge, we
might happily be thought absurd, in holding opinions, that cannot agree
together, but we could not be counted impious; since we urge, and practice
continually, and daily prayer, for the obtaining of forgiveness; but this
conceit is fancied by Papists, not so much as favored by our doctrine. Witness
this poor reason of theirs, and our plain, and true answer thereunto.

Whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiven, sins
Proposition.
most grievously, in asking God pardon for them.

Perhaps some man will marvel, that this Papist, as it may A.
seem unnecessarily, makes so often mention of believing by faith, and being
assured by faith; because there can be no assurance, or belief but only by
faith. But he does it agreeably to their Popish doctrine: which acknowledges a
kind of assurance, but that, not of faith, but of hope. There is (say they,)
concerning every man's own salvation, Certitudo spei, Assurance of hope, but
not Certitudo fidei, Assurance of faith.

The reason of this distinction is, that hope may be deceived, but faith
cannot. Which they would never say, if they considered, that all true Christian
hope arises from some promise made unto us by God in the Scriptures, whereunto
we have interest by nothing, but faith. What a vain thing is it, for a man to
hope for ought, at Gods hands, as the world commonly does, without any
likelihood of obteining it? and what likelihood can there be, where there is a
flat protestation to the contrary? namely, that nothing is to be looked for at
the hands of God, either by faith, or hope, but in, and for Jesus Christ. All
the blessings, that Abraham the Father of the faithful, could make any claim
to, were to be held by gift upon promise. Therefore if we will be his children,
as we must be, if we be faithful, we have nothing to trust to, but Gods
promise in Jesus Christ. Faith then is the ground of Hope, and according to the
measure of true believing, so is the measure of all true hoping. Let us
exemplify it a little.

Do I hope for everlasting life? What reason have I to hope for it? the promise
of God, that proclaims pardon of sin, and inheritance of Glory to all, that
believe in his son Jesus Christ. But how does that concern me? by reason of
my faith in Christ. So that, if I believe not in Christ, I do but deceive my
self, with a shadow of hope; for true Christian hope I have none.

But I hope I believe in Christ. But that will not serve thy turn. For so
does every man, that has heard of Christ, and believes the truth of the
Gospel: and yet he is far from true hope, and from that, which the Papists
themselves require of every Christian. Who teach that every man, by receiving
the Sacrament of Baptism, is actually purged from all his sins before
committed: which he must certainly be persuaded, and assured of. The like they
say of their sacraments of penance, and of extreme unction: Which he, that
receaueth dying, having a general Catholic faith, shall surely go to heaven,
though perhaps through Purgatory. In so much that if he, which is thus prepared,
should doubt whether he were saved, or no, he should sin mortally. Therefore
to conclude this point, which I have hit upon, this by the way I say it is
plain, that faith limits hope, and that there is no true hope, or reason of
hoping, but proportionably to the measure of believing. Which will easilier be
acknowledged of us, if we remember, that hope in the Scriptures is applied to
those things, which we must of necessity believe by faith. And in deed the
true difference betwixt faith, and hope, is not in the diversity of assurance,
but in the circumstance of time. Faith reaching to all times past, present, and
to come: hope being restrained only to the future time. A Christian man
believes by faith, that God will bless him in all things of this life, so
far forth, as it shall make for his own glory, and the believers salvation.
Therefore also he hops for this blessing from God, not absolutely, but with
those conditions, which faith observes in believing. The same man believes by
faith, that because he trusts in Christ, he is now in the favor of God, and
shall so continue for ever. Therefore accordingly he hopes for salvation,
without any other condition. Of the truth of these things I dispute not, but
only bring them to show the nature of hope; which is always fitted according
to the nature of the promises, which faith rests upon: Where we believe
conditionally, we hope conditionally: where our faith is absolute, our hope is
so too.

That the proposition is false it appears by the example B. To the proposition.
of David. Who prays to God for the pardon of those sins, which he believed
by faith were forgiven (for so was he assured, from the Lord, by the prophet
Nathan) unless we shall charge him with infidelity, for not believing the
prophet: since the speech was so plain, that he could not but understand it.
I have sinned against the Lord. A plain, and 2. Sam. 12. 13.
true Confession The Lord also has put away thy sin; thou shall not dye. As
plain, and certain an absolution. Will you come in here with your vain
distinctions of guilt, and punishment, of temporal, and eternal? If you do,
it is to no purpose. For, whatsoever the respects were, in which David prayed
for the forgiveness of sins, once this is clear, that he prayed for it: and
then what remains, but that you condemn him of sinning grievously, in asking
God pardon for those sins, which he believed by faith were forgiven; or of
infidelity for not believing? But if David, in some regard, might crave
pardon, when it was already granted, and believed by him to be so; be think
your self what will become of your proposition, and how wisely you have
charged us with sinning grievously, for doing that which in some respect, may
be lawfully done.

Now for your distinctions, I will not wast time, nor blot paper to refute
them: but only show, that in this case, they cannot help you. Which of the
former is apparent: because the Prophet precisely mentions both parts. The Lord
has taken away thy sin: There is the guilt wipt away. Thou shall not die:
There is the punishment forgiven. Yea, you will say, the eternal punishment,
but not the temporal. I pray you whether of the two is it, that God threatens
Adam Genesis 2. 18.
withal? The day thou eatest thou shall die the death.

The punishment; yea the whole penalty of the statute concerning sin is,
Thou shall die. See how God, for the comfort of David, proclaims this pardon,
in the very contrary words, Thou shall not die. Who shall persuade us now, that
the pardon is less general, then the penalty.

But is the eternal punishment indeed forgiven? I think you mistake your
self, or else popish doctrine hanges but ill fauoredly together. For what is
that, which you say is changed from eternal, to temporal? Is it not the
punishment due to sin? how is it then forgiven, unless forgiveness of sins be
nothing else, but a changing of the punishment: which if we grant, then Christ
has not obtained any more for us, but the altering of the punishment; then God
has not pardoned our sin, but remitted somewhat of the penalty. Speak not here
of the effect of baptism; for, if by forgiveness of sins therein, we are
wholly acquitted from the guilt, and punishment, why should the same words after
baptism, signify a change of the punishment, and not a full pardon? David
therefore, in praying for pardon of those sins, which he believed by faith
were already pardoned, by his practice destroyed this popish reason, long
before it was hatched. Nor may you answer, that this prayer was for any
temporal Calamity, which was laid upon him, for this sin, because the
scriptures make these requests diverse. He was threatened by the prophet, that
the child borne in adultery 2. Sam. 12. 18. Psa. 32. 3. 4 and 51. 1. 2.
should surely dye. For the life of the child he prays, fastes, and weeps,
but those 2. Psalms, I spoke of, are of another nature; not once mentioning,
nor once glancing at any temporal, or outward affliction. And if there be in
deed any such dictinction of guilt, and punishment, David entreats directly
and principally for the former: According to the multitude of thy mercies wash
me thoroughly etc. Every verse expressing the anguish of a distressed soul, for
the conscience of sin committed against God, And whereas he makes also
request to God, for deliverance from the punishment, make me to hear joy etc.
It is manifest that this can no way v. ^1.
advantage the Papists: because he entreats only for the assurance of
forgiveness, which was to be testified unto his soul, by the feeling of Gods
love, and his own rejoicing therein; but what makes this for popish Purgatory
after death, or proud satisfaction, in this life? for David promised noe
satisfaction, but a contrite spirit, and a broken heart: which is no more; then
the first entrance into popish absolution, neither, by praying for the joy of
the spirit, does he beg any exemption from purgatory: because a man may have
that, after diverse sins committed, in some good measure, and yet be liable to
the fire of purgatory: by omitting some duties, which he is enjoined by his
ghostly father to perform. Now the 32. psalm runs in the same manner. Blessed
is the man etc. here is mention of having wickedness forgiven, sin covered,
iniquity not imputed, of punishment not releast not a word, or letter. Let us
go forward, whence Psa 32. 1. v. 2. v 3.
proceeded his roaring? even from the guilt of his sin not felt to be
pardoned, I acknowledged my sin, etc. I co^fest my wickedness unto thee, and
thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. What punishment? No doubt that,
which David entreated for. But the te^porall punishments were not forgiven (I
call the^ as the Papists do) for both the Child dyed, and Absolon was raised up
out of David's own house, and lay with his fathers wives, in the sight of the
son. What question can there be then, whether David 2. Sam. 12. 14. 18. 2.
Sam. 12. 11. and. 16. 22.
prayed for the forgiveness of his sins, even in respect of the eternal
punishment, for all he did believe, that it was granted him, according to the
word of God by the prophet Nathan?

Whereupon it necessarily ensues, that the proposition is untrue, which
condemns every one of sinning grievously against God, that asks forgiveness of
his sins, being assured by faith, that they are forgiven, But for the better
clearing of this point, let us also shape a direct answer to his proofs, and
afterward set down, what we maintain, concerning praying for pardon of our
sins. His first proof is taken from an argument of parity, or equality in
this sort, or form.

If none, but an Infidel, or a mad man would demand of God the creation of
the world, the incarnation of Christ, the institution of the Sacraments, all
which he is assured by faith are performed already, then none, but such an one,
will demand pardon of his sins, which he believes already by faith, God has
forgiven.

The consequence of this proposition is feeble, because it presumes an
equality, where there is none. For we have not the like measure of assurance,
for the forgiveness of our sins, as we have of these other points here
signified: as I have showed already, and must say again by and by, in answer
to the assumption. Therefore though we should sin grievously in craving those
things of God, which without all doubt we are assured he has already done,
because we should but mock him: yet do we not sin, in like sort by desiring
that, whereof our weak faith must needs make some question. I grant we sin
by doubting, through the weakness of our faith; but I deny we sin by
praying, because of that doubting. Further, we are to consider, that there is a
great difference betwixt these things, even in respect of their being past: for
the three former are absolutely dispatched, the later, after a sort, is every
day a doing: because howsoever, in the everlasting purpose of God, the sins
of all the elect are already, from all eternity, forgiven; yet they are, in
respect of us, and the actual being of them, day by day actually remitted: and
therefore we may, without grievous sin, and must (unless we will sin
grievously) daily crave pardon of God; because we have new sins daily to be
forgiven. The point will be made more plain, in the explication of our opinion.

But none, but a mad man, or Infidel, will demand of God the creation of the
world, the incarnation of Christ, the institution of the Sacraments, all which
he is assured by faith, are already given.

If a man be fully assured, that these things are already accomplished, he
cannot without sin, demand of God the accomplishing of them: but, if there
arise in his mind some doubt concerning the certainety thereof, he may, and
must entreat the Lord to reveal the truth unto him, and to confirm unto him
the assurance of it: though his doubting indeed is sin, yet have we no just
cause, nor sufficient warrant to condemn this doubting faith of flat
infidelity, as this rigorous Papist does; who never felt, it should seem,
what conflicts there are betwixt faith and frailty.

Now the Proposition, and assumption being both faulty, how can the conclusion
be without fault? Therefore, this former proof not being able to abide the
proof; let us try the latter, which must thus be applied to the Authors
purpose, for the proof of the first proposition.

Whosoever demands that, which he hopes not to obtain, sins grievously, in
demanding it.

By not hoping to obtain that, which is demanded, there D.
is no reproof employed of praying without hope; as if it were his meaning to
exhort us to trust, or hope in God, for that indeed concerns not this reason;
but he signifies, that a man ought not to pray for that, of the obteyning
whereof there can be no hope, because we are already in possession of it: which
proposition of his is only so far true, as it belongs to him, that knows he
has the thing he prays for. And that appears by his proof; for that, which
a man sees, wherefore does he hope it? That is, a man has no reason to hope
for that, which he is sure he has. For hope is of things to Romans 8. 24
come; as also the words immediately before plainly show. Hope, that is seen,
is not hope. Therefore he only sins grievously in praying for that, he
possesses, who knows he does possess that he prays for. But he, that stands
in doubt, whether he have the thing or no, which he is desirous of, may without
this blame make means to get it, though he have it already; because he is not
certain that he has it; howsoever, it may be, he has some persuasion of the
possession thereof.

But whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiu^^ him, in asking
God pardon demands that, which he has no hope to obtain.

The former answer, of the measure of the assurance, argues this assumption of
falsehood: because a man may by faith truly believe, that his sins are
forgiven, and yet not fully, or certainly be resolved thereof, in regard
whereof he may, and ought to sue for pardon.

But all true Protestants are assured by faith, that their sins Principal
assumptio^.
are for given them.

They should indeed be so assured, and are bound to labor E.
for such assurance: but not one of many thousands attaines to that plerophorie
or full persuasion: and yet every one (as I said before) has his proportion
fitted out for him, by the spirit of God, according to the measure of trial,
which God in his fatherly wisdom, will by any means make of him: so that he
shall never be finally, or wholly swallowed up of despairing. And this is an
effect of that justifying faith, by which we lay hold on, and apply unto our
selves the sufferings of Christ; which every true Christian man feels in
himself, in part, whiles he lives in this vale of misery, and wholly, at the
time of his departure henco; the spirit taking from him all conscience of
sin, and filling his soul with the undoubted feeling of that joy, which God
has prepared for him in Jesus Christ. Other assurance then this, or in other
manner, we teach not, and namely not this; that he is not to be esteemed, as a
true Christian, who makes any doubt, upon any occasion of the pardon of any
sin.

Now, for a conclusion of this Article, he geathers of the F.
former point, that no Protestant can, with a safe conscience, say the Lords
Prayer: because therein he must ask forgiveness of sins, whereas he
believes already, that all are forgiven.

The reason stands thus.
He, that cannot, without note of infidelity, ask forgiveness of sins,
cannot, with a safe conscience, say the Lords Prayer.

What this note of Infidelity means, we shall more fitly examine, in the
assumption. If by a safe conscience, he mean a conscience free from sin,
even in the very action of prayer; we grant his conclusion. Because (as it
shall appear, in the next article) no man performs any duty, in this life,
unto God, but it is stained with some spot of his natural corruption. But, if
by a safe conscience, he understand a conscience without sin, in respect of
his praying (as I am persuaded he does) I deny the consequence of his
proposition. For though a man cannot crave pardon of sin, with a full
assurance, the want whereof this Papist seems to call a note of infidelity,
yet he may make that petition, with a safe conscience; that is, without any
just check of conscience, for praying so.

But no Protestant can, without note of infidelity, ask forgiveness of
sins.

That weak faith is not to be counted infidelity, I take it, no Christian
doubts at all. And as little, that it is not a note of infidelity, to beg
pardon of our sins. The assurance whereof though we should have; yet we have
it, but in part. Therefore this assumption is void of truth, as the whole
discourse of this article has proved. For I make no doubt, but that by note of
Infidelity, he means (as before) want of faith, in not believing, that our
sins are forgiven: or in demanding that of God, which by faith we are
assured, he has already performed. All which being answered before, there
remains nothing, but that I shortly declare what we hold and teach,
concerning praying for forgiveness of sins. First, we believe and teach,
that all our sins original, and actual; before, and after Baptism; both
guilt, and punishment, temporal, and eternal, are washed away by the blood and
sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly, that this pardon is made
effectual to us, by faith, whereby we cast our selves upon Christ, to be saved
by him. Thirdly, that the assurance, which follows upon believing, is wrought
in every man, according to his measure, and is in no man, ordinarily, so
perfect, but that it is mixed with some doubting, more or less. How praying
for pardon of sins may stand with this faith, though I have showed
sufficiently already: yet it will not be amiss to declare it more fully, for
answer to this accusation.

We believe, in some measure that God has forgiven all our sins, in our
savior Jesus Christ. But, because our faith is weak, we continually pray to
God for pardon: or rather for the assurance of our pardon to be increased
neither yet does it follow, that then prayer for forgiveness is an effect of a
weak faith; because though our faith were strong? yet the feeling of our own
wretchedness, the just desert of sin, and the wrath of God due unto us, would
wring out such entreatie from us: as we see the extremity which our savior
Christ was in upon the Cross made him cry out so maynly, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? albeit he was fully assured, that God neither had, nor
would utterly forsake him.

Ad hereunto, that we do indeed properly demand forgiveness of sin; because
we are to receive actual pardon from God continually, both for our original
corruption, which always, in this life, abides with us, and for actual sins,
which we daily, and hourly commit against the majesty of Almighty God. If any
man shall infer hereupon, that therefore the person sueing is guilty of
damnation till his sin be forgiven, which must ensue upon his prayer. I
answer, that in respect of God, it is pardoned, as soon, as committed, because
he, that once believes is thereby made a member of Christ's mystical body, and
so has all his sins satisfied for, by the death, and sufferings of his head
Christ: But to him, that is, in his feeling, it is not by and by forgiven;
namely til by repentance he have craved mercy of God for it.

But indeed the chief reason, and end of our praying to God for pardon, is,
that we may always acknowledge, that every sin committed by us, deserves
everlasting damnaton, of it self, and should everlastingly be punished, if that
God had not accepted our savior Christ's satisfaction for us; By which though
we are freed, if we rest on him by faith; yet both it is our duty, according
to Gods commandment, to sue for pardon for his sake, and in truth, if we do
it not, we have no reason to persuade our selves, that our sins are pardoned.
For howsoever it is true, that Christ our head, has paid the price, of our
ransom: yet it is also true, that we every day deserve condemnation, and must
entreat God for pardon, that so we may come to that assurance, which the Lord
has enjoined us to labor and seek for. The some of all is this, that we pray
for pardon of our sins, 1. because Christ has taught, and commanded us so
to pray, 2. because, by our sins, we have deserved eternal damnation, 3.
because we must daily renew our repentance, as we commit new sins every day,
4. because we have not absolute assurance of the forgiveness thereof.

Some perhaps will rather answer, that we have no assurance at all, but so
long, as we continue members of Christ's body; which is no longer (say they)
then we refrain from great sins; for by every such sin (they say) we are
cut of from Christ, and therefore have need to pray for pardon of it. But this
answer both is false, in regard of that, it affirms, concerning our being out
of Christ; and also does not satisfy the whole doubt. For it shows no reason
why we may pray for the forgiveness of any other sins, then those great
ones. So that either we must not crave pardon for small transgressions, or else
must do it needlessly? since they are already pardoned, as long as we abide in
the body of our savior Christ. Wherefore I had rather rest upon the former
answer, which is agreeable to the word of God, and warrantable by true reason.

Article. 2,
Papist.
The Protestants are bound in conscience, to avoid all good works.

Protestant.
If this Papist would have avoided all slaundering, the world should not have
bin troubled with such absurd collections.

Papist.
Every man is bound, upon pain of eternal damnation, to avoid all deadly
sins. But fasting, prayer, almesdeeds, and all good works, according Luther
in after, ar. 31 32. and 39. Calu. lib. 3. inst. c. 11. ^. 4. etc. 14. 19.
Mclarch. locc. tit. de. peccat. Confess. Augusti articl^. 6. Romans 6. 23. Isa.
64. 6.
to the Protestants religion, are deadly sins.

Ergo, According to the Protestants religion; all men are bound, upon pain of
eternal damnation, to avoid fasting, prayer, Almesdeedes, and all good works.

B. The Mayor is manifest* for the wages of deadly sin is death Stipendium
peccati mors.

D. The Minor is as evident. for, according to the Protestants religion, and
common exposition of this text of scripture, Facti sumns, vt immundi omnes nos,
and tanquam pannus menstruat^ omnes iustitiae nostr^. We are made all
unclean, and al our Justices are like a stained cloth*

That is, as they say, the best works, we can do, are infected with deadly
sin; and consequently deserve eternal damnation, and therefore to be avoided:

I am not ignorant, that some wranglers, with some shifting euasions go about
to answer this article; forsooth, that the stains, and imperfections, the
sins, and spots, ought to be avoided; but yet the good works to be
prosecuted: A silly shift, but put case it be impossible to wring out the
stains, then is not this monstrous cloth to be abhord? put case I could not
give alms, but I must steal am I not bound in conscience to avoid the giving
of alms? Admit I could not see mine enemy, but, by experience long proved, I
should fall a quarrelling with him; am I bound in conscience to avoid his
company? say that I could not eat flesh, but I should scandalize the beholders,
ought I not to say, non manducabo carnes in aternum? I will not eat flesh, for
ever? Grant that I could not relieve the poor, but I should stain this
action with vain glory;

Should I not hear of him, that can not lie, he has received his reward, and
consequently that there remains no recompensation therefore in heaven? So I
say, in like manner, if the corruption of nature, if the poison of concupisce^ce
so stain my best actions, that whatsoever I do, or think, I cannot possibly
effect them, without these infections, and corruptions; then certainly I am
bound in conscience to avoid these crimes, and offenses, the which cannot
possibly be performed, without these vicious circumstances; for, bonum constat
ex integra causa; malum nascitur ex quolibet defectu; a good thing consists
of all integrity; but an evil thing is caused by every defect: that a man be
in health every humor must keep his temper; that he be sick it suffices one
only exceed, and keep not his just proportion; so that a work be good, it
must be effected with all due circumstances, that it be ill, one only will
defile; as we commonly say, one ill herb will spoil a whole potfull of
pottage.

Protestant.
By an orderly course of disputation, the first syllogism should have bin to
this effect.

If al good works, according to the Protestants religion, be deadly sins, the
Protestants are bound in conscience to avoid al good works.

But al good works are deadly syns, according to the Protes^ants Religion.

Therefore the protestants are bound in conscience to avoid all good works.

This, or some such syllogism, would have saved me some labor, for I should
not have needed to have meddled with any thing, but the matter of it: and you
some blame; for the form of it would have been agreeable to logic. Whereas now
I must needs take pains to find fault with the lamenes of your reason.

Every man is bound, upon pain of eternal damnation, to avoid all deadly
sins.

This syllogism is faulty, because the conclusion agrees not with the
question. Your conclusion is general of al men; whereas your question is
particular of protestant^. Besides, that runs upon a penalty of eternal
damnation, this speaks of being bound in conscience. If you answer, that is is
all one, to be bound in conscience and to be bound upon pain of eternal
damnation, either all sins deserve eternal damnation, and then what will
become of your purgatory distinction betwixt mortal, and venial sins; or
else no man is bound in Conscience to avoid any, but deadly sins; and then
what a window do you set open to an innumerable company of sins ^ How empty
will you make purgatory? How short and bare will your auricular Confessions be?
It were as good therefore for you to do that, you make a show of, even directly
to conclude your question. But let us examine the matter of your syllogism.

The Proposition, I grant, is true, that Every man is bound in conscience, or
upon pain of eternal damnation, B.
to avoid all sin. But what needs this popish distinction of Deadly sins?
Which is so alleged by you, as if it had some allowance from our Divines,
whereas we wholly reject this fancy; because there is no sin, that deserves
not eternal damnation. For proof whereof we need no other place of
Scripture, then that which this Papist himself bringes. The wages of sin is
death. Neither may it be prejudicial Romans 6. 25
to us; that he has foisted in Deadly; since neither the Greek has any such
word, nor the latin, which he, according to his fond custom, to no purpose,
and here also unwisely against himself, sets down. We grant there are
differences, and degrees of sins; but the least, that can be, is a
transgression, and breach of the law, and therefore punishable by damnation:
but, if his meaning were, by deadly sins to signify notorious gross
transgressions, he does us wrong another way, as in the assumption it shall
presently appear, which is this;

But fasting, prayer, al^^^sdeedes, and all good works according C.
to the Protestants religion, are deadly sins.

But lying, and slaundering are not, according to the popish religion, as it
should seem by your practice. For surely, if you thought they were, you would
never be so desperate to practice them against so manifest a truth, in matters
of so great impo^tance. It is not possible you should think, that Protestants
account good works to be sins, which they acknowledge both to be commanded,
and also accepted of God. Yea, more then that, to be wrought in the faithful
by the spirit of God, and to have a reward prepared for them in heaven.

But that, which the Protestants teach, concerning sin in good works is, that
our Corruption distaines the best works of Gods spirit in us; so that, not only
they cannot be meritorious to the obteining of everlasting life, but also
deserve eternal damnation, in the just, district, and perfect judgment of
God: in whose sight, nothing, that is any way unclean, can appear to receive
allowance, but only by his merciful goodness, that pardons the sin for
Christ's sake, and affords the work acceptance. Yet does not this admixtion of
our sinnefulnesse, change the nature of the work, as if it made that duty a
sin, which is of it self obedience: but takes from the particular act, all
power to justify, and deserve at Gods hands, which otherwise it has, upon
Covenant between God, and us. For example, Praying, giving of Alms, and such
like, are not made sins by any Corruption of ours: but the actions of these
virtues being performed by us imperfectly, and sinfully, as they always are,
if they be examined in the severity of Gods justice, will be condemned as
sinful, not rewarded as righteous; because we have desiled them. And this
himself acknowledges afterward, for our opinion, where he says, that we
affirm, the best works, we can do, are, infected with deadly sin. But it is
not all one, to say that Fasting, prayer, alms deeds etc. and all good works
done by us, are infected with deadly Sin, and to avouch that fasting, prayer,
almesdeeds, and all good works are deadly sins. He, that says the body is
infected with some disease; does not say the body is that disease. But
concerning deadly sin, if thereby he understand notorious, and wilful
breaking of the law of God, by some greiuous transgression, we deny, that all
good works are so much as infected with dead y sin. For we know, and
profess, that, in the whole course of our obedience to God, we are ordinarily
free from such sins, and that the Corruption, which defiles our works,
proceeds rather from weakness, then willfullnes. As for those actions of ours,
which have such gross sins adjoined to them, we deny that they can, any way
truly challenge so much as the bare name of good works, in the sight of God.
Such are those vaineglorious, and hypocritical deeds of the Pharisees: Which
our Savior condemns; and such, to come nearer home, are popish good works.
Because they are grounded upon an evil intent; namely a purpose, and Conceit
of justifying the doers thereof, and deserving Ex rigore iustitia, in the rigor
of justice, everlasting glory of almighty God.

This I avouch generally of all their good works whatsoever: and particularly
of all the. 3. here named, I say further, that, in some part, for the very
substance of them, they are no better, nor other then sins. Fasting is not of
it self any good work; as if it made a man more acceptable to God, then
moderate eating does; but in. 2. respects it is upon just occasion to be used,
either for testifying of our humiliation, by acknowledging our selves unworthy
so much, as to taste of any of Gods creaturs: or else for the better preparing
of our selves to call upon God by prayer. But Popish fasting accounts the very
absteining from meat, a part of holiness, and not simply from meat, but from
some kinds of meat. So that a man may fully, and truly keep a popish fast,
though he neither be humbled in the sense of his sin, nor consideration of
Gods wrath d^e thereunto, nor perform any extraordinary duty of prayer, nor
have any occasion of fasting, but perhaps of the Contrary. Yea though he gorge,
and glut himself with all kinds of dainties, and fill his stomach, and head
too with most delicate wines. Always pro^ided, that he touch not any flesh,
or whit meat. And hence it is, that a Popish fast, by way of a proverb,
signifies as much, as a costly, and delicious ba^quet. No, this kind of fast is
so far from being a good work, that it is merely a carnal, and superst
tious work of the flesh, ha^ing not so much as the outward form of a fast,
which consists in refraining all kind of sustenance, not this, or that only.

Prayer indeed is of another nature, as being a duty by which in it self, God
is properly honored, whether it be by petition, or thanksgiving. But Popish
prayer stands in vain repetition of Pater-nosters, Aue-maryes, Creeds,
(whereof the two last also are nothing less then prayers) and that many times
for a penance. And out of doubt they are not much deceived therein; for it is a
grievous punishment of blindness, and senselessness, to imagine, that such
toylesome lip-labor can please God. Yet all this might have the better show of
prayer, if that, which is babled over, were understood: but, for the most part,
the common people pray, as Parrats speak, altogether by rote, without
knowledge what they say. Shall I add hereunto, that the prayers, which
ordinarily are made by poor ignorant souls, are not made to God but to
creatures? insomuch that it has been held here in England, and so no doubt is
yet in Popish countries, for a certain mark of an heretic, for a man to
offer up his own prayers to God, in Jesus Christ, without the mediation of
some Saint or other. All which considered we truly avouch, that this Popish
praying is sin.

And the like we affirm of some almesgiuing; howsoever we gladly acknowledge,
that the duty of it self, is one of those sacrifices, with which God is highly
pleased. But Heb. 13. 16.
to give alms, first, to be prayed for after death: secondly, to the singing
of Masses, and Di^^ges; thirdly, to the mainteinance of idle bellies: fourthly,
to the impouerishing, and many times undoing, of the poor wife and children,
is no better then infidelity; if the Apostle truly say, that he, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
which has not care of his own, especially of his domesticals, is worse then
an Infidel.

Therefore, if we speak of these works, as they are done, and allowed by the
Papists, we say that they are deadly sins, not only faulty, by reason of
infirmity; which, for the most part, is the estate of those good works, that
the faithful in weakness perform. Yet are they not, by reason thereof,
deadly sins, nor infected with deadly sin: but only, as all sins, how
light account soever the Papists make of them, deserve eternal death. Neither
does it follow upon the grant of this infection, and desert, that therefore
they are to be avoided, no more, then, that a sick man is bound to starve
himself by fasting, as Pomponius Atticus absurdly did, because his feeding
continued his disease, and that, as Hippocrates says, the more you nourish some
sick bodies, the more you corrupt them. The sin indeed, which cleaving to
the work defiles it, is by all means possible to be avoided; but not the
work it self to be forborne. For we have an absolute charge from God, to
exercise our selves in all good works, and a merciful promise of forgiveness
of those infirmities, which our corruption faste^s to our best indeauors. In
matters indifferent, that are put to our choice, to be done or left undone, it
is a good rule to refrain, because our weakness will bring forth some sin,
in the doing of them. As for example, it is lawful for me to play at chesse or
tennisle, but if I find by experience, that I cannot use these exercises,
without some special sin, as swearing, cursing, and fretting, loss of too
much time. etc. I am bound in conscience to refrain them altogether. The case
stands otherwise in matters of necessary duty, as thus: I am commanded to make
my supplications to God by prayer: daily experience teaches me, that I cannot
pray with such a measure of faith, as I ought; that wandering thoughts, and
sometimes envious, covetous, or ambicious devices cre^p into my heart, and
quench my zeal in praying* am I therefore wholly to give over praying? Nay
rather I must pray more often, that it would please God to increase his grace
in me to the subduing of this corruption: The like I might truly say of other
good works, but this is warrant enough for me to co^clud, that the protestants
are not bound in conscience to avoid al good works, though to the doing thereof
they bring an infectio^ of deadly sin, as all sin is deadly.

The answer to his syllogimse (if it be a syllogism) is made. D
as I have showed by denying the assumption, or Minor, viz. that fasting,
prayer, almsdeeds, and all good works are deadly sins. In steed of proving
this, in his new edition he falls to discourse of a distinction, and so leaves
his argument still without proof, as before it was. The distinction is, that
good works, being enjoyed by God, are not to be forborne, though some
imperfection distaine the^, in the working: but the imperfection only. He
would seem to take away this distinction, by giving particular instance
against the truth thereof. The general syllogism may be thus framed.

If a man be bound in conscience to forbear the doing of some good works,
because he cannot do them without some greiuous sin, then he is bound to
avoid al good works, because some imperfections always accompany them.

But a man is bound in conscience to avoid some good works, because he cannot
do them, without some grievous sin.

Therefore he is bound in conscience to avoid al good works, because some
imperfections always accompany them.

I deny the consequence of your proposition. First because all good works, are
not of the same kind, some being absolutely commanded, some only upon
condition; such as Giving of Alms is, whereof in answer to the assumption.
Secondly because the imperfections are, for the most part, without our consent,
and against our liking: whereas most grievous sins are outward actions of
disobedience; as stealing to give alms, which is your own, though a most
unfit example.

I grant your assumption, upon this supposition (which notwithstanding I take
to be very false) that there are some things, a man cannot do without grievous
sin; and I come to the examining of your particulars which are brought to
prove this assumption.

Giving of alms is one of those good works, which are commanded
conditionally, if a man be able, He that has this 1. Ioa. 3. 17
worlds good etc. Beside we speak not of sinning before the good deed, but
in the act it self; and so this example is not to the purpose.

You are bound in conscience to refrain your enemies company upon that
supposall, unless there be necessity of coming into it, for the performance
of some duty of your general, or particular calling.

It would also be remembered that coming into your enemies company is no good
work commaun^ed by God, and therefore not pertinent to our question.

Eating of flesh is a thing indifferent; and therefore, upon duty to God, and
our brethren, to be forborne, when they shall be scandalized by it. What is
this to good works?

Neither am I to refrain Releeuing of the poor, because I can not do it
without vain glory, and so shall have no reward in heaven; neither is the
reward had here, or lost in heaven for vaineglory: but only when a man makes
that his end; not when it winds in it self, by our corruption, against our
liking.

If I can not effect my best actions (say you) without the infections of my
natural corruption, I am boundia conscience to avoid those crimes, and
offenses, which can not possibly be performed without these vicious
circumstances.

But I can not effect my best actions without such infections.

Therefore I an bound in Conscience to avoid those crimes, and offenses, which
can not possibly be performed without these vicious circumstances.

I will never strive with you about this syllogism; which belonges nothing at
all to the matter in question, only give me leave to wonder at this strange
course of disputing. Your reason, added to prove I know not what, but I am sure
proving neither part of your syllogism, seems to conclude that, which we deny
not, namely, that Every least corruption is sufficient to make the work not to
be perfectly good; This I granted before, and withal showed, that it did not
follow hereupon, that Therefore these good works were to be avoided; since it
pleases God both to pardon the imperfection, and reward the work though
imperfect.

Article. 3.
Papist.
The Protestants either have no faith at all, or lie most damnablie, in denying
that a man assisted by Gods grace, can keep the commandments.

Protestant.
It may appear by my answer to the former Article* that a true Christian both
can, and does perform acceptable obedience unto God, by keeping his
commandments. But this obedience is imperfect: our works being good in the
sight of God, not by their own value, but by Gods acceptance. Our Papists,
that are set upon magnifying themselves, more then glorifying God, cannot
abide to hear of any imperfection in their works, which may impeach or
impair the merit of them. Therefore they rail at us, as this Author here
does, because we say it is not possible for aman, compassed about with natural
corruption, to keep the Commandments of God fully, and perfectly: upon which
Doctrine of ours we are charged, in this Article, either to have no faith at
al, or to lie most damnably, in denying, that a man assisted by Gods grace can
keep the Commandments.

Papist.
Whosoever knows God, keeps his commandments. But A
all true Protestants know God.

Ergo All tru^ Protestants keep his Commandments. The B. Ioh ep. ^. Chap. 5.
4.
Ma^or is express Scripture. Qui ^icit se nosse Deum, and mandata eius non
custodit, mendax est, and in eo veritas non est. He that says he knows
God, and heepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and Truth is not in him.

The Minor no Protestant doubts of. For this knowledge of God is nothing else,
but a lively faith, wherewith all Zealous Protestants (as they say) are endued.
Hence from manifestly it follows, that either the most Zealous Protestants
lack a lively faith, and so are Infidells: or, if they have a lively faith, and
deny that they keep, or can keep Gods commandments, they are damnable
liers; If they choose the first, they are Pagans, Heretics, or Jews: if they
take the second, they are damnable seducers, and imposters in religion; and
consequently their faith is false.

Protestant.
It is more troublesome to apply this syllogism to the A.
question, then hard to answer it: but we must needs do both. The syllogism,
for the proof of the Article, must be thus framed.

If all, that have a lively faith keep Gods commandments, either the most
Zealous Protestants lack a lively faith, because they keep not Gods
commandments; or if they have a lively faith, and keep them they lie
damnably, in denying that a man can keep them.

But all, that have a lively faith, keep Gods commandments.

Therefore the most zealous Protestants either have not a lively faith, because
they keep not Gods commandments, or, if they have a lively faith, and keep
them, they lie damnably, in denying that a man can keep them.

I deny the Consequence of your proposition: because this disjunction follows
not, upon that antecedent. For though it be true, according to Saint John's
meaning, whereof in the assumption, that all, which have a lively faith, keep
Gods Commandments: Yet neither do the Protestants lack a lively faith (for
they keep the Commandments) neither do they lie in denying, that a man can
keep them perfectly; which it is your purpose to prove: But let us put the
case, that they could, and did keep Gods commandments most perfectly, and
withal denied, that either they did, or any man could keep them; might they
be justly charged with lying damnably? I will not say, no A.
charitable, but no reasonable man would so gather. For it is not a damnable
lie to be deceived, in judging what belongs to the perfect keeping of the
commandments; or, upon that error to affirm, that no man can keep them
perfectly. You cannot be ignorant, that the reason of this our denial, arises
from the persuasion, that the defect, and disorder of some circumstances, which
always (as we think) accompany our actions, does make our obedience
imperfect. And shall we hereupon be charged with lying damnably? For example;
suppose that the idle fancies which arise in a man's heart, while he is praying,
being presently misliked, and suppressed, did not, in truth, make the performance
of his duty imperfect, but that, only in his opinion, that does so pray, the
duty be stained with imperfections: might we charge him to lie damnably, for
auouching, in the error of his judgment, that his prayers are imperfect? Yet
Protestants will not be so uncharitable, as to say, that a Papist lies
damnablie, who affirms, though upon a false persuasion, that a man assisted by
Gods grace can keep the commandments.

But all that have a lively faith, keep Gods commandments.

Assuredly they do; but not in perfection. For proof whereof I appeal to you
Papists; who dip your works in the blood of Christ, to make them meritorious,
which either you would not, or at least, should not do, if you held them to be
perfect of themselves. For life everlasting is due to the perfect obedience of
the law by covenant; This do, Romans 10. 5.
and thou shall live. So that he, which can fulfill the law, needs not the
blood of Christ, to make his obedience acceptable unto God. And indeed if we
have sufficient grace from Christ to keep the law, and use this grace to
perfect obedience, though the grace be wholly, and only from Christ; yet the
merit is altogether from our works; to which heaven is due of right, as wages
to a hired labourer, that has done his task. This perfection we dare no^
ascribe to our works: for we know that the most righteous men, even after
justification, disclaim their own righteousness. Our desire, and endeavor is
to keep all Gods commandments, in thought, word, and deed: but we fail many
ways of this purpose. Sometimes (as in running of a gole) being turned out of
the way: sometimes fainting in the way; yet, as David was said to be a man
after Gods heart, because his soul was set upon obedience to God, though he
fell many times, and that grievously: so is every true Christian said to keep
Gods commandments, because his intent, and resolution is to keep the^, and
his practice answerable thereto, howsoever with manifold and great infirmities.

The principal syllogism being answered; we must come to that, which is s^t
down in this article, but it is impossible to make that serve for proof of
the former, as it is apparent; because it concludes neither the proposition,
nor assumption thereof. And, to make short, we grant him the whole syllogism.
For all true Protestants do indeed keep Gods commandments, in such sort, as
before I showed. If thereupon he will infer that distinction, which is in the
title of this article, he must reason thus.

If all true Protestants keep Gods commandments, either the most zealous
Protestants lack a lively faith, or, if they have a lively faith, and deny
that they keep Gods commandments, they lie damnablie.

To which, the same answer will serve, which was shaped to the former
syllogism; that the disjunction follows not upon the antecedent, for the
reasons there delivered: further we must add, that the former part of this
consequence is absurd, because impossible: for it presumes that all true
Protestants keep Gods commandments, and yet that some be dest^tute of a
lively faith. Whereas there is no obedience either acceptable, or possible,
without a lively faith.

Whosoever knows God, (says he) keeps his commandments. B


But all true Protestants know God. Ergo.

All true Protestants keep his commandments.

If we will, in any reasonable sort, apply this syllogism to the purpose, it
must be a proof of the first assumption, not as it is here formed, but after
this manner.

Whosoever knows God keeps his commandments.
But all, that have a lively faith know God.
Therefore all, that have a lively faith, keep Gods commandments.

To the proposition whereof I answer, as before, concerning the truth, but
imperfection of obedience; and to 1. Ioa. 2. 4.
the proof I add further, that the holy Apostle speaks of no other keeping,
then that, which I have granted. For his speech is general of all Christians
whatsoever, that know God to everlasting life; and that not of their ability,
what they can do, but of their practice, what they do; and I hope no Papist
thinks, that every true Christian keeps all the commandments wholly, and
perfectly. For then what shall become of the Sacrament of penance, and extreme
unction? But you will say, they may keep them, though they do not; I would
believe it, if you could show me an example of any that ever did it. But these
places, I alleged a little before, manifestly prove, that they, that are
renowned for holiness, were privy to their own unrighteousness.

Nay, what Saints story have you, any thing largely set down in the
Scriptures, whose life is not tainted with some disobedience? did those
worthies faint sometimes, and can we stand without snaking? It is more
honorable to God, and comfortable to Christians, truly to acknowledge the
imperfection of their own works, and the perfection of Gods mercy, who
vouchsafes a reward to those poor endeavors, which, of themselves, by reason
of the corruption, wherewith they are defiled, deserve, in the rigor of his
justice, everlasting condemnation.

There needs no farther examination of the proof of his syllogism.

Article. 4.
Papist.
The most points, wherein the Protestants dissent from Catholics, tend to
loosenes of life, and carnell liberty.

Protestant.
If the points, we hold, Be warrantable by the scriptures, fear of what may
follow thereupon, must not make us provide for conceited holiness, by denying
a certain truth.

Papist.
This article may be proved by a general induction, in all Luther in asser.
art. 36. Melanc. in locis communibus. Perkins in his reformed catholic the 1.
controversy.
such matters, as now the Protestants call in question. First they say, that man
has no free will to do good, but all goodness proceeds so from grace, that
it lies not in his power, neither to have it, nor resist it, but, of
necessity, ^tmust have effect.

To what other end tends this senseless doctrine, and fatal fancy, but to
make men negligent in disposing, and preparing their souls to receive Gods
grace, and to rouse it up, and put it in execution, after they have it? making
man not much unlike a sick ass, who neither can dispose, nor prepare himself
to seek for his medicine, but, of necessity, must expect, till his Master
thrusts it into his throat; neither, after he has druncke it, can cause it
cure his disease, but carelessly lets it work, as it will.

Secondly, they defend, that men be justified by faith alone. C.
The which solifidian portion overthrows flatly true repentance, sorrow for
sins, mortification of passions, and all other virtues; which tend to the
perfect reconciliation of the soul with God; causing men only to procure a
certain false fantastical apprehension of Christ's death, and passion, the
which faith although they erroneously auerre, cannot be severed from charity,
virtues, and good works: yet both experience teaches that it may (or else 1.
Cor. 13. Whitacherus contra camp. aut fides perpetua est, aut nulla est. And it
is one of the 11. art. enacted and decreed of by the bishops at Lamber ^ some
4. years ago.
few or none of them have faith: because few or none of them have these works)
and the Scriptures plainly prove, that all faith: yea and the most noble
faith, which has force to remove mountains, may be without charity.

D. Thirdly they assure us, that faith once had, can never be lost; the which
vain security opens the gappe to al libertine sesuality: for if a man be
certain, that he has true faith, if it be impossible he should loose it, if
he be secured that by it alone, he shall be saved: why may he not wallowe in all
licencious pleasures in this life: and never doubt of glory in the other? Could
ever Epicurus have found a better ground to plant his Epicurisme? Could ever
Heliogabalus have better patronized his sensuality? Could Bacchus, or Venus
have ever forged better reasons, to enlarge their Dominion?

Fourthly, they say a man can not keep all the commandments: ^
for what other cause, I pray you? but thereby to make men negligent in the
keeping of them; to pretend an excuse of impossibility, whenever they
transgress them. F


Fifthly why deny they the Sacrament of penance? but to make men careless how
they live, and never regard the avoiding of sins, as though they were never
to render an account of them. To hinder that shame, and blushing, which men
conceive in discovering their sins; the which are most excellent means to
deter men from sinning another time: to shuffle up Restitution and
satisfaction of injuries committed against our neighbors, to draw men from
remorse of conscience by burying their sins in eternal oblivion, the soars
whereof Confession rubbeth, and causes remembrance.

Sixthly why exclude they the true and real body of G
Christ from the blessed Sacrament of the Altar; but for that they perceived
how, by the presence thereof, they were deterred from sin, and wickedness?
For they knew well that sinful lives consorted not with those sacred
mysteries, and therefore they rather resolved to banish Christ from the
Sacrament, then sin from their souls.

Finally for what other cause have they coined a new negative H.
religion? wholly standing upon Negation of Sacraments, Ceremonies, Rites,
Laws, Customs, and other principal points of the Catholic Church; but for
Fasting, to bring an Feasting; for Praying, Playing, for Devotion, Dissolution;
for Religious fear of God, vain Security; for zeal, and mortification, a
number of vain verbal sermons; and, to conclude, for a positive working, a
flat denial almost of all points of faith, and religion. A.


Protestant.
In deed a general, or rather a particular induction of all matters, that
Protestants call in question, is of necessity to the proof of this Article.
But neither, if such an Induction were made could any such thing be done: and
that not being done, there is not so much as any reasonable course taken for
the proof of it; for what if all these points here set down tend to looseness
of life? Alas, 7. are neither all, nor the most part, nor any thing near the
most part of those points wherein we dissent from the Papists. So that if it it
were true of every one of these, as it is of never a one of them, that they
tend to looseness: yet were this author as far from proving that, he has
undertaken, as 7. is from seven score, that I may be sure to speak within my
compass: what shall we judge then of this proof, where, from the first to the
last, there is not one true point? as by special examination it will appear.

They say that man has not free will. B.


Nay more then that, we say that free will is a mere fancy, a bare name,
without any thing answerable unto it, in the nature of man, at the least, since
his fall in Adam. But if it be his meaning to charge us with a purpose to bring
in looseness of life, and carnal liberty, by the teaching of this Doctrine,
we appeal from this unjust slaunderer; First to the judgment of God, that
searches the hearts, and the raines; then to the testimony of our conscience,
and lastly to the preaching of our Ministers, and conversation of our people,
even of as many, as are indeed true Christians according to the practice of our
doctrine.

But, to come nearer to the point, we are to understand that the Protestants
Doctrine of free will is, that no man has power by nature, either (without the
grace of Gods spirit) to do any thing acceptable unto God, or to procure this
grace to himself, or to receive it when it is offered. For our present
purpose, it shall be enough to speak a word or two of the last point, not by way
of proof, but declaration. Whereas then we deny a man po^er to receive the
grace of God being offered, we do not mean that this grace works upon him, as
on a stone, or block, but as on a reasonable creature. No man believes but
willingly; only the question is, how it comes to pasle that, when two men have
grace offered them, the one believes, the other does not. The Papist, in this
case, fetches the difference fr^ the good use of his free will, that believes,
we ascribe it to the diverse working of Gods spirit in his heart; not denying
that he uses his free will (to speak as they do) better then the other, but
acknowledging that therefore he so uses it, because the spirit of God
teaches, and inclines, and ineuitably brings him so to use it: that the
difference may be from God, and not from man.

To what end (says he) tends this doctrine?

If it be possible that any man should be so blind, as not to see, I will
venture the loss of so much time, and labor, as may serve to show him: You
ask us, why we say that men are saved by Gods grace and not by their own
freewill. Forsooth because we would have God reap the glory of their
salvation; the pride of man's nature beaten down, and the^ more beholding to God
then to themselves. None of which can be, if a man, by his own free will, make
difference betwixt himself; and another, to the receiving of faith. For he may
truly say to God, that he is no more beholding to him, then many a one, that is
everlastingly damned; nay then every one might have been, if he would. For what
did God for him, that he was not as ready to do for another? how many have had
as much grace offered them, as he, and yet are not justified? No more had he
been, if he had not, by his own free will, helped himself in special manner,
whereas God failed him, leaving all to his choice to be saved, or not to be
saved. Is this to teach carnal liberty? you will say, yea; because it makes
a man negligent in disposing and preparing his soul. How so? for the
difference is made by God. What then? to what purpose is it, form to prepare
my self? I marvel you ask not, to what purpose it is for you, to believe.
Are you yet to learn, that although the cause of all goodness be grace; yet
God requires our endeavors, as means, to the receiving of this grace? Did you
never hear, that we hold it for a monstrous absurdity, to promise our selves
any thing from God, without using the means to obtain it? The same also I
answer to the doing of good works after sanctification: the success, and
event proceeds only, and certainly from the spirit of God, who Phil. 2. 13.
works in us both to will, and to do. Yet are we bound to use all good
means, for the stirring our selves up to holiness; and freely, and willingly
do we whatsoever good work, we do by the grace of Gods spirit. Therefore this
similitude of the sick Ass, shows the Authors dangerous sickness, either
of ignorance, if he know not the truth we hold, or of malice, if, against this
knowledge, he wilfully pervert it.

They defend (say you) that men are justified by faith alone. That is, we
defend that God requires nothing of man to his justification, but only, that
by faith he rest upon Jesus Christ, to be justified by his sufferings.

The general ground of this opinion, is the end of all things created; viz.
the glory of God, that man may have nothing to boast of, but simply ascribe the
praise of his justification to God that justified him. Neither does this
doctrine (scorn God in rejecting it, as much as you list) either flatly
overthrow, or in any part diminish true repentance, sorrow for sins,
mortification of passions, and all other virtues, which will plainly appear
both before and after justification; for what though we be justified only by
faith? who knows not, that it is impossible for any man (ordinarily) to cast
of this natural, and Popish confidence, which he has in his own
righteousness, and to feel necessity of being justified by Christ, If first
he discern not his damnable estate, and being moved with horror thereof, she
from himself to Christ for justification, by pardon of sin? Now after a man
is justified, can the knowledge of the means, by which he is justified, kill
these virtues in him? Let the means, and cause of his justification be what
you will; If he may believe he is justified (and the Papists grant some men
have known, and more may know it, at least by revelation) by your reason this
effect must ensue. So that it arises not from the doctrine of the means, but
from that of knowledge or assurance. But how should these virtues be abolisht
by justification, by faith only? when as every man that is justified, is also
sanctified.

Whosoever has his sins forgiven him, has withal the power of sin abated
in him. How shall we, that are dead Romans 6. 2.
to sin, live any longer therein? No man has any encouragement, by free
justification through faith, to continue in sin. For, if he be not
sanctified, he is not justified. If he be sanctified, he is dead to sin, and
alive to righteousness. True it is that profane wretches will object against
the Gospel now, as they did in the Apostles time. But this was not then, nor
is now, any sufficient reason, why the truth of God should be denied, or
suppressed, for wicked men's abusing it, to their own damnation. Yet perhaps you
will reply, that it is a more likly means to stir me^ up to repentance,
mortification, and the practice of all virtues, to teach them, that they must
deserve the first justification of congruitie, by their good preparation, and
fully make up the measure of their second justification, by deserving of
condignitie, for their good works, everlasting life. First let us suppose it
be likely in our corrupt judgment, yet may we not gratify God with a lie, nor
do evil that good may come of it. And why should not we follow the practice
of the Apostles; whose course is in all their Epistles, still to urge grace in
justification, and good works for thankfulness, not for merit? yet we deny
not, but it is both warranted by the Scriptures, and most convenient to add an
edge to the works of sanctification, by threatening condemnation to sinners,
and promising reward to the righteous. But we deny, that either of these
enforcements of such exhortation, in any part, weakens the doctrine of free
justification by only resting upon Jesus Christ. Which he may easily conceive,
that has a sincere purpose to glorify God, by the salvation of his chosen.
For he knows, that as much as is given to man for justifying himself, is
taken from God. God, and man, after this reckoning, may part stakes. God may
have glory for affording means of salvation, and ability to use those means:
man may be proud of the well using of that ability, and justifying of himself
by the means afforded. Yet, if all men, that are enabled, did so help
themselves, there were less cause of boasting, and more reason to give God the
glory of justification. For it might well seem to proceed from the grace, that
God imparts to them, that they are justified. But when some use it well, some
ill, and this difference of well, or ill using it, flows from the free will of
men, by their own power; what a small part of glory is left to God, in the
several justification of those, that are saved? Hence it follows, that the
doctrine of justification by works preparatorie, before a man is at all
justified, and by works meritorious, after he is begun to be justified, is
dishonorable to God, and the death of all goodness in those very works, that
are done. Because the intent, which our Papists magnify so much, is directly
derogatorie from the glory of God, without the true, and sincere purpose
whereof, no works of any man baptized, are one iott better, then the moral
actions of heathen men. But the sons of the bondwoman, being of a servile
nature, respecting themselves either only, or principally, being ignorant, and
without feeling of the affection of children, can never be persuaded, that any
son of God will perform duties of kindness, and thankfulness to his
father: but must needs do that he does, like a hireling, for love of wages.
And by such means our Papists would procure, and deserve the perfect
reconciliation of their souls with God; as if we were not perfectly reconciled
in Christ, in whom God reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their
sins. What is it to be reconciled to God, but to have Gods displeasure
removed, and his favor, and fatherly love vouchsafed to us? This has Christ
procured, by his death, and bloud-shedding; the increase of our sanctification
in us, by the daily dying unto sin, and rising again unto newness of life,
restores more perfectly the image of God decayed in us, by natural corruption,
and manifold actual transgressions, but reconciles us never awhit the more to
God. When the Prodigal son Luc. 15. 20
came home to his father, starued, and evil colored in his body, ragged, and
torn in his apparel, who can doubt, for all this, but he was fully
reconciled to his father, when he fell on his neck, kissed, embraced, and
entertained him: but as his flesh every day came better and better, as his
color mended, and waxed more fresh, when he was arrayed, according to his
estate, he did more lively represent the son of such a father. The same is
our case in Christ: by his sufferings are we wholly reconciled unto God. For we
are made his Children; but we begin daily, more and more to resemble him, as we
Ioa. 1. 12. Gal. 4. 4. 5.
grow in holiness of nature, and conversation. Therefore let the Papists
imagine that they reconcile themselves to God by mortification of passions, and
I know not what supposed virtues: It is sufficient for us, that Christ has, by
his blood, made our peace, and put us in possession of his fathers love and
favor. If this be a false fantastical apprehension of Christ's death, and
passion, to rely wholly upon him for reconcilation with God, by his blood, and
propitiation; then his dying, the Apostles preaching, and our believing is all
in vain. How then does this Doctrine tend to looseness? especially, if it be
remembered, that we shut al men out from justification, that are not sanctified
by the spirit of Christ.

They tell us (says he) that faith, an^ good works can not be severed.

Would you know what faith he means? only a persuasion of the truth of the
Scripture; even such an one as the Diuil is said to have, and that with a
Popish preparatorie good work, namely Fear. The diuills believe, and tremble.
Iac. 2. 19.
But, if they would speak any thing to the purpose, they should prove these 3.
things 1. that to believe in Jesus Christ, i^ nothing else, but to be persuaded,
that these points, that the Scriptures teach of Christ, are true: Which will
never be done, as long as that famous distinction is retemed, Credere Deum, deo
in deum; To believe there is a God, to believe that all, that God says is
true; to believe, or trust in God, or to rest upon him: and as our Nor theme
men speak, very plainly, and significantly, to believe on God. Secondly, that
a man, thus relying upon Christ to be saved by him* for all this believing is not
justified: contrary to the whole course of the Gospel. Thirdly they must show
us, that a man may be justified, and yet not sanctified; then which nothing is
more repugnant to popery. For the popish Doctors teach us, that to be justified
is To have sin abolisht, and grace infused into us; whereby, and for which,
we are (as they say) truly, and habitually just in the sight of God. If they
answer, that these ma^ters have bin already proved, by their Diuins, we reply,
that ours have showed the insufficiency of their proofs, and that, if either
this accuser, or any other Papist will urge those scriptures (that have bin
aledged to this end) any further, or bring any, that yet have not bin brought,
he shall receive, by the grace of God, true and sufficient satisfaction, if
truth will satisfy him. In the mean while, it shall suffice to put this
Author in mind, that his experience fails him, being made not of those, that
believe in Christ, but of them, that believe Christ, or at the most give credit
to those things, which are spoken of him, in the Gospel. Whereunto I ad, that
neither faith, which has force to remove mountains, is so noble, as that,
which makes a man heir of heaven, nor, because that* faith can be without
Charity; Therefore either he, that believes in Christ, can be without
justification; or he, that is justified, without sanctification.

They assure us (says he) that faith once had, can never be lost.

What then? This vain security (says he) opens the gap to all libertine
sensuality.

If he speak of the event, all experience refuts him; because no men live more
soberly, and Christianly, then they, that have the greatest measure of this
persuasion. And, indeed, it cannot be otherwise. For this is no where, but
where the spirit of God is, and where he is, there only is true sanctification.

If he blame the doctrine, in respect of some liberty, which he imagines it
may afford, let him call to mind what consequences Romans 6. 1. 2. 1^.
flesh, and blood gather, upon the doctrine of free justification, and what
answer the Apostle makes to such objections: and then he will be ashamed to
ask, why a man may not wallow in all licencious pleasures, in this life, and
never doubt of glory, in the other, if he be certain, that he have true faith.
For first, he will understand, that he is bound to the obedience of the law,
though he be freed from the damnation of it. Secondly he shall feel, that
having true faith, it is not possible for him to live in sin because Romans 6.
2. 3.
he is dead, and buried thereto.

If he will say then; I am sure, I have true faith, and that can never be lost;
therefore I may sin, as I lift, without danger of damnation.

He must be answered: I am sure thou have no true faith. For that makes no such
reasons. Whosoever is justified, is also sanctified. Thou want the late^
therefore thou have not the former. Neither Wh^rem^ngers, nor Idolaters nor
Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor Buggerers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, 1. Cor. 6.
9. 10.
nor Drunkards, nor Raylers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of
God. But thou art such a one, therefore there is no place for thee in heaven.
What inconvenience follows now upon this doctrine.

Thou will say, I am sure, if I have faith, I cannot be damned.

I answer, I am sure, if thou let sin reign in thee, thou can not be
saved; As it is not possible, that he, that believes truly, should be dammned;
so is it also impossible that he, Which lives with delight, in presumptuous
sin, should believe truly. But our servile, and proud Papists, cannot be
brought to perform any obedience, or refrain any sin, except they see Hell
gaping to swallow them below, and heavenly glory set as deserved wages above
For the love, and honor of God they will do nothing, but with especial respect
to themselves.

They say (says he) that a man cannot keep all the commandments. E.
No not perfectly, as he ought to do. For then many men might stand, though
God should straightly Psa. 143. 2.
examine what is done amiss; Then we need not Christ's blood, whereof before,
to dippe our works in. But you demand, for what cause we say so; because God
has taught us so; not (as you would have the world imagine) thereby To make
men negligent in keeping them. Nay rather, for the quite contrary; that knowing
how far they shall be from performing their duty, when they have done, all they
can, they may never cease to be doing, neither can they be discouraged, as long
as they know, that God, of his gracious mercy in Jesus Christ, accepts of his
childrens endeavors, in their imperfections, for Christ's sake. and will rewa^^
them abundantly, in the kingdom of heaven. In the ^^ane while, this knowledge
of continual sinning must stir us up to contynuall carfulness, and
pre^isenesse; must humble us under the hand of God; must enforce us to be
earnest with God, for the pardon of our transgressions, both in committing
evil, and omitting good; must make us feel the infinite mercy, and love of
God toward us, in accepting so graciously of our poor, and weak good will,
and lastly must drive us to cleave fast to Jesus Christ, and his obedience,
because we have no other righteousness to present God withal; so far are we,
in this matter, from teaching men to pretend an excuse of impossibility,
whenever they transgress the commandments. Yea indeed we plainly
affirm, that there is no man, but fails very much of that pains, and care, I
will not say that he ought, but that he might bestow, in fitting himself to
true obedience,

Why den^ they (says he) the sacrament of penance? F.


Because it is a patch of Antichrists sowing, to the fair broad cloth of Gods
holy word: because it brings a slavery, and snare upon men's consciences:
because it makes men leave trusting to Jesus Christ's satisfaction, and rest
upon their own, because it breeds security in the^, that receive popish
absolutio^; because it was a devise, or at least, is a practice of the popish
clergy, to get intelligence of al state matters in christendo^e, for their own
advantage. These, and many other such reasons of our denial, this Papist will
not see: but faines to himself an absurd, and impossible conceat; That we
would have men careless how they live, and never regard the avoiding of sins,
as though they were never to render an account of them, whereas we consta^tly
avouch 1* that he, that is careless to bring forth the fruits of sanctification,
has not the root of faith to justification, whereas we teach, that every
venial sin of the Papists, is by desert, even in the regenerate, punishable
with everlasting damnation; That God looks for repentance at his childrens
hands, and is feign, many times, to draw the^ to it, by the misery of all
miseries in this life, the affliction of conscience; which is of more force
with a true christian, then all the blushing, and shame of this world put
together. As for restitution, and satisfaction to men, we do not only urge it,
upon all occasions, but hold it so necessary, as that without it, where there
are means to perform it, there can be no assurance of pardon to him, that
knows he has done wrong, either in this life, or in your purgatory. And
here we say, no shame, of what estate soever a man be, may keep him from
making satisfaction. Whereas, with you Papists, if a man perform some penance
enjoined him by his ghostly father; though quite of an other nature from
satisfaction to his offended brother, and namely, if he fill your Corban, he
shall have absolution a culpa, et p^na, by your devised sacrament of penance.
Now he, that by daily confession of sins unto God, of whom he receaues not,
by and by, absolution, as of your priest, but is feign to beg the assurance,
often times again, and again, with many tears, deep sighs, horror of
conscience, and such like, will never be brought to any true repentance, by
telling a Priest of his finnes past, since he shall find it so easy a matter
to buy out any penance, at the Popes price, as it is set down in his bocke of
Rates for indulgences: Our end therefore, in denying your forged Sacrament of
penance, is to enforce men to a true and hearty sorrow for their sin: That
God may have the glory of their humiliation, and the whole thanks for their
pardon.

You mean, why do they deny, that Christ is bodily present in G.
the sacrament? because there is neither scripture, nor reason to prove it.
Because to hold he is there, in that sort, it is untrue, unreasonable, and
impossible to be true; because it destroies the nature of Christ's humanity;
because it makes his manhood God, because it is an occasion of the most
senseles Idolatry, that ever was committed. And because of many other such
reasons aleadged by our divines heretofore, whereof this of his is none; being
indeed without all show of likelihood. For how does the bodily presence of
Christ deter any man from sin, and wickedness? nay rather it incourages
him thereto. For who would fear, or respect such a God, as has neither eye to
see, nor ear to hear; that is crushed up together into the compass a baggage
Wafer cake, which he may, and must eat, and if he be afraid of any
displeasure by it, he may throw it to the Dogs, or cast it into the fire as
one of your Popes did. Miserable Idolaters, that worship such a breaden created
God! But, I pray you, what advantage get we, by removing Christ's bodily
presence from the Sacrament, as long as we confess, that both Godhead, and
manhood are truly received of all faithful believers in that blessed
communion? How unreasonable an absurdity were it, to imagine that the bodily
presence of Christ can worse consort with sinful lives, then his spiritual?
Whereas we are sure, that while he lived, he was bodily present with sinners,
and Publicans, but spiritually never had any communion, or conversation with
any such, until his grace had, in some measure, purged them. Papists indeed
absurdly dream, that the wicked receive Christ in the Sacrament: and yet have
no benefit by Christ's being in them.

For what cause (says he) have they coined a new negative Religion?

First prove they have, and then require an answer. But that is impossible,
unless your skill will serve you to persuade men, that the Scriptures are
newly coined; and as true is your charge, that our religion is negative;
otherwise then the Scriptures are, which are profitable to teach, to convince,
2. Tim. 3. 16.
to correct, to instruct in righteousness. But what a toye is this, to object
that to us, in disgrace of our Religion, which the Jews, with as good reason,
might have objected to our Savior, and the Gentiles, to his holy Apostles? for
did not he, and they, utterly take away the Sacraments, ceremonies, rites,
laws, customs of the Jews, and all heathenish points of the Gentiles
superstition, and Idolatry? you deal with us, in this case, as a man would
deal with the right heir to lands, which he injuriously deteyned. You have
forged new deeds, and conueiances, and when we come to demand our right, you
tell us, our plea stands upon negatio^ of evidences, deeds, conueiances, whereas
we bring the most ancient record of Scripture to prove our title, as our proper
plea, and deal with your forgeries no further, then the necessity of clearing
our right, and the truth enforces us. which also drives me, at this time, to
make a short answer to your slanders. How do we bring in Feasting for
fasting? When neither you Papists have any true fasts among you, neither do we
(ordinarily) use any feasting, upon those days, which being superstitiously
left to us by you, are Ciuilly retained by us, with more moderation, then your
selves used Save only, that we make it no matter of conscience, to forbear
flesh at such times appointed. In steed of galloping over Pater nosters, Aue
mary's, and Creeds, with many Idolatrous, and some blasphemous adiurations,
without understanding, or affection: we have restored the true use of praying;
which is to confess our sins, and with hearty sorrows to crave pardon of
God, in the name of Jesus Christ, for his sake, and in his only mediation. That
is popish devotion, the dissolution whereof, in deed we have by all means,
procured, and, by the gracious, and mighty providence of God, performed. Not to
make men more vainly secure, but more religiously devout, in giving the honor
to God only, which Papists rob him of, to worship their own Idolatrous
inventions: this we continually teach, and urge, not without zeal in verbal
sermons, (how glad would you be, if it were so, and how well would you like
such sermons?) But with evidence of truth, proving by the scriptures, that the
Pope is that very great Antichrist, prophesied of, by Paul and John; That
popery is an Idollatrous service, patcht up together, by little and little, as
the diuill could, from time to time, devise and procure allowance of such
points, as were fit for the aduanc^ng, and establishing of his eldest son
Antichrist. But, if any of our sermons be verbal, they are those, that are
botcht up out of your postills: foaming up a little froath of carnal wit,
withour zeal in the speaker, or conscience in the hearers: that are delighted
with such vanities: neither of which seems to have any sufficient knowledge,
or feeling of the true course, and use of preaching.

Article. 5.
Papist.
The Protestants make God the Author of sin, the only cause of sin, that
man sins not, that God is worse, then the devil.

Protestant.
The Protestants make the diuill, and man, the only Authors, and committers of
all sin; and namly of these heresies, and slanders, wherewith you have stult
this malicious pamphlet.

Papist.
Whosoever defends, that God commands, persuades, urges, impelleth to
sin, makes God the cause of sin.

But all Protestants say, that God commands, persuades, Calu lib. 1. instit
c 17. sect. 11. etc 18. sect 4 li. 3. c. 23. sect 7. 8. 9. Zuingl serd.
prouidentia. Beza aphoris.
urges, impelleth to sin. Ergo.

The Protestants make God the cause, and author of sin.

The mayor I prove: for if God persuade, or impell men to sin, as for
example, Judas to sell Christ, Saint Peter to deny Christ, the Jews to crucify
Christ; questionles he intended the sacrilege of Judas, the negation of Peter,
the murder of the Jews; and this much more effectually, then Judas, Peter or
the Jews. for who can resist his impulsion, or who can frustrat his intention.
Voluntati euis quis resistet? who is able to oppose himself against his will?
yea what man is he, that in conscience were not bound, to conform his will
unto the will of God, who is the author of al good wills, and the first rule,
and square of al regular wills? Judas, Peter, and the Jews, if they had
followed the motions of God, who could have blamed them for following him, who
could not err, in impelling, nor sin, in persuading them?

But some will say, God moved them for a good end, videlicet, the redemption of
man, and they intended an ill end, to wit, lucre, revenge, or some other
sinister effect. Yet this Ad Romans 3 v. 8.
snift will not salve the soar. For evil may not be done, that good may
follow. Non su^t facienda mala, vt inde veniant bona. For otherwise, a man
might steal to give alms, be drunk for a meriment, commit adultrie to beget
Children. Moreover why might not Judas, Peter, or the Jews intend that good
end, that God intended, and have sold, and denied, and crucified Christ,
conforming their intentions to his; they being instruments, and he the first
mouer.

Agane, it cannot be said, but that God indirectly and most effectually,
intended their sins. For he, that intends any effect, wherewith an other
effect is necessarily conjoined, consequently intends it as for example, He,
that intends to burn a ship in the midst of the sea, inte^deth
consequently the death of all the men, which be in her. In like m^ner, if God
intended, that Judas should sell Christ, unto which action sin was
necessarily adjoined, consequently God intended the sin, as well as the
selling. C. Call. lib. 1. institution. C. 18.. 1.


The Minor is to to evident: for the Protestants deride Gods permission; they
say, that all his actions are energetical, or effectual, they desperately
auerre, that Paul's conversion, and David's adultry, were in like manner the works
of God; and as he elected some to Glory, before the preuision of works, so he
rejected some from glory, before the preuision of sins.

Here hence I infer, that, according to the Protestants principles, God is
most properly the author of sin; because he impelleth most effectually
thereunto.

Next, that he is the only author of sin, for that he inforceth D.
men, upon necessity to sin, and they, as instruments, follow the motion of
their first cause.

Again, that man sins not. For where there is necessity of sinning, there
is no sin. For sin is free, or no sin Besides how can man sin, in
conforming his will, to Gods will?

Finally God is worse then the devil. For that the wickedness of the devil
principally consists, in the moving, persuading and inducing of men to sin,
the which, by the Protestants confession, God performs more effectually, then
the Devil; because the motions of God are more forcible, and less resistable,
then the illusions, or suggestions of the devil. Many sins moreover are
acted, without the temptations of the devil; some of ignorance, some of
passion; but none without the motions of God; so that God is worse then the
Devil: both in causing greater multitude of sins, then the devil, and in
the forcible manner of causing sins. Which the devil cannot attain unto. The
which doctrine, is as good a ground for Atheism, as ever hell could devise:
for were it not much more reasonable, to say, there were no God at all, then
to believe there were such a God, as commands, persuades, urges, impelleth
men to sin: and yet, for the same sins, will torment them with the
inexplicable pains of hell?

Protestant.
Whosoever defends that God Commands, persuades, vrges, A.
impells to sin, makes God the cause of sin. Of this proposition there is
no question, betwixt the Papists, and us. Yet I hold it necessary, to speak a
word or two of it, not by way of refutation, but of explication. If a man
command, urge etc. to that, which is evil, and the effect ensue thereupon, he
is justly to be charged with that sin as the Author of it.

In Gods Commanding it is otherwise. For that, which he B.
commands, being otherwise evil, chaunges the nature by his commandment; so
that neither he, that commands, nor the party that obeies, commit any sin,
in commanding or obeying. For example, it is unlawful for a man to offer up
his Child for a burnt sacrifice, yet God commands Abraham to do so, and
Abraham is ready to fulfill the comm^undement. Both without sin: because the
will of God is the rule of righteousness, and he, that gave man a law, has
reserved authority to himself, to dispense with that law, when, and as it
pleases him. and as this Papist says truly; Every man is bound in Conscience
to Conform his will, to the will of God. But yet this is not simply true. For
admit that Judas had known, that it was Gods will, that our Savior should be
betrayed to the Jews by him; might he therefore the doing of it? At no hand
for he was to have received a warrant for it, that it might be lawful, whereas
he had the contrary charge in the 6. Commandment Thou shall not kill. But, if
God had given him commission to do it, as he did to abraham, for the offering of
his son, then he had bin bound to yield obedience to this commandment of
God, and had not sinned in obeying. So much does it concern a man, to live in
obedience to those laws, which God has prescribed to all, and every man
generally, and particularly. Abraham has a commandment not to kill; if it be
Gods will he should kill without sinning thereby, God will give him warrant, and
charge to kill: without which (howsoever Gods will stand) Abraham cannot do it
lawfully. And therefore it had not ben warrantable for Judas, Pilate, or the
Jews, intending that good end, which God intended, to have done contrary to
the general commandment of God without a special commission to that
purpose: which is more then a knowledge, that God would have it done. This
being understood, we disclayme, as needelesse, all such excuses for God, as
this Papist seems to make, on our behalf.

For we say not, that God moved them, for a good end, but that he did not move
them at all, and yet there is a great deal of difference betwixt moving, and
commanding, persuading, urging, impelling, since he may truly be said to move
a man that offers him the outward occasions, whereby he may be provoked to the
doing of any thing; which (I suppose) God does, and you will grant may do,
without being guilty of sin, for so doing.

But, if we would maintain, that God moved them, it it were no hard matter to
answer your strong proof. For neither does God bind him self to those laws,
which he gives to man; and, his will being the rule of Justice, that which he
will have done, by his willing of it, ceasses to be evil. So that, he cannot
do any evil, though he may command that to be done, which till he commanded
it, could not be done without sin. But you urge us further, that God
indirectly, and most effectually intended their sins. Of his effectual
intending by and by, in answer to the Assumption: Now only of his direct
intending which we are so far from denying, that we hold it absurd to make
any question of it. For what is more plain in the scripture, then that 2 Sa^,
24. 1.
God would have David sin to the end that he might by his sin, have
occasion to punish the people as he did.

Does not Michah profess, that it was Gods purpose, 1. Reg. 22. 22. 23.
that Achab should fall at Ramoth Gile^d, by hearkening to the false prophesies
of them, whom a lying spirit was to seduce? Go, says God thou shall prevail.
And, to come to your own example, did not God intend, and decree, that our
savior Christ should be treacherously betrayed by Judas, falsely accused by
the Priests, unjustly condemned by Pilate? If he did not certainly determine
these things, so that the even could not but ensue thereupon, he did not
certainly provide for the salvation of his children: because it might have come
to pass that Christ should not have been betrayed, accused, nor executed,
since it depended wholly upon their free will, without any determination on
Gods, part. Wherefore it is not to be denied, that it is Gods will that there
should be sins committed in the world; as all men grant, that acknowledge
Gods most just judgment in hardening Pharoes heart, and giving up the Exo. 7.
3. 4. Romans 1. 24. 26.
wicked to a senseless mind, that they may do those things, that are not
convenient. I dispute not as yet of the means, whereby this purpose of GOD is
brought to pass, but only urge that there is such a purpose.

But all Protestants (says he) say, that God commands, persuades, urges,
and imp^lleth to sin etc.

All Protestants say, nay rather all true Protestants deny C.
it; as absurd, and blasphemous; which if this Papist had not known, I think
he would not have used so many sleights to prove it. The first whereof is, that
the Protestants deride Gods permission, and therefore say, that he commands,
urges, persuades, etc. Nay the Protestants deride only heathenish fancies of
permission, which with Epicurus make God sit by, and look on, in worldly
matters, as it were setting all at six, and seven, for the present being of
things. Contrary to which we teach, that nothing falls out, one way, or other,
in this world, but according to the council, and determination of Gods
everlasting providence. To make the matter more plain. God, when he would
punish Pharoes pride, did not carelessly leave him to himself, permitting him
to sin or not to sin; but had before resolved, that he should increase his
sin, to the glory of God, and his own just damnation. How then you will say,
Did God command or persuade, or urge, or impell him to sin? Nothing less.
For indeed there never was, nor never is need of any such work of God, for
the punishing of sin by sin. Because the state of men unregenerate is such,
that the diuill, by their own corruptition, can easily bring them to the
committing of sin, without any Enforcement, or persuasion, or commandment
of God. Yet dare not we undertake curiously to inquire, and boldly to
determine, by what means this will of God is performed, but we content our
selves with that, which is evident, that it is Gods will, that such sins
should be committed. Neither do we hereunto apply any effectual, or
energeticall action of God, to the enforcing of this sin, but only affirm
that this will of God, must needs take effect; and yet without any work of God
upon the souls of the wicked, to command, persuade, urge, or impell them to
sin. D.


And therefore the point, that follows, is not desperately auerred by us, but
Diuillishly, that is sla^derously devised by you. For we constantly affirm,
that God works by, and in, the godly: but by the wicked only, not in them.
Paul's conversion was wholly the work of God who inclined and bowed his will,
to the obeying of the truth, which of himself he did willingly, and cruelly
persecute: But Dauides Adultery, occasioned by the sight of Bathsheba,
proceeded from his own concupiscence, without any inclining of his heart
thereto, on Gods part. Yet we deny not, but both the one and the other, was
willed of God, and could not but take effect, though in diverse sorts, and by
diverse means. God would that Paul should be converted, and this he did like
of as a good, and holy thing, nay not so only, but by his almighty power he
wrought it, and (without forcing of Paul's will) made him of unwilling willing;
it was also the will of God that David should commit that Adultery, but God
neither approved this fact of David, as good, not stirred up the motion in his
heart, nor wrought his heart to the liking of it but only gave him up, for a
time, to the diuill and his own corruption. Call it permission if you will, we
mislike not you should do so, so that withal you grant, that the end of this
permission was, that the thing might come to pass, as it did.

The last point is added ignorantly, because it is the common doctrine of the
Papists, as well as of the Protestants, that there can be no reason given, why
God chooses one, and refuses another, but his own will.

To the proof whereof, your great Doctor Thomas of Aquin, many times applies
these similitudes. As there can be no reason yielded (says Thomas) why this
part of materi^ prima, the first matter of natural things, becomes fire, that
water, rather then that fire, this water, save only the will of the creator;
and as it depends wholly upon the will of the builder, that this brick lies
above, that below, and not that above this below: so why Peter is chosen to
glory, Judas refused, no reason can be alleged, but the will of him that
chooses. Noli Iudicare (says Austi^) Si non vis errare. Offer not to judge
what the reason of this difference is, unless you desire to err. This is that
monstrous opinion forsooth, for which the Papists charge us, with I cannot tell
what blasphemies, what would they do, trow you, if any later Protestant had
written, as the Ancient Austin has. August. de gr^. and lib. art. cap. 20.


Deus operatur in cordibus hominum, ad inclinandas ^orum ^oluntates, quocunque
voluerit, sieve ad bona, pro sua misericordiae, five ad mala, pro meritis little:
judicio vtique suo, aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper autem iusto.
God works (says Austin) in the hearts of men, to the inclining of their
wills, whether soever it pleases him, either to good things, of his own
mercy, or to evil things, upon their desert; which judgment of his, in
respect of the reason thereof, is sometimes evident, sometimes secret, but
always just. Let our Papists go now, and rail upon this ancient, and
learned Protestant, for making God the Author of sin; for auouching that man
sins not, that God is worse then the diuill. For if these points follow upon
our doctrine, much more do they upon Austins. Who, though for the substance of
his matter, he speak the truth, in that former sentence: yet in words
affirms that, which has need of a very favorable construction. But let us
examine these consequents.

You must bring better proof of your Antecedent, ere your consequents will be
granted. For all Protestants deny, that God impells, either effectually, or at
all to sin. How then can he be the only Author of it? or how can men be said
not to sin, but as Instruments, when by the corruption of their nature, they
conceive, and with consent, and liking of their will, bring forth sin; and
that freely, without any force, though the event be certainly foreappointed by
God? neither will it serve their turn to say, that they conform their wills
to Gods will, and therefore cannot sin. When as they neither do that, they
do, with any purpose to fulfill the will of God, and if they did, yet ought
they not to do so, without warrant from him, in every matter, contrary to his
revealed commandments.

Blasphemous therefore, and not be thought on by any christian, much less
uttered, are these consequents, and especially the last of them: which
inferres, that God is worse, then the diuill. Because neither does God, as I
have often said, impell, or induce any man to sin, and though he should, for
causes known only to himself, incline (as Austin says) the hearts of men to
evil things: yet were it still blasphemous, to deny the justice of his
judgment, whatsoever profane flesh, and blood imagines. O man Romans 9. 19. 20.
what art thou, that disputest with God! shall the clay, etc.

Article 6.
Papist.
That faith once had may be lost.

Protestant.
This point, it should seem, sticks in this man's stomach, he is so much
troubled with it. Art. 5 in the extrauagant syllogism; Art, 4. the third
point; and here it makes a whole article.

The principal syllogism is thus to be framed.

If David l^st his faith, then faith once had may be lost.

But David lost his faith.

Therefore faith once had may be lost.

The assumption of this syllogism he offers to prove, in this manner.

Papist:
Whosoever leeseth his charity, leeseth his faith. A.


But David when he killed Vrias, lost his charity.

Ergo, David, when he killed Vrias, lost his faith.

The Mayor is a principle undoubted of, in the Schools of Protestants. For
they peremptorily affirm, that true faith, such as was in David one of Gods
elected, can no more be severed from charity, then heat from fire, or light
from the Sun; and therefore if David, killing Vrias, lost his charity, no
doubt but therewithal he lost his faith.

The Minor I prove: for whosoever remains in death, B.
is without charity. But David, when he killed Vrias, remained in death. Ergo,
David, when he killed Vrias, was without charity. If he was without that,
which once he had, no doubt but then he lost it: for he was deprived thereof,
for his sin.

The Mayor Proposition of this last Syllogism, thus I prove. For charity is
the life of the soul, and it is as impossible, for a man to have charity, and
remain in death, as it is impossible, for a man to be dead in body, and yet
indewed with a reasonable soul.

The Minor cannot be denied; to wit, that David, by killing Vrias, remained in
death. For it is the express word of God. Qui non diligit, manet in morte. He
that lo^eth not his neighbor remains in death* but certain it is that David
loved not Vrias, when he killed him. Ergo likewise certain it is, that David
remained in death.

The same position might easily be proved out of Ezekiel. Ezech. c. 18. ver. 24.
Si autem a^erterit se iustus a iusticia sua etc.

Protestant.
Whosoever loses his Charity, loses his faith: If by Charity A. Romans 13. 10.
you understand an absolute being without sanctification, which is signified by
Charity, because Love is the fullfilling of the Law, your proposition is true,
but your assumption is false. If thereby you mean, not performing some act of
Charity, or doing the contrary, your proposition is false. For not every one,
that fails in the performance of some duties of love, or does some thing
contrary to the rule of Love, by such omission of good, or committing of evil,
loses, nor in deed may truly be said to loose his Charity: though he sin
against the law of Charity, in so doing,

Your proof, being grounded upon a misconceauing of the Protestants principle,
which I expounded in the 4. Article, is of no force. True faith, such as we
confess David's was, always after his calling, can no more be without love,
then the sun without light, or the fire without heat.

But ^et he, that has this faith, and love, may sometimes neglect some duties
of this love, and do some works of hatred. Because his sanctification being
imperfect his obedience also must needs be so. But it neither falls out, that
such a man becomes again wholly unregenerate: by which means only, and by
none other, sanctification, or love, can be altogether lost.

But David, when he killed Vrias, lost his Charity. Nay rather, if Charity can
be lost, he then lost it, when he committed ^.
Adultery* unless we shall say, that either Adultery is not against Charity or
that murder only, and not Adultery procures a d^priuation of Charity. But
David did not loose his Charity by either, or both of them; though in each he
grievously sinned against the love of his neighbor. Which for murder this man
grants: for Adultery that parable, that Nathan brings, proves undoubtedly.

Whosoever remains in death is without Charity. Namely 2. Sam. 12. 1. 2.
so far, as he is in death. If he be altogether in death, he is wholly
without Charity. But a man may, in respect of some sinful action, be in
death: and yet, for all that, be truly sanctified, though not thoroughly. In
regard whereof he may and must be taken for a sanctified man, as in truth he
is, howsoever he do some thing contrary to the grace of sanctification
according to the lusts of his natural corruption. He, that has some of his
members dead, as his hands, or his feet, in respect of these parts is dead;
and yet may be alive in all the other. How much more may he then be truly said
to have living charity in him, which failing in some one duty, and that but of
one part, for a time, brings forth notwithstanding many fruits of love, even of
the same kind, of which that sin against love is. What needs any further
answer to your proof, then has already bin given? For in deed it is of no
force. Unless that be granted, which is the question, that every act contrary to
love; draws love out of the soul, so that a man thereby ceasses to have any
part of regeneration in him. And this answer were sufficient, though Charity
were in deed the life of the soul. Which is but an Idle popish fancy, or
rather a sudden conceit of this quick disputer. Romans 1. 17.
If there be any other life of the soul then God, surely it is faith, rather
then love. by which the righteous man lives. Is it not enough for our Papists
to make Love the form of faith, but that they must have it also, the life of
the soul?

David, when he killed Vrias, remained in death. In respect of that sin, yet
was he translated from death to life, by believing in the Messiah to come, and
accordingly brought forth the f^^its of sanctification, in obeying both the
other commandments, and that also o^ not kil^ing, which, by the murder o^
Vrias, he brake. So tha^ the proof, which follows, is insufficient. Because
that David could not be charged simply with the want of love, though he did not
love Vrias, in that action. Which yet proceeded not so much from the ha^red of
his person, as from David's fear to have his former sin of adultery
discovered, If by Vrias death it were not otherwise provided for. And, that the
place of Scripture by him alleged, is not to be wrested according to his
fancy, it may appear by the 3. chap. 17. verse, where it is said, that he,
which shuts up his bowels of compassion from his brother, that has ^eed, has
not the love of God abiding in him. Yet, I think, this Papist will not condemn
every man as void of the love of God, upon the refusal at some one time, to
give alms to him, that stands in need? Though it can not be denied, but such
a refusal is a breach of the law of God. So then, by this reason it is not
proved, that David lost his faith, or that faith may be lost. If it could as
easily have bin proved out of Ezechiel, 18. as said, no doubt we should have
had it to the full. But you shall give us leave to believe it, when we see it
done. In the mean while it is enough to stop your mouth, that your proof may
as easily be answered* as you Imagine it may be made. Especially if you
remember, that Ez^chiels speech is conditional, and Conditionalis ^ihil poni^
in esse, A thing is not proved to be, because if it be such or such an event
shall follow thereupon.

Artictle. 7.
Papist.
The Protestants shall never have life everlasting; because they will have no
merits, for which everlasting life is given.

Protestant.
Miserable Protestants, if the Pope had given that place, and office to this
man, which he has bestowed upon Saint Peter, to make him porter of heaven
gates.

Papist.
A.
Whatsoever is given as wages, is given for works.
But the kingdom of heaven is given as wages.
Ergo the kingdom of heaven is given for works.
The mayor; or first proposition may be declared after this manner. For example,
her Majesty may bestow 1000. pounds a year upon some suter, either gratis, of
mere liberality, and so it is called a gift, Donum, a grace, or favor* or
upon condition, if he behave himself manfully in the wars of I^eland* and in
this case the revenue is called Merces wages, Remuneratio, Stipendium, a
reward, or payment. And although her Majesty did show him a grace, and favor,
to promise such a reward for performing such a work, the which he was bound
upon his allegiance otherwise to perform; yet once having promised, and the
work being performed, her Majesty, is bound upon her fidelity, and justice, to
pay that, she promised.

In like manner, God may give us the kingdom of heaven, without any respect, or
regard of works; as he gives it to little Ad Romans 4. v. 5.
Children, that are baptized, and so it is a mere gift, and a pure grace. Or
he may give it, with some respect unto our works, and so he gives it to al
them* who having use of discretion keep his commandments: and for this
cause, it is called wages, M^rces, a reward; and thus the mayor must be
understood, to wit, that Whatsoever God gives as wages is given for works; and
such wages are called merits; wages then, and merits, have a mutual relation:
for what are wages, but a reward of merits? and what are merits, but a desert
of wages.

The minor is most plain, and inculcated in scriptures. Voca B. Apoc 22. verse.
12. 1. Cor. 3. verse. 8. Mat. 5. 12. and cap. 6. v^rs. ^. 1. 1. Tim. 5. verse. 18.
operarios, and read illis mercedem. Call the workmen, and pay them their
wages. Ecce ego venio, and merces mea mecu^ est, reddere vnicuique, secundu^
opera sua; ^oe I come, and my wages with me, to give to every one, according to
his works. Vnusquisque propriam mercedem accipiet, secundum suum laborem.
Every on shall receive proper wages, according to his labor. The like we have
in twenty other places of scripture; al which infallibly prove, that the
kingdom of heaven is given as wages, for merits, and consequently, that
Protestants, who are enemies to merits, shall never attain to the kingdom of
heaven, which is purchased by good works, and merits and for such men we may
well say that heaven was never made, no more then learning for him, that will
never study, nor virtue for him, who despises the exercise thereof.

Protestant.
Any man may see with half an eye, that the point in question is not concluded
in this syllogism. But this fault is so common with this disputer, that I am
weary of noting it. The reason stands thus, being orderly, and shortly
concluded.

If the kingdom of heaven be given for works, and the Protestants will have no
merits, the Protestants shall never have the kingdom of heaven.

But the kingdom of heaven is given for works, and the Protestants will have
no merits.

Therefore the Protestants shall never have the kingdom of heaven.

See this popish sleight of confounding works, and merits, as if they were all
one. Indeed the ancient Latin writers put meritum, desert or merit, for opus
work sometimes, and mereri, to deserve, sometimes for consequi, to obtain, or
to be vouchsaft a thing. But neither are they all one in truth: and the
scripture, that speaks much of works, never vtters any word of merit.
Therefore the consequence of this proposition is little worth. Neither is the
assumption of this syllogism any better, as being altogether false. For how
can the kingdom of heaven be given for works, when as it is an Inheritance,
and not a purchase. For as many as are redeemed by Gal 4. 4 5. Ioa. 1. 12. Romans
8. 17.
Christ, receive the adoption of sins, and all Gods sons are heirs, even
fellow heirs with Jesus Christ. Now to the heir, the inheritance is due, as
descending upon him, neither can he make purchase of that, which already is his
own by law. Hireling indeed work for wages, and yet many of them c^not justly
plead desert, in claiming their wages. But whatsoever their plea be, it is
strange divinity, and law too, for children to deserve their own inheritance.
The weakness of this assumption is underpropped with this reason.

Whatsoever is given as wages, is given for works.
But the kingdom of heaven is given as wages.
Ergo; The kingdom of heaven is given for works.
This is your proof, to the which at the last we are come. But you forget your
self much therein. For the question is not of works, but of desert by
working; so that if the conclusion of this syllogism be granted, the kingdom
of heaven is given for works; yet are you far enough from proving your
article, that everlasting life is given for merits. Since some thing may be due
upon promise by covenant, which notwithstanding is no way deserved. And this,
it should seem you saw well enough, and therefore chose rather to bring a
weak similitude, then to make offer of any sound proof. You tell us a tale,
what the Lord may do, utterly to no purpose. Wherein I note only these two
things.

First, that if all you ask be granted, it helps you nothing: for what if
everlasting life be given for works? how often must you be told, that working
and deserving are not all one? We deny not, that God will reward every least
good work of any of his children; but we cannot grant, that either the reward
he will give, is everlasting life, or that any works of his children deserve
that reward, which he will give. I doubt not (which is the second thing I note
in his similitude) but you Papists your selves would think it extreme
presumption, for any subject to claim, as of merit, that 1000. pound a year,
which was promised by the Prince, for good service in Ireland: especially if it
may be truly objected against such claim, that though some few actions have
been valiantly performed in part; yet both in the best there has been defect,
and for one thing well done, twenty have been left undone. How then shall any
man proudly vaunt of merit, that knows what Gods law requires, and what his
own deserts are? It is the infinite goodness of God our father in Jesus
Christ, that he does accept of our imperfect obedience, and crown it with
glory, for all the imperfections thereof.

But everlasting life (says he) is called wages, and given as wages.

As if we denied, that good works shall receive reward, and need every foot
put you in mind of the difference of works, and merits. But indeed
everlasting life, or the kingdom of heaven is never, I think, called wages in
Scripture. There is a reward promised by God, viz. an increase of glory, which
shall be imparted to the faithful, proportionably to the measure of grace, and
use thereof in this life, according to works. But the kingdom of heaven is an
inheritance, belonging to all the faithful, as members of Jesus Christ their
head, whose first, and properly it is. This I proved a little before, and
therefore will now only set it out more plainly by a similitude, or likeness.

The son and heir of a King has interest in the kingdom, by right of
inheritance, the Kings mo^eables may either, in his life time by gift, or by
legacy, after his decease be disposed of to whom he please. The King to incite
his son to valor, and love of virtue, promises him that he will give him
some special reward, for every valiant exploit, or attempt, with true martial
discretion, and resolution. This reward is to be raised out of his moueables,
given indeed for works, but not to be claimed upon desert, in regard of some
just exception, which the King his father may take against all such his
enterprises, and atchiuements. Such is our estate, in matters of everlasting
life, by resting upon Jesus Christ to be saved by him, we become members of his
mystical body, sons of God his father, and ours by him, heirs of
everlasting life, which is his inheritance, and ours as members of him. God our
Father has made promise to us being now sons, and heirs, and having thereby
interest in his kingdom, of reward of all things, that we shall valourously
atchieue, or resolutely undertake, for the glorifying of his name, according to
his will. This promise conueyes not to us any title to the kingdom (for that
is ours already, even in possession by Christ) but incourageth 1. Cor. 15. 58.
us to Christian obedience, to be steadfast, immovable, abundant always in
the work of the Lord, for as much as we know, that our labor is not in vain
in the Lord. And yet this is not our only, or greatest motive to good works:
For that arises from our Child-like affection to so kind, and bountiful a
father. Which if the Papists have not, let them not therefore deny, that there
is any such thing: like the mole, that will not believe, that any beast can
see, because she her self is blind. What if they, like hirelings, will do
nothing but for wages? The sons of God in this life, take as great pleasure
in their present obedience, as in their future reward: which notwithstanding
they most assuredly look for, according to his promise, that can not fail,
ever God our Father; To whom with the son, and Holy Ghost be all obedience,
thanks, and glory, from this time for ever, and ever Amen.

A Conclusion unto his most special friend, Master F. T.
THus (my dear friend) I have set down those reasons, which induced me to
receive the Catholic faith, and for which I continue therein. Consider, I pray
you, whether they be not so substantial, and weighty, as any wise man might
accept, and allow of, or at least might cause a reasonable doubt of religion
arise in his mind, concerning the Protestants faith, for if these be true, as
questionless they are most true, what man of judgment, will hazard his soul
upon a religion, pestered with so many notorious absurdities and palpable
errors: Eternal damnation is a matter of no small moment: when the soul is
once plunged into those flames, it is past recovery: far he ^eapes, and ill
he lights, that iumpeth into hell; and questionles, without true faith, you
shall never come to Heaven. Urge your Ministers therefore to satisfy your
conscience, in answering these articles. Will them to reply with maturitie, and
cause them answer distinctly, and as they think in their consciences: For I
fear they will rather do it for a form, to seem to say some thing, then they
will be judged ignorant by silence, in saying nothing. And with this I rest at
your devotion, expecting what your new Evangelists can answer to these just
accusations, of their erroneous religion. From my chamber in Antwerpe this
first of March, your loving friend H. T.

FINIS.
As much of this postscript, as has any need of answer is touched in my
Preface. I will therefore loose no more time in examining such discourses.

The abridgement of the former answer.
ART. 1.
Papist.
THe Protestants have no faith, nor Religion.

Protestant.
The question is, whether the Protestants, by their doctrine, profess any
faith or religion.

Papist.
If the Protestants have any faith, charity, repentance, Justification, church,
altar, sacrifice, priest, religion, Christ, then the world was without them,
for fifteen hundred years.

But the world was not without them for 1500. years.

Therefore the protestants have no faith, no hope, no charity, no repentance,
no justification, no church, no altar, no sacrifice, no priest, no religion, no
Christ.

Protestant.
I deny the consequence of your proposition, neither do we confess any such
eclipse of our Church, for a thousand years, (and yet the same being eclipsed,
ceases not thereby to be in the world; but rather is proved to be) neither can
you prove any such thing as you brag of; Try when you will.

ART. 2.
Papist.
The learned Protestants are Infidels.

Whosoever builds his faith upon his own private and singular exposition, of
Scripture, is an Infidel.

But all Protestants in England do build their faith upon their own private
exposition of Scripture;

Ergo, all the Protestants of England are Infidels.

Protestant.
I deny your whole antecedent, first your proposition, for the truth of faith
depends not upon the publicknesse of an exposition, but upon the soundness
thereof.

Papist.
If faith must be infallible, and impossible to be either erroneous, or
changeable; and faith, built upon private exposition, be subject to error and
change, then he that builds his faith upon his own private exposition, is an
Infidel.

But faith must be infallible, and impossible to be (...), ^^ changeable; and
faith built upon private (...), is subject to error, and change.

Therefore he, that builds his faith upon his own private exposition, is an
Infidel.

Papist.
I deny your assumption. Because the latter part of it is false. For a true
exposition, though it be private, is not subject to error, or change: we
dispute not of the event, whereby it may, and does come to pass, that true
doctrine is changed, but of the nature of that doctrine, which is true. I am
sure no Papist will deny, that a true Catholic in profession, may become an
heretic, yet an apostata; and yet that faith of his, which he forsook, was
true, and unchangeable.

Your principal assumption is also false; for no protestant builds upon any
private interpretation; but upon such, as is warranted by the analogy of faith
publicly acknowledged, and the circumstances of the particular Scriptures,
advisedly weighed.

Papist.
All protestants build their faith upon their own priuas opinion, or upon the
exposition of the Church, the fathers, or councills.

But they build not their faith upon any of these three therefore upon their
own private opinion:

Protestant.
I deny your disjunction in your proposition, as insufficient: for we build
upon the evidence of truth in it self, revealed in the scriptures by going,
from things manifest, to those that are less manifest in themselves, but
become manifest, by being compared with, and examined by the other, we allow of
no exposition contrary to the fathers; but where evident reason taken from the
scriptures themselves, necessarily requires it.

Article. 3.
Papist.
All protestants, who are Ignorant of the Greek, and Latin tongues, are
Infidells.

Whosoever re^^eth his faith upon the ministers credit, and fidelity, has no
faith at all. But all those, that are ignorant of the Greek, and Hebrew
tongues, rely their faith upon the ministers credit.

Ergo all those in England, who are ignorant of the Greek, and Hebrew tongues,
have no faith at all.

Protestant.
If, by relying upon the Ministers credit, you mean, they have no ground to
build upon, but that, I deny your assumption. For the unlearned Protestants
rest upon the witness of Gods spirit, which persuades them of the general
truth contained in the translation, and directs them to, and in the trial of
particulars.

If to the Credit of the Minister you add the witness of the spirit, I say the
Proposition is false. For he has true faith, that relye^ upon the Credit of
the Minister, being directed by the spirit of God so to do, and persuaded by
him of the truth, that is delivered.

Besides, this reason makes as much against the Papists, learned, and
unlearned, who rely one the Popes credit: being at the most, but a learned man,
oftentimes not so much.

Article 4.
Papist.
The Protestants know not what they believe.

They, that have no rule to know what is matter of faith, know not what they
believe.

But the Protestants have no rule to know what is matter of faith,

Therefore the protestants know not what they believe.

Protestant.
I deny your whole antecedent. First your proposition; for a man may know what
he believes, without a rule to know what is matter of faith: though he may, by
that want believe that he should not, and fail in not believing that he should.

Your Assumption also is false. For we have the whole Scripture to be our Rule.
Therefore this discourse needed not. All the Articles whereof are faithfully
believed ioyntely by Protestants, and Puritans, that is by those that dissent
in opinion, about the outward government, or ceremonies of the church.

Papist.
They, that believe that to be the catholic church, which has not been, is,
and shall be universal, for all times, and places, deny the article of believing
the catholic church.

But the Protestants do believe that to be the catholic church, which has
not been, is, and shall be universal, for all times, and places. Therefore they
deny the article of believing the catholic church.

Protestant.
I deny your whole antecedent again. First your proposition: because the
Article of believing the catholic Church, requires not the acknowledging, that
this, or that congregation is the church But only believing, that from the
beginning of the world to the end there always has been, is, and shall be a
holy church of Christ, which, since his ascension, has not been tied to any
place, but is dispersed universally, amongst all nations.

Your assumption also I deny, because the Protestants do not hold that the
church in England, is the catholic church, but only that it is a part of the
Catholic Church. Which reaches to all times, and places. And, in one word, we
deny not to the Church, the necessity of Catholicknesie, but of visiblenesse.

Papist.
They, that believe not that Christ has instituted 7. Sacraments, and
especially the Real presence of our Savior in the Eucharist, do deny the
article of the communion of Saints.

But the Protestants believe not that Christ has Instituted 7. Sacraments, and
the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist: Therefore the Protestants deny
the article of believing the communion of Saints.

Protestant
Any man may make as good a reason of seven score, seven hundred, or seven
thousand; or of the Real presence in Baptism.

The Real presence we believe, the Carnal and bodily presence no Papist can
prove. If the faithful be made one body by receiving, so may they be though
there be no such presence. Therefore the Apostle calls it Bread: all that
participate of one bre^^ not of one body carnally; besides, if by receiving
they be made one body, then they were not one body, till they received: then
they are made such every time they receive: both which are manifestly false.

Papist.
They, that deny the communion of the Church militant, and, triumphant, by
exclaiming against invocation of Saints, and prayers for the souls in
purgatory, deny the Article of believing the communion of Saints.

But the Protestants deny the communion of the Church militant, and triumphant,
by exclaiming against invocation of Saints, and prayer for the souls in
purgatory. Therefore the Protestants deny the Article of believing the
communion of Saints.

Protestant.
The proposition is false. Because there is no such communion. your proof is
nothing. Jacob and John prayed to God, that the Church may be protected, and
blessed by the ministry of Angels; therefore the Saints departed pray for us,
and we must pray to them.

1. Why not rather to God, as Jacob, and John did?

2. It follows not, because they protect us, therefore they 1. Cor. 3. 15.
Saint Paul speaks not of purgatory. For the fire thereof burns the work men,
not the work; but the fire there mentioned burns the works. not all works
neither, but only false doctrine. The latter place being understood 1. Cor.
15. 29. 2.
of purgatory, will not serve the Apostles purpose. How can the resurrection of
the body be proved, by praying for the souls, in purgatory?

Papist.
They that acknowledge not that Remission of sins, is an effect of Baptism,
deny the article of believing the remission of sins.

But the Protestants acknowledge not that remission of sins is an effect of
Baptism. Therefore the Protestants deny the article of believing the remission
of sins.

Protestant.
The proposition is false: because not all have Baptismum flaminis, the
Baptism of the spirit, that have Baptismum fluminis, the baptism of water; we
acknowledge, that whosoever is baptized by the spirit, has received
forgiveness of sins, which no man has, which shall be damned, as many shall be,
that have been baptized. Baptism is the Lauer of regeneration, to as many, as
have the spirit added thereunto, because then they have remission of sins
sealed up unto them.

The Sacrament of penance is a Popish fancy: our Savior I^^. 20. 23.
ordained no such Sacrament; but only affirmed, that the work of the
ministry shall be effectual, to the remitting, and retaining of sin.

We deny not that our sins are perfectly forgiven, but that, by forgiveness
of sins, the power of sin is wholly destroyed in us, at once: for the
destruction of sin comes by sanctification, not by justification; and it is
always in this life imperfect.

Papist.
They that affirm that Christ is God of himself, and not God of God: deny
that he is the son of God.

But the protestants affirm that Christ is God of himself, and not God of
God. Therefore the Protestants deny, that Christ is the son of God.

Protestant.
I deny your proposition. For Christ is not the son of God in respect of the
Godhead: if he be, then must the father and the holy Ghost also be the son,
because they are one and the same God with the son. He that precisely urges
the natural generation of man, as a pattern of the spiritual begeting of the
son of God, will make the son a diverse God, from the father. The substance
of God is essential to every person in Trinity, only thus far, that every
person is God: not that the Godhead is the essence of every person.

The Protestants believe and confess, with the council of Nice, that Christ
is God of God, very God of very God: not that he has his Godhead from the
father: for then they should give advantage to Arius, who was condemned by that
council: for he would readily answer, that Christ must needs be inferior to
God his father, because the father has his Godhead of himself, and the son
not of himself, but of his father. Besides, hereby we should make two
distinct Gods; one that has the Godhead of himself, and another, that has
it not of himself, but of him, that has it of himself.

Papist.
They, that deny that by descending into hell is meant, that Christ went in
soul into the place of the damned, deny the articles of descension into hell.

But the Protestants deny, that by descending into hell is meant, that Christ
went in soul into the place of the damned.

Therefore the protestants deny the article of descension into hell.

Protestant.
I deny your proposition. Because (...) properly signifies nothing but the
estate of the dead, and is not to be expounded hell, but only where the
circumstances of the place, in which it is used, do necessarily require that
exposition: but here there is no such necessity. The protestants do not
interpret ( the descent) of suffering the wrath of God in soul; though they
acknowledge that doctrine to be sound; and thus answer this cauillers
illations.

Papist.
Christ bare the wrath of God. Therefore he despaired of his salvation.

Protestant.
I deny the consequence. For Christ knew both that God loved his person,
because he was his son, and that, by the power of his Godhead he was to free
himself from eternal damnation.

Papist.
Christ suffered the wrath of God, therefore God hated him, and he hated God.

Protestant.
Again I deny your consequence. Our Saviors person was dearly beloved of God
his father, though being considered as a sinner, such as by imputation he was,
for a time, he was, in that respect, to God for us, as every on of us is, in
himself to God. It is not certain, that in the punishment of the damned,
there shall be hatred of God, as a part thereof, and if it were, yet Christ is
exempted from so much of the punishment, as cannot be without sin.

Papist.
Christ suffered the wrath of God, therefore he was tormented with anguish of
mind for his offenses.

Protestant.
The consequence should be, therefore he was tormented with anguish of mind
for those offenses, for which he felt the wrath of God. But these were not his
sins; in whom there was not the least Tainte of sin but ours.

Article 5.
Papist.
The Protestants have no means to determine controversies, and abolish heresies.

Protestant.
The proposition is false, for the scripture has light enough in it self, to
discover and abolish heresies, which they that will, may by conference of
diverse places discern off. Look my answer to the second, and third
Articles. There follows an extrauagant syllogism, which belongs to the 6.
Article of the second part: this it is,

Papist.
Whosoever exhorts us to doubt of that, which we are bound to believe by
faith, exhorts us to infidelity.

But S. Paul exhorts us to doubt of our salvation, which we are bound to
believe, by faith, according to the Protestants Religion.

Ergo S. Paul exhorts us to infidelity.

Protestant,
I deny your assumption. S. Paul does not exhort us to doubt of our salvation;
but commands us to use the means, whereby we may come to assurance, viz.
still to stand in fear, and watch over our selves, least by carelessness we
fall to sinning: to which we are always subject, in this life.

The Protestants do not teach, that whosoever is not assured of his salvation,
without any doubting, is in the state of damnation: But that every man must
labor to come to the perfection, as of all other graces, so of assurance too:
the means of attaining whereto are fear and trembling: by which we may be
kept from sinning, and so, strengthened in assurance of salvation.

Papist.
Articles concerning good life and piety.

Article. I.
The Protestants are bound in conscience never to ask God forgiveness of their
sins.

Whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiven him, sins most
grievously in asking GOD pardon for them.

But all true Protestants are assured by faith, that their sins are forgiven
them.

Ergo all true Protestants sin grievously in asking pardon of God for them.

Protestant.
The principal syllogism for the proof of the Article, omitted, I know not
upon what reason, by this author is thus to be concluded.

Whosoever sin grievously in asking God forgiveness of their sins, are
bound in conscience never to ask him forgiveness.

But the Protestants sin grievously, in asking God forgiveness of their
sins.

Therefore the Protestants, are bound in conscience, never to ask God
forgiveness of their sins.

The Assumption of this syllogism he proves thus.

Papist.
Whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiven, sins grievously
in asking God pardon for them.

But all true Protestants are assured by faith, that their sins are forgiven
them.

Therefore all true Protestants sin grievously in asking God forgiveness of
their sins.

Protestant.
That the proposition is false, it appears by the practice of Psalm. 32. 1. and
51. 1. 2.
David, who prayed to God for the pardon of that sin, which he believed by
faith was forgiven, for so was he assured 2. Sam. 12. 13.
before, from the Lord by the Prophet Nathan.

Papist.
If none but an Infidel, or a mad man would demand of God, the creation of
the world, or Christ's incarnation, or the institution of Sacraments, which
already is effected, then none but such a one, would ask of God, pardon for
his sins, being assured by faith, that they are forgiven him.

But none but an Infidel, or a mad man would demand of God, the creation of
the world, or Christ's incarnation, or the institution of the sacraments.

Therefore none but a mad man, or an Infidel, would ask of God pardon for his
sins; being assured by faith, they are already forgiven them.

Protestant.
I deny your consequence, because it presumes of an equality where there is
none. For we do not believe the later with so great assurance, as the former,
besides, we have a commandment for the latter, but not for the former.

Papist.
Whosoever demands that, which he hopes not to obtain, synns grievously by
demanding it.

But whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiven him, in asking
pardon, demands that, which he has no hope to obtain.

Therefore whosoever is assured by faith, that his sins are forgiven him,
sins grievously in asking pardon for them.

Protestant.
I deny your proposition, for he only sins grievously, in praying for that,
he possesses, who believes certainly that he does possess that, he prays
for: not he, which having some true persuasion, has also some doubt withal.

Neither is the assumption true. Because with the assurance there is some
doubt, even in those, that believe truly the forgiveness of their sins. The
doubt is sin, but the asking pardon, because of this doubt, is noe sin.

The Protestants do not teach, that all Christians have this absolute
assurance, but that they ought to labor for it. Upon this reason he gathers
this conclusion.

Papist.
He, that cannot without note of Infidelity ask forgiveness of sins,
cannot, with a safe conscience, say the Lords prayer.

But no protestant can without note of infidelity, ask forgiveness of sins.

Therefore no Protestant can, with a safe conscience, say the Lords prayer.

Protestant.
If by note of Infidelity, you mean sinning by weakness of faith; your
proposition is false. For a man that doubts of pardon, may crave it, without
sin, though he cannot doubt without sin.

If by it, you understand being an Infidel, because of asking that, which he
is sure he has; your assumption is false: for a true Protestant is not an
Infidel, by such doubting, though he should not doubt.

Article. 2.
Papist.
The protestants are bound in conscience ^^ avoid all good works.

Every man is bound, upon pain of eternal damnation; to avoid all deadly
sins.

But fasting, prayer, allmesdeeds, and all good works, according to the
Protestants Religion, are deadly sins.

Ergo, according to the protestants religion, all men are bound, upon pain of
eternal damnation, to avoid fasting, prayer, and all good works.

Protestant.
By an orderly course of proceeding in disputation, the first syllogism should
be to this effect.

Every man is bound, upon pain of eternal damnation, to avoid all good
works.

But the Protestants are bound in conscience, to avoid that, which every man
is bound, upon pain of eternal damnation, to avoid.

Therefore the Protestants are bound in conscience to avoid all good works.

Instead of that, he has set us down the proof of the proposition. The
assumption whereof I utterly deny; as false in it self, and slanderous to our
doctrine. For neither Fasting, praying, almesdeeds, etc. are deadly sins,
neither do we teach any such thing; but only (as this man himself confesses,
in expounding that place of Esa. 64. 6.) that the best works we can do, are
infected with deadly sin. And it is one thing (I trow) to say that a man in
his best health is never without an Ague, and another thing to say, that a man's
best health is an Ague.

Further, we must observe these two points, in this matter; that by deadly
sin we mean not as the Papists do, the gross breaches of Gods
commandments. For the good works of a regenerate man, are (ordinarily) void
of all such transgressions; but slippes of infirmity, by which w^ defile these
good works. To which if any man reply, that we are bound to refrain all such
sins; I willingly subscribe unto him. But withal I deny; that we are bound
to avoid all good works, because we can do none without this taint of
corruption. For the works are commanded, and accepted of God, and shall be
rewarded, for all this infirmity of ours; which cleaues unto them, and would
make both them, and us for them, hateful unto God, but that it has pleased
him to pardon it in Jesus Christ.

Art. 3.
Papist.
The Protestants either have no faith at all, or else lie most damnably, in
denying that a man assisted by grace, can keep the commandments.

Whosoever knows God, keeps his Commandments.

But all true protestants know God.

Ergo, all true protestants keep his commandments.

Protestant.
It is more troublesome to apply this Syllogism to the question, then hard to
answer it. But I have performed that task, in my larger discourse, and now
only speak to his syllogism, as it lies.

Where, first I grant him the conclusion, according to S. John's mind. For
indeed every true protestant keeps Gods commandments; though not perfectly.
Which imperfection, our papists must needs grant, as long as they run to
dip their best works in Christ's blood: which needed not, if they were perfect
of themselves.

Secondly, I say, the text of Saint John does prove, that he is not to be
understood of perfect obedience; because he speaks, without exception, of all
Christians, that know God to everlasting life. Many whereof, yea even the best,
as David, oftentimes sin grievously.

Art 4.
Papist.
The most points, wherein the protestants dissent from Catholics, tend to
loosnesse of life, and carnal liberty.

If the (...) points following tend to loosnesse of life, and carnal (...)
then the most points, wherein the Protestants dissent from Catholics, do so.

But the seven points following tend to looseness of life, and carnal
liberty.

Therefore the most points, wherein the Protestants dissent from Catholics,
tend to loosnesse of life, and carnal liberty.

Protestant.
First I answer to the whole syllogism; that if the Protestants Romans 6. 1.
and 9. 19.
thereupon.

Secondly, I say the consequence of the proposition is

Thirdly, I deny that any of these points tends to looseness

Papist.
If man have not free will to do good, he may be negligent in preparing his
soul to serve God.

But man has not free will, as the protestants teach.

Therefore he may be negligent in preparing his soul to serve God.

Protestant.
I deny the consequence of the proposition. For God, that commands a man to be
careful in preparing his soul to serve him, must be obeyed simply* though we
see not the particular reason of the commandment.

But indeed we deny not, but men freely both prepare their souls, and receive
Gods grace: but we say, that it is God, which makes difference betwixt the
believers, and unbelievers: yet not without their own labor and willingness,
to which they are stirred up, in respect of the event, necessarily.

Papist.
The doctrine of Justification by faith, only tends to looseness of life.

You would never say so if you knew, that we believe and teach, that no man is
justified, but he, that is also sanctified, and no man is sanctified, but he,
that walks in obedience to God. We hold a necessity of works, but not to
justification; and we look for a reward of works, but not upon desert.
Wherein we dissent from the Papists, without preaching carnal liberty.

Wherefore though faith once had, can never be lost: yet

Neither does our want of liberty to keep the commandments,

The sacrament of penance we refuse; because it is a patch

We deny the carnal presence in the Sacrament, because

Lastly, we neither have coined any Religion, nor 7. have a negative religion,
but we hold the truth of God revealed in the scriptures: and reject your popish
errors contrary thereto.

The Jews by the same reason condemned our Savior Christ, and the Gentiles
accused his Apostles for bringing in a new Religion, whereby they denied and
abollished the heresies of the one, and the Idolatry of the other.

Article 5.
Papist.
The Protestants make God the author of sin, the only cause of sin, that
man synneth not, that God is worse, then the Diuil. Whosoever defends that
God commands, persuades, urges, and impelleth to sin, makes God the
author of sin.

But all protestants say, that God commands, persuades, urges, and
impelleth to sin.

Ergo the Protestants make God the author of sin.

Protestant.
The proposition, in the 3. latter points, is altogether true* in the former
thus it is to be conceived of; that if God command that, which by some law of
his own is sin, as that Abraham should kill his son, he is not the Author
of sin, but only so far, as he commands that, which of it self, without
that special dispensation of his, were sin; but by that it cease to be
sin.

The assumption is false, no Protestant defends any such thing; howsoever we
all acknowledge, that it was Gods will, that Judas should betray Christ. etc.

But we deny, that either Judas had any commandment, or warrant from God, or
that God put that wicked thought into his heart, or that he inclined him to the
liking of it. Neither do we deride any permissiue will in God, but that which
makes him an Idle beholder of things, without any determination of their being,
or not being, but only such as d^pend^s wholly, or principally upon the
creature. We believe, and profess, that God works otherwise by the wicked,
then by the godly: in these by putting in good thoughts and bringing the^ to
effect, by their will, and labor.

In the wicked he does not work, but only by them bringing his own purpose
to pass, without commanding, persuading, urging, or impelling to sin, this
latter you* may (if you will) call permission, without fear of being derided
by any Protestant; yea with the good liking of all Protestants; so you
acknowledge a necessity of event.

Article 6.
Papist.
That faith once had may be lost:
Whosoever loses his charity loses his faith.
But David, when he killed Vrias, lost his charity.
Ergo David when he killed Vrias lost his faith.

Protestant.
As before, so here also, he leaves out the principal syllogism; which I thus
supply,

If David l^st his faith, then faith once had may be lost.

But David lost his faith.

Therefore faith once had may be lost.

The assumption is false: which he labors to confirm notwithstanding, by the
reason before rehearsed. To the which I answer, first by distinguishing on the
proposition; whosoever leeseth his charity altogether, that there remains no
grace of sanctification, has no faith; but it is not true, that whosoever
commits some grievous sin against the law of Charity, thereby leeseth his
faith.

I deny your assumption, David lost not his charity; because he was still
sanctified; though he fell grie^ously.

Papist.
Whosoever remains in death is without charity:
But David when he killed Vrias remained in death:
Therefore David when he killed Vrias was without charity.

Protestant.
I distinguish again upon your proposition; he that remains in death, is so
far without charity, as he remains in death.

But a man may* in respect of some sinful actions, be in death, and, for all
that, be truly sanctified, though not thoroughly: as the hand may be dead to
any motion toward the head, and yet alive to all motions downward. The proof
is both false and absurd. For if there be any life in the Heb. 10. 38.
soul, abiding in it as a quality, that must be faith. Some Papists call
chairty, the life of faith, but none that ever I read, or heard of, the life of
the soul.

The assumption not only may be, but must be denied, because it is untrue 1.
Ioh. 3. 14. is to be expounded by the 17. where it is said, He that sh^^s up
his bowels of compassion from his brethren, that has need, has not the love
of God in him. And yet no Papist will say that a man is void of the love o^ God,
upon the refusal at sometimes, to give alms to him that stands in need He that
is quite without love, that is, he, that has not in him the love of his
neighbor, is without sanctification, and Justification; but this a man may
have, and David had, in some good measure, though he fail, as he did, in that
one particular of love toward Vria^. When you bring any proof out of that
place of Ezechiell, 18. 24. you shall have an answer to it.

In the mean while I say no more but this, that conditionalis nihil p^^it in
esse: a thing is not proved to be, because if it be, such or such an event
shall follow thereupon.

Article. 7.
Papist.
The Protestants shall never have life everlasting; Because they will have no
merits, for which everlasting life is given.

Whatsoever is given as wages, is given for works.
But the kingdom of heaven is given as wages.
Therefore the kingdom^ of heaven is given for works.
Protestant.
Any man may easily perceive, that the question is not concluded in this
syllogism. But I will not, in this short answer, trouble my self with any
more; then answering to the point.

Papist.
Whatsoever is given as wages, is given for works.
But the kingdom of heaven is given as wages.
Ergo the kingdom of heaven is given for works.
Protestant.
If we grant him the whole syllogism, he gets nothing by it* unless he can
prove, that works and merits are all one; which is utterly false.

I deny your assumption: which none of these places you bring does prove; the
first is a parable, signifying that the Gentiles shall have place in heaven
as well as the Jews, though they came later to the knowledge of the truth. The
other two, mention reward, but not wages: and these two, are your common ^rrors
in most of your arguments, concerning the question o^ works, that you without
all authority of Scripture, or reason, confound works, with merits; and
reward, with wages. Which you professing a schollerlike disputation, should not
have done, without some special proof of their being all one; especially
since you can hardly be ignorant, that we always distinguish the one from the
other, not without reason, as we surely persuade our selves.

FINIS.

