Earth raining upon Heaven. A SERMON PREACHED at the Assizes holden at
Nottingham, August 5. 1614. BY WILLIAM WORSHIP, Doctor in DIVINITY.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Panier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Iuy-Lane. 1614.

TO MY GOOD Friend, Mr. Doctor Hall.
SIR: the combination of Zeal and Learning, wherewith GOD has honored you:
together with your Love, imparted kindly to me by Letter, have been the
Allectiues to this small Remembrance. Wherein I covet to show my
Thankfulness, and the great Respect I deservedly bear you. I know mine
insufficiency to perform much on the best terms; much less, at this time,
being worn with tedious Sickness, by the means of a gross and cruel Air.
Yet, it pleased the Lord to prosper this poor Endeavor at the Delivery; and
who can tell, if hereafter He will bless it, to the winning of some Soul? O,
if He do, what a sweet Addition shall it be to his former mercies. This
gracious GOD assist us by his Spirit, encourage us daily in the course of our
Ministry; that spending our selves for the good of his Elect, we may one day
shine like Stars, for ever and ever. Amen.

Your unfeigned Friend WILLIAM WORSHIP.

THE TEXT.
LVKE 7. 37. 38. 37 And behold, a Woman in the City, which was a sinner, when
she knew that Jesus sat at Table in the Pharisees house, she brought an
Alabaster-Boxe of Ointment:

38 And she stood at his feet, behind him, weeping, and began to wash his
feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hayres of her head, and kissed
his feet, and anointed them with the Ointment.


Our Savior Christ was invited by a Pharisee to eat. He went. For meat and
drink? No: Yes: It was his meat and drink to do John. 4. 34.
his Fathers will, to convert and comfort Sinners, as he does in this Story.
Where is a Watchword [Behold,] and a Devout Party, largely described: by her
Sex [a woman] by her Place [in the City,] by her Reputation, [a Sinner,] by
her Faith, [when she knew that Jesus sat at Table in the Pharisees house, She
went to him,] by her liberal Intent, [shee brought an Alabaster-Boxe of
Ointment,] by her Humility, [she stood at his feet,] by her Modeslie,
[behinde him,] by her godly Sorrow, [weeping,] by her Increase of that sorrow
[she began to wash his feet with her tears,] by the Neglect of her self,
[and did wipe them with the hayres of her head] by her Love [and kissed his
feet,] by her Bounty, [and anointed them with the Ointment.

Thus am I imbarqued for a long Voyage, and am to pass the Magellan Straits:
but my comfort is, I sail in the DESIRE, where the Word is my Compass, and
the Lord my Pilot.

[ Behold.] This particle, Behold, is sometime in Scripture Repletiue, but in
this place Demonstratiue, importing Attention and Admiration. The People must
at one time attend two Preachers; the Man in the black gown, that delivers the
Meditations of his heart, and the mighty GOD, whose Chair and Pulpit is in
Heaven. About the Heart (says De Re Anat. lib. 7. c. 1.
Columbus) are two Ears, a Right one, and a Left, both thin-skin'd, and
anfractuous: whose use, in Reason, is to preserve the Hollow and Arteriall
veins from bursting; in Divinity, to teach us to draw up our Hearts to our
Ears, that the word may pearce both at once. The end of all our Senses, is to
bring us to Christ, but of Hearing chiefly, as being the sense of Discipline.
The Gospel for the ear, the ear for the Gospel, and both for the
Conscience. So that to attend, is to hear, meditate, practice. For as Art
without Nature is lame, Nature without Art, Plut. Mor. 1.
blind, and both without Experience fruitless: so Hearing without Meditation,
is windy, Meditation without Hearing erroneous, and both without practice,
ineffectual.

Beloved, not I, but the Evangelist, not He, but GOD inioynes you to attend: if
I thought you would not, I would call upon the dead Element to hearken, and
cry out with the Prophet Jeremy, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear Ierem. 22. 19.
the word of the Lord.

Further, this, Behold, implies Admiration. Things are wondered at, either for
their greatness, or rarenes: both these are conspicuous in this Example. Behold
an huge Whale, a living Mountain of sin, a mighty Sea Monster caught in the
silly Draw-net of the Gospel, and the Cords unbroke, and the Mashes whole,
because the Fishers name is VVONDERFVLL. Behold a Blacke-Moore Isaiah. 9. 6.
washed white, a Leopard made spotles, a merry Lark turned to a groaning Culuer:
Behold a modest boldness, a joyful sadness, an acting passion, a speaking
silence. Behold one weeping. Is It such a matter to see one weep? A great
matter to see one weep for sin. This of the Watchword.

The Devout Party follows, who is first described by her Sex [a woman.] If
you ask What woman? Austen, Gregory, Beda, tell you Mary Magdalen: others
doubt: here godly Ignorance is safest. The Lord, for just causes Matthew. 15.
has concealed her Name, as he did the Syro-Phaenicians, her Parallel. Suffice
it us, that a woman must read us a Lecture of Repentance. Do we scorn it?
But Apollos disdained not to be Catechized by a woman, and Super Cant. Ser. 75.
Ierem. 8. 7. Prouer. 6. 6.
women (says Bernard) were at Christ's Resurrection, The Apostles of the
Apostles. As proud as we are, we are sent to the Crane, and Swallow for
Instruction, and (by your leaves) to that little, lean, creeping Thing, the
Pismire. What beauteous flower, what medicinal herb, but may be found in the
Woman's garden? May we not learn Meekness of Sarah, Fortitude of Deborah,
Patience of Naomi, Humbleness of Hanna, Wisdom of Abigail, Zeal of
Elizabeth, and all these Graces of the Virgin Mary? O that our women would
tread in these steps! No: they will not, they care not, they degenerate, they
go like men; and some fear they will shortly ride after that ill-fauour'd
fashion, used in this Realm, before Richard the seconds Queen The Annals of
England.
came from Bohemia. Hark, ye Grammarians; Hic mulier, ere long, will be good
Latin. Well, since they will not few by those Samples, I will send them
Latimers Handkerchers, Ezech. 16. 23.
and work woes in Chayne-stitch, as the Prophet Ezechiell has taught me.

The second branch, is this good woman's Place of abode. She was a Citizen. Of
what City? Some say Nain, some Jerusalem: we cannot point down on any one. It
is like her worst staynes were Citie-sinnes, for, the Country (usually) sins
more bungerly than Corporations. Mightiness of state, frequencie of strangers,
multitude of people, curiousness of Arts, heaps of riches, sumptuousness of
buildings, store of provision, strength of munition, make Cities settle upon
their Lees; and yet not they, but their abuse. O harlot Jerusalem! O bloody
Nineveh! Ezech. 16. 33. Nahum 3. 1.
they be the words of the Prophet Ezechiel, and Nahum. Diana at Ephesus, Lais
at Corinth, Mahumet at Constantinople, Antichrist at Rome, at Venice nothing
but Pride, because Venice is nothing but Riches, but at London, Omnia been.
Far be it from me to be blown up with such a Gunne-pouderzeale, as to
forget the honor of that Place: yet this I must tell them, that as the great
sickness, so the great sins, ordinarily, are from them derived to the
Country.

The Reputation of this woman comes next to be scanned. She was counted
mercenary, a notorious sinner, a whipster. Yet, lo, she is now become an
honest woman. Vpbraid her not then with her former lewdness, but give God
thanks for her present goodness. The Lord has forgot, and shall we remember?
The Angels rejoice, and shall we be fullen? A graceless woman (says a
Father) Ambros.
that had long in snared a young man, now converted, speaks to him familiarly,
as he goes by. He regardes her not. She replies, Ego sum; Its I. He answers, At
ego non sum ego, But I am not my self: I am not as I was, I was not as I am.
There were some of the Corinthians, Idolaters, Adulterers, and (which I tremble
to utter) Buggerers: and yet they 1 Cor. 6. 11.
were washed, yet they were sanctified, yet In fest. Mar. Magdal.
they were justified. Who would despair (says Bernard) when such great
sinners obtain not mercy only, but glory? Did not Rahab, the Harlot, recover
her self? I dare say more, (and S. Matthew will bear me out) Christ himself
descended from her, and from Thamar too: to succor ignoble birth, says
Chrysostom, to comfort distressed souls, says Jerome. Here let us pause, and
sigh, In Math.
and joy: sigh at our sins, joy at the wondrous love of our Savior, who for
our sakes became a worm, and no man, the very Psalm. 22. 6.
scorn of men, and contempt of the People.

But let us now weigh this woman's Faith, so highly commended afterward by our
Savior. Thus she reasons: Christ Jesus disdaines not to eat with the
Pharisees, (to whom, of his goodness, he preferres us Harlots,) therefore will
I to him, and importune him for mercy. I know these haughty Sectaries will
mock me, and all the Town and Country will ring of me; but I am so sick of
Sin, and feel such Convulsions, that I dye, alas, unless I repair to him.
And in truth, she had perished, had she not embraced him: for, no other Name
was Acts 4. 12.
there under Heaven, by which she could possibly be saved. If a King be
displeased, (though his Wrath be like the Roaring of a Prou. 19. 12.
Lion) yet, Force may encounter him, or Friends entreat him, or Music still
him, or Eloquence persuade him, or Promises win him, or Riches tempt him, or
something prevail with him: but when fire is kindled in the wrath of The Lord
of Hosts, that consumes the Earth, and burns unto the bottom of Hell, what
Creature dare step forth to look him in the face, much less to parle with
him, and least of all, to grapple with him? Dare Man? Like enough; for he is a
proud Worm, and will lift up his Neb, but the Lord can soon tread him into
slime. But (perhaps) he will offer him heaps of Coin, and think to buy out
his Sin with Silver. No: Gold and Silver are corruptible things, and the
Samuel of Heaven will take no Bribes. Now how rare this Faith is (howsoever the
World thinks nothing more common) the Christian in his Combat, finds by
experience. Before he commit sin, the Serpent tells him, he shall not dye at
all; and, come what will come, it is but Believing in Christ: but when he has
yielded to the temptation, then he shows him Halters, and Knives, and Poisons.

And thus (no doubt) the Devil insulted over David, when he was in penning the
one and fifteeth Psalm. Why, how now David, are you fallen to a Psalm of
Mercy? Are you at last come to whyning and puling for your sins? O, Sir, you
should have looked better about you: it is now too late to call again
yesterday. Thou arrant Hypocrite, how dare thou lift up those eyes, those
adulterous eyes to Heaven? How dare thou spread those hands, those murtherous
hands before the Lord? What? the King? the King of Israel? a Prophet? and play
the Beast? Is your Zeal and Dancing before the Arc come to this? And would no
less sin serve thy turn than Adultery? Could not thine own wife, nay
wives suffice thee? Is the breach of holy Matrimony nothing? No, no, it was
nothing, and therefore to make it something, thou lashest into murder, and
chainest thy sins together. But, if thou will needs kill, I hope it shall be
some Philistine. Calst thou Vriah a Philistine? Thou Tyrant, thine own
Conscience tells thee, it was thy Subject, thy faithful, honest, and valiant
Subject, whom craftily thou caldst home, and all to hatch thy Cuckowes-egg, by
2 Samuel 11. 13.
same token thou made him drunk, and thou never the better, and he much the
worse. Ah Sir, who would have thought that David could play such pranckes? Thy
other sins I have upon Record, and they be forth-comming, but these will I
write in a paper by themselves in Text-letters, and pin them on the Curtain
at thy Beds-feet, when thou lie a dying. And so farewell for a season.

I proceed to this Woman's liberal Intent. She goes not empty-handed, but
takes with her a Box of Ointment, with full purpose to bestow it on Christ.
The Box is Alabaster, so called of A, the privative particle, and (...), as
hard to be held for the slippirinesse. A fit Vessel for such piercing aeriall
matter. The Ointment was not gross and sophisticate, but pure and costly,
being (to speak in the Schoole-mens phrase) Refrigerativum, Delinitivum,
Confortativum, Cooling, Suppling, Refreshing, chiefly with the odor, which was
like the sweet sent of Musk, Ciuet, Ambergris. This was her Present
resolved upon for Christ, not in opinion of Merit (for that were to proffer him
the Nard, and to throw the Alabaster at his head) but in token of the
soundness of her Faith, the truth of her conversion, and the dearnesse of her
affection to him, who had already given her hansell of his abundant mercies. A
notable Pattern and Platform of Christianity, declaring that good thoughts
must be nourished by continuance, fortified by Prayer, and not iustled out by
rouing cogitations. For a divine motion killed soon after the conception, is
like an Embrio, unkindly perishing in the womb. But that we may build on a
sure foundation, we must look that our purposes have substantial Originals,
Directions, Ends, since Aduerbs in Scripture, are more forcible than Nownes,
and Been better than Bonum. This churlish age admits no thought of Spiknard for
Christ. What, nothing to carry him? Nothing. What Is the cause? Want. True,
want of Devotion. For otherwise the poorest man has two Mites to give him, his
Soul and his Body. But pass we on to this Christian woman's Humility.

She stood, that is, she remained at his feet, for so standing is taken in the
seventh of the Acts, the 55. verse, and in other places. The Foot is the
lowest part of the body, and is opposed to the Head, the principal member for
Order, Perfection, Virtue. This silly wretch is here stooping to the ground; in
abasement of her self for her grievous offenses: for Humility thinks nothing
more strange, and incredible, than the report or supposall of her own
worthiness. A virtue so honorable, that Pride (her enemy) will strive to
resemble her. The Virgin Mary (says Bernard) was adorned with three flowers,
the Violet, the Lilly, the Rose, with Humility, Chastity, Charity. And, in
truth, all Graces loose their gloss and brightness, go not Humility before
them, beside them, after them. Down then, proud heart, that never yet felst
the weight of Sin, the wrath of GOD, the wound of Conscience: down on thy
knees, this day, this night, least thou be in thy winding sheet, in thy grave,
and in the fire of Hell by to morrow. Say unto the Lord, in the anguish of thy
soul, Lord, I am a wretched, and woeful creature, I am nothing but sin. Sin
in the womb, sin in the birth, sin in the cradle, sin in my youth, sin
in my riper age; blind in judgment, dull in memory, stubborn in heart,
wayward in affection, vain in words, perverse in manners; an outrageous
Swearer, a damnable Mockpreacher, a cursed Sabbaoth-breaker, a Thief, a
Barabbas, a Viper, a Carrion, ah Lord, so loathsome, and so full of poison,
that I know not how to express my vileness.

There follows the Modesty of this Saint. She stood behind him. She dare
not presume to behold his countenance, but (like the woman with the bloody
Issue) comes stealing behind Mark 5. 27.
him, with a trembling heart, and blushing hue (the color of virtue.) And here
(as every where) behold a wonderful alteration. She had been wild, and
audacious, giving her members servants to uncleanness: Romans 6. 19.
dallying with her hands, minsing with her feet, smiling with her cheeks,
glancing with her eyes, flaring with her hair, kissing with her lips,
impudent in all, and all to make others impudent: but now she is ashamed of her
self, and creepes at the back of this noble Guest, with eyes so demisse, and
gesture so modestly composed, as if Bashfulnes it self were confined to her
person.

Then, let us here cast our eyes on this Shamefastnes: a passion, in yong-men
commendable, in women admirable, which good men need not, but by accident,
which old men would not have, which bad men cannot have. I will show you (if
you please) her Picture, drawn by a cunning hand, above four hundred years
ago, and the Table yet sound, and the colors fresh. She is the Sister
Bernard. ad Mil. Temp.
of Continency, the Discouerer of Simplicity, the Lamp of Chastity, the
Defender of Purity, Consciences Glory, Fames Keeper, Life's Honor, Virtues
Seat, Natures Praise, Honesties Cognizance. Yet as lovely as she is, she is
little set by in this sensual age, which spending it self in brutish
pleasure, has a face of Brass, though Shame, by Nature, be entailed to
Intemperance, as a vice most repugnant to humane excellency.

Time and Desire now hasten us forward to this woman's godly Sorrow, which she
testifies by tears, the dew of Grace, the joy of Angels. The Compunction of
the wicked is either Ceremonial or Desperate: from which this differs, both
in the form, as being a true grief, allayed by the comforts of the Gospel:
and in the effect, as coming to GOD, when the other flies from him. The
Attendants of it are seven: Care, Apology, Indignation, 2 Cor. 7.
Fear, Vehement Desire, Zeal, Revenge. The Parts are three, Discussion,
Collection, Detestation: by the first we make priuie-search for our sins:
by the second, we put them in hold: by the third, we censure them with
bitterness and adiudge them to death. The Means of it are eight; The Knowledge
of the Law, of the Sanctions of the Law, of the Contempt of both, of the Guilt
of sin, of the Judgment of God against it, of the Price of our Ransom, of
the End of our Redemption, and of the Promise of Salvation.

Now all this Knowledge, and (by sequel) this Sorrow, is from God, chiefly
wrought by sharp (but discreet) Application of the word. This is that Jesus
whom Ye have crucified, Acts 2. 36.
says Peter to the Jews: He sets the Accent in the right place, this ye, was
it that pricked them to the hearts. Yet must we take heed we throw not stones
at the head of Innocence, nor vent our gall to the disgrace of Persons. But,
Oh, for a Moses in these days, to fetch water from the Rock, and tears from
the eyes of our hard-harted drunkards, who swarm in every place, carowsing
mans-bloud in Cans, and Flagons. The land, at this day, mourns because of
Oaths. Ier. 23. 10.


From the Nobleman to the Kitchin-boy, and from the Lady to the Inckle-begger,
there is nothing but Swearing. They champe in their mouths the blood of GOD,
as Paul calls it: that blood, that speaks better things than that of Abel,
the least drop whereof is Acts 20. 28. Hebr. 12. 24.
more worth than Mines of precious Metal, nay Gold, and Silver are but
Tinker-mettall to it. Would you know the chief cause of this enormity? It Is
want of application: which once set on foot, would smite the consciences of
these offenders, and sting the Magistrate for his cruel pity, and dangerous
conniuencie. But now, since the Preacher acts the Parasites part (fearing the
speech of Ahab to Michajah, the same, in effect, with Agamemnons to Calchas,
(...). Hom. Il. 1.
Did I not tell you, he would not prophecy good, but evil? 1 Kin. 22. 18.
since then has Blasphemy taken head, and feeling the reins lie loose, has
laid Gods honor in the dust. Ad to this evil, the lasines of our unlearned
Ministers, who are all the six days merely secular, and so but read, if
read on the seventh.

The next point contiguous to this, is the Increase of this woman's godly
sorrow. When the body receives a wound, at first you see nothing but a white
line: forthwith comes out blood in great abundance. Deep grief for sin is a
while intestate, at last it yields tears, more sparingly at first, but after
plenteously. Thus Eliahs Cloud was but like a 1 Kin. 18.
man's hand at the rising, presently the heaven was black, and there was a
great rain.

The measure of this grief must be great, and serious; yet can it not possibly
be proportional to the sin, as Scotus dreams: which Bellarmin qualifying by
the distinction of Intensiue, and Appreciatiue, though he gather up his feet
more cleanly than the Schoole-man, yet is he found to inter-fere in his pace.

That we may conceive great grief, we must acknowledge our selves great
sinners, and beware of the Negation, Extenuation, Justification of our
offenses: for though we never committed heinous crime to the worldward, yet
many small sins clotterd together, will make a sad lump: though in truth no
sin be little in it self, but damnable.

The Romanists make but seven Deadly sins, all which are couched in this
word SALIGIA.

Vt mortem vites, semper SALIGIA vites.

By S, is meant Superbia, by A, Avaritia, by L, Luxuria, by I, Ira, by G, Gula,
by I, Invidia, by A, Accidia, or rather (...). Crafty Cubs; for they have left
out Idolatry that Master-sinne.

Four things declare the grieuousnesse of sin; The Law; Punishment in our
selves and others; Terror of conscience; The death of Christ. There are four
Crying sins, for which we must weep, like Rahel, that would not be
comforted: Murder, Sodomitrie, Oppression of Genes. 4. 10. Genes. 19. 13. Exo.
22. 23. James 3. 4.
widows and Orphans, and Detayning of wages. Some of these sins are rife
among us; therefore God calls us to baldnes, and sackcloth: but behold Joy and
Gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Isaiah
22. 12.
Wine. Nay we have learned the Epicures Enthymeme, The Prophet Esaias says, We
must die tomorrow; Therefore let us eat and drink.

In the next place let us view this woman's Neglect of her self: She wipes
Christ's feet with the hairs of her head. Certainly she wanted not fine linen
to have dride them, but now she will consecrate her dearest Ornament, which so
often, which so gently she had kemb'd, and broyded so cunningly against the
Glass. The hair is but a poor Excretion, yet strange it is how some admire
it. The Callant must have his fleece of Vanity, at least, one Lock
effeminately twisted. For which pride, he is sometime so justly punished, that
he is forced to fall to his Gregorian. Our Daughters of Sion, spend the
Morning-time (the prime and freshest of the day, and fittest for Prayer) in
crisping, curling, building Towers on their heads: changing the color with
liquors, powders: borrowing, and buying, of the living, of the dead. Nay, they
counterfeit the great Seal of Nature, and walk with artificial Complexions,
which GOD will one day wash off with fire and brimstone, fall they not in time
to Deprecation. Thus wethreaten, but what care they? They will shrieke, and
squeale, at the leaping of a frogge, but not shrink an inch for all the curses
in the Bible.

We are now to consider this woman's love: She kissed his feet. Five kinds of
Kisses are found in Scripture. The first a whorish one: so she caught him, and
kissed him, Prou. 7. 13. The second a chaste one: thus Jacob kissed his cozen
Rahel, Ge. 29. 11. The third the Kiss of Courtesy: Thou gave me no Kiss,
Luke 7. 45. The fourth the Kiss of Treason: Thus Ioab kissed Amasa, 2. Sam. 20:
and Iscariot our Savior, Matthew. 26. 49. The fifth, the Symbol of Peace, and
Brotherhood; Greet one another with an holy Kiss, 2 Corin. 13. 12. This
Kiss was reverent, and argued the truth of Love, which Love (to use Scaligers
definition) is an affection uniting the soul with Christ. It imports three
things, an Inclination, wherewith she was affected: a Desire, wherewith she
was ravished: a Joy, wherewith she was quieted. The measure of this Love is
without measure, says Bernard. The Schoolmen give two acute Reasons. First,
because Love is the utmost end of our affections. Now the End of Desire is
without End. Therefore the Physician puts an end to his medicine, never to
Ariss. Pol. 1.
the health of his Patient. Secondly, a measure is found in Love, not as in the
thing measured, but as in the measure, in which there can be no excess.

Our Adversaries, that call themselves Catholics (as did the Arrians and
Donatists) avouch with confidence, that they only love Christ. How prove they
it? By an Argument drawn from Kissing: they Kiss his Picture, the Pax, the
Altar. But stay: the Israelites, under Jeroboam, might stand as much on such
kissing as they: yet the Prophet Hosea Hosea 13. 2.
tells them they kissed the Calves. Do our resolute, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
dissolute Catholics love God? Then would they love our dread Sovereign, his
Vicegerent. So they do: so they say.

No, Bellarmine (their Pythagoras) reads them another Lesson, De Romans Pont.
lib. 5. c, 7. Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem Haereticum: It Is not lawful
for Christians to endure a King that is an Heretic. And what King counts he
an Heretic? The Protestant. Witness his own words: Regnante Constantino,
florebat fides Christiana. When Constantine reigned, there was nothing but
Christianisme: When Constantius reigned, there was nothing but Arrianisme:
When Julian reigned, there was nothing but Ethnicisme: When Henry of England,
and Edward reigned, there was nothing but Lutherisme: When Elizabeth reigned,
there was nothing but Caluinisme.

Now when Subjects are thus Iesuited (unless GOD restrain them) they study
professedly the Art of King-killing. Shooting as dead as Maureuell, poisoning
as sure as Brazuto, stabbing as right as the Iacobin, goring as deep as
Ravilack. When first I beheld the Quarters of the Pouder-traitors, my heart
began to earne, and the tears stood in mine eyes: at last, I was sorry that I
was sorry, and charged my soul not to enter into passion. O! but they will
never do so more: Not till the next time: For at this hour (like Catilins)
they note us with their eyes, and design us every one to Death.

At last we are almost come a-shoare, ready to cast Anchor; for now remains
only this woman's Bounty to be touched. She annoynteth Christ's feet with
Ointment. The annoynting the head, was an act of kindness, much used then at
Bankets, in the East-Countries: for us we must show from this Example, the life
of our Faith, by Communicatiue goodness. And this must be performed sincerely,
that the Neighbour-hand take not notice of the deed: cheerfully, that the eye
be not clouded with disdain: seasonably, that the heart be not broken with
delay: plenteously, that all may have some: discreetly, that some may not have
all.

Rich man; thou shall perish soul and body, though thou never hurt the poor,
if thou do not help them. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
(says our Savior:) for what? for Oppressing the Needy? and for sins Math.
25. 41. 24
of Commission? No, for not Succouring the Needy, and for sins of Omission.

What then will become of the sacrilegious Patron, that Rob-God? (I Will not
eat the word, for I had it from the Prophet Malachy:) he thinks the Tenth a
golden Fleece, and a goodly Sheafe, but he shall find that the locks of the
one, and the yawnes of the other, shall choke him. Shortly will the Lord arise,
lay himself fair in his Bow, and send the Arrows of Death singing into his
bosom.

And what will become of the Lord of the Town, that takes away the Commons,
incloses whole fields, vnpeoples the Country, rackes, improues, undoes his
Tenants, kills the Dam with the young-ones, the Mother with the Children? Let
him restore, and do the works of Mercy quickly, or, as the Lord lives, he
shall wring his hands, and rue the time that ever he was borne.

And what will become of the brauing Knight, that builds like Augustus, drinks
like Tyberius, spends all, more than all, in Reuils, in Licentiousness? His
Chimnies shall cry vengeance against him, that breathe out no relief to the
Orphan, he shall sigh out a Tandem si, and grief shall break the kall of his
heart.

And what will become of the grim Usurer? O wretch! yet will he tell you, some
Ministers approve him, yea, and join with him in the Trade. O Theife! O
Thieves!

And what will become of the unconscionable Lawyer, that leads his Clyent into
a Maze of trouble? A Motion to day, to morrow crossed, Execution suspended, and
called in question by a Writ of Error. I hope, says the plodding weather-beaten
Soul, I shall have an end of my Suit the next Term. Nay, nor the next
Term, nor the next; nay, nor the next year, nor the next. Behold, the Lord
will be a Lion to these men, as he was to Judah; or else a Moth, as he was to
Israel: he will either destroy them suddenly, or consume them lingringly.

And what will become of the slye Vndersheriffe, who will take double fees,
that Gryphin-like he may floor his Nest with Gold? Doubtless this sin is
written with a Pen of Iron, and with the Claw of a Diamond.

And what will become of our Lambbayliues, and Cheese-bayliues, who to stock
their ground, and cram their wallet, will let honest men alone, when the
Sediment of the Country must be stird up for Iurers? Surely these things are in
the ears of the Lord of Hosts, the Author, and Patron of Justice.

If now some Sycophant shall closely say, He Is bold with others, but dare not
come near the Scarlet-Robes: let him take this answer from him, who was never
yet taxt for soothing greatness: This Circuit never saw The L. Chief Justice
of England, and I. Winch.
so Reverend Judges. For which mercy, and all other, to GOD, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, be honor and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

