The Castle of Christians and Fortress of the faithful, beseeged, and
deecnded, now almost six thousand years. Written by John VVolton, one of the
Cathederall Church in Exetor.

woodcut architectural compartment with figures (St. Peter and St. Paul?) at
sides, Christ triumphant at head (with motto: CONFIDITE EGO VICI MVNDVM. IO.
XVI), and the Royal Arms at foot (not in McKerrow)

The contents or table of this book.
OF the temptacions and assaults of Satan against mankind vniuerfally. Chap.
1. The same handled more particulerlye. Chap. 2. Of the subtle pollycies and
practyees of the Devil against man in this warrefare. Chap. 3. What
Capytaynes and Soldiers the the devil uses in these assaults and warfare
against man. Chap. 4. Of man's only succor and refuge in these assaults of
the Devil, Chap. 5. Of the army of our heavenly Chaptaine in these wars.
Chap. 6. Of the Armor of Christ's soldiers in this warfare. Cap. 7. Of the
Victory of those that serve under the banner and ancient of Jesus Christ. Cap.
8.
The end of the Table.
To the right honorable Frauncys VValsyngham, Secretary to the Queens most
excelent Majesty, and one of her highness privy Counsel: John Walton witheth
the favor of God, continual health, and felicity.
THose that deeply consider The continual warfare of christies church.
the estate of Christ's Church, and atentiuely observe the course of the same
do well perceive, how aptly and truly it is resembled to battle and warfare,
Luke 11. Ephesians ^6 Job. 4.
whiles it wandereth here upon earth. For it is much like an army being
always in the feelde: pursued by the enime, and continually ^^^ed with
assaults and allarmes.

The Church never ^^^yeth (...) ^^ace, nor faithful leag^^s: and if sometime
there are any outward shows of these things, they are full of fraud and
deceive. For the capital enemy of Christ is never quiet: but always inuieth
his glory and dignytie, lays snares to intrappe the godly and insatiably
thirsts after their blood. And although he seem sometime to remit his
vehement assaults, yet he continues one and the same devil, and sends
forth still supplies against the Army of Christ, who practice new sleightes
and polycies, now putting on the vysor of faithful friends, then showing
themselves cruel enemies, seekynge all means to suppress and tread down
the Church of Christ which thing our savior testyfieth in that reuealation to
his so dearly beloved apostle and Disciple on this wise.

And when the Dragon savv that he was cast into the earth, he persecuted the
manchilde. And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made
war with the remnaunt of her seed: which kept the command ementes of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. The Prophet David also
complayneth thus, in the person of the Church. Many are come about me, fat
Bulls of Basan, close me in on every side. They gape upon me with their
mouths: as is it were a ramping and roaring Lion: many Dogs are come about
me, and the counsel of the wicked says seege against me. And Job, the
pattern of patience ^e^^eth us that man's life is a war are here upon earth.

And that it fares so in deed with the church of Christ, not only those
that are studious of antiquytie, and faithful in the (...) do right well know,
but also this our miserable and woeful age, with many lamentable crampies
does a^^^dantly testify the same unto us. For although great vexations and
troubles, have always afflicted the Church: yet both experyence shows, and
almighty God has with many ^^stimo^^^ foretold, that this ^^ble and ba^^^ age
of the world, should be (...) and troublesome, then the golden and silver age.
Already passed both for the great sin and iniquitle of men, in the la^^ days:
and especially because the diuill that old dragon is now most furius knowing
the heavy and horyble day of doom to be at hand: the remembrance whereof
makes him tremble and quake, because his foul and det^itable fylthines and
uncleanness shall lie open to the eyes of all angels and men: when he with all
the route of unbelievers, shall be cast down into endless torments, where
shall be weeping and grinting of teeth. And also understanding, as the Angel
says, that he has but a Reave. 12.
short time: he powers out most abundantiye his malice and poison into the
world, and disturbeth both good commonweals, and godly congregations.

All parts of the world run upon weeles, bloody Wars in all parts of ye
world.
war r^geth every where, and whyther soever a man turn his eyes, either
toward East of west, North of South, al things will appear to be full of
dangers. In the East the Turk enlarges his dominion wastinge the Church not
only with sword but also with biasphemous oppinions. In the North east the
Tartarians and Muscouittes be^e Gods people. In the South and West parts of
Italy, Flaunders, France and Spain, we see no durable leagues of peace: but
I^una^ity, and cruelty practiced upon all degrees, ages, and sexes, showing
any hearty love and iyncere affection to the Gospel of Christ. Amongst these
heavy confusions of nations and kingdoms: the ship England the haven of
Christ's ship and the harbor of persecuted men for the Gospel.
of Christ having binne long tossed with boystious storms and contrary
blasses: ^and driven upon many rocks and quicksandes, insomuch that it seemed
to be in peril of drowning, has at the last recovered a calm road, and
quiet haven in this Island, where the Prophets and their Children have ^^me
harbored, and lodged, as it were in annother Sarepta and we our selves have
enjoyed blessed peace now a good space and season.

Which things when woe behold, let us not What good men should do in ye
consideration of these things
so much busye our selves inquyringe the causes, why God has so sharply
punished other nations and mercyfully spared us: but rather call to mind the
speech of the son of God when Pilats crueltye was opened unto him in that he
had murdered certain Galyleans, and enforced the rest to drink the blood of
their Cosyns in their sacryfyces. Although the matter was horyble, yet our
Savior lettynge Pylate pass, applies Luke 13
the example to the Andytory saying, unless you repent you shall all perish.
Even so the cala^mities and deaths of our neighbors, ought to admonish us of
our sins, and to move us to repentance. And let us be careful that we
abuse not this peace and quietness beeinge the inestimable benifyt and
blessing of God: for it can not long continue amongsts us, if we spend it in
fylthy concupiscences, and beastly pleasures. For what causes peace and other
temporal blessings are given to common Wealths.


GOD gives pleasant peace, fyrme leages, and careful Princes at certain
times and seasons. For what cause that men may tumble, and wallow in filthy
pleasure? nothing less. But rather that mariges, procration, and education of
Children, may be as it were a frye or nurcerye for his Church: and that the
doctrine of GODS essence and will, revealed by his son may be publyshed
far and nigh, that true discipline and Christian conversation may be
effectuallye practiced and executed.

If we abuse then, this divine benefyt of peace, contemninge the knowledge of
God and neglecttnge good life commanded in his word: this blessing can not
be durable with us: and those plagues which GOD has now a long time
withdrawn from us will be acquitted at the last, with heavy and intolerable
sharpness when he begins to punish.

But as our blessings at home ought not to breed in us senssesse security:
so the forraigue plagues and almost oppression, of the Church, abroad
Consolations amongst these worldly calamyties.
should not abashe or make us shrink. Let us not be moved with the might and
multitude of enemies, whether they be Turks, or Papists: neither let us be
dismayed which the weak and poor estate of the Church, to judge that they
therefore be accepted and we contenmed: which carnal and perverse speculation
moves many to reuoulte to Turk and Pope from the Gospel, because they often
times behold the Church as a refuse void and destitude of all humane help.

In such cases we ought to take unto us in faith The per^ce armor of godly
men.
and invocation those defenses out of the Armorye of the bible which will make
us inuinsible, against the weapons, and assiultes, of all dyuelles and wicked
men. Those munitions are Gods prounises which we ought deeply and steadfastly
to imprint in out minds: and they shall better fortify and defend us then any
stonge Bulwark or Cast'e. Of the which sort among many other are these that
follow.

Thus says the Lord I will bear you when you are old, I have made you, I
will bear you, Esa. 46.
I will carry you, and again. Can a mother forget her Child? and not have
pity upon the son of her womb: and if she do for Esa. 49.
get it yet will I not forget thee Syoh.

How sweet is that speech of the Prophet, which resembles the son of GOD to
an Herdma^, feedinge his flock, gathering his Lambs ^egether Esa. 40.
swith his arms, caryinge them in his bosom and kindly in treatinge them that
bear young ones: Whereby we are put in mind in our daily prayer, that we are
the sheep of this shepharde: and therefore ought to fly unto him for succor
and defense in all distresses. And no less pleas^unt is that picture of GOD
caryinge his Church in his womb and bosom, proueysinge to bear the same
Esa. 44. ct 46.
in her old age.

Men use deep inquysitions and careful cogytations, where the Church shall
remain among these ruins of kingdoms, confusion of opinions and infynit
domestical calamyties which we beeholde with great, dolor and grief. The
Prophet caseth this carefulnes saying that the Church shall remain, in the
bosom and womb of God: that is to say, that he will alwa^es defend those
places y^ harbor and intertaine his church. But amongst the rest, it is
chiefly to be observed that the Church of Esa. 11.
God is compared to a sucking infant puttyng his hand in a serpents nest and
Cokatrices den, and playing with them. For as the little babe sythinge among
Serpences and Cokatrices: neither understands his danger, neither is well
defensed against those vencmous vipers: so the Church does not thoroughly seethe
crafty conuenticles, and lurkyng dens of her emiuties, and is assaulted with
greater forces then she has defenses visible: and yet she is myraculously and
inuysibly preserved by the son of God the protector and defender thereof.
Whenever therefore we see our enimyes ready to devour us, and our selves
destitute of all human help: then we may most assurc our selves of Gods
presence. If we be exiled let us not think that we are therefore abiectes or
forsaken of God, or that we wander alone. For the son of God marches before
with an infinite company of chaste ^ngels: Christ Jesus is the Herbinger, War
shall not ouerco^e Christ's Church.
and will lotte out a conuement restinge place for his obedyent people.

Blooddy war rages presently throughout the whole world, and the crueltye of
Tyrants increases every where, wastinge and destroyinge many servant of
Christ. But they shall not utterly abollsh and vanquish the Church albeit they
have made many breaches in the walls, and seem now ready to enter: for even
then will God show his presence, to the confusion of Rabsaces and his 2. Reg.
19. Esa. 37. Esa. 31.
mighty army: which is lyuelye painted out by the Prophet in this wise. Thus
has the Lord spoken unto me. Like as the Lion and Lyones vvhelp roreth upon
the pray that he has gotten, and is not afraid though the multitude of
Shephardes, cry out upon him neither is abashed for all the heap of them: so
shall the Lord of hosts come down from mount Syon and defend his Hill.
Like as the birds flutter about their nestes so shall the lord of hosts,
save and deliver Jerusalem. Therefore O ye children of Israel turn unto
him whom you have ostentimes forsaken.

Let us fyxe our eyes and hearts upon these euydent testymonies of Gods mighty
presence and protection of his Church in such sort that the gates of hell: that
is to say the fearce assaults, and subtle vndermininges of devils, and men
shall not be able to prenayle against it.

The Church indeed is a little tower or Oil, if you compare it with the
warrelyke Castle of Satan: but by means of her Captain, she sustayneth and
beats off the beseege and assauites of all her adversaries.

Neither ought we to think that the Church The godly dye with honor and
tirantes with dishonor.
shall at ye last be destrcyed because many of her members be dyuersely
afflicted, and cruelly murdered. For they in their torments and passions, do
triumph over Tyrauntes, and profess bouldelye their Faith and Relygion. So the
three Children in the fyrie fu^nace tryuinphed over Nabuchodonezor, and the
scauen, Machabies against Antiochus, with many others Dan. 3. 2. Mac. 7
who have left a sweet memoryall of their names even in this world: whereas
^yrauntes Ieaue and carry with them perpetual shame and ignoniie as the wiseman
says. The memorial of the just shall have a good report, but the name of the
Psa. 112. prouer. 10
ungodly shall stincke. For the death of Gods saints is precious in his sight,
and is an enter into everlasting felicity. Sapi. 3.


And as the son of GOD in the first Easter, passed through Egypt, and slew
al their first Exodus 12.
borne, and spared the Israelts whose door posts were sprinkled with the blood
of the Lauthe: even so he always passed over mankind, subuerting God
increseth his little flock and makes the^ a mighty people.
great and mighty Princes, who have afflicted and persecuted his Church: but
sparynge and preseruinge his own flock myraculously. The church then shall
always continue, until the coming of the son of GOD to judgment. And
albeit the face and countenance of the same be not always one, and the
light thereof sometime more, sometime less, much like the Moon in her wayne
and Eclyps: yet as she after her change increases to the full and shines
most brightlye: August. in psalm. 10.
even so of seauentye souls that descended into Egypt they anymented in short
spac^ to six hundred thousand, besides women and children: and beeinge
streytened for a time in obscure corners of Iuryc, she kindled under
persecution in such sort, that in the days of Constantine the Great, she
shined throughout all the world: She was beseeched latly by ^mperours and
Princes powers in little Magdcburge and Rochell, but was set at ly bertye in
short time, and had free passage almost throughout all these lands. Although
then the power and furor of tyrants be great, threten destruction to christian
kingdoms, and breath out cruelty against the Saints. Yet we ought to know
that both fatal ruins, and mutations hang over their heads, and also that
the son of GOD, who has entitled himself, the Emperor, and Captain of
his army, will bridle their headdy and varbarous rage, and give a joyful rest
and glorious peace to his Church.

Yea he will also defend and conserve honest Some commonweals that cannot
be overthrown. Gene. 7.
polycies, and Commonweals so long as they suffer Christ's ship to ride
quietlye in their strandes, give harbor unto his guie harbor unto his
Church, mayrtayne, Schools and Uniuersities being the fountain of humanytie
and Christianity. Even as the son of God in the universal flood saved the
Arc and in the same Noah and his family, who were Gueed^ne and keepers of the
divine promyses, concerning Mcssias Jesus Christ. Whereof The commodyties
which england inicyeth by imbracinge the word of God.
little England has had good proof, who among the raging furors of Satan,
the mortal hatred of the world, and dangerous conspiracies as well of
domestical as foreign enemies retayninge with sure handfalt Christ's Gospel,
and intertaynig his Church, has binne blessed by almighty God with the
Halcyons days in their polycie and common wealth, that they might learn both
to know and serve h^n in this life, and hereafter to praise him throughout all
eternyties.

Of this argument I have written somewhat largely in the Treatesse following,
and have applied the same to the estate of these perilous times and tragical
days, which I humbly present unto you honor. The reading whereof may happily
renew in your mind, the cruel practices and dealinges of wicked men, which
with great dolor and perryl, you were constran^ed to be hold in that
Massacre: where amongst an innumerable company, that penished as it were with
the Machabies: yet almighty GOD in his mercy saved many even in the fyerie
furnace and den of Lions: and used your honor as mother Obadia to hide and
preserve 1. Reg. 18.
many of Christ's servants, from the ege of the sword: whereof, some of them
have given open testimonye, to the world in their writings, and have made
grateful remembrance of your wisdom, honor, virtue and great charges,
plentifully powered upon Christ's members in their myserye, for the which you
cannot be unrewarded at that great day, That time made you fytte for this
your present estate: and the often remembrance of the same will not suffer you
to be unprovided for like events for those that fear God will not be
rechlesse by means of prosperytie, knowing, that there is a change of al
things, and nothing under the Sun fyrme and stable.

Morcouer because man's wisdom and regyment, is neither happy in time of war
nor peace: without the direction of the word of God, this matter derived out
of the same cannot be impertinent to your calling. Lastly if your honor whom
God has endued with excellent wisdom, virtue and learning will favorably
accept this little work, it shall the rather escape the checks of the
malycious, and procure credit of the honest and godly, The father of al mercy
give you many good days and years, and direct you with the spirit of wisdom
and counsel: that you may continue long a comfort and ornament unto the Church
of Christ and this common wealth increase you presentlye with temporal
honors, and in the end crown you with those that be eternal. From Exetor
the last day of May. 1^77.

Your honors humble John VVolton.

Of the temptations, and assaults of Satan, against mankind universally.
Chap 1.
IT is truly written of that learned and Sirach. 40
wise Hebrewe Sirach. A great travail is created for all men, and an heuie
yoke, upon all the sons of Adam, from the day that they go cut of their
Mothers womb, till they be buried in the earth, the mother of all things:
Which is an excellent sentence, and worthy to be observed, of all such as
profess them selves the servants of Christ. For whereas man was created in
the beginning, to life and immortality, and endued with the Image of God:
whereby he diverse and sundry ways, resembled his creator, but espetially in
Righteousness and true holiness: carnal Ephe 4.
men have with great care, and pensiveness of mind, marueyled at and
inquired, the cause of that horrible ruin, and destruction of Man, the chief
and principal amongst all visible creatures. Whose noble and excellent nature,
dailye fades away the Uyolette or Rose, and in tracte of time dies and
corrupts, much more lothsomelye Author sermon. ad fratres in eremo.
and lamentablye, then an Ox or Ass: for that (as learned men have observed)
immediatlye after his death, filthy Todes will breed of his guts, and
venomous Serpents of his reins and kydnes.

Othersome there are, so astonished, and as it were deprived of all sense, and
feeling: that they never think how they received life, nor how they shall at
the last taste of death. And if peradventure by means of great callamities,
the face and fear of death now and then oppresses them: yet they never
think upon any remedies, whereby they might be somewhat eased, under so
heavy and weighty a burden. The wise man therefore, in this his sentence
satisfyeth the careful cogitation of the one, and heals the senceles
Apoplexy of the other: in rendering the causes and occasions of man's myserie
and callamitie. Which whiles we behold and consider, let us also fyxe our
eyes upon the Redeemer and delyuerer of mankind, Jesus Christ: and in regard
of the great imbecility, and tyckle estate of mortal men's matters, bow our
minds to humility, modesty and fear of God.

Whereunto this grave writer exhorts Job. 14. 1. Cor. 15.
all men, in making mention of old Adam, and of our mother, from whom we
have our origin and offspring. And although none almost can be ignorant of
this propagation and discente: yet the Wise man calls them to the
consideration of that, which conunonlye they forgette, or little record: and
admonishes them of the malediction and curse pronounced against Adam and Eve
in Paradize, Genesis 3.
for the transgression of Gods commandment.

This curse is the course of all our myserie. For as Gregory says, what
strength can he have that is borne in infirmity? what thing, can come of
flesh, but flesh? what can descend of a miserable father and mother, but a
miserable creature. Which he enlarges in laying down before our eyes our
painful and perilous birth, our combersome and unquiet life, our inevitable,
and terrible death. All which things will appear, and more evidently shine in
our eyes: if we open and unfold these things somewhat more perticularly.

First if we consider the beginning of The generasion of man unclean.
our birth, whereby man is prepared to this life, it is unclean, and almost
loathsome to nature her self: for other Beasts do openly engender, even
nature as it were moving them thereunto. The conceauing of man only bears
shamefastness, desyring rather to be hid, then opened: because of the stain
of sin, which drives man to bashfulnesse, and causes him to be ashamed of
him self. Nature brings forth brute Beasts, but sin after a sort,
brings forth man, the Prophet wytnessing the same. Behold, I was conceived
in iniquity, and in sin Psalm. 50.
my mother conceived me. What should I speak of the time, between his
conception and birth, which is full of sorrow and sickness: the mother being
encombred with weakness of stomach, headache, swymming of the head, and many
other infirmities: yea, ofte^tymes if she either sneese, or smell the snuff of
a Candle, she trauayleth before her time.

If besides these, you mark the time Man's birth.
of delyueraunce, you shall hardly judge, whether Nature be a more loving
mother, or an heavier stepdame to man. For Man is cast forth bare and naked
upon the earth, senceles, and is compelled to kiuer him self, and hyde his
privy parts, by the relief of others: so that if we will signify any notable
misery, we need no more but note the Birth of man into this world. Whereupon
the Thratians were wont to weep in their chyldebedde, and the Parents with
mourning to receive their Children newborn into the world: but at their
death, to bury them with marvelous rejoicing, and gladness: as though that he
which is new borne were rather to be lamented, then he that deceaseth, and
departs the myserie of the world. Other Beasts entering into light, are
cladde and covered, and by the very motion of nature do seek after food.
The Lamb as soon as he is All living creatures have their de^fences man only
excepted.
yeaned, is able to follow the damme: the Chicken as soon as it is out of the
shell, will do the like: and every one in their kinds have couerings and
defenses to reskew them selves from danger. The Elephante his snowte, the
Bucke his horns, the Boore his tuske, the Woolfe his teeth, the Birds their
bylles and Tallants, and to every creature accordingly. But naked man is cast
into naked nature, crying and wayling: and straight way is wrapped in swadlyng
clothes, (as it were in manacles and fetters cast upon his hands and feet)
beginning his life with a kind of imprisonment, so that we may right well say
with Pliny. O mere madness to think that we are borne Plinius lib. 7 cap.
1. et. cap. 50.
to pride, upon such simple beginnings, how long is it before a man can speak,
how long before he can go.

Now when man is brought up, many Perils and dangers
thousand lets, many dangers, many kinds of intrapmentes: declare how
whereunto man is subject.
hard it is for him to pass the race of his life, and to come to his fatal
end. Surely he is subject to all kind of perils and dangers, in his
mind, body and goods: In danger of water, of fire, of ruin of houses, of
the sword, and of diverse kind of maladies: whereby he is cut of most commonly
by death. before he come to old age. Which things moved a certain Wise man to
say, That Cities and Tounes, were nothing else but places of humane sorrows
Solon.
and miseries, wherein mourning, lamentation, and troublesome labors of
mortal men are enclosed and contained. Whereof Pliny also writes after this
manner. The gift of Nature is fyckle and uncertain, yea, it is evil and short
to those that lo^gest enjoy it. What should I speak of one half of man's age,
passing away in sleep, and spent in darkness. For we may not accoumpt the time
of infa^cy any part of life, which almost wants sence^ neither yet old age,
which is full of so many sorrows, cares, thoughts, and fears, insomuch that
old men p^ay for nothing so often as for death: a^ though nature could give
nothing so good unto man, as a short life. For in old age the limbs wax
stiff, the sight dim, the hearing deaffe, and the teeth fall away.

Again no living creature, is in Man is mane so and enemy.
danger of moo disseases, none stands in more ha^arde of privy
Amboushmentes then he does, and that by man. Lions for all their wyldnesse, yet
doc not one encounter another, the Serpent stingeth no Serpent: but Man is a
Woolfe to Man, at whose hand he daily receaueth much harm. Furthermore, none
is covetous but he, none ambitious, none vncontentable in desire of things,
but he only: he is in continual pain wearyed with calamyties, of which
euylles although thou art persuaded that thou have discomfetted one or two,
and so think thy self in safety: Yet thou must abide a sore conflict, with
Nature her self: seeing thou art enforced to fear even the lyghtning of the
Element, the stenche of the earth, the Scorpions stroke, so many kinds of
poison and venime: which although they never chance unto thee, yet fleshly
flees, crablyce, and many other like vermins, shall annoy thee, and declare
that man is in danger of many thousand myseries.

But also the necessity of death, is Painful and fearful Death.
not to be so much counted upon, seeing it is common to all living creatures:
for whatsoever is horn must dye, and return to duste, whence it had his
beginning: were it not that another kind of death had fallen to man, which came
through sin, whereby we have also found another beginning of a miserable
lyse. For there is no other living Everlasting death.
thing but it decays universally and totally, man alone excepted: whose
only body perishes the soul, which is severed from it continuing
everlastingly: so that the good be received into a blessed life, whereas the
badd^ be thrust down into everlasting torments of hell: having in this point
death like to brute Beasts, because they neither think the soul immortal,
neither believe that there is any resurrection, or any hell, that thereby the
death of an ^xe, and a Man seems like. Heap hither so many means, whereby
we Eccless. 3.
either hasten our own death, or upon very tryfling occasions, leese our life:
seeing more dye by surseyt and wine, then by the sword. Many whyies that
contrary to their nature, they labor by help of cunning and art, to
lengthen their years, and only seek means to live, cast them selves away by
using too much Physic.

Here I need not to touch diverse Sudden deaths.
kinds of soddaine deaths, whereby very many have miscarried and decade. So
dyed Anacrien the Poet, chooked with a reysyn kyrnell. So dyed Fabius the
Senator of an heayre, which he did drink in milk. Cornelius Gallus, which
sometime had been Praetor: and Quintus Heterius a knight of Rome, dyed whiles
they were in the very act of generation. Sophocles and Dyonisius the tyrant
of Cycille, both deceassed for joy, when they heard tidings of the vpperhand
of a Tragedy. Of which sort of examples I could rehearse a number, whereby we be
put in mind of our mortality, and that ere we ween, we dye soddainly. Sure we
are to dye, but by what kind of death, and in what moment we know not. We must
watch therefore whiles we live in this civil life among men, lest the soddaine
necessity of death, find us unprovided, and not awake, for we shall be so much
the less, be able to give an accom^pt of our former life, the more we yield
to wickedness, and despise the obedience of Gods commandment.

Finally the dangers of yt soul, (neglected ^arnon security or di^fydence.
or slightly passed over by carnal men) are principally to be considered: such
are the errors and ignoraunces of the mind: profane opinions of God, carnal
security, dystrust, cuyll concupiscence, torments of the Conscience, and
horrible terrors of death: wherewithal Saul, Caine, Judas, and such like,
being vexed and afflicted, fell into damnable dyspayre, and murdered them selves.

These myseries of man might be The complayntes of Philosophers touching man's
stailnesse.
seen by Reason, and felto by daily experience: if we were not too perciall,
and even wylfullye blind in our own causes. Whereof so many complaints are,
almost in every page, of profane writers: out of the which heap, a
Selueccerus in prolegon ad Genesin.
learned man of our time has made thoyse, of three principal sentences. The
first is out of Aristotle, who asks 1. Aristo.
this question, what is man? He is an example of weakness, a spoil of time,
a play of fortune, an Image of inconstancy, a ballaunce of envy and
callamitie, and whatsoever is besides, is but fleame and Choler. The second
saying is taken out of Euripides. There is no 2. Euripides in orest. et Cicero.
Tuse. 4
myserie nor woeful mishappe, and mischief, whereunto man's nature is not
subject. The third is of Pindarus: we are men, but of one day, what is some
body? and what is no body? all 3. Pindari in pithijs. od. 8
men are no better then a dream of a shadow. And unto these three sentences,
we may reduce all other complaints, which either the Cthincke Poets,
Historians, or Philosophers have uttered of the fraylnesse of man's life.

All which sentences, Ludouicut Vines endeavored to comprehend briefly after
this manner: Man's body is infirm, and De veritate fidei. lib. 1. cap. 16.
subject to all injuries, every member has his especial malladie: And as for
his mind it is exceeding sick and unquiet, blind and improuident, neither
does will suffer it self to be lyghtned, being much like the taste of a sick
man, desiring those things that be hurtful, and lootheth those things that be
wholesome, unruly and intractable, toward such as would cure him: all his
affections are out of order, and whole man is a servant of those things
which are needful for him, vvherof he was sometime Lord and master. Thus
man lies in this sickness, as it were in his death bed, until he give up
the goast, which is called Death: vvheras man's birth might more aptly be
termed Death, as Manilius vvriteth.

Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origna pe^det, Such a continual death is laid
upon Adams children, for a punishment of his transgression, being much more
bitter, then if he had immediately dyed. Thus we see the estate of this our
sorrowful and short life, some part whereof (a^ Seneca writes) we spend in
doing evil, a greater part in doing nothing, Seneca Epist. 1 ad Lucil.
and the greatest part of al, in doing those things that appertain nothing
unto us.

These things moved Theophrastus to utter his lamentable complaint, That
Nature is rather a stepdame to mankind, then a loving mother. For whereas she
Theophracomplaint of Nature. Lucretius. lib. 5. plinius. lib. 7 Salust in
praesat. Belli Ingu^th Lactant. de opificio. cap. 3. et. 4. Lud. viues de
veritate. Fidei. lib. 1. cap. 12. Seneca de breuitate vitae. Cicero. Tusce.
lib. 3.
has dealt with brute Beasts lyberally. and lovingly, giving unto many of
them a long life, serving to no purpose: She has lent to man a very short
time, unto whom more years had been convenient, to the end he might have
commen to perfect knowledge in wisdom, which is man's chief felicity.
Besides these things, she has expelled him, into this world, poor and
weak, not able to do any thing: but with howling and crying, to foreshew his
miserable estate and condition. Albeit I am not ignorant that Theophrastus
saying has been reprehended both of human, and divine writers: of these
because he usurped the word Nature, (as they suppose) for God himself, and so
charged the Creator, with the fault of she Creature.

And it can not be denied, but that both Philosophers, and Divines, have Of the
word Nature.
termed God by the name of Nature. For so speak not only Hippocrates and
Seneca, but also Lactantius: although else where he seems to mislyke that
Seneca de benef. lib. 4 cap. 7.
phrase. As for those words of Saint Augustine: Omnis quippe natura vel Deus
est, qui nullum habet autorem: vel deus Gallenus de placitis hippocr. et plat.
lib. 9 lactantius. lib. 2. cap. 9 De anima et eius origin. lib. 2. cap. 3
Mathous Beroaldu^ Cron. lib. 2. cap. 6. Caluniuc. lib. 1 institut. cap. 5.
non est qui ipsum habet autorem, Are not to this purpose: for the word Nature
there, has a far other signification. And y^ great Philosopher of our time
Mattheus Beroaldus, amongst many significations of the word, allows that
manner of speech: yet the words of his Master John Calvin, please me much
better, writing hereof after this manner. I grant that we may godly use this
phrase (Nature is God) so it proceed of a sincere mind: but because the
speech is hard and improper, for that Nature is an order appointed by God: It
seems unto me very dangerous, and hurtful, in matters of so great moment,
and wherein there ought to be a singular Religion, to vvrappe and confound
the eternal God, with the inferior course of his handy works.

Of the same mind was Lactantius, Lactant, lib. 3. cap. 28.
writing: That the subversion of true Religion, brought forth the name of
Nature. For they being either ignorant, by whom the world was made:
either desirous to persuade that nothing was made by God: said, that Nature
was the mother of all things, meaning that all things sprang of their own
accord, vvherin they opened their great unskillfulness. For if providence and
Gods power be set apart, Nature is plainly nothing. And if they call God
Nature: what perverseness is it to term it Nature, rather then God, Nature
verily is not God, but the work of God.

But in my opinion, Theophraste who had that name given him, partlye for his
divine sentences of God, and his what Theophrast meant by the word Nature.
providence, and partly for his sweet vain in writing, used not the word
Nature in any such sense: but rather for vicious and corrupt qualities, which
have infected this divine workemanshippe. Hereof that common saying comes,
that the beginning of virtue is of Nature, to wit of Perfect Nature: and that
vices proceed of Nature, verily of corrupt and poisoned Nature. And if any man
think that I thus conu^erre Theophrastes words, led with ioylfulnesse to
descent from others, rather then with a desire to seek out Truth: let him
understand that I have not sucked this out of my own conceit, but have
received the same of that learned father Saint Augustine: who alleging the
very same sentence, cyted out of Theophraste by Cicera, pronounces thereof
after this manner. The Augu co^tra. Iusianum lib. 4. ca. 12. repetit. ex lib.
3. Cic. de Repub.
same Tullie in his third book of a common wealth, writes that man is brought
forth into this life not of a Mother, but of a stepdam, in body both naked
weak and infyrme: and in his mind perisiue in sorrows, abiecte in fear,
faint in labors, prone to lechery: wherein notwithstanding, there is covered
certain d^^^s^ sparks of vvitte, and understanding. What say you to these
things? he: save the disease, but he was ignorant of the cause, Hitherto
Augustine, who notwithstanding myslyketh this complaint, if it be applied to
Nature sincerre and incorrupt.

But to the end that this matter may The sygnifycations of the word Nature.
be more easily discussed, you shall understand that the word Nature, as we
reason of it in this place, has two significations, as Saint Augustine in
sundry places has observed. The first Aug. retrac. cap. 10.
estate of man which was sincere, and without sin, is properly called man's
Nature: but by translation we use it for this condition of man, wherein ^he is
borne, and lives. And in another place: That was the meaning of the Apostle,
De trinitat. lib. 13. ca. 12
when he said that he was by Nature, the child of wrath, as other men:
meaning as it is corrupt with sin, not as it was right in the beginning. And
again: That which was a punishment to the In Psalm. 38.
first man, is turned into our nature, As the Apostle says. We were by
nature Ephe. 2.
the children of wrath. Seeing then we see the word Nature, used not only of
the best expositors of the holy Scriptures, but in the word of God it self,
for the corrupt and sinful estate of mortal man: why should any man
reprehende Theophraste, justly lamenting our woeful, and mysarable condition.

Saluste going about to confute. Theophraste, Sulucte reyrehenbeth Theophraste
but yeldeth no reason.
joins not issue in any peynt: but digresseth: into the commandation of
Man's nature, and exhorts us to the due consideration thereof: which is
very plausible to the children of Adam, who more willingly record such things
as sound to their praise and glory: then that reveal their miserable beggerie,
and ignominy. Surely Saint Augustine De natura et gratia. cap. 1.
accoumpteth this high commendation and excelling of nature, to be joined with
great perryl and danger, and affyrmeth such men to have a zeal, but not
according to knowledge. Who being Romans 10.
ignorant of the justice of God, and desirous to place their owue, are not
subject to the justice of God. And a little after he writes most excellently
after this manner. The first nature of man was Ibidem. cap. 3.
created without any sin. But this nature wherein we descend from Adam,
has now ne. de of a Physician. For albeit 2. Cor. 5. Ephe. 2.
we are now in Christ a new creature, yet we were the childr^^ of wrath
even as others. But God who is rich in mercy, for that great love wherewith
he has loved us, when we were dead in our sins, he has quickened us in
Christ, by whose grace we are saved.

The Ethnickes does most commonly The disorder of the Ethnickes
propose to man his end, that he might thereby understand her excellent
dignity. But to what end serve those Pompeus words: That we should
delyberate and enterprise things laudable, and honest, and that we should
contend after virtues. Seeing that by corruption of Nature, we have neither
perfect understanding nor Power to follow virtue, so that such speeches of the
excellency of Man's nature, as it is now, do puff him up with a vain
conceyte of him self, and as it were in a maze, caryeth him headlong into
destruction. We ought not I confess to forget that first Lege Calu Iustit.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
Nobility, which God gave unto our father Adam, and the remembrance of the
same must needs breed in us an ardent desire of Immortality: but we can not
once think of that Dignity, but there will on the other side appear a heavy
spectacle of our shame and miserable ruin, whereof we our selves by
Propagation and Imitation are guiltye. Whereby we shall have better cause to
like of Theophrastes complaint, then vainly to extol this our most ruinous,
and corrupt Nature.

Seneca, whom Lactantius accoumpteth Seneca his judgment of this matter Lact
lib 1. cap 5. et lib. 2. ca. 9.
the most witty and subtyle Philosopher, of all the Stoikes, cyting
Theophrastes sentence, does not find any fault with it: but rather takes just
occasion thereby, to exhort men to spend that little time which is given
them, in living well and honestly: Whose words, because they are full of
excellent, and divine lessons, and there withal appertain to my purpose: I
thought good to put down, as I find them, in the Aucthour him self, which
are after this man's. Most part of mortal men, friend Paulyne, do complain
of the cruelty of nature, Seneca de breuitate vitae.
because she has given us so short a race, and course, Truly our time is not
so short of it self, but we make it short^r: Our life is long enough, if we
spend it west. But when we pass it over in ryotte and neclygence, it is
bestowed in no good thing: so that in the end of our life, that time which
we thought not to go, is even run away. Insomuch, that we have not received
a short life, but we cut it shorter, neither is that so vvating unto us, as
we are prodigal of it. Even as ample and princely riches, when they come to a
prodigal master are waste in a moment: But if a mean stock be committed to
a thriftye, and frugall man, by wise using it increases. Why continue we
then our plaint against nature, seeing for her part she has showed her self
benign and lyberall unto us? our life is long enough, if we could use it. For
example sake: One is possessed Our life is long enough if we could use it well.
with greedy covetousness, another gives him self to vain conclusions. This
man delights in wine, that man passes time in sleepie slouthfulnes. Here is
an ambicious man, that gapeth after popular fame: there is one that runs,
over all Seas and Lands, after Marchaundize: and finally, a man shall see
such, as exercise them selves in no trade, but rub out the time: so that
Exigua pars est qua vitimus.
we may well say with the Poet. That part wherein we live is very little. All
our race, is not a life, but time only. We bestow and employ our life
exceeding coumbersomely and diversely: but when we come to the loss of time,
we are too prodigal, and therein is sparing covetousness, only commendable.
VVherby it would come to pass, that albeit our life should come to a
thousand years: yet we our selves abridge it, and consuming time does eat
it cut: and a little after inclining as it were to Theophrastes opinion, he
writes thus.

If we consider the estate and condition Man has great causes to lament.
of all mortal men (...) we may see great and manifold occasions of
mourning and lamentation, yea, we shall rather want tears, then matter of
mourning. As for all these vvorldly goods which delyght us which deceytfull
pleasures, as money, dignity, power, and ma^ny other such, vvherwithall the
blind desire of man is more taken, and amazed: they are possessed with labor,
seen with envy, and oppress now and then, rather then profit their masters and
owners: they are uncertain and slippery, and a great part of quietness is lost,
in careful keeping of them. Verily if you will credit me, and weigh more
deeply with me the matter as it is, all man's life is mere vexation and
affliction. We being cast out then, into this deep and unquiet Sea, flowing
and ebbing: sometime hoyst up, sometime plu^ged down: never continue in
stabilitie: For we are tossed too and froo, we depend in the waves, vvind
and vveather: sometime run and bruise one another, and sometime make
shypwracke of all. So that in this tempestuous, and stormy Sea, there is no
sure harborovve, nor quiet part, but death alone. Hitherto Seneca complaining
also of man's portus nauigantiu^ mors.
miserable and rufull case. But I let Theophraste and his opinion pass at this
time, and returning to my matter, will consider, what the spirit of God has
uttered, and pronounced of Man's estate and condition.

The word of God therefore, being What the word of God pronounces of man's
estat.
the Lantern, and perfect Lodesman, leading us to everlasting life, is most
plentiful in the description of Man's miserable, and corrupt nature. For to
omytte many places, wherein he is expressed in his nature and kind: As all
Genesis 6. et. 18.
flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, and I am but duste and ashes: I come
to that Dialouge and communication between the virtuous Patriarche Jacob, and
good Phorao, King of Egypt, that fastorer, and fauorer of Gods people: Jacob
demanded by the Prince of his Genesis 47.
years, and age, answers thus: The whole time of my Pylgrimage, is an
hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of my life been, and I
have not attained unto the years of the life of my Fathers, in the days of
their Pylgrimages. Out of this answer, issue thuse two notable lamentatio^s of
man's fragility, vttred by the two chief Prophets, Moises, and David, Most
worthy Deu. 34. Psa. 90.
to be considered and learned without book of all Christians. But to return
to Jacobs answer: First I think it worthy the consideration, that he
calls Man's life a Pylgrimage. Most true it is, that we have not any certain
Man's life a peregrination.
or continewall habitation here upon earth: for we were created of God in the
beginning, and again restored by Christ to immortality, and eternal
blessedness in heaven. We are then Hebr. 11. Phili. 3 2. Co. 5.
Pylgrimes here upon earth, neither have we any abiding City, but look for
another, and our conversation, or common wealth is in Heaven, and our desire is
to be strangers from the body, and to be present with the Lord. Let us then
earnestly record with our selves, always that our life on earth, is a
perpetual exyle, and Pylgrimage, to the true and heavenly Country, and the
last Harborowe or Inn in this viage is Death: from whence we shall pass
immediately into eternal life.

Now as Travelers and Pylgrimes, The disposition of strangers.
do not delight to tarry long at any bayte, or lodging, nor stay not at every
Orcharde or Gardin: all their mind being set upon their Native Country, and
proper family: even so we running the race of this life, ought not to have our
minds fixed upon rytches, pleasure and honor: but daily to have our eyes,
fyred upon the Gole or mark of eternal life, whether we ought to run and
contend, with all our might. Moreover, as those that travel by Sea, or by
Land: who either by the goodness of their Horses, or commodiousnesse of the
wind, coming home to their country, do think their fortune better, the^
those that wanted like opportunity: Even so ought we to rejoice of the
departure of our friends, in their flourishing time, arriving happily into the
haven of rest.

The other Epitheton, is that man's Man's days are evil.
days are evil: for the years of our Infancy are spent in deep ignorance:
Youthful days vanishe away moore quickly then the May flower, and old age
seapeth on our backs unawares, which we are admonished to fear. For that she
never comes alone. Whereunto the Wise man consents, saying: All man's days
are sorrows, and his travails grief: Ecclesia. 1. 2. et. 9.
his heart also takes not rest in the night, which also is vanity. Experience
verily teaches us, that no kind of life is without great care, pensiveness
and study. The Craftesman is busy, unquiet, and always toyling in the
exercise of his Art: The Wise man is commonly severe and sad, and a
stranger to all pleasure. The books of Ethnickes, are full of complaints,
concerning the cares, and labors, which the governors of the common wealths,
sustain in their Regiment: and there is some controversy amongst them,
whether the wisdom of Themistocles, Demostenes, Cic. de niuent. lib. 1.
Cicero, Cato, and such like, have more hurt, or helped their Native country.
But certain it is, that in many Wisdom abused.
of them it has been an occasion of ruin to themselves: for Solon that wise
Lawier, dyed in banishment: so did those famous Captains, Themistocles
amongste the Athenians, and Scipio amongste the Romans.

Achitophell, who in the time of David was accoumpted a very Wise man, when he
perceived his counsel to be, contempned, he took it so deepelye to heart,
that he hanged himself. Some pleasant companion, will happelye choppe in and
say: Let us then contemn vvisdome, and follow folly. Not so, let us rather
highly esteem vvisdome, as a singular good gift of God: But let us not repose
any trust and confidence in it: for whatsoever appertains to perfect
quietness, and true felycitie, is to be had at Gods hand only, as the
Prophet teaches: Let not the wise man says he, glory in his wisdom,
Ierem. 9
etc. Therefore if any man will use Wisdom well: he must join it unto God,
and then it shall be wholesome and take good success.

But to return to miserable man again. Man's daugerous condiciou set out in
some symylitudes.
The holy scripture stays not with such discriptions, as not having there
withal fully comprysed his calamytie: but unto his fraylenesse, adds his
daily dangers, by means of his dreadful adversaries, as well bodily as
ghostly. Be sober and watch (says Saint Peter,) For your aduersarye the 1.
Pete. 5.
devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour: whom
resist steadfast in the faith. And that tried and approved old souldior Job. Is
Job. 7. Sic enim vertit Chaldeus Paraphrastes.
not man's life a vvarrefare upon the earth. (or as the, Septuaginta
translate it) a school of temptations. Saint Paul also trayning up his young
soldiers the Ephesians in this warrefare: paynteth out most lively the
assaulting enemy, and the surest way of defense, after this manner. Brethren
be strong through the Lord, and in the power Ephe. 6.
of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the assaults of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh, and
against blood: but against principallities, against powers, and against the
vvorldly governors, the prince of the darkness of their world, against
spiritual wickedness, which are in the high places. For this cause take unto
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist on the evil day,
and having finished all things; stand fast, etc.

These holy men, in such symilytudes, endued to express Man's misery here
upon earth. The fear and terror of a battle is set out by the Prophet Nahum
in this sort. O blooddie City the noise of a whippe, and the noise of Nah. 3.
the moving, of the wheels, and the beating of the Horses, and the leaping of
the Charrettes. The horsemen lyfteth up both the brighte sword, and the
glyttering Spear, and a multitude is slain, and the deadde boddies are many,
there is no end of the^r Corpses, etc.

As in warrefare al things are sorrowful and terrible: so is Man's life,
subject to a thousand peryls, by means of his mighty and malicious enemy
Satan, who being General and chief Captain, has a huge host, and many Pety
captains, of such puissaunce: that even one of them is able to vanquishe, and
put to flight all mortal men. But there is yet some difference between the
Spyrituall, and that corporal warrefare.

For in those worldly conflictes and battaylles, albeit there be many fearful
adventures, and present death, be very often before men's eyes: yet the
souldior is dymissed at the last with his passeport and wages, and returns to
his own home, and there enjoys desired rest and quietness. And so it fares
commonly with all other sorts of men, that although their calling be full of
trouble and calamity, yet it contineweth not so always with them, for there
taste of sweet and sower together: but in this battayl against satan there is
no peace, no rest, no quietness, but continual Allarmers, and dangerous
assaults, given unto man, so long as he lives here upon earth. Now since the
case so stands, it is no maruayle that so many revolt from true
Christianity: and it is more marvelous, that we al do not fall, and perish
amongst so many perils and dangers: but we should take occasion hereby to be
more vigelaunt and careful, more deeply to consider our selves, more
dylligent to meet with the enemy, and more earnestly to call upon God, Happy
therefore are we, if we fight manfully, for then we shall be crowned. The
Ethnickes were wont to say: Those that will be blessed, must labor: for
reverend knowledge lies not in a soft bed. On the other side, those be
unhappy that suffer them selves to be overcome, that yield them selves
captives, and prefer the myseries of this world, before the joys of Heaven,
that resist not sin, but follow pleasure, as their guide and sovereign: and
so defying Heaven, make a covenant with death and hell, destroy and dampn^
them selves.

Let us learn then, that we are not Man is borne to labor. Job. 5
borne to ease and rest, but to labor and travel: as the holy man Job says.
Man is borne to labor, as the bird is to fly: That we ought to trande in the
field armed against our enemies, As the Apostle exhorts: That we should
fight 1. Tim. 1.
a good fight, keeping our faith, and a good Conscience. Let us learn that our
life is short, instable, and fleeting, Job. 7. Esa. 3 S. Psa. 89.
being an ^ccasion to the wicked of eternal destru^cison: so that it had been
better for them never to have been borne, then to come to that woeful end, as
our savior Christ speaks of Judas. Let us learn also, that if we labor and
fight with the enemy: God will give us victory, and a Crown of eternal
glory: and though in this conflicte our outward man perish, yet the inward
2. Tim. 4.
man is renewed daily, for our light affliction, 2. Tim. 4.
which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far most excellent, 2. Cor. 4.
and an eternal weight of glory, while we look not on the things which are
seen, but upon the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen,
are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal. The wilful
obstinacy of the world.


But O good Lord, few and small is that number (if at least there be any at
all) that pondereth how short and fleeting Man's life is? how full of
myseries? how many and mighty enemies he has? how sorrowful the last day,
shall be to the wicked, and how joyful to the blessed. The promised rewards
in the life to come and heavenly kingdom, do not stir up men to virtue:
neither does the fear of endless formentes stay them from vices. Such an
amazed sencelesnesse, has even possessed almost all men's minds: that albeit
they be compassed and besieged with infinite dangers, and enemies, and have
death hanging every moment over their heads: yet they never consider, the
greatness of their dangers, nor yet think of any remedy, whereby this their
heavy burden may be mitygated and cased. But rather ^yke the wicked Thief,
who hanging upon the Luke.
Cross, mocked Christ: even so most part of men in this frail life, being
in the myddle of death, do with wicked security scoff at godliness, and
feeke after filthy pleasure, as though all things were well, and they them
selves out of all Conne shot. They very much resemble those that are taken
with the Phransye, who neither understand the greeuouse danger of their
discease, neither regard the wholesome counsel of Phisicions: even so blind
and careless men, repute sermons and communications of Gods wrath, of the day
of doom and of endless torments: to be but vain bugges and no better then old
wives fables. Hipocrates does accoumpte it an ill sign in disceases, if the
mind be sick: and those soores are accoumpted of the Chirurgian most
dangerous, that can feel neither knife nor Coraziue: even so that misery and
blyndnesse is the greatest: when man's heart is harder then any flynt and so
without all sense, that he considers not any perryll or danger: Let us then
that have any fear of God, before our eyes, abandon this deathfull dullness,
far from us: let us unfold and in partycularites set before our eyes the
infinite, immensie, and Desperate dangers, whereunto our life is subject by
means of our mighty and most malycious enemy the devil and his Petycaptaynes
and soldiers: and afterward let us examyne and find out if we can some
heroyecall and noble Prince, who will be content to ioyn us in leage and
confederacy with him, and receive us into his Tutele and protection. Of the
first I have said somewhat: before, but (as I said) I mean to handle the same
in his parts more specially.

Of the temptations and assaults of Satan against man kind, handled more
particularly. Chap. 2.
EXperience plainlye No man content with his estate.
proves, and every man's conscience will witness unto him, that this life
is most miserable: having in it no rest, quietness, nor contentation, whiles
every man is weary of his condition, and wishes an exchange with his
neighbor. The Prince and mighty man, oppressed with endless cares, and
subject to many dangerous downefalles: wishes himself a poor country man,
who has commonly a quiet mind, and with healthful exercise of his boddy,
gets his living. They see oftentimes the high mountain stricken with
lyghtnings, and thunderboltes, and the long Ash tumbled down with the great
wind: but the low valley and little bushe, to remain untouched. The rytche
Merchant in many perils upon the Sea, by means of Pirates, of rocks,
flats, and sands, and in great storms, almost sonken in the sourges, wishes
himself a poor Coteger upon the Land with a smokie house, and a few acres of
ground: and the poor Husbandman, who still toyleth in the mire, to foster and
cherish his seely familye, is weary of husbandry: and wishes for a house in
the City, full of costly wares and Marchaundise. The honorable Lawier
stricken with dangerous sickness, accoumpteth the Physicians profession most
excellent: Again the Physician always wrestling with disseases, and as it
were with death it self, having sighing, groaning, and gasping as a common
Tune, whether soever he is invited accoumpteth the Lawiers life more happy.
And to be short, every one thinks another condition better then his own,
and wishes an exchange with his neighbor. But this vain opinion is
discovered by an earnest consideration, and collation of one estate with
another: whereof one writes no less truly, then finely after this manner. I
know right well, that if all men Herodotus.
would lay down puylikely their private misfortuoes, to the end that one of
them might commute with another: after a little interuewe, of particular
estates and conditions, every man would lap up his grief, and recarie it
to his house. There are many and great perils in every vocation, be it never
so Many and great pe^ua in all vocations.
base and poor, neither is there any man so happy that does net often wish
his last day at hand, and the holy Ghost by the mouths of Moses and David,
says: That which is best in man's Deuteronomy. 34. Psalm. 90.
life, is sorrow and labor: and Christ himself affyrmeth every day, in
every kind of life, to bring his Afflictions. Math.


And to the end that Man's myserie and calamity, may more evidently show
forth it self: let us with some dilligence consider, the three vocations or
functions of man's life, commonly called Oeconomicall, Cyuile, and
Ecclesiastical: for there is no lyberall man, but he leads his life in one
of these three Conditions. First a man's whole familye is now and then
neclygent, stubberne, and disobedient, which vnquieteth the householder: and
thereunto is added such a neclygent carelessness, and wylfull wasting of the
masters goods, that the householder comes oftentimes thereby unto extreme
poverty.

The Husband him self is oftentimes Of Oeconomie, or housekeeping.
given to prodigallitie, and casting away care of his Wife and children,
spends all the day in bybbing and iaueling. And coming home very late with
a dronken head, and an emptye purse: curses and swears, and drives his Wife
and Children out of the doors: and the next morrow, he happily returns to
his old vomit, and keeps this course until all be consumed.

The Wife seeing her self and little onss contemned and unprovided for,
begyuneth to seek out her gosseppes, and passes the time merely with them, so
long as any relief comes: and at the last driven to extremeties, she
vyolateth the Marriage bed, and prostituteth her self. The little Children
then beg their bread at every door? sometime fall to picking and stealing,
and in the end come to the gallows, in the sight of their Parents.

It happens also very oftentimes ye The sorrows of parents.
good Parents, bring forth Children very unlike unto them selves, as we
may see in Noah and Chame: David and Absolon, Solomon and Rebohame: Now what a
deadly darte and wound it is, in the heart of the good and godly Parent, to
have a Child degenerate, and one that wylfully runs into ruin, before his
face, cannot be sufficiently in words declared. Surely after the sense of Gods
wrath, there is no greater sorrow, then that which Parents conceive of the
dishonestie and destruction of their Children. In what agony was our first
parent Adam, when the murder Genesis 4.
of his son Abell by Caine, came unto his ears? And the Patriarche Jacob
sustained deathfull torments, Genesis 34.
when he heard of the rauishment of his Daughter Dina, and of the bloodshedde
done upon Hamor, Sechonn, and all their City against the leage and
confederacy made between them. The vexatio^ of David can not be expressed in
the incest of his own children, Amnon 2. Sa. 13.
and Tamar, and in the murder of Amnon by Absolon: finally in Absolons
unnatural and sauadge rebellyon, and most tragical and lamentable
destruction. David weepeth in the death of his obstinate child, he rests not
in any place, but running up and down, repeateth one sentence twice, or
thryse, saying: My son Absolon, my son Absolon: would to God I had dyed
for thee, Absolon my son, my son.

There happen many horrible chances A lamentable story.
in Oeconomie. As that constant and true report of a murder done at Vienna in
Austria: where dwelt a certain Baker, who had in his house his wife, his
little daughter, a man servant, a maid servant, and a boy. Now this man
servant seeing his master to have some money and plate: was tempted by the
devil to steal the same. He desired his masters good will to depart: who was
also vnwylling to retain an vnwylling servant, and gives him his good will
to go away. The fellow within short space after in a dark evening,
returning privily, creeps into his masters house: and knowing all corners
perfectly, hydeth him self: and at mydnight he comes out of his den, and
murdreth the husband and wife, boy and maid, as they were fast a sleep in
their beds: and afterward comes to a Trouckle bed, where the Bakers
little daughter lay waking nigh unto her Parents: who seeing him approach unto
her with his blooddye hands, said thus. Ah good Barthelmew sley me not, and
I will give thee all my babes and puppettes: But the Homecide spared her not:
Who being afterward apprehended and put upon the wheel. In all his torments
confessed Georg. Maiot in postill.
that nothing did so much afflycte him, as the little chyldes lamentation, which
in the myddle of death did sound in his ears most grievously, pricking and
stynging his heart and conscience.

Stories are plentiful, in recyting such pittyfull examples: but amongst al
Grafton in part. 6. polid. lib. 1. Ferrex. porrex.
others there is none more lamentable then that of Forrex and Porrex sons of
Gorbedug, whereof mention is made in our own Chronicles. For after the death of
their Father, the younger slew the elder in the field: and Videna their Videna.
Mother mourdered her son that suruiued, in the night season as he lay in
his bed, and with the help, of her women most cruelly without all Motherly
pity cut his carkes in pieces: and lastly Videna (as sum suppose) was
murdered of her own people. Which story, is set out in a Tragedy The tragedye
Gorbedug.
named Gorbedug, excelently pe^ned by two learned Gentlemen in our English
tongue: would to God the Morrall thereof most meet for the present state of our
Country, were well marked and considered in these days.

There are also many other myseries and calamityes which make this domsticall
regement or housekeping more difficiall as the daily and incurable disseaces
that vex the husband, the wife, their children and servants dissension
between them: breath of faith and pollution of the marriage bed, which is not
the least cross in Famelies and householdes. Whereunto may be added dangers,
by means of fire and water, an utter waste and spoil of corn and pasture,
the froward and ouerth wart nature of malicious neighbors, and wasting
servant, with other infinite such sorrows, which every day brings upon
us.

Now if we cast our eyes upon the Petryls and miseris in civil regement.
civil Magistrate, we shall see that estate even oppressed with infinite
troubles and vexations. For what are Honors and Authorities, but heavy
burdens? whereunto when many are advanced, they have a desperate downfall.
Whereby Demostenes was moved to name public Demostenes.
Regiment, A mad Dog: and constantly affirmed, That if there were two
vvayes offered him, the one leading to great honor in the common wealth, the
other directly to death, he would: rather choose the way to death: because
he had learned by long experience, the Cares and thoughts, together with the
envy and malice, which men in authority can not avoid, to be intolerable
and inuitable. And Herodotus says: Herodotus.
A kingdom is a perilous thing, and yet many desire it: there has never been
yet any man, nor shall be unto whom heaps of euylles are not conjoined
immediately after his birth: Ye the greatest estates are incombred with the
greatest euyls. The estate of the Magistrate more cumbetsome then that of the
subject.
The mean subject enjoys more quietness and hearts ease, then their Lords,
and sleep soundlye in their pleasant beds: whiles their Lords: pass the
long nights with open eyes in consuming cares and thoughts. Which moved
Xenophon to say. Peace is an especial Xenophon in Hierone.
blessing, but the least part thereof, redoundeth to Kings: and war is a
great curse, whereof Kings are the greatest partakers. And to the end that
subjects may live in quiet rest, the good Magistrate susteineth many long
iourneyes, dangerous conferences, and chargeable Ambassageons. Let us
therefore love and bless the Magistrate, with tongue and heart, unto whose power
and dignity there are joined so many peryls and dangers.

We may add unto the premises greater inconueuiences which may, and offer
do arise by emulation and envy, amongst men in great authority: as happened
between Darius and Cyrus, Sylla and Marius, Pompei and Caesar. It comes to
pass also now and then that among thyrtie or forty Colleges in
administration of ye common wealth: there are scarce two, that are lynked
together in perfect friendshyp, and respect the public profit. And sometime
those carry the chief swinge, that say and do all things after their own
self will and lust, not admytting any man's counsel: and if any of a good
meaning dissent from them, they either banish them, or destroy them. Alexander
the great when he was drunk, murdered Clitus, that had deserved very well of
the whole Empire, because he dealt with him plainly and faithfully. Caligula
and Domitianus Nero executed many noble and verteous counsaylers: and so did
Caracalla, and amongst others that famous and upright Lawier Rapinianus,
because he would not excuse Parricyde.

Moreover, we may see oftentimes, Children murder their parents and Parents
their children for dominion.
that which is more lamentable: how many Parents destroy their Children, and
many Children their Parents, through ambicious desire of a Kingdom: and for
the same cause the brother to sley the brother. Adonius was wont to say: That
to obtain a kingdom, be would burn his own City, his father and mother.
Whereof Xenophon writes notably after, this manner. Xenophon in Hicrone.
The amity and friendship that is between the Parent and the Child, the
brother and brother, the husband and wife is most: constant and faithful.
And if we will consider the matter dyllygently, we shall find the same fast
and firm, between private persons, but wavering and inconstant, amongst
those that be in rule and aucthority: vvhyles many Princes have murdered their
natural sons: and again, many have been murdered of their sons, the
brother to have destroyed the brother, and the wife her husband. And finally
many have oppressed their fellows and companions unto whom they showed a
friendly face and countenance.

Histories of all times do testify these things with great store of examples:
Solyma^ne the twelfth Turkish Emperor, Examples
who besieged Vienna, An. Do. 1529. and gave their 21. terryble assaults:
murdered his son Mustapha, suspected to aspyre unto the Empire. And Selym
father to Solymanne poisoned his father and so obtained ye Empire. An. Do.
1512. The two Brethren Polynices and Etocles slew one another, in that war
which themselves moved for dominion and rule. Antonius Bassianus Caracalla,
murdered his Brother Geta, hanging about his mother Iullo her neck crying.
Help, help, mother for I dye the death. And the mother was not only
sprinkled with her sons blood, but also received a wound in her hand.
Domitian also poisoned his brother Titus Vespasianus, that notable and valiant
Captain. Julius Caesar perished with the daggers of Cassius and Brutus, whom
he had advanced to great authority, and accoumpted his faithful friends.
Whereby this Epitaph was afterward ingraued on his Toumbe. Have I therefore
Caesar's Epitaph.
preserved them, to destroy me? And Moses the sixth Turkish Emperor slew
Orcanes his brothers son, and so set the Crown upon his own head.

And to come to our own Realm, Examples of our own country.
letting therein pass both Bryttons, Daines, and Saxons: we may find therein
many miserable and Tragical examples. For Wylliam Rufus the second King of
England after the Conquest, either by malice or mysaduenture, was slain in
the new Forest, as he was hunting, by Walter Tyrrell, with the shot of an
Arrowe. Robert Duke of Normandy, eldest son to Wylliam Conqueror, deprived
of his inheritance of England, by the said Wylliam Rufus his second
Brother, and after by Henry his youngest Brother having both his eyes put
out, myserablye imprisonned in Cardlyffe Castle where he dyed. Likewise the
most lamentable case of Wylliam, Richard, and Marie, children of the said
Henry drowned upon the Sea. And king Richard the first, slain at a quarrel
in his chief prosperity. Also king John his brother, as some say poisoned:
besides these the cruel murder of Edward, and Richard, the sons of Edward
the fourth, by their own Uncle, Richard Duke of Gloucester: was most
monstrous and unnatural, whereby we may see that no Nation, nor kingdom
wants r^wfull and tragical examples.

Last of all look upon the Ecclesiastical regiment, and state of the Church,
and you shall find therein also so many great The ecclesiastical estate
incoumbred with floods of troubles.
and grievous inconveniences between the shepherd and the sheep: that you
cannot tell which way to turn you. And first to speak of the Pastors: we see
and hear of many; that ignorauntly or maliciously corrupt the doctrine of the
essence and will of the living God, of sin, of the law, of grace, of good
works, Pastors paruerting Christ's flock.
of repentance, of invocation of the true use of Sacraments, of Christian
liberty, of marriage, of Magistrates, etc. Such Pastors and Shepheardes, have
been always since Cains time, even to this our age. Such are called of Christ
thieves and murderers, who with John. 10.
their false doctrine, do not only steal the hearts of the hearers, and draw
them from the living God, with their subtyle practices, as Absolon did the 2.
Sam. 15.
people from his Father: but they murder also the souls of their hearers, and
throw them into everlasting destruction. That monster Arius, who powered out
his bowelles when he sat at the stole, reuiueth again in Hungary, and
Polonie. And besides many thieves of the soul, which Italey breeds, being as
it were another. Africa in these kind of monsters, the scholars of Martion are
most plentiful who with the Saduces deny the immortalyty of the soul, and the
resurrection of the flesh. In Italye, Germany, France, Spain, and west India,
there are great swarms and droues of a new and strange kind of cattle
unknown to our forefathers the Mounkyshe lesuites: or rather to term them
truly the Esauits, who weery of the honorable name of Christians tremble not to
commyt blasphemy, and spiritual robbery, in assuming that to them which is
proper to Jesus, only to vvitte, to be a Savior. In this our country the
Annabaptists and fellowshippe of love begun to graffe and plant: but Gods
name be praised therefore by the dylligence of the minysters and magistrates:
they were suppressed even in the green hear be, and not suffered to take any
deep root. Andif there be any fantours either of Seruetus or of Arius as they
are not of our country, so they do not communicate with our Church.

Neue thelesse, there are found amongit those that rejoice in the name of a
Minister, who with Theons tooth, byte and gnawe their mother the Church most
cruelly, and think it a glorious thing to be notable either in singular
devises, Ministers singular in opinions.
or in opposing them selves, either against honest persons, or in carping
decent and comely orders. There are othersome, who in their sermons seek to
satisfye men's carnal affection, either for glory or lucre, and depend
upon the lyking of the mutable people: these men respect not Christ's glory,
but their own, not the profit of the Church, but their own private gain:
and speak pleasant things in the pull pit, to feed them at whose hands
they look for preferment, and for their pleasures, inueigh against virtues and
godly men: whereby they do not only deceive them selves, but many others. For
such kind of men deceive, and are deceived, that rest upon the favor of the
vulgar. Demostenes was wont to complain of such kind of Orators: Consider I
pray you (says he) how the whole common wealth inclyneth to decay and ruin,
by means of certain Orators, Demostenes.
who frame their speech to the pleasing of the people. And as Herodotus
Herodotus.
was wont to say of his countrymen: That they were contemners of ancient
good things, and altogether newfangled.

Again there are many ambicious Ambicious and proud myniuets.
and arrogaunt, pufte up in their own conceyte, contentions: of whom that
which Agamemnon used of the prophet Calcantes may be uttered: That they are an
ambicious sort of Prophets, in whom there reigns as it were, a new
fangled nature, a curious head, who reject sound and true phrases, and bring
in their own. These men blinded with selfloue of them selves, and thinking
more then enough of their own wisdom and learning, advance themselves, and
despise others. They sigh and groan and beat the Pulpytte, and boast their
care and dylligence, in watching over Christ's flock, and their success in
wynning of the people. And yet they neither have any great wit, nor learning,
and if they lay aside their soleme and sage pace and countenance, they become
as bare as a man's nail. Othersome again, are bitter and severe in all their
doings, mindful of offenses: having no cromme of humanity, and compassion:
which Saint Paul requires in Teachers, by whose extreme dealinges, many are
driven from Sermons and Sacraments.

Besides these, there are others, tymerous Tymerous and fearful pastors.
and fearful above measure, domme dogs, who for fear of mighty men, hold
their peace, and wincke at many heinous offenses. Of whom that verse of
Homere, spoken by Achilles in despyte of Agamemnon may be pronounced. O good
man laden with wine, having the eyes of a Dog, and stomach of a Heart. In
the which verse three faults are noated. The first is belly cheer or
pleasure. The second is impudency in boasting and prouocations. The third is
cowardlynesse in defending and resisting. There are others that are impatient
of labor, that will take no pains at all for the profit of Christ's Church,
that care not for the pasture of their sheep, so that their own panches be
stuffed full. There are also some that are profane, and unjust that impair
and discredit their calling and profession, with their filthye life and
conditions: and make their Auditorie, thereby doubt of their doctrine.

Finally amongst the wicked Pastors, those are not the least, that know little
or nothing them selves, and less regarding the commodities that issew into
common wealths and families: do contemn Ignorount pastors. ad hatets of
learning
schools and Uniuersities, being the fountains of all nurture and ciuility.
They inueigh and speak against the knowledge of tongues, and arts: Whereby the
honor and estimation of good learning decreaseth, and rude and rusticall
Pastors daily increase. The number of such Pastors spoken of before, is much
more, then of the sincere and godly sort, who according to Hippocrates oath,
do keep their calling chastely and holylie: Whereof I could cite infinite
examples, for daily experience lets us see of the woorser race, moo then we
would, to our great grief and dyscomfort.

I might in a particular rehersall of sundry heresies, she we that ignorance
was their mother and nourse. But I Ignorance the mother of error.
only desire the Christian reader to consider the o^easion of that great
darkness which obscured the Church shortly after Constantinus Magnus time: to
have been, the Barbarus mallyce of Goats and Vandals, who in their conquests
destroyed al houses of learning, and consumed with fire their Lybraries. Which
things done: those two monsters, the Turk, and Pope, begone to shoot forth
their many heads of heresies. And as ignorance in the beginning bredde them,
so has it fed them, from time to time. In so much that a man of great name
and tredyt amongst the Papists pronounced considently in a most honorable and
noble assembly that Ignorance is the mother of devotion, which position is
a^coumpted of them a chief ground and principalle of their religion even unto
this day. And the whole rabble of Anabaptists, whether they be of the Famely of
their filthy love, or of their deluding spirit (for they also are sundred into
diverse opinions) and protedeth of ignorance and contempt of good learning.

And as unlearned Pastors breed these euylles in the Church, so are they the
occasion of manifold mischiefs in Ignorance the cause of much mi^cheefe in
the commonwealth.
the common wealth. For where unto can we impute the sundry rebellions within
this our Region and country, in our own memory, but only to the blind and
malicious ignorance, of popish Priests. And if any man peruse our own
Chronicles, he shall find, that in the days of king Richard the second: that
dreadefull rebellyon in Kent and Esser, where one hundred thousand men at the
least were gathered together, was chiefly by the means of an eloquent, but an
ignorant Priest, named John Wall, in the which commotion: diverse outragies
were committed by that rude company, against the learned Clergy, Nobility,
and Commonaltie: and the King him self was constrained to tolerate many
dispytefull speeches, of those two villains, Watte Tyler, and Jack Straw:
and with great diffycultie, escaped the violent hands of the barbarous
multitude. And if any man list to have an example of a manpleaser and
flattering Prelate: let him read the history of Doctor Shaa, who to serve the
huntor of King Richard the third: abashed not in his The shameful end: of
flattering preachers.
sermon at Paul's Cross, in the presence of that Tyrant, to commend him for
a very noble Prince, and an espetiall pattern of knightly Prowess: and on the
other side, defaced that noble king Edward the fowrth, and his two sons,
with shameful and cursed bastardie: Such menpleasers and seruers of the time,
are hurtful, both to the common wealth, and church of God: but yet those
barborus and ignorant enemies of good learning, are much more dangerous
Doctor. (...).
and pernicious: For the former sort annoy but a few, and that in the present
time, and commonly their althy (...) Pynke.
flattery espied, purchases nothing but shame and hatered in the world: (...)
it is evidently by the examples of Doctor polidorus. lib. 25. et ^raston. 9. in
vita. Edward. quinti.
Shaa, and Frear Pinke: For this man in his flatteryng sermon, lost his voyes
and was feign to ^ume down, in the myddle of his matter. And the other after
his sermon gatte him home and durst never after look out for shame, but kept
him out of sight us an Dwell: and his own Conscience, did so vere him that
within few days after, he withered and consumed away. But the ministers that
are both unlearned them selves, and detest learning, are commonly the only or
chief occasion of beastly barbarousnesse: Whereof there springs confussion
of laws in the common wealth, and in the Church of God ignorance of true
relygion, with ^^armes of strange and heretical opinions: which are hardly in
many years after quenched and extinguished: with the great learning and labor
of the godly Preacher and cyuile ^agistrate.

Nows let us come unto the perverse Corrupt and carnal hearers of the gospel.
hearers, and learners of Gods word, from whom there yssueth many myseries,
and calamities into the Church of God: as daily experience, and the Histories
of all times do declare. But it is to be observed that hearers are of two
fortes, to wit, the man of might, and the mean or simple man. These great
Corrupt hearers of two sorts.
worldlinges can not away with long sermons, especially such as reprehende
vice and manners: they would have pleasant and strange doctrine delivered
only: but if their faults be told them, and they exhorted to amend their
lives, they fret and fume against the Preacher, yea and against God himself.
And if power do serve them to their will, they either banish such godly
Preachers, or imprison them, or kyl them. Decius the Emperor, cruelly murdered
those godly Ministers and Bishops of Christ's church: Fabianus of Rome,
Alexander of Jerusalem, and Babilas of Antioche. Herod killed John Baptiste,
reprehending his adulterous incest out of Gods word. So dealt Nero with Saint
Paul. Apryes with Hieremy. Mannasses with Iesa: and so upward unto Caine, who
slew his own brother Abel, because he was so dearly beloved of God.

Amongst this route there are many The faults of some men of might.
Churchrobbers, who either by force or fraud, do hale and pull unto them the
goods of the Church, using some colerable show, and pretense of good intent
and meaning. Which when they have once seasoned upon: they spend and waste in
bellye cheer, in costly apparel, in sumptuous building: and in all ryotte and
prodigallitie mayntaine, faukenners, horsekeepers, and doggedryuers, with the
portion due to learned Pastors and Preachers: and content them selves with
simple sir John, that will gladly keep their gardens for meat and drink, and
a blewe or read cloak. These men are not careful for the instruction of
their people: But tyrannically, do draw their Tenaunts children from
learning, and honest arts, unto the which they are commonly well bent and
inclyned, to druggerie, and slavery works. For such men had rather have
roysters then Scholars, clownes then Cou^sellors, keepers of brute beasts then
of reasonable men.

These perverse and Godless manners of wicked worldlinges are imitated, and
practiced of wealthy men, in many Towns Corporate, where the whole
fellowshippe of the corporation is mayntained with Ecclesiastical lyuings: for
commonly no other receytes have they. And if happily the living be worth
yearly two hundred Marks, they alotte out for their Preacher twenty pound,
for their Curate ten pound, and for their Scolemaster ten pound. The
residue is bestowed by the discretion of master Steward, or master Receyuer
upon their Guylde hawsse, their counsel chamber, Counter, and in their
Sergiaunts wages: Of the which great disorders, I writ something in my
discourse of the Conscience, and procured displeasure of those men, whose
soores I endeavored to cure and heal. My fault was blame worthy for y^ I
launced not the impostume deep enough: But if God grant me life and health,
I shall shortly amend that error, in my second part of the Christian
Manuell. Presentlye my purpose is only to put all good men in mind of the
great myseries and calamities, that arise by such polling and pylling of
Ecclesiastical lyuings, whereby Borrowes and Corporations are enriched, and
the poor church of Christ daily impouerished.

Many of the inferior or meaner sort of hearers, not being able to take away
the stypendes, and lyuings due to the Mynisters: do yet many other ways
Perverse hearers in the inferior sort.
molest and unquiet their Pastors. For when they should repair to the Tiple
upon the Sabbath days to hear sermons, and be partakers of sacraments: they
walk abroad into the fields, or into some other place to provide for
te^porall and worldly things: or else do contain them selves at home,
occupied in idle sportes and pastimes. For they will not stycke to say, that
they can sow, and plowe their ground, know their revel days, and live under
laws in the common wealth, without hearing any Preacher. And if for good order
and confirmitie sake, it happen they come to the Church, and make up a number
amongst the rest, and hear sermons: yet they apply them not to edification,
they amend not their wicked manners, accusations, reprehentions, institutions
and consolations.

Many also absent them selves, a year Contempnets of sacraments and
cong^^gatio^s.
two or three, yea, sometimes whole ten years from the Lords supper: they
relieve not the Ministry, nor help the poor. But commonly if grave and
whyteheadde Fathers, or seely young children do beg but a morsel of bread,
it is lamentable to hear with what reprochefull words they drive them away
from their doors. Some there be amongst a great number, who love Mynisters,
but such as are good fellows and companions: espetially they are delighted with
those that impudentlie inueigh against men in authority, whom the
inferiors commonly hate and abhor. And the Preaching or rather rude railing
of these, the vulgar embrace, and receive as Oracles: for men gladly hear such
things as tyckle and delight their appetite and affection. But such Preachers
as are neither populer in speech, nor delighted with roysting company, and
jolly cheer, albeit they deliver soundly and conveniently the Law and
Gospel, unto their flock: yet they make no more account of them, then of a
common shephearde: and amongst their Alepottes, they utter all scoffs and by
words against them.

Thus you may behold what a Sea A more particular considera^ion of man's
miseries.
of many mischiefs, does invade, and as it were, ouerflow these three estates
and callings in human society. And yet if you will again examine more
perticularlie, every singular man's misery and danger: this yoke will seem
more intolerable. Whereof there and many testimonies in the holy scriptural.
There are some that meeting a man, do she ^^^ him outwardly a louingled
untenaunte, salute him, yea ^ embrace him but in such lesture was (...)
deceived, 2. Sam. 20. Luke. 22.
and inurbred by (...) and Christ our Lord and master, was trayterouslie
delivered by Judas into the hands of his enemies. We are desirous sometime to
walk into the fields with our friends: but godly ^ hell was that way also
circumuented, and slains of his (...) and only brother C^ine. Some (...)
Gene. 4.
men are invited to a delicate feath; and by that color Absolon (...) and 2.
Sam. 3.
killed his brother Ammon. What should I speak of the said: Amm^^^; who
fained him self sick, and even enforced his natural sister Tha^^^, when she
taine to visit him. If a man settle himself 2. Sam. 13.
to marie, he may happily find such a Father in law as Jacob did of Laban, or
as David of Saul: and such a Wife as Genesis 30. 1. Sam. 18.
Potiphar of Egypt, or as blessed Ioh had: Again, if single life like a man
better; he may he assaulted as was Joseph and (...) or with his nyce
admiration of single life: wall^^^^ in wandering lust, and at last break out
into detesteble acts, with the heretic Martyonns who presinding chastity
abused a Dyacon, Imbr^^se house he lay (...)p^^s; Epiphamus.
and ^a^ue away with hi^ hostess: Now ^^a man be without children, what
comfort has he, (...) must have his goods to straungeres if he have
thyldr^^^, heanaye^fe are the veration and unquiet life of Noah, Jacob, Holy,
David. And to be shoot, whether a man be ^itche or poor; public or private,
owe or young, master or man, and (...) affairs with other men, he shall find
that prouen he very true. One man (...) to another. But happily some man will
sequester him self from all men's company, and live an He^mite or Monkish
life, what then? even such a one wants not infinite perils. For if he
inclosse him self within his house, one pin loses, and the maine posts
flypping out of their joint, the whole buylding falls upon his head.
Moreover, a spyder falling out of his web, into the pottage, wherein his
meat boyleth: or a little vimolsome water, or finally, one leaf of an
herb, either poisonous of it self, or some venomous woorme, dod oftentimes
bring destruction. If again, it lyketh him to walk abroad, every little
stone, and every Tr^ee threaten him death: in danger every where of falling,
of Snakes, of Hornets, yea of little ^ees: which do molest him: and lastly,
always sucking the wind and air, which if they be corrupt, do^ by and by
kill him.

But let him bee^ without danger of all these, what shall we say of that
lump of flesh, whereof his body consists: which having many parts, has so
many singular disseases, accoumpted of the Physicians to be three hundred. The
eye is but a little portion, and yet the Physicians name twenty and four
sorts of Malladies, which vex and encomber the same. Consider then the
disseases which greater parts of the body are subject unto. We may not
forgette in the mean time, the internal vexations of the mind: how often
and commonly without cause, we are unquieted with fear, pensiveness, and such
like perverse affections, which do even wear away, and consume us. How
often ddeth our own conscience, accuse and unquiet us: (as I have largely
declared in the Treatye thereof) tormenting us day and night. And finally,
the subtyle and sinful suggestions of the devil, and wicked men, who like
raging furies molest us, not suffering us to pauseor take any rest.

Of the subtyle policies and practices of Satan a against man. Chap. 3.
THe holy ghost in many places of the scripture, painteth out in collors, the
breeder and author of these manifold myseries and calamities: with many
Metaphores, and similytudes, out of which plentiful story: I will selecte
three or four only at this time, which if we consider dillygentlie as they
deserve, the rest will offer them selves plainly, and pleasantly unto us.
And first I accoumpt The diuyll resembled to a strong soldier.
it worthy to be observed, that this Author of all evil, who is Satan the
devil, the accuser and murderer of mankind from the beginning: is named by
our savior Jesus Christ, A strong armed Soldier, who never vnarmeth Luke 11.
himself, neither day nor night: patient of labor, aduenturous, cunning in
feats of war, most courageous in charges and assaults. Yea, he sometime
disguiseth, and transformeth himself, into ye shape of a friend: and gestwise
joins himself unto men's feasts and banquets, and especially of noble men and
preachers, amongste whom for tryfling matters often times he casts a bone,
and as the proverb is, An apple of contencions, and styreth up mortal wars,
and discention in Churches, Common wealths, and Familyes: he sows debate,
between those that should live in peace and unity: This practice he used, to
break the knotte of Christian charity, between Paul and Barnabas: and his
malice took effect in Tertullian and Aquila, for the one through the
vncurtesie of the Priests at Rome: fell into the he resie of Montane: the
other being earnestly, and often required by the Primative Church, to give
over supersticious observations of Astrology, and casting of figures, and for
his contempt excommunicated: reueged the Christian faith, and became a Jewish
Epiphanius
Proselyte. And such enimitie was sown between king Saul and David. after
the overthrow of the Gyaunte Golyathe, when the people at their return home,
gave out songs of praises, and gratulation, saying: Saul has slaio^ his
thousand, and David his ten thousand, and he said. They have aseribed 1.
Reg. 18.
to David ten thousand, and time but a thousand: and what can he more have,
save the kingdom? wherefore Saul had an eye to David, from that day for war^.

The like discention arose, between King Richard the first, and Leopolld
Archduke of Austria, in their expidition to ward the holy land. For whe^^
one of the Dukes Knights, had advanced The dyuell breaks friendshipe between
saythfull friends.
his masters Banner first: in the scaling and taking, and that strong and
famous City Acon, in Phaemicia, some time named Ptolomais: King Richard
caused it to be thrown downs, and in the same place set up, his own Ancient.
Afterward, when the king in his return, was driven by tempestuous weather
upon the coasts of Austria, he was there taken prisoner by the Duke, and was
sold to the Emperor for three score thousand Marks. And whollysse may in
the examples of our own age, see the ruin almost of a whole state, by means
of smaller occasions. For I have heard some of honor, wisdom, and great
godliness affirm: that arrogaunt and proud women, contending only for the
vpperhande, bredde such envy, between their noble Husbands, that the same
could not be appeased without the price of their own bloods, and afterward
ensewed the death of a virtuous Prince, being a Phaenix of the world, and the
utter exyle, of sincere and true Religion.

This fearce and cruel soldier besieges The devil besieges the strongest
fortes and valiant Captayns.
the strongest fortes and castles: For he did not shrink to assault that
fortress, in the which our first Parents were placed in the beginning: and
took the same not so much by sort as fraud: which thing being done, he
depryued them not only of that blessed place, but of all their goods, and
led them captive out of that most pleasant Garden into the wide world,
repleate with Gods curse and malediction: what should we say of that boulde and
presumptuous adventure of his, in geuinge three desperate charges and onsets in
the wilderness upon his most mighty Lord and creator even Jesus Christ, the
son of God our savior and redeemer^, where he tempted him with hunger,
ambicion and manifest Id^lalatry. If he feared not such strong Captains so
careful and vigyle^^: let us us be assured that he will not spare us, so
weak; careless, and neglygent in our vocation, and charge^ and that he will
not away, until he have either by open might, or privy vnde^uinyng blown us
up, with our fore and castle. Xenophon writes that great Babylon, was taken on
the holy day when the (...) sacking of Babylon.
Citizens wallowed in surfeiting and drunkenness: and even so the devil
deals most commonly with mankind and oppresses them in their security. For
when the wicked shall say peace and quietness, Then shall a sudden
destruction 1. These. 5.
fall upon them.

And if he happen sometime to sustayn The devil counterfeateth a retire.
a repulse and to counterfeyte a running away: yet he either returns in short
space more fearcely then before: or else in his counterfeyte flight, lays
subtell snares to catch and entrap his purseuer: much like the Parthians, who
^lucarchus.
fayning to retire: do even in their fleyght, most annoy their enemy with
their arrows, so cunning and nymble they are on horsbacke, to shoot bacwarde
at the face of their enemies: Even so this crafty deuell deals. For having
long and many ways, assayde to make man yield unto him, with the delectatins
and pleasures of the flesh: and not able to prevail that way: he makes a
show of rasing his seege, and running away: but even then in his feigned
flight, he shoots back the arrows ^eruh. in psalm. 9.
of Selfeloue into Man's breast: which Saint Barnarde aptly names the
Cockatrices eye: with the very aspecte Selectloue a Cockatrices eye.
and sight whereof man's corupt nature has been wounded, and infected from the
beginning. For no sooner have we resisted vices, but straight way we are
puffed up, with a vain conceyte, and opinion of our own holiness, and with
the proud Pharisee, condemn others, and iustisse our selves. What a
fearful ennemie is this then that so subtly can make virtues, occasions of
vices: so that one of the Fathers had good cause to say. That Ambrosius.
all other vices have place in evil deeds: but only pride has some power in
good deeds.

Moreover this souldior having a repulse, or two one way, approves anonother,
The Diuill has infinite polliced.
and if the boweor byll will not serve: then fetches he out his other
artyllerie, whereof he has plentiful and great store: and for a short space
withdraws himself as weary of the besiedge: But lo, He fetches seven
other Luke 11.
spyrites worse then himself (and they making a breach) enter in there: and
the end of that man is worse then the beginning. That is to say, if avarice be
ouerthe^tone, lechery aryseth: if a man suppress that, ambicion follows, if
ambicion be trodden down, anger vexes, pride puffs up, wine allureth. So
that the devil comes again with many fellows: whom man's nature of it
self can not possiblye withstand and resist. We see no time then left for us
to spend in idleness and filthy pleasure: which thing whiles many have wholly
embraced, and followed the denyll, has soddainly in their security, come in
upon them, and deuowred them, as daily experience, and the fearful example
of Caine, Saul, and Ludas do declare, whereof I shall speak more amply in
their proper place.

Secondly the holy ghost calls this The devil ce^empled (...) hunter. Psalm.
91. lere. 6. Ezech. 32.
Author of so many Euells, a Hunter: who has good skyll, and perfect knowledge
in all tongues: and has not used the trade of huntyng, twenty or one hundred
years: but even from the beginning of the world, and his age is not in the
declining estate, but yet fresh and green, he watches for his game both day
and night: he keeps good dogs, and bloodhoundes, that will exactly follow
the trace and foot of the game: If he find out any great game, he follows
such at an ynche, even through the most hard and diffycult places: neither will
he rest, before hetyre and weary them and so he either kylleth them with his
dogs, or snareth them in his nets. And if any be so strong that they break
the netts he pursues them with his Crossobome and Giume, and so one way or
other makes an end of them. He is not thought to be a good huntseman says
Plato, which cannot plato in Liside.
dessemble his purpose, or that puts up the game before all things be
ready. But this strong Hunter the Devil is very wary in his doings, and
compasses the whole wood about, before he cast of his hounds: Xenophon in his
Book of hunting, shows that there are diverse ways and means to catch
great Beasts: whereof one in my opinion is especially to be observed and
noted. Hunters (says he) take Lions, Pauthers, Bears, and other great beasts,
with baits of poison. You will ask how verelie they mingle poison, with that
meat. wherewithal they know the Beast is delighted: and they lay the same
either by the water side, or else in some such places, whether they know the
Beasts use to frequent and haunt. And sometime the Hunter sets wine and
venerie in such places, wherewithal the wild Boore, yea and the Lyharde, who
with her swyftnesse escapes the chase of Dogs, is most easily taken. The
like trains are used of the infernal hunter being an obsolute craftesman in
such sleyghtes.

^ For with these practices, he entangled Examples
and took for a time, the eight preacher of righteousness Noha, with that
good father other wise called Loath: And with like policy he snared that famous
Captain of the Thebans, Pausanias. who as it is thought was present at the
battle of Thermopylis: where a small band of men, not above three thoussand
Gretians (some accoumpt but three hundred) through commodity of the places,
withstoode the great and mighty army of Xerxes, and slew twenty thousand in
the place: albeit they also fell with the rest. Neither do we read of the
like conflyct, in any history, except that but of the Heluetians by Basil in ye
time of the Counsel there: when time the peucerus lib. 5. chro. Simlerus de
repub helue uptum.
Pope Eugenius persuaded the Doulphin of France, with a great army of Gascones
and Bryttons to dissolve the counsel by forre. These men exercising all kind
of cruelty in that expedition were incountered by one thousand and six
hundred Heluetians, who slew twenty thousand of their adversaries, and albeit
they also perished in that battle: yet the residew of the Dolphins army
fled: and the Counsull was delivered from fear for that time. But to return
to my matter, Pansanias was praiseworthie in many of his doings: and
especially for his modesty in victory. For when he was advised to set the
noble men's heads of Persia slain in battle, upon long Poles: because the
Petsians had so despitefullie dealt with Loonido the king of the Thebans: he
answered that he would not use any contumely toward deadde men: and besides
that, having taken a noble and right bowtyfull Lady prisoner, he sent her
home untouched unto her own hushande. But in trate of time, he became eruell
and proud: and where the Gretians won Bizantius, he viol ently took an
honaurable Cattizens Daughter: and being awaked soddainlye with some fear out
of his unquiet dream, he murdered the seely woman, sou^dly sleeping by it is
side. And also after ward moved with Ambicion, he attempted a secreete league
with the Persians. wherein it was concluded ye he should take Xeixes daughter
to wife: that being ^yded by the Persians, he might obtain the kingdom of
Greece, and unite the same to the Monarchy of the Persians. Whereof when the
Senate at T^ebes had intellygence, they called him home from Bizantium: and
when as in the first examination, he saw all the matter dysclosed, he brake
from them and fled into the Temple as a sanctuary. Where he also confessed
his fault: and was adjudged to be shut up, there to perish with famine and
hunger. And his Mother Al^ithea, brought the first stone to wall up the gates
of the Temple.

And in like manner, this Hunter caught Alexander the great, endewed with many
excellent virtues: especially valiant in the field, and merciful in
victory. For he being invincible in so many battayles, was at the last himself
vanquished with women and vein: even as the Prophet Daniell foretold, that
the Macedonian King should be like a Leoparde; whithe is not commonly taken
with the snares and arrows of hunters (for by means of his great swiftness
he escapes them all) but only with wine and venery. The miserable end of such
worthy wyghtes, is so much more pitt^full, because it shows the unbeeillitie
of man's nature: and that not only good Fortune (as they call it) is
unstable, but also virtue it self, not to be dnrable in heroical natures, but
oftentimes soddainly, and in the myddle of their course forsakes them. Let all
men therefore that be in High estate tyckle and slippery.
office and authority, beseech God continually to direct and govern their
enterprises: and let them always think, that soddaine conuersions, and
mutations may follow, according to that saying. Great estates sall in a
moment, and God punishes mischief and wickedness.

Thirdly this Author of so many euylles, and mischiefs, even satan the The
devil resembled to a fowlet.
devil, is named by a metaphor in the holy scripture, a Fowler. For when he
sees his sleightes in hunting, not to prevail: he applies him self so to
Psa. 124. Iere. 5. Amos. 3.
fowling: Which although it be a laborious, and an idle practice oftentimes:
yet this fellow contempneth all diffycultie, and approves the matter. He
prepares him a fair flower, and oftentimes: casts corn there, that the
birds may accustom themselves to the place. He forces not much for the loss
of some labor and charges. For according to the saying, He that will gain
Plautus.
have, may not seek al cost to save. The byrds happily fly away now and then
with the corn, but if they once be taken in the snare, they acquyte the
Fowlers charges. He uses diverse means and ways to take the simple birds.
For he either casts corn upon his floor, or lays nets, or sets
lymetwygges, or else geeth a byrdebattyng. Besides these, he sometime sets
same birds in cages, who with their sweet singing, allure the birds in the
bushes to approach nighe unto them: whereby they are easily deceived and taken.
And sometime the Fowler him self uses an instrument, and whyslleth sweetly,
expressing the noise and chirping of birds, wherewith they are beguyled and
entangled in the lyme twigges. In all these feats, the devil is very
skylfull, but his chief pollycie in fowling; is to take birds, with those that
be tame and sing pleasauntly.

With the sweet singing of such a Examples.
bird, mamed Berseba, this fowler took that bewtyfull bird David, endewed
with wisdom, fortitude, and many other 2 Samuel. 11.
excellent virtues: whose wings were so fastened in his lymetwigges, that he
defiled another man's wife, and procured her husband to be murdered. By that
bird Pharaos daughter, and other strange women: he took Solomon the wise,
even in his old age, who was so entangled and wrapped in the lymetwigges, that
unto filthy pleasures, he added the worshipping of Idolles. And by the bird
Dalila, he caught an Eagle, that sometime did 1. Reg. 11.
fly very high, and had often broken the fowlers netie: Sampson I mean,
that strong and courageous wight. If Iud. 16.
any man lust to see the like dealings of the devil with Kings and Princes of
our own Country: let him peruse the Mirror of Magistrates, which will yield
plenty of examples in that behalf.

Since the Conquest, the devil has prevailed mightily against the mighty
English examples.
that way: and amongst the rest call to mind that bewtisull bird, King
Edward the fowrth, taken with three Concubines: who were lively and in their
colors set out by the King him self: to wit, one of them for her mirth, the
other for her craft, the third, for the holiest harlotte, within his Realm,
as one whom no man could get out of the Church to any place, saving to his
bed. Was it not lamentable, that the King was so clear eyed to see them, and
so blind to discern him self, for if they were his whores, what could he be
but a whoremonger: but this carnal jest, was turned into weeping, upon his
seelye Children, who tasted of the whyp sor their Fathers wickedness. How
much more laudablie did King The laudable fact of King Henry the fyfte.
Henry the fifte behave him self, of whom it is written: that as soon as he
came to his kingdom: he called his Counsaylers together: and commanded the
Clergy, sincerely and truly to preach the word of God, and to live
accordingly. The lay men, he wylled to serve God, and obey their Prince, and
above all things to avoid the breach of Matrimony;: the vain use of
swearing, and wylful perjury: for the which his virtuous inclination, God gave
him a happy and vyctorious reign: whose blessings ought to move al English
men in dignity and authority to follow his virtues: as the plagues and
curses, which fell upon king Edwards dyscent, ought to diswade them, from
expressing his vices.

Fowrthlie, this enemy of mankind The Devil resembled to a gleade or kyte.
Satan the deuyil, is called in the holy scripture a Gleade, or Kyte, who
has long claws and tallauntes, wherewithal seasoning upon his pray: he so
presses Leuit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
and peerceth it, that it dies in a moment. And with his long beak, and
crooked byll, all to renteth the flesh, and Jesa. 34.
^hopping the same up: does by means of his hot stomach, digest by and by
even the rawest morsel. Aristotle writes, Aristot. lib. 9. cap 1. de natura
animalium.
that there is a natural enimitie between the Kite and Raven, and that the
Kyte is both stronger and swyfter, and therefore commonly spoyleth the Raven
of his pray: Even so this infernal kyte, fyghteth oftentimes, with black
Ravens, even cruel Tiraunts, and takes from them all that they have. So he
spoiled Pharao, Caligula, Nero, Sinnacherib, king Richard the third, of all
their force and power, wherein they having affiauhoe, did commytte many things
most ungodly.

And as the Kyte houereth too and fr^^ in the air, watching greedely young
chickens; and when he espyeth any peaking far from their dame: he straight
way falls down, ceasoneth upon the pray and caryeth it away: even so the
Infernal Gleade flies byther and thither in ye air where he is a Prince, as
the Apostle says and is like an Arrow Ephe. 6. Psa. 91.
flying in the noone day as the Psalmist notes: and with his bright eyes
beholds men walking upon the earth: and if he espy any of them, wander and
err from the foundament of faith and from the society of Christ's Church: he
falls suddenly upon them, and all to renteth them.

The dyuills practices are terrible and fearful when he openly assaulteth
mankind The devils dealing most dangerous when he pretends friend ship.
and shows himself plainly in his coolers, even as he is, that is to say, a
cruel Thief and murderer: but his 1. Cor. 11.
practyses are more dangerous, when he deals covertly, and as the Apostle
writes, transformeth himself into an Angel of light. And example of this his
practice is extant in the history of the Origin, of the world. When he took
upon him the shape of the Serpente, being the wysest of all the beasts of the
earth, and coming to Eve, took occasion to talk of God, and feigned
himself, to lament his vncurtuous and hard dealing with Adam and Eve, in
envying them perfect felicity. And therewithal promised them equality with
God, if they would obey and follow his counsel. And so he deceived them
being over credulous, and drew them violently with all their posterity, into
those miseries, out of the which they could be delivered by no means, but
only with the price of Christ's most precious blood.

So he deceived Achab, when he became a lying spyrite, in the mouth of Example
1. Reg. 22.
his Prophets, and in the name of the Lord promised him victory against the
Syrians. And after the same manner, he seduced all the Paynims, under the color
of wisdom, and truth: whereby they faygned infinite Gods, served Idolles, and
poluted them selves, with all filthy lust. Moreover, in tempting of Christ, he
Romans 1. Math. 4.
pretended him self careful for his glory and health, and covered the malice
with sentences of scripture. And persuading Gregory the first, to offer The
diuils apperitans for Purgatory.
prayers and sacrifices for the deadde, he showed him self in revelations, and
apparitions in the form of those that were sometime his familiar friends. We
our selves attending warely, shall find his like practices with us: he keeps
still his old woonte. For if at any time he solicit us to forsake God, to
renege our faith, to give our selves to superstitions and curious arts, to
follow filthy and unlawful pleasures, and to co^mpt all kind of mischief: he
does not show himself openly, and in his very colors: for then his horns and
nails (as they say) would make us lathe and deteste him. But he
counterfeyteth the form of a friend, faigneth him self careful for our
wealth: shadoweth false doctrine with a color of truth, excuses our denial
of God through necessity: and finally extenuateth, yea and sometime commends,
abhomynation and witkednesse, with the cloak of profitte and common example, of
worldinges. We have good cause therefore, to record these things oftentimes; to
watch and pray, that we fall not into temptation. Antigonus the king was wont
to pray, that God would defend him from feigned friends: for he thought
himself able with moan policy, to with stand Antigonus prayet against false
friends.
his open enemies: how much more ought Chrystians to pray against the
temptations of the devil: who often comes with subtle suggestions unto man,
having according to the proverb, honey in his mouth, but ^aull and poison in
his heart, which he desires to convey and power into us.

Fiftlie and finally, this enemy of The devil resembled to a roaring Iyon.
mankind, is resembled to a roaring Lion, which image and picture is most
terrible. For the strength of Lyens and greediness in pursuing their pray, is
well known. Even so the devil inflamed with malice, against the son of
God, and his scruaunts: grinteth his teeth against us, egerlie coveting to
swallowe up, and destroy both our bodies and souls. Peradventure he
desisteth from open assaults, for a time and season: but this policy he
uses, that the Castle may be kept more nerlygentlic. The like practice is
used of prudent Captains in their temporal wars: who when they see their
adversary unprovided, they then set upon him, and easily spoil him: as we our
selves know by Callys, which taken by y^ English hardly after the besiedge of
thirteen months: being unfurnished of ^^en, was easily wo^ne by the French
almost within thirtene hours: such an especial commeditie it is to use
occau^on and opportunity.

Even so fares our ghostly enemy with us, in suirituall temptations and
assaults: for then does he with his doubble (...) and great engyns of war,
batter our Forte and Castle, when it is weak and unprovided: At the hour of
death carnal man is weak in body, and faint in mind: for besides the pains
of the disease, and the face of death, which of all terrible things, is most
terrible: the weeping and wayling of wife and children; the care of our will
and Testament, and the setting of our goods in order, does exceedingly
withdraw our minds front the contemplation of heavenly heavenly things: at
what time the devil goeueth most terrible and sharp assaults. For he then
especially, sets before our eyes, and calls to our remembrance, our
works, our words, and our thoughts even from our tender years. And whereas
before time he covered sin, and persuaded us to accoun^^ it but a tryfle: he
now appears and unfolds the same, yea and amplyfieth the heynousnesse of
the offense, and uses all means to weaken and cut of our faith, and hope of
forgiveness. And to the ^nde he might carry us into the gulf of despair,
he puts us in mind of the judgment seat of God, of the endless
torments in hell, of Gods severity, of examples of his wrath and indignation.
Whereof aryseth to seelye man in that afflycted case, an astonished mind, an
unquiet conscience, an uncertain hope: and finally, (without Gods especial
grace and protection) a shipwreck of faith, and a sinking into the
bottomless; pyt of hell.

There are many other pictures and The use of this d^^ ^tyne.
Images of the devil, in the holy scripture: As Math. 12. Luke 22. Job. 11.
et. 3. Ephe. 6. All which tend to this end, that we laying aside all other
cogitations: should wholly bend our selves to resyste, so mighty and
malyeious an enemy. And for that we being both careful and vigelaunt, are
weak enough of our selves, to encounter him: much more unable shall we be, if
we entrappe our minds in unnecessary and most vain cogitations of the world.
Hereunto we may and ought to add, that this our adversary seeks not our
goods and bodies only: but he; greedely gapeth as it were in one morsel, to
swallowe up both body and soul. The strife therefore between him and us, is
about a matter of great importau^ce, even for life and death, salvation and
dampnation: wherefore as the Apostle says, it stands us upon, Ephe. 6.
to take unto us the whole armor of God: that we may be able to resist in the
evil day, and stand perfyt^ in all things.

The fourth Chapter declaring what Captaiues and soldiers, the Devil uses
in this warfare against mankind. Chap. 4.
Although the The huge and mighty army of Satan.
Devil be sufficient enough of him self, to suslaine this warfare: yet for
the better performance of the matter, he lynketh unto him such companions as
have revolted with him, most trayterouslie and shamefullie from the heavenly
captain Christ. Between whom albeit now and then there fell some
variaunce, as between infernal spirits, that want the spirit of peace and
concord: yet they conioyne, and knitte them selves together most steadfastly,
to overthrow and destroy mankind. We read in the Gospel, how Luke 8.
a whole Legion of deuylles (which consists of 5300.) conspyred the ruin of
one seely man. Yet he conte^teth not him se^fe with the power and aid of his
fellow deuylles: but leuyeth an army of all Nations and professions, which
acrueth to such greatness, that the whole world, is scarce able to conteyne
the same.

It is writtan of Xerxes, that he came into Greece, with an army of ten
hundred thousand men? which drunk up the little ^yuers where they camped. But
this huge and might armic had no good Captain. For Xerxes was Xerxes.
bold and courageous, in prodoking his enemies, but in dangers he was both
fearful and pensive, the last in the field, and first in slight. But the
deuy^ has yet a greater army, whereof himself ^being always the chief,
seueraigne, he is first and last in the field. He has underneath him, sundry
great and mighty captains: who have trained up an innumcrable company, of
pollitique soldiers, made expert and cunning, to de^eyue and destroy
mankind. The druyll has many capitains under him.
But because the public, and common adversaries of ^an: are excellently well
painted forth in that book, entitled the VVarrefaire of the Christians: My
purpose at this time is only to discrie those enemies that chiefly oppose
themselves against the church of Christ, and bend their power against his
chosen and ele^^e servants.

There are four sorts of men, esperially The principal enemies of Christ's
Church.
that yssewe out of the camp of Satan, into the Church of Christ. Against
whom unless we be defenced with spiritual Armor: we stand in great
danger, not only in things appertayning to this life, but also in our
souls, and of eternal life and salvation. Who albe it they do not assault
the Church, after one sort, yet they all shoot at one mark: even that
oppress the same, themselves might bear the chief ^wai^ and dominion, and
that the kingdom of Satan may be enlarged far and near. These graunde and
Capital enemies, are Tyrants, Sophisters, Hippocrites, and Epicures.

Tyrauntes (whese minds are puffed Tyrants.
up with rytches, and good success in the world,) do either scornefullie
object unto the Church, the ignominy of the Cross: or with hostilytie,
oppose them selves against it, delyghting to bathe their hands in the blood of
his Saints.

Sophisters, and Sicophantes, with Sophisters
vain ostentation of worldly learning, and knowledge, do subtly
laye-snares and ginnes, to entrappe the servants of Christ, and study
either to abolysh, or too deprave his Church: whose life is the written word
of God. These men by deuyllish sleyght, endeavor with undermining, to
subuerte the foundament, of Christ's Church: sometime corrupting this article
of y^ faith, sometime that insomuch that the more pure the doctrine is: the
more and mightyer Sophisters and Sicophantes, the devil sends out to
trouble, and molest the bright fountaynes of Israel, and wells of life.

Hippocrites put upon them, the face, or rather the visor of friends. These
Hippocrites.
men would not be reputed for enemies, but for fauorours of the Gospel: whereby
they do more hurt, to simple and unexperienced persons, then open and
notorious adversaries. For that is a true saying: It is a safe and common
practice, to deceive under the pretense of friendship. Hippochrites sustain
the personage of a fr^^nde, cloked with counte^fayte holiness and so rushing in
to the they fold of Christ: do like ravening wolves, scatter and all to
ren^the same.

Epicures are of diverse fortes. Albeit then all follow vayn^ Pleasure: as if
it were man's chief blessedness and felicity. For there are (...) of them,
that are notorious Athests, and irreligions persons, whose joy is to be famous
mal (...) and making no neckonia^ at all of the speech of the world do
wallowe and tumble in all kind of wickedness. There are othersome, that impart
cruility and piety: and these how it the chief goodness, to have a (...)
name and same in the world. They (...) seeing to abhor ungodliness; they hear
Gods word, they are partakers of the sacraments, and maked show of honesty in
their lives. But they hyde and cover under that mashe, three heinous offenses.
First they preserre their pleasures before the will of God, secondly then live
securelye without his feal, thirdly, they willingly, and with pleasure, here
profane and godless speeches of Religion, which do wonderfully unquiet weak
conscience^s, and oftentimes alienate them from Christ. Such blasphemous
persons as these are, the devil traineth up to be Captains, and leaders of
his army.

The devil appoints unto his Army, expert Drators, and Trumpeters,
Imbassadours Hattoldes and Troumpetors in the Deuplls army.
who with their subtle words, and warlike sounds, call their soldiers
together, and encourage them to fight. The holy Ghost terms such by the
mouth of y^ Prophet: Leopardes, Aspes, Cokatrices and Lions VVhelpes: by the
names of these beasts he understands the poison, that wicked and:
supersticious preachers, blow (as it were) in to Captains and Soldiers.
These Trumpeters with obsecrations, execrations, and detestrations do inflame
the minds of men to defend false doctrine, and to suppress true religion,
whereby the Church of Christ, is oftentimes exceedingly assaulted and
afflicted: We have known a Cardynall in an Card. Poole.
Dracion published by himself, to have moved Charles the lift to withdraw
his power from inuading the Turker and to convert the same to the destruction
of his native Country. Mounkes and Friars have with full pypes now these many
years, blown bloody blasters, and incensed the minds of Princes, to
persecute piety, and to defend Idolatry. One so raged in a sermon before
Charles Gasparus Church.
the fifte, and many of the Princes of Germany: that he shrunk not to tell
them, that they could never please God perfectly, until they had bathed their
hands unto the elbowe, in the Lutheranes blood. Many scholars coming out
of the Protestants Schools, have blown a warlike sound, and wonderfully
troubled the church of God. Of this number were Staphilus, Harding, and such
like: who were well known to the world, to have bin of a factious and
conte^tious nature, desirous to be accoumpted singular, and notable above
others in gyfts and Judgments: which because they could not deserve and obteyn
amongst the learned: the revolted from Christianity, and led with ambious
minds, apposed themselves against the (...) truth And now a days the
Jesuits.
lesuites (or rather Esuites) do like Aspes, (...) up and down: Who with
their sweet poison, prevail much against at those, that (...) no I that
precious and perfith (...) al me, which is the word of Got, con^prehonded in
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. The devil has also very
faithful and trusty The Deuylls Especialls.
spies, whom he sends always before his army, to divure commodity of the
place, and the multitude and strength of his aduersue^ ^^^ These especials are
of as clear light as any Eagle, or Dragon: and (...) cast their eyes upon all
coasts and corners, and examine every phrase, and fyllable of the Protestants:
and if they ^^n by wresting things into a wrong sense, take any small
advantage, they ly^^^ Sycophants gnawe and byte the good meaninges of godly
men, and with great v^^yueration, sclau^^der and backbite the sauie. All these
sorts of Soldiers, with many others, are bound unto the devil with an
oath, faithfullye to serve and obiy him: and do in deed bend all their
power, and strength, to vanquithe and su^due the Church of Christ: and to
settls and establish, the kingdoms of Antichrist.

The fifth Chapter declaring-Mannes only succor and re fuge in their great
temptations, and assaults of Satan. The. 5. Chap.
MOst part of men What remedies carnal and ignorant men soeke for in their
miseries.
in their miseries and calamities, do flee unto human helps, and fence them
selves, with the power and favor of earthly friends: of whom if they be
forsaken, they commonly become desperate and cry out with the Tyrant. O
wretch that I am, I being forsaken of my frinds, do perish. Others ru^me to
the devil, and ask counsel of him by Southsayers, and Coniurers: who to
confirm me men in Idolatry, helps some in such euylles, whereof him self
is the author: but when God restrains this power of his that he can not now
help any more: then miserable men do frette and murmur against God, and with
Saul, Judas, and Nero, laying violent hands upon them selves, hasten their
own end, and destruction.

There have have been some, that in Philosophical consolations of no force.
their miseries have sought consolations out of Philosophy and monumentes of
Heathen writers. But there they could find no relief, as many lamentable
examples make manifest unto us. Marcus Cato, in that bitter sorrow of his,
which he conceived by means of Pompeis ruin and overthrow: read over again
and again, that notable book of Plato, of the immortality of the soul, to
mitigate his sorrow and grief. But he could find no rest in that vexation
of mind: for overcome with dolor, cast he away the book and murdered him
self. Philosophers both saw and lamented all kind of calamities, but they
could find no salues for their sores, nor medicines for their sicknesses. For
their co^solations are nothing else, but a vain sound without any matter: and
bare words wanting efficacy in the minds of miserable and afflicted persons.

The word of God only teaches the The word of God is the clear fountain
of perfytte consolation.
relief and remedy, in such cases, and deliudreth unto man munitions and
defenses: whereby he may either stoutly contempne, or patiently continue, in
verations and troubles. Truth is the best buckler and shield. Which is the
word of God, contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
proceeding out of the mouth of the true God: whereby the holy ghost is
effectual in pensive and afflicted minds: who are preserved and comforted,
beyond all man's judgment and expectation, that they faint not in tribulation,
neither murdre the^ selves, nor yet ru^ne into eternal ruin and destruction.
This word and truth of God is our Target, for so it is ^med in many places of
ye holy scripture. The word of the Lord (says Solomon) is pure, and a
buckler to them Pro. 30. et. 21. Heb. 5.
that believe, Pro. 30. And the word of the Lord is liueliy, and more
effectual or peercing then any sword. Heb. 5. And the word of the Lord, is
named a candle, (...) to men ne life and ^pyrite. Pro. 21.

Those that are covered and defenced with this sheelde, need not to fear the
fyrie darts of the world and devil: for, they are compassed with such
strange munitions, that no cruel enemy is able to pierce the same. This word
of God does show unto us a sure and certain refuge: and counsels us to
fly into the camp of the almighty Lord: who will hyde us under his wings,
and defend us with his holy Angellos: who has promised to be our captain
and defender: who never forsakes the field, but is always in the forefront of
the battle, and is never taken of the enemy. So ^riteth Chrysostom: Our
Captain is always ready to help, the enemy can never take him prisoner, he
has armor of proof, for all his soldiers. This Captain does not only
preserve his soldiers in the fyelde safe and sound, but he also gaueth them
victory, aduanceth them to great honors, satisfyeth them with a long life,
and lets them see and feel his aid and help.

There are many examples, which (...) Examples.
approve and confirm the same, to the great (...), and comfort of the godly.
He was in the fiery furnace with the three young men: with Laurence upon the
Gridiron: with Daniell amongst the Lions: with Jeremy in Babylon: with Joseph
in prison, with the Israelites in Egipte, and in the Wilderness with Elisaeus
the Prophet, when Samaria was besieged, where the famine was so great, that an
Asses head was sold for fowrescore silver pence, and the fowrth part of a
Cabbe of Dooues dunge, for five pieces of silver. He was with David 2. Reg. 6.
in the Pestilence, when as in a short tracte of time, there dyed three score
and 2. Sam. 24
ten thousand. He was with Ezechias lying sick in his bed of the
pestilence. Esa. 38.
By the which examples, and many other of that sort, we may most firmly
conclude: that this heavenly Captain, is always present at hand with his
servants, and is there sheelde and buckler, according to his manifold
promyses, by most earnest assuerations and oaths, in his holy word assured and
confirmed unto us.

So that Christians are never desolate Christians
and alone in their fight and battle, but never alone in their trouble. 2.
Para. 15
have allwaies their Captain presently assisting them, according to that
saying. The Lord is with you whiles you be with him. And again fear not,
because I have redeemed thee, and called thee by thy name, thou art mine own:
If thou Esaias. 43.
pass through water, I will be with thee, and the flooddes shall not cover
thee: If thou walk in the fire, thou shall not be burned, and the flame shall
not hurt thee, for I am the Lord thy God, thy holy one O Israel. Consider
(good Reader) dillygentlie, the weight and circumstaunce of this text: first
mark who does promise, even God the holy one of Israel. Then what he does
promise, verelye protection and defense, in all dangers. Afterward to whom
this promise is made, even to all faithful believers, whom he calls by
their proper name, which is a sign of kindness, and entyre love toward them.
Thus you see how this truth of Gods word, which is our buckler, does set
out and describe in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, the infinite
power, goodness, and mercy of our heavenly Captain, toward his faithful
seraunts and soldiers.

Philosophy is mute and dumme, in The defect and lamenes of philosophy in
their matters.
these matters: and if at an adventure, it happen to utter some golden sentence
of Gods mercy, and love toward mankind, yet it keep not hold and handfast
constantly: but in the end declineth to a dubitation or an utter denial of
the same. Antilochus wylled men to ascribe al thing to Gods providence: Who
oftentimes aduaunceth poor to their deserved degree of dignity and honor: and
throws down the high and mighty. These and such like sentences of Gods
providence are scattered in the writings of Ethnicks, which for a time delight
men's minds, but they are not built upon any sure foundation. For they never
knew God, as he has reveled him self in his son, by his word: they doubt
in their prayers, whether God hears them, as Euripides in the person of
Hecuba, cries out and says: Euripides in Trodibus.
O you Gods, I call upon impotent and slothful helpers.

But the word of God contained in The constant faith of Christians in their
trouble
the old and new testament: does effectually and truly, describe unto us the
living God, reveled in his only son Jesus Christ who commands us to call
upon the heavenly Father in his name with boldness and trust without any
trembling or doubting: for that through him, his heavenly Father is well pleased
with us, we may then speak thus unto him. Thou O God art the Creator and
conseruor of heaven and earth, thou art also the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who was borne, suffered, dyed, and rose again for the justification
of mankind. Thou sendest thy holy ghost into our hearts, who kindles in us by
the sound of thy holy word, true faith, and spiritual motions, agreeable to
thy holy will: thou art my hope and strength, thou do cover me under thy
wings: thou do keep me with thy holy Angels, thou do hear me and
deliver me: thou art with me in this my tribulation, out of the which in thy
mercy thou wylt deliver me, yea and glorify me: thou wylt advance me from
adversity to prosperity: thou wylt satisfy me with long life. If the same
may tender to the setting forth of thy honor and glory, and to the profit
and furtheraunce of thy holy Church.

This confidence and liberty of speech The occasion of Christian boldness.
we may use with our Captain, but not in respect of our own worthiness:
for this cheerfulness, and courage of mind, we may conceive through our
ransom once satisfied: and through the continual intercession of the Son
of God, who dyed and rose again for all penitent sinners. We our selves bring
nothing, for faith is also the gift of God, kyndeled in our hearts, by the
holy ghost, through the preaching of the gospel. Let us then place and
oppose this promise of GOD, together with the death and intercession, of his
son Christ, through faith, and true repentance against all doubting, and
unworthiness of our selves: and let us flee away, and appeal from God being
angry with us for our many and grievous offenses: unto God most loving and
merciful, turned and reconcyled unto us, through the passion, resurrection,
and intercession of his dear and only son Jesus. Hereof comes that stout
and valiant heart of Christians: that they fear not although the earth gape,
and open her mouth, the Element do fall upon them, and the waves of the Sea,
would seem to ouerflowe them, according as David witnesses. The sound of
many waters, Psa. 93.
and of the waves of the Sea, are strong and mighty: but the Lord above is
stronger, and mightier.

Julian the Reneger, was for a time of great power and strength, but he
Examples.
being vanquished at a field foughten in Persia, was enforced to yield the
honor of the victory to this Captain, and with a loud voice said: Thou
have gotten the victory of me, O thou Galilaean. Apries, King of Egypt, who
put the Prophet Jeremy to death, said: That no power, neither of God, nor
man, was able to take his kingdom from him, he had so firmly established his
Scepter and Crown: But our myghtie Captain, who has power, over all
kingdoms of the world, spoiled him of his kingdom, and strangled him by the
hands of Amasis his Courtyer. Neoptolimus his worthy
Neoptelemus the player of Tragedies, being demanded, what sentence he had
observed as most notable, in Aeschilus, observation.
Sophocles, and Euripides: answered, that he found in them nothing woorthye
so great admiration: But he rather accoumpted it a thing memorable: that he
saw with his own eyes, King Phillippe of Macedon, at the marriage of his
daughter Cleopatra, Iustine. lib. 6.
in the most noble assemble of the world, honored as a great God: and the next
day after, ryding in the Tylte or Theater miserably murdered and contempned. And
Herodus Agrippa, who stopped not the flattring mouths, of such as named him a
God, but fed and delighted him self with the same, perished immediately with
corrosion of his Intralles, and lousy sickness. Surely all human power, is no
better then glass, which when it is most bright and clear, is then the
soonest broken: for rashness procures speedy spoil, and God always
resists ye proud. Let us not then fear man's power, which when it is at the
highest and in his pride: then is God able, yea and often indeed, over turns
the same, with the least blast of wind.

The sixth Chapter describes the Army and warlyke power of our heavenly
Captain, in this conflicte and battle. The. 6. Chap.
THIS our Heavenly Our God, is the Lord God of Hosts. 2. Sam. 5. Psalm. 59.
Esa. 6.
Captain has many glorious names in the holy Scripture: but amongst other he
is named the Lord of Hosts: Which title albeit, it be common to the three
persons in Trinity: yet because the Son of God was sent to vanquishe and
break the power of the devil, and to redeem mankind, this honorable name
is properly, and for the most part given unto him, as in that Psalm. Who is
this King of glory? the Lord God of Hosts is the king Psalm. 4.
of glory. In the which place without all doubt Christ the King of glory,
was signified, whereof the Arc of Covenant was a testimony and witness. And
the Prophet Esaias says: That the Eesa. 59.
Lord God of hosts dwells in Syon, which sentence is to be understood of
our savior Christ. This most noble The Lord strong in battle.
title is given unto him, because he is the chief Emperor and Captain in
the City of God, against the City of the Devil. For he is the only head,
of all celestial and terrestrial powers, the most strong and mighty
defendor, and is therefore named in the Psalm: A God that is strong and mighty
in battale. Psa. 24.
He is not idle then, but fights valyantlie, he is never overcome, but but
always overcomes, he never flies but ever tryumpheth, and that not so much
for his own cause, as for the City and Church of God: and therefore the
Prophet ascribes unto him the chief souerainty saying: Blessed be the name of
his glory for ever, and let the Psalm. 72.
whole earth be filled with his majesty.

Now although this our Captain Whereof the army of God consists.
be Schaddai, that is to say omnisufficiente, and strong enough of himself,
and needs not ye help of any creature: with whom (as the Angel says)
nothing is impossible. Yet for the greater comfort Luke 1.
of his Church, he uses the industry of his soldiers, in this expidition
against the devil: and leuieth a great and mighty army, partly consisting
of pure and chaste Angels, who are named in the holy scripture, flaming
spirits, horses and charets of fire: who pitch their camp Psa. 104.
round about the godly, and are appointed to be ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister for their sakes, who shall be Hebr. 1.
hcyres of salvation. Of whom the number is almost infynite, that man's infyrme
nature is not able to comprehend the same. Here unto he adioyneth a great
company of virtuous, and faithful men and women, picked and chosen out of all
callings and vocations. Which supply he uses not to strengthen him self, as
though he were either weak, or vnwarlyke: but such is his gracious will, and
tender kindness toward his servants, that he vouchsafes in some sort, to
communicate and impart his glory, with his faithful seruytors and soldiers.

And first concerning Angels, they are all serving spirits, For their sakes
who shall be heirs of salvation. For so Hebr. 1.
long as this world shall endure. Angels Of the service of Angels.
serve and attend in the Church mylitaunt: which notwithstanding is not the
end of their nature, but an office or function temporal: for after the
general Judgment, when the Church of God shall obtain perfect victory, they
shall triumph with the elect everlastingly. Touching their number, the
Prophet Daniell speaks after this manner. Thousand thousands ministered
Dan. 7.
unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him. Of the battle of
the Lord of Hosts and his Angels, and of their victory, we may read more
in the Revelation. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, Revel. 12.
and the Dragon fought and his Angels: but they prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great Dragon that old serpent,
called the devil and satan, was cast out, which deceyueth the whole world:
he was even cast into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.
Then I heard a loud voice, saying: Now is salvation in heaven, and strength,
and the power of our God, and the kingdom of his Christ: for the the accuser of
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.
But they overcame him by the blood of the La^be, and the word of their
testimony. This Michaell, whom the holy ghost in this place makes the
Captain of the battle, is the son of God, even our Lord Jesus Christ: as
we may both by the Prophet Daniell, and by the etymology of the word,
easily gather. For Dan. 10.
Michaell is as much to say, as who is like God? The Angels therefore
following the ensign, and Ancient of Michaell, that is to say, of the Lord
of Hosts, are celestial powers and spyrites.

The manner and order, of their service, is noted in many places of Gods The
manner and order of the service of Angels. Psa. 9.
word. But in my judgment, are most effectually collected, and set down in
one place by the Prophet David. First he says, That they guard and keep all
the faithful, That is, that they keep watch and ward in housholdes,
commonwealths, and Church: who as they never sleep themselves, so do they
awake those that sleep when dangers are immynent and at hand: for so they
raised up Peter and brought him out of prison. These keepers and watchmen
Act. 12.
never depart out of that room wherein God has placed them unless is be by
his especial commandment. Some of them therefore, are always in all present
with us: when we pray, when we sing Psalms, when we either here sermons
publicly, or privately reed the holy scriptures when we eat, drink and
fleepe: they then fight for us and defend us from all fiery darts: which the
world and devil, with great malice, cast and throw against us. Behold the
great love of our Emprour and Captain Emanuell toward his Church: in that he
vouchsafes to appoint some of his heavenly soldiers to wait upon it: unto
whom he gives a singular and an especial charge, that they keep us warely
in all our ways. We shall Men are watched with Gods own guard
the better perceive this benefit, if we open it with asimilitude. There is no
worldly man, but he would accoumpt it a great sign of love, and an argument
of safety: if a worldly Prince should appoint him a sufficient number of his
Guard, to wait and attend upon him day and night; that no misfortune might
betide him. But there is no comparison between this heavenly Prince and
earthly Princes: nor between their guard, consisting of weak men, and this of
strong Angels: appointed to us by our Captain in Baptism, to watch and wait
upon us both night and day, in water and fire, by sea and land: in all our
life, and at the hour of death.

Secondly, the Angels bear and carry godly men about in their arms. Behold
herein the rage and fury of the devil: who in every place lays shares and
stumbling blocks, for men's feet, whereby many fall, and hurt themselves, even
upon plain ground, breaking their arms and thighs, yea, and some times
their necks. The living Lord, and merciful God, therefore minding to prevent
these mischiefs: commands his holy Angels, to bear us in their arms,
and to carry us from place to place, that we may do the works of our
voration: Behold I say, even as the Mother, with an especial delyght and
pleasure, takes her young child wrapped in swathlyng clothes, and lying in
the Cradle: and bears it in her arms, with many kysses, until the Child be
weary, and then she lays it down again in the Cradle. Even so the
Angels every morning do lift us out of our beds, and bear us about all
day long in their arms, that we may exercise our selves, in the work of
our vocation: and in the evening when we are weary, they bring us to our
beds: and refresh us with many long days, and years, and in the end carry
our souls in their arms, with incredible joy, into Abraham's bosom, where
we shall behold the cheerful countenance of God eternally.

The third kind of service of Angels, expressed in that Psalm of David, Is
that they shall put and submytte evil beasts, and venomous serpents under
godly men's feet without any harm: as Lions, Leopardes, Lions whelps,
Cokatrices, and Dragons: that is to say, all sorts of Tyrauntes, and
herytiques: upon whom good Fathers in there families, Schoolemaisters in their
Schholes, Ministers in their Churches, and Princes in their Realms do tread
and subdue. So John the Evangelist with his prayer and preaching, trod upon
Cerinthus that Leoparde. So was Arius Examples.
that Cockatrice stamped down with the seete of Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople. So Polycarpus John the Evangelists scholar and Bishop of
Smyrneus trod upon that Dragon Marcion. And finallye, so Constantine sur^^^^^^
the great, trod upon, and with warlike sword suppressed those sauadge and
cruel Beasts: Maximiamis. Maxencius and Liciuius his Cosyn, when they begone
with fire and sword, to persecute and afflict the Christians.

There serve also under our heavenly The service of men in this war fair.
Captain in this army, godly and ^ertuous men of every vocation and calling.
And amongst this number, Ministers and Preachers stand in the forefront of the
battle: and fight against the Dragon that is to say against the devil and
his adherentes, who defend blasphemy, Idolatry, and all abomination (...)
were Moises, Elins: (...) together with all the Prophets Apostles (...)
Pastors, in the Church of God, theology of all times and ages: whose armor are
not earnall but spiritual, as the Apostle says. For the vv^apons of 2. Cor.
10.
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds.
Casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against
the knowledge of God, and bringteth into captivity, every thought to the
obedience of Christ. That is to say, the armor of godly Teachers, and
Ministers in the Church of God, are the word of God, the holy ghost working
effectually in the word, and earnest prayer and inuocations.

There follow in this army godly hearers of the word, who for the glory of
God, and their own salvation, fight against the flesh, sin, world, and
devil: whose fight and armor are at large described by the Apostle. My
brethren be strong in the Lord and in the power Ephe. 6.
of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the assaults of the devil. For we vvrastle not aganste flesh. and
against blood but against principali^ies against powers and against the
worldly governors, the princes of the darkness, of this world, against
spiritual vvicloednes which are in high places. For this cause take unto you
the whole armor of God that you may be able to resist in the evil day and
having finished all things, stand fast. Or if thou list to have a shorter
lesson thus he says in another place. Fight thou a good: having faith, and a
1. Tim. 1.
good conscience, which some have put away, and as concerning faith have made
shipwreck.

Women and feely children who seem, The service of women and children in this
warface.
and are indeed most unfit, for temporal wars: fight not most faintly
in this spiritual battle: but with their chaste and devout prayers, and
faithfulness in their vocation, give the devil, and his accomplices a foul
foil, and overthrow. There are many, examples, that confirm this matter, and
amongst others that which happened of late in Germany, both pleasantly and
comfortable serves to this purpose. When Virus VVinshemius in obi^u Philip.
Melancth.
the Emperor Charles the fifte, and the Pope of Rome, by Campegius his Legate,
threatened the Protestauntes with fire and sword, and terrifie^ them with the
multitude of Princes and peoples, that were ready to subdue them. The learned
men of Saxony, were commanded by their Prince to assemble at Torga, to
confer what they thought convenient to yield unto the Papists, for the
iniquity of the time. By means whereof there met many learned men: and
amongste the rest, thither came Martin Luther, and Phillippe Melancthon. These
men came together every day in ye Superintendents, or Preachers house of the
said City: and in this conference, peace was offered by the papists, but
with such hard conditions, that a noble man said, the same were paysed in
goldsmythes weyghts: so unjust and cruel they were, for it was apparent, and
that they sought ways and means to cyrcumuent and destroy frawdulently in
time of peace: those mean whom they could hardly touch, intyme of war.

This little flock therefore continued their conference with prayers and
supplications: reposing their whole confidence in the living God, who in the
myddle of dystresse prepares out a way for man better then him self can
devise or think. On a certain day after long delyberation. Phillippe
Melancthon even tired with labor, and heavy with cares, rose up very
sorrowful and sad: and went out to speak with a stranger, who at the gate,
had knocked, and made inquysition for him: Now after he had given the
stranger answer, and sent him away, he hastes to this assemble again: and
in his return through a gallory, he hears little Children pronounsing their
Cathechisme, which moved him to put open the Parlor door, even in his way, to
talk with those little Babes, whose mouths he heard so sweetly utter the
prayfe of God: For amongst his recreations and pastimes, this was the chief:
with pleasant and wyttie questions, to laugh with little Children: and toward
them he would show howelles of compassion, and the entrye affection of a
natural Parent. When he came into the Parlor, he found Ioach. Camerarnis de
vita et obitu P. Melancth.
there three Women with their little Children about them. These were the
Preacher and the two Dyacons wives of that place: who were dressing and feeding
their young Babes. But there was one thing, wherewith all he was then
especially delyghted: he saw one of the Dyacons wives giving her young Infaunt
suck, and therewithal paring parsneppes for her Husbands dynner, and thyrdly
hearing another of her children recyting the Lords Prayer, the ten
commandments, and the articles of the Christian faith.

Phillippe stood still, and with great admyration and pleasure, lystened unto
(as he was wont) the heavenly sound of those sweet Children, mindful of
that saying: Out of the mouths of Psalm. 8.
Babes and sucklings, have thou ordained thy praise, that thou might still
the enemy, and the auenger: and therewithal exclamed, O three works, so
holy and acceptable unto almighty God. So he left them, and returned unto
his company exceeding merrye and cheerful. Luther espying his gladsome
countenance, said thus unto him. Phillippe how comes it to pass that you
return so joyful, that went out but even now so sorrowful? he answered. Let
us be of good comfort: for I have seen those that will fight for us, and
defend us: Luther asked what where those stout and valyant Captains and
soldiers: Phillippe answered, the chaste wives and virtuous Children of godly
men, whose earnest prayers I heard right now, which God will accept with
vigilaunt and careful ears. For the living and merciful father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, has not hitherto despised them: neither will he henceforth, as
we trust stop his ears unto them.

The holy scripture in many places makes mention of such denoute women and
virtuous Children, as of Myriam the Prophetess and sister of Aaron, Exodus 15.
and all the women of Israel: who song praises for their delyueraunce out of
the land of Egipte: And in like manner we read of certain good women, that
served at the door of the Tabernacle, who gave their glasses to make a Lauer
of brass for the Lord. Such women were Debora, and Iaell, by whom Exodus 38.
the Tyrant Sicera was overthrown. And of little Children our savior says:
See that ye despise not these little ones: for I say unto you, that in heaven
there Judge 4. Math. 18.
Angels always, behold the face of my Father who is in heaven. And of other
Children aduaunsing and extolling his name before the Scribes and Pharisees and
saying Hosanna the son of David. Math. 21
Which voyte being disdayned, by the obstinate Jews: Our savior answered for
them. Read ye never. By the Psalm. 8.
mouth of babes and sucklings, thou have made perfect thy praise.

Finally we may right well accoumpt All the works of God serve in this
warfaire.
the Su^ne, Moon, and Stars, the Earth, Water, and Fire, together with all
the works of Gods hands, Soldiers in this Army and warfare: which do not
only serve the needful use of man to his great consolation: But also are
ready at every beck and commandment of almighty God, to annoye and
destroy the wicked and ungodly. Those things therefore that I have spoken of
the Lord GOD of Hosts, The use of this doctrine.
and of his Army have two uses: First to confyrme and encorage the minds of
the godly, in this warfare. Secondarilie, to terrify, cast down and
confound the rebellyous and ungodly. Wherefore let us join and unity our
selves in faith and obedience unto this heavenly Captain Christ, and unto
his chaste and pure Angels: being assured that all those who serve in this
holy warfare with faith and a good conscience: shall obtain an everlasting
crown, which our Lord and Savior Jesus has promised. For as the victory is
most sure and certain, through the blood of the Lamb, and the word of his
Testament: so all those who are sprynckled with this blood, (which thing is
done when men believe in Christ. according to his word) shall without all
doubt recarie a glorious and tryumphaunt victory.

The seventh Chapter wherein is declared what Armor the Soldiers of Christ,
use in this warfare. The. 7. Chap.
I Have read, that The discipline of this war and the armor.
the first lesson or rule, which a young soldier is commanded to observe:
is to prepare his sheelde or Targette, and then his sword: And in skirmishes,
not that man sustained a rebuke, that let his sword fall: but his buckler: and
the reason is that men ought to have first and chief care to defend
themselves, and then, to strycke and overthrow their adversaries. So that in
temporal wars armor is of two sorts: the one to defend our selves the other
to defend the enemy. Eue^ so in this Two sorts of armor.
spiritual warrefare the word of God makes often and large rehearsal, of two
sort of armor of Artilarye, of a Christain man. The Prophet David and the
Apostle Saint Paul seem most dyligently and of purpose, to have handled this
matter: out of whom I will gather so much as shall be appertayning unto this
matter. The Apostle therefore accou^pteth Ephe. 6. 1. Tessa. 5.
five wherewith faithful me^ defend themselves, verily a Girdle, a breast plate,
Shoes, a sheelde, and an Helmet. The armor appointed by the Apostle.


The gyrdle was used in warfare not only to tie and girde fast the garments
together, but also to defend the lower parts of man's body: for it was full of
ringes, or studs of brass. This girdle he calls the Truth, being the
understanding of true doctrine, which is the knowledge of the living God, and
of our justification in Jesus Christ. That we may therefore stand fast,
against the assaults of the devil, we must gird our selves with Truth,
which is as it were an Armory of all the rest: The girdle of truth.
whereof if men be destitute, therefoloweth ignorance of God, and
dublications of his providence, whereby in a moment they fall into ruin and
destruction. For we read of Saul, that when he had lost this gyrdle of
Truth: he fell into fearful pauors, and murdered himself, and therefore
David prays Psa. 119.
earnestly saying, Thy word is a lantern to my feet and a light unto my
paths. And this gyrdle serves also to another end verily, that no man should
give over much unto his own liberty, neither yield himself to the sweet
intisements of Satan, and so either lay snares for himself, or cherishe a
deadly enemy at home. For hereof comes the admonition of Christ. If thy
right Math. 5.
eye cause thee to offend pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for better it
is for thee to have one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body
should be east into hell. And in another place he says Let your loins
begyrte. The Luke 12.
Loins in the body, are the couples of ye inferior and superior members: and
therein the beginning of ryotusnesse is thought to be. To gyrde our Loins
therefore is to bridle lust, and al other vices, to decline Psa. 29
from evil, and to do that which is good.

The breast plate is the defense of the breast, which he terms the Breast
The breast plate of Righteousness.
plate of righteousness: that is to sa^e, reconciliation with God, and the of a
good Conscience: for both these are so coupled together, ye one cannot be
without the other, as the Apostle excellently unites them: Eight a good
fight, having 1. Tim. 1.
faith, and a good conscience, which some have put away, and as concerning
faith, have made shipwreck. And again our rejoicing is this, The testimony of
a 2. Cor. 1.
good Conscience, that is in simplicity, and godly pureness. The matter goes
very hardly with us, if our own conscience fight against us, and hope of
reconciliation through Christ be wanting unto us. For then aryseth biting and
vexation of mind, trembling and fear: whereof ensues diffidence and distrust,
and finally eternal death. Whereof Christ our savior does admonish us, That
our loins be gyrte about, and our lyghts burning, and that the same Luke 12.
should so shine before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our
father Math. 5.
which is in heaven.

The third kind of defending Armor are Shoes, which signify our
profession: or rather they dyrect and govern The shoes of Peace.
our profession, that we intermed^^ not with things that appertain nothing
unto us. Neither is there any kind of temptation more usual and dangerous:
then when Satan our capytall enimye, draws us from our profession to things
impertynent, and unnecessary. Which perverse inclynation is almost naturally
bredde with us: whereof the very Panims seemed not to be ignorant: whiles one
of them said. That a great part of our time passes away in doing nothing, a
greater part in Seneca Epist. 1.
doing evil, and the greatest part in doing those things that are besides our
calling. A Christian soldier may not therefore break his array and order, but
do the works of his office and calling, and abide in that room wherein God
has placed him. By man's feet ye scripture understands oftentimes his
carnal affections and desires. The meaning therefore of the Apostle is, that
we should well defend and keep them under: that they lead us not captives to
terrene and earthly things, but that we may be prepared for the gospel of
peace, which proclaims an universal Romans 5. et. 12.
peace unto both, between God and man, and also between man and man.

The fowrth kind of Armor, is the The shield of faith.
sheelde, which is faith, and has therefore that name, because it fyrmelie
apprehends Gods promises in Christ, and beats back all the fiery darts
of the devil. For as the worldly soldier holds his sheelde, before his
body, so the spiritual warrier proposes Gods goodness and mercy: and
concludes according to his promise, that God cares for his faithful
servants, that he respects them, and will defend them, as the Prophet
says. The Lord will Psa. 5.
bless the righteous, and with favor will compass him as with a sheelde And
upon this ground, he comfortablie concludes in another place. The works of
his hands are truth and judgment, and al Psa. 111.
his commandments are faithful confirmed for ever. In the days of
Ezechias, when Jerusalem was besieged, the mind of the good King was vexed,
and assaulted with many fiery darts of the devil: and he was enforced to
hear the blasphemies of Rabsaces against the living God. But he fled to
Gods Esa. 36.
promises uttered unto him by the holy Prophets: and so opposed a vndoubting
faith, against all those mighty temptations: assuring himself ye God knows
his own sheep, and that no power shall John. 10. Math. 1
be able to wring them out of his hand: and that he will be present with them
even unto the end of the world.

We must also have an Helmette The Helmet of salvation.
to defend our selves with all: for the enemy does especially seek to hytte
and hurt our head, and therefore we must put on a Helmette; even the helmette
of Salvation. This is also named the Hope 1. Tes. 5.
of Salvation: for that as in this present life, we receive Gods promises, and
apply them unto us by faith: even so is hope a steadfast waiting of
delyueraunce out of these worldly myseries. In this hope Saint Paul fought a
good fight. 2. Tim. 4.
And hope of eternal life is the ground of all consolations, and therefore it
is aptly called an Helmette. Those therefore that come into the field with
this Armor, get the victory: and such as are without this, either fight not
at al, or else are easily and soon overthrown: Hope does exceedingly
comfort us, amongst Hope.
the myseries, and troubles of this world, and commands us to be of good
courage, in hope of the glory in the life to come. And as the Apostle says:
Suffers us not to be ashamed. With this Helmette Saint Stephen armed Romans 5.
his head, when he was stoned. And with the same were all holy Martyrs armed,
who sustained with invincible Act. 7.
patience, the sharp and bitter torments, of cruel Tyrauntes, hoping for the
everlasting Crown of glory, which God has promised to all such as persevere
faithful unto the end.

The profit of this doctrine consists The use and application of this
doctrine.
in a spiritual application. As the Sheeld therefore, does not only defend
the head, but also other parts of the body: even so true faith, does not
only strengthen the mind, but confirms all other Christian virtues. For
faith is ground of our Religion, and has his place also throughout the whole
buylding: And whatsoever is not of faith is sin. It is the instrument whereby
faithful men repel all the fiery darts of the devil: as the holy Apostle
and Evangelist writes. This is your victory. 1. John. 5.
which overcomes the world, even your faith. So that whiles fylthie lusts
and vain pleasures do invade us on the one side: and carkes and cares on the
other side, or else when the spirit of error blows in our tyckle ears. All
these things I say, we shall easily avoid and withstand: if we hear Gods
word often times, if we arm us with faith: And it is truly said of an
ancient Clement. alex. lib. 5.
Father. That through faith in the day of doom, we avoid many sins.

And these are those kinds of Armor The armor of defense.
wherewithal, we cover and defend our selves: now the Apostle specyfieth,
those wherewith we offend our enemies. And as those sorts of armor spoken of
alredie, are not of iron, and brass, but spiritual, as Truth, Justice,
Faith, and Hope, is even so to vanquishe the enemy, our armor is not carnal
but spiritual. And of that kind he names The sword of the spirit.
first the sword of the spirit, because the holy ghost is working through
the word. For the word of God is effectual, Heb. 4.
and more pearcing then any two egged sword. And again the Gospel is Romans 1.
the power of salvation to every one that believes. This word our savior
Christ used against the Devil, and overcome Math. 4.
him. Let us then be armed after the example of Christ, not only against
spiritual temptations, but also against heretics as Maniches, Arrians and
Anabaptists: who are put to flight by the word of God. This spiritual sword
must be sharpened with daily meditations, hearing and learning of Gods word,
and must all ways be ready and in our hand: which as an ancient Father
says, Deuideth that part of the soul which serves affections, and
mortyfieth Basili. Mag.
the lusts of concupisence.

The other Armor wherewith we encounter and vanquish the enemy, is Prayer.
daily and ardent Prayer, whereby not only the power of satan, but also the
cruel malice of tyrauntes, is restrained and brydled. This must therefore be
added as the perfection of the rest: wherein we desire of God that he would
assyst us in this conflyct, and give us courage and victory: according to his
own precept and promise. Call upon me in the day of thy tribulation, I will
hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. And again: Psa. 50.
He shall call upon me, and I will hear him, and deliver him, and will show
Psalm. 90.
unto him my salvation. So Christ in that his agony, a little before he
suffered his Passion, wherein he had a terribie conflicte with sin, and Gods
indignation, prays most earnestly, and exhorts his Apostles to watch and
pray. Which kind of worship and service, is so acceptable to God: that even
when Ioh. 18.
we begin our Prayer, it is by and by heard. For so says the Angel: From
the beginning of thy prayers the word Dan. 9.
went out, and I am come to show it unto thee. And, It shall come to pass
that before Esa.
they call upon me, I will hear them. Upon which sentence, two learned men
commencing, have vttred two comfortable sentences. The one says thus: God is
always more desirous to Taulerus. Hieron.
give then man to receive the other. God gives always more liberally then
man desires, as we may see in the penitent thief, whose prayer was that
Christ Luke.
would remember him when he came into his kingdom, and receives a gracious
aunsvvere, that he should be with him that day in Parradise. Let man therefore
be ashamed of his sluggishnes: seeing God will give more then man would
receive, and more pittieth his misery, then himself calls for his help and
mercy. Hitherto have you heard how the Apostle Saint Paul an expert
soldier, or rather a Captain under Christ, would have the Christian man,
to be appointed and armed, in this spiritual warfare.

Now let us consider also, how the How David would have his soldier
furnished.
other Captain David trayneth up his you^ soldier: and after what sort he
p^tcheth his Camp, and ordreth his batrayle. And we ought to be the more
attentive herein: for that of his own experience he found, and tried his
Armor to be of proof, and such as could not be pierced. Besides that he was
not only a Prophet, but also a Prince, and King, inferior to none in
temporal battayles: For his Ancient once displayed in the field, he never
turned his back, or gave ground unto the enemy: He forsawe dangers, had a
present mind in perils: he was fierce in fight, and merciful in victory.
And in all these things it was his chief praise, that he fought Bella domini,
The Lords wars. But as he was notable that way, so was he an Artificer (and
as they say) his Craftsemaister, in spiritual warfare: wherein he sustained so
many temptations and assaults of satan, and so often carried away victory
through Gods assistaunce: that next after Job, I may place him the second
Captain under Christ's banner. And albeit there may at the first sight, seem
to be some diversity between the holy Apostle, and him touching their Armor
and weapons: Yet we must remember the occasion thereof, to be the sundry
sleyghtes and The cause of some dissimilitude, between Paul and David's Armor.
crafty policies of satan, rather then the dissenting minds of these
spiritual warriors. For the devil uses not always one kind of weapon, and
manner of war: but has his daily devises to invade the faithful: he must
therefore be encountered likewise we store of weapons, and variety of armor, if
we mean to get the victory. In old time the black Byll, and Bow, bare the
price in battayles: but now the Gonne and Pyke, are better lyked. These two
Captains therefore are no more blame worthy, in furnishing Christ's seruitors
with sufficiency of Artyllarie: then a temporal Prince, who opening his
Armorie, wylleth his soldiers to make their choice of such weapons and
armor, as may seem fyttest and commodious for their strength and ability.
And if there be any difference in their precepts touching this matter, it
consists chiefly in this point. That the Apostle kindlesh man's industry, the
Prophet calls to our remembraunces Gods prouidencie, the Apostle calls for
the labor and work of man, the Prophet encourages the same in the power of
God, the Apostle shows how the Lord blesses the travails of his Children
in mercy, the Prophet opens how God tryumpheth over his enemies in his
mighty majesty.

And although as I said before the temptations of Satan the veration of Gods
servants, and his present aid, are dispersed like sweet spice throughout all
the Psalms: yet he seems of purpose, to have handled this matter in one
place, where he also numbreth two kinds of Armor the one defending our selves,
the other offending the enemy. Of the first sort are those which the Psalm.
91. Who so dwells. etc.
holy ghost names. The wings of God, the word of the Lord, and the
knowledge of his holy name. For thus he says. 1. He will cover thee with his
wings. 2. His truth shall be thy The armor appointed by the Prophet David.
shield and buckler. 3. I will defend him because he has known my name:
For about the City of God, where sincere doctrine is delivered, with fruit
received, and sacraments rightly administered: Gods Angels pitch their camp
and build such high walls that no Tirant is able to scale the^, or with
gunnes to batter them. That Cyttie is covered and shadowed by almighty God:
even as an hen hides her chickens under The Lord covers his church.
her wings according to that saying of the Prophe^t. I will defend this
City. Almighty God therefore draws the Esa. 37.
Curtayne and casts a cloak as it were over that City, that no storms,
tempest nor rain shall fall upon it: or if it so do, it shall turn to the
profitte and benefit of the godly: and to the trouble and ruin of the
ungodly, as the history of M. Aurelius Antonius, surnamed the Philosopher
plainly declares. This Examples.
Emperor had wars against the Marcomanes and Quades, which people are named
at this day Morauians, and Sylecians: and in his army there served a Legion of
Christians, who were of the I Will of Malta, where Saint Paul preached the
gospel. This Legion did not only serve with swoorde, but fought with prayer.
For when many of the Horsemen and Horses peryshed for want of water, this
Legion took a public fast upon them with prayer: humbly craving at Gods
hand rain, and a happy end of the war. And immediatlye there arose a
myghtie storm and tempest: whereby God gave both great store of rain to the
Roman army: and cast down lyghtening and thunderboltes upon the Morauians
and Quades. The Roman army therefore was covered under Gods wings: and the
other were terryblie overthrown and destroyed.

The other sort of Armor whereby the violence and force of our enemies are
broken and beaten back, are named in this Psalm. 1. Desires of God. 2. And
The desires and clamors of the oppressed.
the clamours or cries of the oppressed. For he says: Because he has loved
me, or desired me, therefore will I deliver him: there shall no evil come
unto thee, neither shall any plague come near thy tabernacle. These Armours
proceed from a pure heart, and true faith, kindled by the holy ghost, through
the sound of his word: which do even enforce, and after a sort compel, our
heavenly Captain, to succor and defend us. And when he comes out of his
Chamber: he is not unfurnished of Armor and Artyllarie: for he has famine,
pestilence, thunderboltes, haylestones, vehement blasts of wind, mundations of
waters, the sound of Trumpettes, and other infinite terrors. The Lord did
help Titus Vespasianus in T. Vespatian.
the besiege of Jerusalem, not only with the sword: but with famine and
pestilence: insomuch that when Titus him self had taken the City, and saw
the Munition, Bulwarks, and Trenches made for their defense in the City: he
eryed out with great admyration, saying. We have foughten, God assisting us
and it was he that drew the Jews from their holds and defenses.

When Antiochus in his pride said Antiochus
that he would make Jerusalem an heap of graves, and utterly destroy the
Jews that believed in God: he was suddenly stricken with torments, and
wringing of intestines: insomuch that life increased 2. Mac^ 9.
in his body, which by little and little rotted away, and annoyed the whole
army with a poysenous odor and stincke: and so God stryke the Philistians,
with Emrodes and a flyxe, because they took the Arc of the Lorbe from the 1.
Sam. 6
children of Israel. The Marcomanes, and Quades, as I said before, were
destroyed The elemen^s fight in Gods cause
with lyghtning and thunderbolts. And so the Lord rayned down great
haylestones from heaven, upon the five kings of the Amorites, that a great
deal more perished that way: then with Iosu 10.
the swoorde of the children of Israel: Hereof comes that sentence of
Sirache: Fire, hayle, famine, death, al these are prepared for vengeance. And
in another Sirac. 40.
place. They fought from heaven against them, the stars fought against
Sycera. Iud. 5.
So Theodosius the Emperor fighting against Eugenius and Arbogastus, was
Claudiamus.
helped with vehement blasts of wind, which blewe mightily against the
Infidelles. The winds are also created to Sirac. 40.
hurt and to revenge. Pharao with his Exodus.
Horsemen and Chariots were drowned in the red sea.

By the hands of those noble women, Examples.
Debora, Iael, and Judith, he slew those cruel Tyrants, Sycera and
Holofernus. With Kings, and bryddled those two bloody men, Saul and
Sennacherib, were drawn from pursuing, and besieging good David and Ezechias.
With the sound of Trumpettes, and lyghtes of Lamps, God scattered the great
army Iud. 7.
of the Madeanites: So that the saying of Sophocles is very true. When God
The Lord sometime suffers cowerdes to vanqishe the valliant.
punishes, the cowarde vanquisheth the hardy soldier. And all these sorts
of armor wherwithal the wicked men are put to flight: are named by the Prophet
David, with one word, The hand of the Lord. For the Lord destroys his
enemies, either immediately by him These armor are generally termed the hand
of the Lord.
self: or immediately by Angels and men. So the Angel of the Lord slew in
the Assirian Camp, one hundred, fow^e score, and five thousand. He overthrew
Nero by goastes and fearful sightes. By the hands of the Kings of Persia,
Esa. 37.
he took Valerianus the Emperor, a cruel persecutour of his Church, and
caused his skin whiles he was a live to be stripped of. But David being a man
but of a mean proporcion, he killed Goliath of a huge and monstrous stature.

All those therefore that will get the Prayer and sword are to be conjoined
in battle.
victory in battle, must fight with prayer and sword. For to use the sword
without prayer, what other thing is it but a point of arogant folly? Such a
man was Ajax, who at his going into warfare, was admonished godly by his
Father, that he should fight the Gods assysting him: who answered. O father
the Gods help cowards and dastardes, but I will vanquish my enemies with my
own hand, without the aid Examples.
of the Gods: But there fell vengeance upon him, for this hautines of stomach:
for he was strycken with a frenzy, wherein he murdered him self. The example
therefore of David is rather to be followed, who encountering Goliath, said: I
come unto thee in the name of the living God. And in another place: Psalm. 144.
Blessed be the Lord my God, who teaches my hands to battle, and my
fingers to fight. Wherein he gives us to understand, that valiantness and
courage in war, and policy therein, is in the godly, and heavenly gift.
We learn not only in holy scripture, but in profane writers: that good
event and victory in battle, depends upon the pleasure of almighty God,
and not in the multitude and strength of soldiers. For Demostenes repeateth
very often this sentence. That the event of Zenoph. in paedia Cyri.
vvarres are governed from above. And Cyrus was wont to say unto his
soldiers. You know that victory in war is gotten, neither with multitude,
nor with strength of men: but such as are assisted by the Gods, are not by any
means to be resisted of the adversary.

Again to fight with prayer without Armor not to be refused.
the sword, is the point of cowardes, and rashbraynes, who sit idle at home
moumbling prayers only and reicet ordenarie means appointed and commanded by
God. Many there be also that being very fool hardy object themselves,
without defense into perrills: against whom that saying of Saint Augustine
August.
is to be remembered. All things ought to be done which may godly, by wisdom
be practiced to avoid perilles: yea, even when God is most assuredly on our
sides. And again: If thou do not decline August.
dangers, as much as lies in thy power: thou do rather tempte, then trust
in How men temp God rather then trust in him.
God. Let these things I say, admonish us to avoid snares and perils, with
good counsel, consonaunt to Gods holy will: and let us take good heed that
we adventure not our selves unadvisedly, to thraldom and misery.

In time of war therefore let us vnytte and lyuke together prayer and
Eternal means and instruments are by no means to be contemned.
swoorde: In time of Pestilence, let us call on God, and use preservatives and
curatiues: let us not without urgent occasion go into infected places: He that
loves danger, shall perish therein. For although Gedeon had a commandment
of God: to pull down the Alter of Baall, and to cut down the Grove nigh
unto the same: Yet to avoid danger Iud. 6
which might arise in the day time unto him, being but one: he took unto him
Examples.
ten of his servants, and executed that commandment in the night season.
And Daniell did not break the Dan. 6.
kings commandment mallapartlie, in the myddle of the street, but went into
his Chamber and prayed. Tobias Tob. 1,
buried the dead bodies, not in the day, but in the night season. And so
Ezechias albeit he received a comfortable answer of his recovery: yet
notwithstanding, Esa. 28.
the Prophet Esai commands him to lay a Fig leaf unto his soore.

Our Lord and savior being able without any external mean to cure all Mark.
7.
disseases and defectes: Yet he sighing and grooning, cast by his eyes
toward heaven, and touched the tongue of the domme. And in that great storm
wherein Saint Paul and his company in their voyage to Rome: when an Angel had
assured him of his life, and all those that were with him: yet when the
Marryners were about to flee out of the ship, and in a little boat to row
unto the shore: Saint Paul cries out and says, Unless these men abide in
the ship, Act. 27.
you can not be safe. These examples ought to be set before our eyes, whereby
we may be moved in case of necessity to conioyne prayer with lawful means,
that we may avoid and withstand perils and dangers. Let us then gyrde
our weapons about us, but let us pray to almighty. God to dyrecte our hands
and fingers: let us also fly unto Psa. 144.
those for succor, that can with their word and deed under God relieve us:
as many pressed with persecution under Licinius, fled to Constantine for
help. Let us in the time of plague and pestilence, call upon the son of God,
the true and perfyte Physician: and therewithal seek the counsel of the
learned, godly, and honest Physician: and yet notwithstanding, all our trust
and confidence ought to be only settled and reposed, in the living God.

The eight Chapter declares, that those only who serve in this warrefaire,
under Christ's banner, are victors, and conquerors. The eight Chapter.
THe holy ghost in the forenamed Psalm Isa. 91.
affyrmeth that those men only may freely and safely, without fear or shame,
have access, unto this heavenly Captain: Who dwell in the secret of the
most high, and abide in the shadow of the almightye: That is to say that
have a room or place in the house of ye Lord and Church of Christ. Out of
which station and Who those be that obtain victory.
place no man may without perril of his own life depart, or have any conference
with the enemy. But he must harken to the word and commandment of his
Captain only, he must know his name he must perfytly know the badges and
tokens given out by his Captain, to discrie the enemy: He ought to have
recourse to this his master in all distress: and in the name of his son
Christ to crave remission and forgiveness of sins, to have constant faith,
and fyrme hope in him alone, which suffers not a man to be ashamed neither to
come to confusion. To such a man The Lord defends the faithful man an all
that he has.
and to no other says the holy ghost that this victory and conquest
apperteyneth: because he is shaddowed under Gods wings, so that no evil can
come nighe him neither touch his house, his famely, his cattle, nor his
ground, as Moses to man's great comfort writes after this manner. And the
hail smote throughout the Land of Egypt all that was in the feeld, Exodus 9.
both man and beasts: also the hail smote all the herbs of feelde, and brake
to pieces all the trees of the feelde. Only in the Land of Goshen, (where the
children of Israel were) was no hayle: Where unto consents David saying, The
Lord saves both man and beast. Psa. 36.


Surely the Children of Israel and all that is theirs: that is to say the true
and lively members of Christ, with all their goods, are under the wings of the
Lord, A spiritual application
in the custody and Tutele of his Angels, in whose hands they are borne: whiles
they walk in Gods ways, and do the works of their vocation. Which addition
is especially to be remembered: For there are many in the shadow of the
Church, that pollute themselves against their conscience with many grievous
offenses and busy themselves in other men's matters, and presumptuously object
themselves against great dangers, tempting almighty God. But these men keep
not the heavenly We may not busy our selves in those matters which apperteyne
not unto us. Examples. 2. Para. 16.
discipline of this warrefare, albeit outwardly they make a show that they be
soldiers under this Captain. King Osias contrary to his vocation went into
the Church to offer sacrifice, he was not covered under Gods wings, but stricken
with an incurable Leprosy. The sons of Aaron were not kept by the Angels,
but in the sight of the Lord were killed, for laying strange fire upon the
Altar, Number. 16.
so Chore, Dathan and Abiron were swalowed up quick into the earth. Absolon
walking in his own ways, was 2. Sa. 18.
myserablie hanged by the hair.

This victory therefore properly appertains Every man ought to keep his
place in this battle.
unto those who abide under Gods wings, walk in his ways, do the works of
their vocation in true repentance and faith, are content with their estate,
which they labor to adorn and bewtifie and avoid sins of presumption and
against the conscience. Such men are not only partakers of this glorious
victory, but also see oftentimes the fall of those Tyrauntes, that with The
godly often times behold the (...) of the (...).
sword and fire persecuted them for the profession of the gospel: So Noha
saw the wicked men in the first age drowned with the floode: who had long
mocked and laughed him to scorn. Loath saw the fearful destruction of Sodom.
The children of Israel with their own eyes, beheld the army of Pharao,
drowned in the red sea. David saw the destruction of Saul and of many other his
enemies, so Mardocheus beheld Hamon, and John the Euangliste Cernithus the
heretic. Many godly Christians saw the destruction of that bloodye Tyraunte
Maxentius. Didimus Bishop of Alexandria, saw in his dream the death of
Julian the Reneger: Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, with many other
faithful men, saw how Arius ye dampened heretic perished terribly, but
worthily. And examples in all times and ages plainly verify that saying of
David. Doubltes with thy eyes thou shall behold Psa. 91.
and see the reward of the wicked. This is verilye no small comfort that the
holy ghost, does succor and relieve, all such as are oppressed, for the
profession of the gospel. And that we who are oppressed of tyrauntes, shall
see in this life their ruin and fall: or if that come not always to pass in
this world: yet without all doubt, we shall see their eternal objection and
condempnation, which far passes all worldly pain and punishment. For there
can be no convenient proportion, or comparison between things finite, and
infinite, temporal and eternal.

But here aryseth a question, and a An objection, how does God presecue his
chosen: seeing we see them daily murdered.
great scruple, in men's minds, how this promise of the holy ghost can be
true: That no evil shall come nigh the godly, nor his family: but that they
shall be shadowed, under Gods wings, and kept by his holy Angels. For both many
examples in the holy scripture and daily experience teaches: that the most
excellent lyghtes, and members of Christ's church, are first and most commonly
taken away with sword, fire, pestilence, and other plagues and mischiefs.
Abell dwelling under the shadow of the highest, believing in Christ and
walking in his ways: was murdered of his wicked, and unnatural brother Caine.
Joseph from his chyldhoode, Examples.
fearing the Lord, and doing the work of his vocation, is sold by his
brethren into Egipte, and was there without cause imprisoned. Esaias the
Prophet in whom was many excellent gifts, wherewithal he governed the
Church, was cut in two pieces by the tyrant Manasses. Apries king of Egypt,
caused Jeremy to be stoned to death. Herod cut of John Baptist head: then
whom there was no greater amongst ye sons of women. Nero caused Saint Paul
to be crucified. And the cruel tyranny of Diocletian, Maximanus, and
Maximinus, murdered in one month, seventeen thousand Christians, because they
would not offer sacrifice, to the Idolles of the Panims. Now when carnal
reason considers these, and such like examples, it begins to doubt of
Gods providence, and of his promises touching man's protection and defense:
whereof I speak somewhat, in my Book intytuled, The armor of proof: But
because it is very pertinent to this tractation, I will handle the matter more
perticularlie, and largely in this place.

If (say they) God does protect and defend his servants under his wings, and
keeps them by his holy Angels: why then are there many thousands, of those
that serve God sincerely, and call upon him earnestly, either murdered cruelly,
or spoiled miserably, or drawn into heavy bondage, where they serve
barbarous and godles people painefully. And hear I have good occasion to speak
generally, of the causes of persecutions, against the Church of God: but I
will keep my self within compass, and deduce my Reader to ye consideration of
those things, which are most needful for these troublesome times. Answer to
the objection.
I will first speak of ye sartenty of Gods promises which are in the objection
infyrmed and weakened. I say therefore that these promises of God made to his
Church are not therefore frustrate because How Gods promises are to be
understood.
throughout all times, some members thereof perrishe. For the body of the
Church is preserved and shall continewe until the end of the world allthough
some bowghes and Branches be cut of: and albeit some of the soldiers of this
army fall with sword, (as oftentimes it comes to pass that both the godly
and ungodly perish together) yet other soldiers by and by succeed in their
places who fight manfully for the law and for the congregations. This heavenly
captain, the son of God, shall always have a strong army, allthough the
number be sometime more sumtime less. No infernal power shall prevail against
this whole army wherein if peradventure there be some, as fearful as hayres,
or hearts: yet the captain has the heart of a Lion, and is therefore called
the Lion of the tribe of Judah. And if he do not save his army, by those
means which human reason deuiseth and likes, or at such time as we desire,
or by those noble men, who we suppose to be wise and strong enough for such a
matter. This therefore comes to pass that men may understand, even by use
and experience, that the church is not defended by man's strength, but by the
living God, according to that sentence. Psalm. 44.
Least you should say our hands have done it.

Secondarely we ought to know, that Gods promises of temporal ^^nges include
a condition.
unto Gods promise, of temporal blessings, there is always annixed a
condition, or an exception, of temporal affliction: which is a companion, or
wayting^ servant unto the milytant Church. For assuredly, there are three
things, that are linked together, in a true Christian, one Faith, Confession,
and Persecution. He that will follow me, let him take up his cross, that
is, let him persevere unto the end, in faith hope and patience. The world and
devil do hate those most vehementlye, that follow Christ: but in the myddle of
their formentes, their faith is so kindled, and their strength and patience
confirmed, by the holy ghost: that the hotest flames of fire make them shrink
no more, then if they were beaten with a f^ther. Many of us have seen with our
eyes, and those that have not seen, may read in the book of Martyrs: of the
constancy and patience, of Christ's servants, in the flames of fire, so
straunglye, and above all humane strength, that they wearied and appaled the
cruel tormentors. For when some of them untied, stood still, whiles their
hands burned in the fire: and othersome lynked fast in the chain, and the
fire feeding and consuming their bodies, casting up their hands, and eyes
toward Heaven, and never struglyng: what does it show? but either a
sencelesnesse of pain, or an heavenly gift of tollerancie, and patience.
Peruse that notable story of the mother and her seven Sons, suffering
Martyrdom, and you shall see that Antiochus was 2. Mac 7.
overcome, ashamed and wearyed, with tormenting: whiles the servant of GOD,
overcame, reioysed, and endured. The History as it is memorable, so is it
confyrmed by experience in this our age, whiles many weak Women, with more
then manlye stomachs, endured willingly and cheerefullie great pains, and
torments, wherein that speech of our savior Christ is verifyed: My power is
made perfect 2. Cor. 12.
through weakness.

This mighty operation, of the holy An evident proof of the certent of
Christian Religion.
ghost in the deaths, and sufferings of his Saints: is one of the undoubted
testimonies, which the ancient Fathers have used, as an evident demonstration,
to prove the certainty of Christian Religion: in that the holy ghost is given
into men's hearts, to breed, and kyndle divine flames of consola^ion, which
can not be quenched with the mighty flooddes of Persecution, whereof the
Apostle speaks: You have received the spirit of adoption of Romans 8.
sons, whereby we call Abba Father, this spyrite gives testimony unto our
spirit, that we are the sons of God. These things we find true indeed,
in dolours and pains, when we hear the sound of the gospel, wherein the
son of God, shows unto us the will of his Father, confirms our assent and
persuasion, and also powers the holy spirit into our hearts, whereby we feel
and cast an heavenly joy, rest in peace, fly not from God but like sons
call upon him in our distress. Surely this stoutnesse^ of mind, in men,
whereby they triumph, even in death, is an evident testimony, that they are
the children of God.

Sometime also the Lord sheweh his The Lord delyuereth his servants sometime
myraculously.
helping hand in the extreme need and distress of his servant. For most
myraculously he delivered the three children in the fiery furnace, Daniell in
the Lions den, and Peter out of Prison: We read also of a Bisshoppe in the
City Nilopolis, named was one Cheremon: Phil. Melanct. in valerian. Eusebius.
lib 6. cap. 34. Sirca annum dium. 260.
who being driven into eryle, and banishment, with a great company of the
Christians: was not able with his Wife to go any farther, by reason of their
old age: and therefore in the sight of the multitude, he and his wife were
taken up into Heaven. So that the honor and glory of the Church, then
especially appears, and shyneth either when men with inuinsible courage, do
without murmuring, and despair, tolerate most painful forments, or are at the
last myraculouslie delivered.

In these matters therefore we must Now God and devil behold the deaths of
the godly but diversely.
open, not the eyes of Reason, but of Faith, not the sense of the flesh, but
of Gods spyrite is to be considered. I grant that it is a joyful spectacle
to the devil, to behold A bell murdered, Job afflycted, Daniell cast unto
the Lions, and Stephen stoned. But I say, the view thereof is more acceptable
to God: Who witnesses that the death of his Saints is precious in his
sight: But not in respect of the pain, but of the event. Both God and devil
behold the torments of the godly, but with diverse affectes and counsayles.
For God permy^^eth his Saints to be afflycted of his mere goodness, but the
devil desires it in malice: God to crown them, the devil to confound them:
God as a Father, the devil as a tyrant and hangman: God does it for the
glory of Saints, the devil for their ignominy. Of these causes Augusti.
Saint Augustine writes thus. Every vvycked person has will to him of
himself, but power by Gods dispen (...) on only: he is permitted to prevail
against some (...) punish them, against others to prove them, and against other
some to crown them. Strangers were permytted to punish the Children of
Israel, because they had offended against God. The dyuell was permyfted to
prove and try Job, but him self was confounded. Persecutours afflicted holy
Martyrs, but to their crown and victory. The holy witnesses and Martyrs of
God, therefore are more happy in their torments, then mighty Princes in
their pleasures, for as Saint Augustine bears witness. Men of this world are
happy vnhappilye: But Martyrs are unhappy happily: they were unhappy
temporallie, but happy eternally. This event of Martyrs is painted out in a
sweet symilytude by the Psalmist. They that sow in tears shall reap in
joy. They went weeping, Psa. 126.
and carried precious feed: but they shall return with joy, and bring then
sheaues. For the holy Martyrs cast not their eyes only upon the time of
sowing, and upon the practice of satan, who seeks to ouerflowe the Church,
with streams and floodes of blood: but upon the joyful time of Harvest, when
as they shall be confourmed, and made like the glorious body, of our savior
Jesus Christ.

God would have us therefore, to be constant in faith and hope, and to have
all our confidence reposed in the omnipotency of the eternal majesty: who is
able in every monument, to remoueaway his cross from us, which not with
standing he does not commonly, until we be sufficiently chastised, and turned
unto him by true repentance. For as the tryer of mettayles, takes not his
gold, out of the furnace, before it be perfectly purified and cleansed: even so
God does not deliver us from temptation, before we be thoroughly tried and
confirmed: Wherefore let us depend upon almighty God, who can and will
deliver us if not corporally, yet spiritually, if not our body yet our soul.
For it was the same God that delivered the three children out of the fiery
furnace: and suffered the Machabeis Dan. 3.
to be consumed with fire. They singe in the fire and these dye, and yet 2.
Match. 7.
he was the same God of them both. He delivered them to confound the Idolles
of Babylon: and suffered ye other to perish in their bodies, that the pain and
damnation Aug. in. Psalm. 33.
of their persecutours might be the greater. It comes to pass also
sometime, that the godly and ungodly suffer in this world together, but for
diverse respects and ends. They in the destruction of their bodies do in a
momente and speedely lay aside the uncleanness of their flesh, and are so
brought to everlasting peace and rest: but the other do then but begin to
feel fearful and endless torments of body and mind. And that saying of David
has place herein. In the hand of Psalm. 75.
the Lord, there is a cup, and the wine is read in it: it is full myxt, and
he powers out of the same: As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the
earth, shall drink of them, and suck them out.

When therefore we stand in some perils, like branches to be cut of the
body of the tree, or like valiant soldiers, to fall in the forefront of this
battle: let us comfort our selves, with the consideration of these things.
Let us be assured, that God can deliver us if he will: but if he will not it is
for great and weighty causes, and the same tending Dan. 3. Why God takes away
his servants oftentimes with death.
to our own best profit. For he either closes our eyes with good King
Josias, that we should not behold the woeful estate of our country and Church
which shall ensue: or else he takes us away, in our best time, least malice
and wickedness should alter our hearts, and in the mean time he makes us
worthy vessels, to testify his honor and glory, even before most cruel
tyrauntes: and ryddeth us shortly out of temporal misery, to the end we
may speedily pass into endless felicity.

And if we give our lives unto death, Death not so terrible to the mortifyed man
for these things, as the matter is most excellent and lawdable: so is it not
so terryble and fearful to the mortified and spiritual man, as flesh and
blood would make us believe. For if the Heathen soldiers, do abide a long
and sharp warfare, either to defend their own country, or to enlarge their
dominions: shall we shrink to pass the pykes, to the end we may keep our
Just. lib. 2.
faith, and possess those dominions that are most excellent and endless.
Codrus Codrus.
king of Athens, understood by an Oracle, that if he were preserved, his
Country should perish, he therefore purposely procured his own death: and
shall we stick to give our lives for our heavenly Jerusalem. That noble
Roman Marcus Curtius, cast him self headlong into a bothomles lake, for his
1. Curtius. Leuius. lib. 7.
City and Country: and shall we fear imprisonment, and dangers temporal,
that we may possess Palaces and lyberties eternal. Shall Zopirus the
Sopirus.
Persian, cause his servant to whippe him, to cut off his noose, his ears,
and lyppes, and that so coming to Babylon, Just. lib. 1.
he might the more speedily obtain credit of them, to have some authority,
whereby he might betraye, and yield the City, otherwise inuinsible, unto
his Master King Cyrus: and shall Christyans faint with like torments, to
purchase not for others, but to rerayne and keep that City already provided
for them by Christ.

Surely these things made Job to exclame. Albet he kill me, yet will I trust
Job. 23.
in him. And the Apostles departed from the counsel rejoicing, that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus. And Saint Paul
certyfied Act. 5.
by Agabus the Prophet, of the calamyties and miseries which he should suffer
at Jerusalem, and his case much bewailed by the Brethren, answered: What do
you weeping, and vexing my heart? for I am not only ready to Act. 21.
be bound, but also to suffer death for the name of the Lord Jesus. So spoke
Ignasius in ^^ke case. I am ready to abide the fire, beasts, sword, and
cross: so that I may see Christ my savior, who Ignatius ad Tarsences.
dyed for me. And again: Let all pains and torments most exquisitly devised,
by the devil himself: be executed upon me alone, so that I may have the
fellowship of Jesus Christ.

Finally, the blessed and happy exchange of temporal pain, into
everlasting The happy exchange which the godly make.
joy, which the godly shall possess in the world to come, ought to make
them, abide these short afflictions manfully, whereof we have an evident
example in the ritche man, and Lazarus. Abraham said to the ritche man, Son
remember that thou have Luke 16.
received weal in thy life, and Lazarus woe. But now he is in joy, and th^^
art in torments. Our savior Christ also says to his Apostles. You shall
Job. 16.
vvepe and lament, but the world shall rejoice. You shall be full of sorrow
but your sorrow shall be turned into love. When a woman traueileth, she
has pain, because her hour is come: but when she is delivered, she
remembers not her pain, because a man child is borne into the world. And
you now shall have sorrovve: but I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy shall no man take away from you. Although there are no
greater pains, then in Chyldeb^th, yet after delyueraunce, the Mother for joy
of her Child, forgets all: Even so the godly in this world ^de wonderful
torments, but after they have passed this life, they never think of worldly
sorrows: by means of that unspeakable joy of Heaven. Which as yet the eye
has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man. For our light affliction Esa. 65.
which is but for a time, causes unto us a far more excellent, and an
eternal weight of glory. Whereof he Apostle 2. Cor. 4.
saint Peter writes thus: We are regenerate 1. Pet. 1.
to an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for you. The man of God names the celestial inheritance
The reward of the godly most excellent and endless.
immortal, because it never fleeteth nor vanish away, as the joys of this
world do. Whether they be honor or riches, or power, or friendship, all
these perish and decay: he calls it undefiled, because it is void of all
sorrow, heaviness and sin: it is pure, sincere, and permanent, he says
also, that it fades not away, because there is no fullness nor weariness of
it. These joys are in a vision expressed more largelye in the Revelation. And
after these. I beheld and lo, a great multitude which no man could number,
etc. stood clothed, with long white robes and palms in their hands. These
are they which come out of great tribulation, and have Revel. 7.
vvashed their long robes, and have made their long robes white in the blood
of the Lamb: Therefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and
serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the throne will
dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, neither shall
the Sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the middle
of the throne, shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the lively
fountains of water, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
These things enforced saint Paul to say: I desire to be loosed, and Phil. 1.
to be with Christ, and Christ is unto me both in life, and death, an
advantage. This you see for what causes God suffers some particular soldiers
in this spiritual warrefare to fall in the forefrunt of the army: and yet
keeps his main battle without disorder or discomfeture: and there withal
what causes ought to move and aminate these witnesses, and Martirs to persevere
and endure most valiantly.

Now although God suffers some of his servants, to perish and fall in Gods
army and main battle always contineweth.
this conflict: yet his promises remain sure and inviolable toward the whole
Church, which abides much like unto the body of ye tree or main battle, firm
and constante, although some branches and members be cut of and decay. And
yet those that fall and perish, do procure great profit, and commodity to them
that survive in this warrefare, and battle, whereof Theodorete, writes
excelently Theodo^rete.
as follows. As Moses saw in times paste the bushe red with fire, and yet
not consumed: even so the crewell, torments, and executions of Chrystians, by
Tirantes did not consume them, but rather: as we see it come to pass, when
men cut down wood, moo twigges and branches budde and spring from the
root, then were the boughs that were lopped down: even so when many were
murdered for the profession of the gospel, moo came unto the Church: for the
blood of those Saynctes did as it were water, the young and tender plants in
the Church of God. It is truly therefore said of Saint Ambrose. A martyr does
not suffer for himself only but for other. He suffers for himself to
obtain a Crown, to others for their example: for himself to purchase rest,
for others to procure them comfort.

And that Christ assisteth, and delivers his Church, in perrilles and
dangers, Testimonies of scriptures.
and will conserve the same, until the end of the world: we are not only
taught by many promises in the scripture, but also assured and confyrmed by
examples throughout all times and ages. Hear ve me (says God, by the mouth
of his Prophet) O house of Iaeob, and all that remain of the house Esa. 46.
of Israel: which are borne of me from the womb, and brought up of me,
from the birth. Therefore unto old age, I the same, even I will bear you,
until the horie hairs: I have made you, I will also bear you, and I will
carry you, and I will deliver you. Christ him self does not ouelie promise
that he will be with Math.
us until the end of the world: but also that he and his Father will come
and dwell with us. And in another he speaks of his sheep most
comfortablie. Job. 14
There shall none be able to pull them out of my hand. In the which Job. 10.
words he signifies, that he will not be an idle gaser, or looker upon us:
for although world and devil bend their power to displace the Church, and
to dysturbe Common wealths: that confustons and Athisme might follow: Yet
the some of God holds as it were in his hands that little flock which
calls upon him: he represseth the rage of Satan, he puts him to flight,
and will at the last enclose him in the huge and horrible prison of hell
eternal.

Examples also throughout the whole scripture do ratify as it were, and
Examples.
confirm with perpetual testimonies: that God delyuereth his Church out of
all perilles and dangers. But especially, that memorable History of the
people of Israel, rydde from thraldom and bondage in the Land of Egypt,
lyuelie painteth out the same: and is of all other Histories, from the
beginning of the world, unto the end thereof most notable, the mystery of
our redemption always excepted. For it is an Image and lively pycture of all
ages, full of The deliverance of the people of Israel, a perpetual image of
the church.
strange wonders: which witness, and preach unto all posterities, that God
exercises his Church with many calamities, and in the end without man's
help, delivers the same. How horrible a thing is it in this company of
Israelites, bearing the name of the Church of God, and tasting sensibly his
myghtie working in mercy with them: that many of the Princes and nobylitie are
punished, and the whole multitude so often chastised, until all those were
almost consumed, that came out of the Land of Egypt. Yet some small remnaunt
of the people, were preserved, that reverently remembered Gods woonders, and
kept his commandments with all their hearts. They had Manna and Quales,
given unto them, and the stony rock stryken with the rod of Moises, gave
out large streams of water. The whole army was covered with a cloud in the
day time, and was guyded with a pyller of fire in the night season: in these
battayles God showed manifest signs of his presence. And to conclude, the
glory of this people was more excellent, in the wilderness: then at any time
after in the fruitful Land of Canaan. But it would be too tedious a matter
to prosecute all syrcumstaunces particularly: I will therefore add one only
example, wherein we may clearly behold as it were in a glass, Gods
maruaylous regement, and relief of his Church.

There is scarcely to be found, any A reuelacion exibited to Moses touching
the estate of Christ's church. Exodus 33.
more maruaylous Revelation, then that which was exhibited to Moises. Exodus 33.
Where he is called for to come and speak with God: and it is said in that
place. That God communed with Moses face to face, as one friend is wont to
talk with another. In the which communication, Moses first desires of God,
that he would be a governor and Captain over that people, unto whom he
had given his word and promise. For daily experience had sufficiently taught
him, that it was to busy and hard a matter for him to guide, and dyrect so
wylfull and stubborn a multitude: whom he saw for their Idolatrous
inclynation, to sustain from The carke and care of Moses.
time to time, grievous punishments: and yet immediately, to inclyne to their
former wickedness again. He saw the intolerable dangers, hanging over the
Church: and that in a moment pure doctrine, and sincere serving of God, was
depraved with man's carnal opinions. He therefore feared least in that company,
the right reverence of God would be forgotten: and that the Church would be
subverted, especially for that he had heard, Gods terrible threats against
the people.

And thus musing with him self of How Moses comforted, himself.
the remnaunts of this Church: he could find nothing wherwithall he might be
stayed and comforted: but those promyses only given to the people of Israel
concerning Christ the Messiah and savior. And for that he perceived well that
no Regyment can be happy without God, He said: Unless thou O Exodus 33.
Lord do go before us, bring us not out of this place. And afterward desiring
to The requests of Moses and Gods answer.
see Gods glory, to this God answers. Thou can not see my face, for there
shall no man see me an live: but behold there is a place by me, where thou shall
stand upon the rock. And while my glory passes by, I will put thee in a
cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand vvhyles I pass by. After
I will take away mine hand, and thou shall see my back parts: but my face
shall not be seen.

This is a hard, and obscure history, The spiritual interpretacion, of the
history.
which although I cannot open and handle according to the worthynesse thereof:
and if I could, this place does not require it: yet I will briefly touch it,
for it comprehends most grave, and comfortable consolation, concerning the
church of Christ, which this scripture testifies to be covered in this
world, with the hand of God, and that it shall be glorified here after. And
herein I follow the plain and usual exposition, which is. That Moises
beseeches God to open and reveal unto him the end of that people, which was
then the Church of GOD. Whereunto God answers: That he will not have his
face seene^, which is that he will not have his secreete counsels known,
before the end of the Church consu^mate and perfitted: But he shows his
back parts: Which is that in the end, we shall see his glory. In the mean
season, the people lies hid, in the clefte of the rock, that is in this
present Church, which is often times pressed with persecution. But it stands
upon the Rock Christ, and is covered with the hand of God whiles he passed,
that is, until the Church be consummate and finished. Wherein God signifies
The passage of God.
that he passes by at all times in this world: in the which passage he
gathers his Church, wherein both him self is glorified, and the same by him
also glorified in the life to come. And that this his Church, is governed not
by man's counsel, and pollycie, but by the voice and sound of his word
given from Heaven: and that it is defended not with the strength of carnal
man, but with the only hand of the living God.

So this text does propose unto us, a A picture of the clear sight and
knowledge of God.
pleasant pycture, of Christ's Church: besides the consyderation of a great
point of doctrine, of the sight and perfect knowledge of God, whereby Gods face
is seen. As our savior answered Phillippe, desyring to have the heavenly
Father showed unto him: Phillippe, he that sees me, sees the Father. Even so
Moises desiring a deeper, and clearer in sight of almighty GOD, is deduced to
the word, touching Messiah, revealed unto the Church: and it is also showed,
how GOD would be known, until the second coming of Christ, when it is
said: Thou can not see my face, but thou shall stand in the cleft of the
Rock: That is, thou shall stand upon Christ and his gospel, until I pass,
and so thou shall see my hinder parts. For the Church does not perfitlie see
God in this life, neither enjoys the glory promised: but stands yet upon
the Rock Christ, by faith, and being in the cleft of the Rock, subject to
persecution, looks and awayteth for glory, whiles God passes, even when the
Church is consumate and finished. For after this The back parts are Gods word.
passage, there is eternal glory, wherein we shall behold God perfitlie,
and as he is. Whereas now we only see his back parts. But I omit the
deep mysteries of this piece of scripture. I only propose the story to be
considered of my godly Reader: that he might observe how this sentence serves
all times, of the Church to the end he may reap such effectual consolations,
that hell gates shall not prevail against him. We ought to know therefore yt
the Church shall continue always amongst the raginge storms and tempests of
the world, and that by the maruailous, and mighty protection of God, whiles God
passes by, even until the time of glorifycation.

Surely the Church of God in these The face of the Church in these days.
latter times, wandereth as it were in the wilderness, almost without any
certain seat, or defense: saving it has his Halcions days, presents in
this Island. In the mean season, as amongst the people of Israel, a great
multitude forsook God, and so fell into Gods wrath and vengeance: even so
now a days, we may behold Kings and Princes, and a great multitude to
contempne the gospel, and so to procure unto them selves everlasting
maladiction and destruction. On the other side that little flock, which
professes the gospel, to be deprived of all human help, and to wraffle
daily with miseries and callamities. But let us behold the Image, proposed in
the hystories of the Israelytes: and assure our selves, that although the
Church, seem now to be as an exyle and banished person upon earth: yet that
it is covered, with Gods hand, and with a heavenly pyller of fire, and that
Christ her captain, is present with her. Who will as the Psalmist says:
Appear to be a God in Sion. Psa. 84.
For albeit God appears and shows his presence throughout the round world
Gods special presence and apperaunce in the Church.
by his providence, regiment and conservation of all things: yet he manifest
his presence in the Church by more peculyar and special means: Namely by
preserving and maintayning the Ministry and sacraments, by his dwelling in
the Saints through faith, by his internal consolation in the holy Martyrs:
and to conclude, in defending his congregation myraculouslie, against the
raging furors of diuelles and worldlings. Whereof Moises speaks thus. They
have heard that thou Lord, art amongst Numb. 14.
this people, and that thou art seen face to face. And Joshua: You shall know
that the Lord God is in the middle of Iosu. 3.
you. And again: That all the inhabitaunts of the earth may know that God 1.
Reg. 17.
is in Israel.

This presence and protection of God Two use of this doctrine.
over his Church, has two ends: whereof the one appertains to such as are
without, and as yet profane persons: the other, unto those that be of the
household of faith, and City of God. And as touching the ungodly, this is
the end of Gods presence in the Church: that they either conioyne them unto
the congregation of the faithful, through Gods presence a witness and Judge
against the ungodly.
true repentance, renouncing a^^ impiety and wickedness: or else being
obstinate, may have their own consciences, as witnesses of their just
condempnation. For it shall come to pass, according to that sentence of the
Psalm. All mine enemies shall be confounded, and Psa. 6.
sore vexed, they shall be turned back, and put to shame suddenly. And again:
God shall destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee, and pluck thee out of thy
tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the living. The righteous also
shall see it, and shall fear, and shall laugh at him saying: Behold the man
that took not God for his strength, but trusted unto Psa. 52.
the multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his malice. etc. There
can therefore be no greater plague then by sin, to be separated from God, to
be turned from the fountain of all goodness, unto the bothomlesse lake of
all evil, from sweet life, to bitter death, from true blessedness, to
everlasting misery.

On the other side as touching the elect A confirmation and encouragement of
the godly.
and faithful, this is the effect and end, of Gods presence in his Church. To
confyrme them in faith, to move them to be thankful toward him, under whose
wings they are covered, to make them fear God, in whose fight they walk:
that they should also in time of trouble call upon him being present with them:
that in patience they should look for victory against world and devil.
Hereof spryng those sayings full of divine consolation. The Lord is with us
fear not. And another: And now O Number. 14.
Lord our God, save us out of the hand of Sennacherib: that all kingdoms of
Esa. 37.
the earth may know, that thou only art God. Wherefore let us pluck up our
hearts unto us, and be of good comfort for without all doubt, God will through
all times, save and preserve that Church, which keeps the doctrine, that has
been delivered by the Prophets, Apostles, and by Christ himself, as that
sweet promise in the Prophet testifies: This is my covenant which I will make
Esa. 59.
with them says the Lord. My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which
I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the
Lord, even from henceforth for evermore. Even so we may assure our selves
that Christ will be present in our Church: sytting at the right hand of his
Father, and rayning in the myddle of his enemies.

But we must remember, that it is our parts to think upon our duty, and
calling, to retain steadfastly, the confession of sincere Doctrine, to bewtifie
Gods Church with good endeavor, life and manners. Then will he not fail us,
to pytche his Camp round about this Christian Castle, and faithful
Fortress, that no evil thing shall approach nigh unto it: he will be the master
and leader of his Sheep, that it shall not be drowned with the floodes of
persecutions. He will bless this our Country, that it shall continue another
Sarepta, and be an harbor for his servants. He will defend our gracious,
and godly Queen, with the custody of his holy Angels: he will adorn her
Nobilytie, with prudent counsayles and happy euentes. He will repress the
sedicious enterprises of diuelles, and wicked men: whose only bent and chief
desire is, all to rent the unity and concord of his Church, and to dysturbe
peace, and tranquillity in Commonweals. He will stir up daily, learned and
faithful Pastors, and Ministers that shall fight against Idolatry, and al
erroneous opinions: which Lurk and Pope mayntaine, with savage immanitie, and
cruelty, against the honor of Christ. And finally, he will abandon and remove
from us, sedicious wars, persecutions, famine, and contagious disseases: that
we having restfull and quiet minds, may wholly give our selves to prayer, and
all other holy exercises, yielding unto him only praise and thanks for the
myraculous propagation, and conservation of his Church.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by I. C. for Thomas Sturrup: dwellinge in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the George. Anno 1577.


