THE ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTVRE, Collected by HENRY WOTTON Knight, from the best
Authors and Examples.

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL. M.DC.XXIV.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall not need (like the most part of Writers) to celebrate the Subject
which I deliver. In that point I am at ease. For Architecture, can want no
commendation, where there are Noble Men, or Noble minds; I will therefore
spend this Preface, rather about those, from whom I have gathered my knowledge*
For I am but a gatherer and disposer of other men's stuff, at my best value.

Our principal Master is Vitruuius and so I shall often call him; who had this
felicity, that he wrote when the Roman Empire was near the pitch; Or at
least, when Augustus (who favored his endeauours) had some meaning (if he were
not mistaken) to bound the Monarchy* Tacit. lib. 1. Annal.
This I say was his good hap; For in growing and enlarging times, Arts are
commonly drowned in Action: But on the other side, it was in truth an
unhappiness, to express himself so ill, especially writing (as he did) in a
season of the ablest Pens; And his obscurity had this strange fortune; That
though he were best practiced, and best followed by his own Countrymen; yet
after the reviving and repolishing of good Literature, (which the combustions
and tumults of the middle Age had vnciuillized) he was best, or at least, first
understood by strangers: For of the Italians that took him in hand, Those that
were Gramarians seem to have wanted Mathematical knowledge; and the
Mathematicians perhaps wanted Gramer: till both were sufficiently conjoined, in
Leon-Batista Alberti the Florentine, whom I repute the first learned Architect,
beyond the Alps; But he studied more indeed to make himself an Author, then
to illustrate his Master. Therefore among his Commenters, I must (for my
private conceit) yield the chief praise unto the French, in Philander; and to
the high Germans, in Gualterus Riuius: who, besides his notes, has likewise
published the most elaborate translation, that I think is extant in any vulgar
speech of the world: though not without bewayling, now and then, some defect of
Artificial terms in his own* as I must likewise; For if the Saxon, (our
mother tongue) did complain; as justly (I doubt) in this point may the
Daughter: Languages, for the most part in terms of Art and Erudition,
retayning their original poverty, and rather growing rich and abundant, in
complementall phrases and such froth. Touching diverse modern men that have
written out of mere practice, I shall give them their due, upon occasion.

And now, after this short Censure of others, I would feign satisfy an
Objection or two, which seem to lie somewhat heavily upon my self; It will be
said that I handle an Art, no way suitable either to my employments, or to my
fortune. And so I shall stand charged, both with Intrusion, and with
Impertinency.

To the First I answer, that though by the ever acknowledged goodness of my
most dear and gracious SOVEREIGN; and by his long indulgent toleration of my
defects. I have borne abroad some part of his civil service; yet when I came
home, and was again resolved into mine own simplicity, I found it fitter for
my Pen (at least in this first public adventure) to deal with these plain
compilements, and tractable Materials; then with the Laberynthes and Mysteries
of Courts and States; And less presumption for me, who have long contemplated
a famous Republique, to write now of Architecture; then it was anciently for
Aristot. 2. lib. Politi. cap. 6.
Hippodamus the Milesian, to write of Republiques, who was himself but an
Architect.

To the Second, I must shrink up my shoulders, as I have learned abroad, and
confess indeed, that my fortune is very unable to exemplify, and actuate my
Speculations in this Art, which yet in truth, made me the rather even from my
very disabilitie, take encouragement to hope; that my present Labor, would
find the more favor with others, since it was undertaken for no man's sake,
less then mine own. And with that cofidence, I fell into these thoughts; Of
which, there were two ways to be delivered* The one Historical, by description
of the principal works, performed already in good part, by Giorgio Vassari in
the lives of Architects: The other Logical, by casting the rules and cautions
of this Art, into some comportable Method: whereof I have made choice; not
only as the shortest and most Elementall; but indeed as the soundest. For
though in practical knowledges, every complete example, may bear the credit
of a rule; yet peradventure rules should precead, that we may by them, be made
fit to judge of examples: Therefore to the purpose; for I will preface no
longer.

OF THE ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTVRE.
The I. part.
IN Architecture as in all other Operative Arts, the end must direct the
Operation.

The end is to build well.

Well building has three Conditions. Commodity, Firmenes, and Delight. A
common division among the Deliuerers of this Art, though I know not how, some
what misplaced by Vitruuius himself lib. 1. cap. 3. whom I shall be willinger to
follow, as a Master of Proportion, then of Method.

Now, For the attayning of these Intentions, we may consider the whole
Subject, under two general Heads.

The Seat, and the Work.

Therefore first touching Situation.

The Precepts thereunto belonging, do either concern the Total Posture, (as
I may term it) or the Placing of the Parts: whereof the first sort, howsoever
usually set down by Architects as a piece of their Profession: yet are in
truth borrowed, from other Learnings: there being between Arts and Sciences,
as well as between Men, a kind of good fellowship, and communication of their
Principles.

For you shall find some of them, to bemeerely Physical, touching the
quality and temper of the Air: which being a perpetual ambient, and
ingredient, and the defects thereof, incorrigible in single Habitations (which
I most intend) does in those respects, require the more exquisite caution; That
it be not too gross, nor too penetratiue; Not subject to any foggy
noysomnesse, from Fenns or Marshes near adjoining; nor too Mineral
exhalations, from the Soil it self. Not undigested, for want of Sun, Not
unexercised, for want of Wind: which were to live (as it were) in a Lake, or
standing Poole of Air, as Alberti the Florentin Architect, does ingeniously
compare it.

Some do rather seem a little Astrological, as when they warn us from Places
of malign Influence: where Earthquakes, Contagions, Prodigious Births, or the
like, are frequent without any evident cause: whereof the Consideration is
peradventure not altogether vain: Some are plainly Oeconomical; As that the
Seat be well watered, and well fewelled, That it be not of too steepie and
incommodious Access to the trouble both of friends and family. That it lie
not too far, from some nauigable River or Arm of the Sea, for more ease of
provision and such other Domestique notes.

Some again may be said to be Optical? Such I mean as concern the
Properties of a well chosen Prospect: which I will call the Royalty of Sight.
For as there is a Lordship (as it were) of the Feet, wherein the Master does
much joy when he walks about the Line of his own Possessions: So there is a
Lordship likewise of the Eye which being a raunging, and Imperious, and (I
might say) an usurping Sense, can endure no narrow circumscription; but must be
fed, both with extent and variety. Yet on the other side, I find vaste and
indefinite viewes which drown all apprehension of the uttermost Objects,
condemned, by good Authors, as if thereby some part of the pleasure (whereof we
speak) did perish. Lastly, I remember a private Caution, which I know not well
how to sort, unless I should call it Political. By no means, to build too
near a great Neighbor; which were in truth to be as unfortunately seated on
the earth, as Mercury is in the Heavens, for the most part, ever in
combustion, or obscurity, under brighter beams then his own.

From these several Knowledges as I have said, Ioannes Heurnius Instit:
Medicin: lib. 7. cap. 2.
and perhaps from some other do Architects derive their Doctrine about
election of Seats: wherein I have not been so severe, as a great Scholar of our
time, who precisely restrayneth a perfect Situation, at least for the maine
point of health, Ad locum contra quem Solradios suos fundit cum sub Ariete
oritur, That is, in a word he would have the first salutation of the Spring.
But such Notes as these, wheresoever we find them in grave or slight Authors,
are to my conceit rather wishes then Precepts; and in that quality, I will
pass them over. Yet I must withal say that in the seating of our selves
(which as a kind of Marriage to a Place) Builders should be as circumspect as
Wooers; lest when all is done that Doom befall us, Opidum quidem aedificatum
eleganter sed imprudenter positum.
which our Master does lay upon Mitylene: A Town in truth (says he) finely
built, but foolishly planted. And so much touching that, which I termed the
Total Posture.

The next in Order is the placing of the Parts; About which (to leave as little
as I may in my present labor, unto Fancy, which is wild and irregular) I
will propound a Rule of mine own Collection, upon which I fell in this manner.
I had noted, that all Art was then in truest perfection, when it might be
reduced to some natural Principle. For what are the most judicious Artisans
but the Mimiques of Nature? This led me to contemplate the Fabrique of our own
Bodies, wherein the High Architect of the world, had displaied such skill, as
did stupifie, all humane reason. There I found the Heart as the fountain of
Life placed about the Middle, for the more equal communication of the vital
spirits. The Eyes seated aloft, that they might describe the greater Circle
within their view. The Arms proiected on each side, for ease of reaching.
Briefly (not to loose our selves in this sweet speculation) it plainly
appears, as a Maxim drawn from the Divine light; That the Place of every
part, is to be determined by the Use.

So then, from natural structure, to proceed to Artificial; and in the rudest
things, to preserve some Image of the excellentest. Let all the principal
chambers of Delight, All Studies and Libraries, be toward the East: For the
Morning is a friend to the Muses. All Offices that require heat, as Kitchins,
Stillatories, Stoues, rooms for Baking, Brewing, Washing, or the like, would
be Meridionall. All that need a cool and fresh temper, as Cellers, Pantries,
Butteries, Granaries, to the North. To the same side likewise, all that are
appointed for gentle Motion, as Galleries, especially in warm Climes, or that
otherwise require a steadie and unvariable light, as Pinacothecia (says
Vitruuius) by which he intends, (if I may guess at his Greek, as we must
do often even at his Latin) certain Repositories for works of rarity in
Picture or other Arts, by the Italians called Studioli, which at any other
Quarter, where the course of the Sun does diuersifie the Shadows, would
loose much of their grace. And by this Rule having always regard to the Use,
any other Part may be fitly accommodated.

I must here not omit to note that the Ancient Grecians, and the Romans by
their example in their buildings abroad, where the Seat was free, did almost
Religiously situate the Front of their houses, toward the South; perhaps that
the Masters Eye, when he came home* might not be dazeled, or that being
illustrated, by the Sun, it might yield the more graceful Aspect; or some
such reason. But from this, the Modern Italians do vary* whereof I shall
speak more in another place. Let thus much suffice at the present for the
Position of the several Members, wherein must be had as our Author does often
insinuate, and especially lib. 6. cap. 10. a singular regard, to the nature of
the Region: Every Nation, being tied above al Rules whatsoever, to a
discretion, of providing against their own Inconveniences: And therefore a
good Parler in Egypt would perchance make a good Celler in England.

There now follows the second Branch of the general Section touching the
Work.

In the Work, I will first consider the principal parts, and afterward the
Accessorie, or Ornaments; And in the Principal, first the Preparation of the
Materials, and then the Disposition, which is the Form.

Now, concerning the Material part; Although surely, it cannot disgrace an
Architect, which does so well become a Philosopher, to look into the
properties of Stone and Wood: as that Fur Trees, Cypresses, Cedars, and such
other Aereall aspiring Plants, being by a kind of natural rigor (which in a
Man I would call pride) inflexible downwards are thereby fittest for Posts or
Pillars or such upright use; that on the other side, Oak, and the like true
hearty Timber being strong in all positions, may be better trusted in cross
and trauerse work, for Summers, or guirding and binding beams, as they term
them. And so likewise to observe of Stone, that some, are better within, and
other to bear Weather: Nay, to descend lower even to examine Sand and Lyme,
and Clay (of all which things Vitruuius has discoursed, without any daintines,
and the most of new Writers) I say though the Speculatiue part of such
knowledge be liberal: yet to redeem this Profession, and my present pains,
from indignity; I must here remember that to choose and sort the materials,
for every part of the Fabrique, is a Duty more proper to a second
Superintendent, over all the Under Artisans called (as I take it) by our
Author, Officinator lib. 6. cap. 11. and in that Place expressly
distinguished, from the Architect, whose glory does more consist, in the
Designement and Idea of the whole Work, and his truest ambition should be to
make the Form, which is the nobler Part (as it were) triumph over the Matter:
whereof I cannot but mention by the way, a foreign Pattern, namely the Church
of Santa Giustina in Padoua: In truth a sound piece of good Art, where the
Materials being but ordinary stone, without any garnishment of sculpture, do
yet ravish the Beholder, (and he knows not how) by a secret Harmony in the
Proportions. And this indeed is that end, at which in some degree, we should
aim even in the priuatest works: whereunto though I make haste, yet let me
first collect, a few of the least triuiall cautions, belonging to the Material
Provision.

Leon Batista Alberti, is so curious, as to wish all the Timber, cut out of the
same Forest, and all the Stone, out of the same Quarrie. Philibert del'Orme the
French Architect goes yet somewhat further, and would have the Lyme made of the
very same Stone, which we intend to employ in the Work; as belike imagining
that they will sympathize and join the better, by a kind of Original
kindred. But such conceits as these seem somewhat too fine among this Rubbage,
though I do not produce them in sport. For surely the like agreements of
nature, may have oftentimes a discreet application to Art. Always it must be
confessed, that to make Lyme without any great choice of refuse stuff, as we
commonly do, is an English error, of no small moment in our Buildings. Whereas
the Italians at this day, and much more the Ancients did burn their firmest
stone, and even fragments of Marble where it was copious, which in time became
almost Marble again, or at least of indissoluble duritie, as appears in the
standing Theaters. I must here not omit, while I am speaking of this part, a
certain form of Brick described by Daniele Barbaro Patriarch of Aquileia, in
the largest Edition of his Commentary upon Vitruuius. The Figure triangular,
every side a foot long, and some inch and a half thick, which he does commend
unto us for many good conditions: As that they are more commodious in the
management, of less expense, of fayrer show, adding much beauty and strength
to the Murall Angles, where they fall gracefully into an indented Work: so as
I should wonder that we have not taken them into use, being propounded by a
man of good authority in this knowledge; but that all Nations do start at
Novelties, and are indeed married to their own Moulds. Into this place might
aptly fall a doubt, which some have well moved; whether the ancient Italians did
burn their Brick or no; which a passage or two in Vitruuius has left
ambiguous. Surely where the Natural heat is strong enough, to supply the
Artificial, it were but a curious folly to multiply both Labor and Expense.
And it is besides very probable, that those Materials with a kindly and
temperate heat would prove fairer, smoother, and less distorted, then with a
violent: Only, they suffer two exceptions. First, that by such a gentle drying
much time will be lost which might otherwise be employed in compiling. Next,
That they will want a certain sucking and soaking Thirstinesse, or a fiery
appetite to drink in the Lime, which must knit the Fabrique. But this question
may be confined to the South, where there is more Sun and patience. I will
therefore not hinder my course, with this incident scruple, but close that part
which I have now in hand, about the Materials, with a principal caution: That
sufficient Stuff and Money be ever ready before we begin: For when we
build now a piece, and then another by Fits, the Work dries and sinkes
unequally, whereby the Walls grow full of Chinques, and Creuices; Therefore
such pawsings are well reproved by Palladio, lib. 1. cap. 1. and by all other.
And so having gleaned these few remembrances, touching the preparation of the
Matter, I may now proceed to the Disposition thereof, which must form the
Work. In the Form, as I did in the Seat, I will first consider the general
Figuration, and then the several Members.

Figures are either simple or Mixed. The simple be either Circular or Angular.
And of Circular, either Complete, or Deficient, as Ouals, with which kinds I
will be contented, though the Distribution might be more curious.

Now the exact Circle is in truth a Figure, which for our purpose has many fit
and eminent properties; as fitness, for Commodity and Receipt, being the most
capable; fitness for strength and duration, being the most united in his
parts; Fitness for beauty and delight, as imitating the celestial Orbs, and
the universal Form. And it seems, besides, to have the approbation of
Nature, when she works by Instinct, which is her secret School: For birds
do build their nests Spherically: But notwithstanding these Attributes, it is
in truth a very unprofitable Figure in private Fabriques, as being of allother
the most chargeable, and much room lost in the bending of the Walls, when it
comes to be divided: besides an ill distribution of light, except from the
Center of the Roof. So as anciently it was not usual, save in their Temples
and Amphi-Theaters, which needed no Compartitions. The Ouals and other
imperfect circular Forms, have the same exceptions, and less benefit of
capacity: So as there remaynes to be considered in this general survey of
Figures, the Angular, and the Mixed of both. Touching the Angular, it may
perchance sound somewhat strangely, but it is a true observation, that this Art
does neither love many Angles nor few. For first, the Triangle which has the
fewest sides and corners, is of all other the most condemned, as being indeed
both incapable and infirm (whereof the reason shall be afterward rendered) and
likewise vnresoluable into any other regular Form then it self, in the inward
Partitions.

As for Figures of five, six, seven, or more Angles; They are surely fitter for
Militar Architecture, where the Bulworks may be laid out at the Corners, and
the sides serve for Curtains, then for civil use; though I am not ignorant of
that famous Piece at Caprarola, belonging to the house of Farnese, cast by
Baroccio into the form of a Pentagone, with a Circle inscribed, where the
Architect did ingeniously wrestle with diverse inconveniences in disposing of
the Lights, and in saving the vacuities. But as designs of such nature do
more aim at Rarity, then Commodity: so for my part I had rather admire them,
then commend them.

These things considered, we are both by the Precepts and by the Practice of
the best Builders, to resolve upon Rectangular Squares, as a mean between too
few, and too many Angles; and through the equal inclination of the sides
(which make the right Angle) stronger then the Rhombe, or Losenge, or any other
irregular Square. But whether the exact Quadrat, or the long Square be the
better, I find not well determined, though in mine own conceit I must
prefer the latter, provided that the Length do not exceed the Latitude
above one third part, which would diminish the beauty of the Aspect, as shall
appear when I come to speak of Symmetry and Proportion.

Of mixed Figures, partly Circular, and partly Angular, I shall need to say
nothing; because having handled the simple already, the mixed according to
their composition, do participate of the same respects. Only against these,
there is a proper Objection, that they offend Uniformity: Whereof I am
therefore opportunely induced to say somewhat, as far as shall concern the
outward Aspect, which is now in Discourse.

In Architecture, there may seem to be two opposite affectations, Uniformity
and Variety, which yet will very well suffer a good reco^cilement, as we may
see in the great Pattern of Nature, to which I must often resort: For surely
there can be no Structure, more uniform, then our Bodies in the whole
Figuration: Each side, agreeing with the other, both in the number, in the
quality, and in the measure of the Parts: And yet some are round, as the
Arms, some flat, as the Hands, some prominent, and some more retired: So as
upon the Matter, we see that Diversity does not destroy Uniformity, and that
the Limbs of a noble Fabrique, may be correspondent enough, though they be
various; Provided always, that we do not run into certain extrauagant
Inventions, whereof I shall speak more largely, when I come to the parting and
casting of the whole Work. We ought likewise to avoid Enormous heights of
six or seven Stories, as well as irregular Forms; and the contrary fault of
low-distended Fronts, is as unseemly: Or again, when the Face of the
Building, is narrow and the Flank deep; To all which extremes, some
particular Nations, or Towns, are subject, whose Names may be ciuilly spared:
And so much for the general Figuration, or Aspect of the Work.

Now concerning the Parts in Seueraltie. All the parts of every Fabrique, may
be comprised under five Heads, which Division I receive from Batista Alberti,
to do him right. And they be these.

The Foundation. The Walls. The Appertions or Ouertures. The Comparti^ion. And
the Cover.
About all which I purpose to gather the principal Cautions, and as I pass
along, I will touch also the natural Reasons of Art, that my discourse may be
the less Mechanical.

First then concerning the Foundation, which requires the exactest care; For
if that happen to dance, it will mar all the mirth in the House: Therefore,
that we may found our Habitation firmly, we must first examine the Bed of
Earth (as I may term it,) upon which we will Build; and then the
vnderfillings, or Substruction, as the Ancients did call it: For the former,
we have a general precept in Vitruuius twice precisely repeated by him, as a
point indeed of main consequence, first lib. 1. cap. 5. And again more fitly
lib. 3. cap. 3. in these words as Philander does well correct the vulgar Copies.

Substructionis Fundationes fodiantur (says he) si queant inueniri adsolidum,
and insolido. By which words I conceive him to commend unto us, not only, a
diligent, but even a jealous examination what the Soil will bear: aduising
us, not to rest upon any appearing Soliditie, unless the whole Mould through
which we cut, have likewise been solid; But how deep we should go in this
search, he has no where to my remembrance determined, as perhaps depending
more upon Discretion* then Regularitie, according to the weight of the Work;
yet Andrea Palla^dio has fairly adventured to reduce it into Rule: Allowing
for that Ca^uazione (as he calls it) a sixth part of the height of the whole
Fabrique, Vnderdiging, or Hollowing of the Earth.
vnles^ the Cellers be under ground, in which case he would have us, (as it
should seem) to sound somewhat lower.

Some Italians do prescribe, that when they have chosen the Floor, or Plot,
and laid out the Limits of the Work, we should first of all Dig Wels and
Cesternes, and other vnderconducts and conueiances, for the Suillage of the
House, whence may arise a double benefit, for both the Nature of the Mould or
Soil, would thereby be safely searched, and moreover those open vents, will
serve to discharge such Vapors, as having otherwise no issu^ might
peradventure shake the Building. This is enough for the natural Grounding,
which though it be not a part of the solid Fabrique, yet here was the fittest
place to handle it.

There follows the Substruction, or Groundwork of the whole Edifice, which
must sustain the Walls; and this is a kind of Artificial foundation, as the
other was Natural. About which these are the chief Remembrances. First, that
the bottom be precisely level, where the Italians therefore commonly lay a
platform of good Board; Then that the lowest Ledge or Row be merely of Stone,
and the broader the better, closely laid without Mortar, which is a general
caution for all parts in Building, that are contiguous to Board or Timber,
because Lime amd Wood are insociable, and if any where unfit confiners, then
most especially in the Foundation. Thirdly, that the breadth of the Substruction
be at least double to the insistent Wall, and more or less, as the weight of
the Fabrique shall require; for as I must again repeat, Discretion may be
freer then Art. Lastly, I find in some a curious precept, that the Materials
below, be laid as they grew in the Quarrie, supposing them belike to have most
strength in their Natural and Habitual Posture. For as Philippe de l'Orme
observes, the breaking or yielding of a stone in this part, but the breadth of
the back of a knife, will make a Cleft of more then half a foot in the
Fabrique aloft, So important are Fundamental errors. Among which notes I have
said nothing of Pallification, or Pyling of the Groundplot, commanded by
Vitruuius, when we build upon a moist or marshy soil, because that were an
error in the first choice. And therefore all Seats that must use such provision
below (as Venice for an eminent example) would perhaps upon good enquiry, be
found to have been at first chosen by the counsel of Necessity.

Now the Foundation being searched, and the Substruction laid, we must next
speak of the Walls.

Walls are either entire and continual, or intermitted; and the Intermissions
be either Pillars or Pylasters; for here I had rather handle them, then as some
others do, among Ornaments.

The entire Muring is by Writers diversely distinguished: By some, according to
the quality of the Materials, as either Stone or Brick, etc. where, by the way,
let me note, that to build Walls and greater Works of Flint, whereof we want
not example in our Island, and particularly in the Province of Kent, was (as I
conceive) merely unknown to the Ancients, who observing in that Material, a
kind of Metalicall Nature, or at least a Fusibility, seem to have resolved it
into nobler use; an Art now utterly lost, or perchance kept up by a few
Chymicks. Some again do not so much consider the quality, as the Position of
the said Materials: As when Brick or squared stones are laid in their lengths
with sides and heads together, or their points conjoined like a Networke (for
so Vitruuius does call it reticulatum opus) of familiar use (as it should
seem) in his Age, though afterward grown out of request, even perhaps for
that subtle speculation which he himself touches; because so laid, they are
more apt in swagging down, to pierce with their points, then in the jacent
Posture, and so to creuice the Wall: But to leave such cares to the meaner
Artificers, the more essential are these.

That the Walls be most exactly perpendicular to the Groundwork: for the
right Angle (thereon depending) is the true cause of all Stability; both in
Artificial and Natural positions; A man likewise standing firmest, when he
stands vprightest. That the massiest and heauiest Materials be the lowest, as
fitter to bear, then to be borne. That the Work as it rises, diminish in
thickness proportionally, for ease both of weight, and of expense. That
certain courses or Ledges of more strength then the rest, be interlayed like
Bones, to sustain the Fabrique from total ruin, if the under parts should
decay. Lastly, that the Angles be firmly bound, which are the Nerves of the
whole Edifice, and therefore are commonly fortified by the Italians, even in
their Brick buildings, on each side of the corners, with well squared stone,
yielding both strength and grace And so much touching the entire or solid Wall.

The intermissions (as has been said) are either by Pillars, or Pylasters.

Pillars which we may likewise call Columns (for the word among Artificers is
almost naturallized) I could distinguish into Simple and Compounded. But (to
tread the beaten and plainest way) there are five Orders of Pillars, according
to their dignity and perfection, thus marshalled: The Tuscan. The Dorique. The
Ionique. The Corinthian.


And the Compound Order, or as some call it the Roman, others more generally
the Italian.

In which five Orders I will first consider their Communities, and then their
Proprieties.

Their Communities (as far as I observe) are principally three. First, they
are all Round; for though some conceive Columna Atticurges mentioned by
Vitruuius, lib. 3. cap. 3. to have been a squared Pillar, yet we must pass
it over as irregular, never received among these Orders, no more then certain
other licentious inventions, of Wreathed, and Vined, and Figured Columns,
which our Author himself condemns, being in his whole Book a professed
enemy to Fancies.

Secondly, they are all Diminished, or Contracted insensibly, more or less,
according to the proportion of their heights, from one third part of the whole
Shaft upwards, which Philander does prescribe by his own precise measuring of
the Ancient remainders, as the most graceful Diminution. And here I must take
leave to blame a practice grown (I know not how) in certain places too
familiar, of making Pillars swell in the middle, as if they were sick of some
Tympany, or Dropsy, without any Authentic Pattern or Rule, to my knowledge,
and unseemly to the very judgment of sight. True it is that in Vitruuius,
lib. 3. cap. 2. we find these words, De adiectione, quae adijcitur in medijs
Columnis, quaa apud Grecos (...) appellatur, in extremo erit formatio eius;
which passage, seems to have given some coutenance to this error. But of the
promise there made, as of diverse other elsewhere, our Master has failed us,
either by slip of memory, or injury of time, and so we are left in the dark.
Always sure I am, that besides the authority of example which it wants, It
is likewise contrary to the Original and Natural Type, in Trees, which at
first was imitated in Pillars, as Vitruuius himself observes, lib. 5. cap. 1.
For who ever saw any Cypress, or Pine, (which are there alleged) small below
and above, and tumerous in the middle, unless it were some diseased Plant, as
Nature (though otherwise the comliest Mistress) has now and then her
deformities and Irregularities.

Thirdly, they have all their Vndersettings, or Pedistals, in height a third
part of the whole Column, comprehending the Base and Capital; and their upper
Adjuncts, as Architraue, Frize, and Cornice, a fourth part of the said Pillar;
which rule of singular use and facility I find settled by Iacobo Baroccio, and
hold him a more credible Author, as a man that most intended this piece, then
any that vary from him in those Dimentions.

These are their most considerable Communities and agreements.

Their Proprieties or Distinctions will best appear by some reasonable
description of them all, together with their Architraues, Frizes, and Cornices,
as they are usually handled.

First therefore the Tuscan is a plain, massy, rural Pillar, resembling some
sturdy well-limmed Labourer, homely clad, in which kind of comparisons
Vitruuius himself seems to take pleasure, lib. 4. cap. 1. The length thereof
shall be six Diameters, of the grossest of the Pillar below. Of all
proportions, in truth, the most natural; For our Author tells us, lib. 3. cap.
1. that the foot of a man is the sixth part of his body in ordinary measure,
and Man himself, according to the saying of Protagoras (which Aristotle does
somewhere vouchsafe to celebrate) is (...): as it were the Prototype of all
exact Symmetrie, which we have had other occasion to touch before: This Column
I have by good warrant called Rural, Vitru. cap. 2. lib. 3. And therefore we
need not consider his rank among the rest. The distance or Intercolumniation
(which word Artificers do usually borrow) may be near four of his own
Diameters, because the Materials commonly laid over this Pillar, were rather of
wood then stone; through the lightness whereof the Architraue could not
suffer, though thinnely supported, nor the Column it self being so
substantial. The Contraction aloft shall be (according to the most received
practice) one fourth part of his thickness below. To conclude, (for I intend
only as much as shall serve for a due Distinguishment, and not to delineate
every petty member) the Tuscan is of all the rudest Pillar, and his principal
Character Simplicity.

The Dorique Order is the grauest that has been received into civil use,
preserving, in comparison of those that follow, a more Masculine Aspect, and
little trimmer then the Tuscan that went before, save a sober garnishment now
and then of Lions heads in the Cornice, and of Triglyphs and Metopes always in
the Frize. Sometimes likewise, but rarely, chaneled, and a little slight
sculpture about the Hypotrachelion, or Neck under the Capital. The length,
seven Diameters. His rank or degree, is the lowest by all Congruity, as being
more massy then the other three, and consequently abler to support. The
Intercolumniation, thrice as much as his thickness below. The Contraction
aloft, one fifth of the same measure. To discern him, will be a piece rather
of good Heraldry, then of Architecture: For he is best known by his place,
when he is in company, and by the peculiar ornament of his Frize (before
mentioned) when he is alone.

The Ionique Order does represent a kind of Feminine slenderness, yet says
Vitruuius, not like a light Housewife, but in a decent dressing, has much of
the Matrone. The length eight Diameters. In degree as in substantialnesse, next
above the Dorique, sustayning the third, and adorning the second Story. The
Intercolumniation two of his own Diameters. The Contraction one sixth part.
Best known by his trimmings, for the body of this Column is perpetually
chaneled, like a thick plighted Gown. The Capital dressed on each side, not
much unlike women's Wires, in a spirall wreathing, which they call the Ionian
Voluta. The Cornice indented. The Frize swelling like a pillow; And therefore
by Vitruuius, not vnelegantly termed Puluinata. These are his best Characters.

The Corinthian, is a Column, laciuiously decked like a Curtezane, and therein
much participating (as all Inventions do) of the place where they were first
borne: Corinthe having been without controversy one of the wantonest Towns in
the world. This Order is of nine Diameters. His degree, one Stage above the
Ionique, and always the highest of the simple Orders. The Intercolumniation
two of his Diameters, and a fourth part more, which is of all other the
comeliest distance. The Contraction one seventh Part. In the Cornice both
Dentelli and Modiglioni. The Frize, Our Artizans call them Teeth and Cartonzes.
adorned with all kinds of Figures and various Compartments at Pleasure. The
Capital, cut into the beautifullest leaf, that Nature does yield, which
surely next the Aconitum Pardalianches (rejected perchance as an ominous Plant)
is the Acanthus or Branca Vrsina though Vitruuius do impute the choice thereof
unto Chance, and we must be contented to believe him: In short, As Plainness
did Charactarize the Tuscan, so must Delicacie and Variety the Corinthian
Pillar, besides the height of his Rank.

The last is the Compounded Order: His name being a brief of his Nature. For
this Pillar is nothing in effect, but a Medlie, or an Amasse of all the
precedent Ornaments, making a new kind, by stealth, and though the most richly
tricked, yet the poorest in this, that he is a borrower of all his Beauty. His
length, (that he may have somewhat of his own) shall be of ten Diameters. His
degree should, no doubt, be the highest by reasons before yielded. But few
Palaces Ancient or Modern exceed the third of the Civil Orders. The
Intercolumniation, but a Diameter and an half, or always somewhat less then
two. The Contraction of this Pillar must be one eight Part less above then
below. To know him will be easy by the very mixture of his Ornaments, and
Clothing.

And so much touching the five Orders of Columns, which I will conclude with
two or three, not impertinent Cautions:

First, that where more of these Orders then one, shall be set in several
Stories or Contignations, there must be an exquisite care, to place the
Columns precisely, one over another, that so, the solid may answer to the
solid, and the vacuities to the vacuities, as well for Beauty, as strength of
the Fabrique: And by this Caution the Consequence is plain, that when we
speak of the Intercolumniation or distance, which is due to each Order, we
mean in a Dorique, Ionicall, Corinthian Porch, or Cloister, or the like of one
Contignation, and not in Storied buildings.

Secondly, let the Columns above be a forth part less then those below, says
Vitruuius, lib. 5. cap. 1. A strange Precept, in my opinion, and so strange,
that peradventure it were more suitable, even to his own Principles, to make
them rather a fourth Part greater, For lib. 3. cap. 2. where our Master
handles the Contractions of Pillars, we have an Optique Rule, that the higher
they are, the less should be always their diminution aloft, because the Eye
it self, does naturally contract all Objects more or less, according to the
Distance; which consideration, may, at first sight, seem to have been
forgotten in the Caution we have now given; but Vitruuius (the best
Interpreter of himself) has in the same place of his fifth Book, well
acquitted his memory by these words: Columnae superiores quarta part minores,
quam inferiores, sunt constituendae; propterea quod, operi ferendo quaesunt
inferiora, firmiora esse debent; preferring like a wise Mechanic, the natural
Reason, before the Mathematical, and sensible conceits before abstracted. And
yet lib. 4. cap. 4. he seems again, to affect Subtlety, allowing pillars
the more they are chaneled, to be the more slender; because while our Eye
(says he) does as it were distinctly measure, the eminent and the hollowed
Parts, the Total Object appears the bigger, and so as much as those
excauations, do subtract, is supplied by a Fallacy of the Sight: But here me
thinks, our Master should likewise have rather considered, the natural
Inconvenience; for though Pillars by chaneling, be seemingly engrossed to our
Sight, yet they are truly weakened in themselves; and therefore ought
perchance in sound reason not to be the more slender, but the more Corpulent,
unless apparances preponder truths, but Contra Magistrum, non est disputandum.

A third Caution shall be that all the proiected or Iutting Parts (as they are
termed) be very moderate, especially, the Cornices of the lower Orders, for
whilst some think to ^iue them, a beautiful and royal Aspect, by their
largeness, they sometimes hinder both the Light within, (whereof I shall
speak more in due place) and likewise detract much from the view of the Front
without, as well appears in one of the principal Fabriques at Venice, namely
the Palace, of the Duke Grimani on the Canal Grande, which by this magnificent
error, is somewhat disgraced: I need now say no more concerning Columns and
their Adjuncts, about which Architects make such a noise in their Books, as if
the very terms of Architraues, and Frizes, and Cornices, and the like, were
enough to graduate a Master of this Art; yet let me before I pass to other
matter, prevent a familiar Objection; It will perchance be said, that all this
Doctrine touching the five Orders, were fitter for the Quarries of Asia which
yielded 127 Columns of 60 Foot high, to the Ephesian Temple, or for Numidia
where Marbles abound; then for the Spirits of England, who must be contented
with more ignoble Materials: To which I answer, that this need not discourage
us: For I have often at Venice viewed with much pleasure, an Atrium Graecum (we
may translate it an Anti porch, after the Greek manner) raised by Andrea
Palladio, upon eight Columns of the Compounded Order; The Bases of Stone,
without Pedistals, The shafts or Bodies, of mere Brick; three foot and an
half thick in the Diameter below, and consequently thirty five foot high, as
himself has described them in his second Book; Then which, mine Eye, has
never yet beheld any Columns, more stately of Stone or Marble; For the Bricks,
having first been formed in a Circular Mould, and then cut before their
burning into four quarters or more, the sides afterward join so closely, and
the points concenter so exactly, that the Pillars appear one entire Piece;
which short description, I could not omit, that thereby may appear, how in
truth we want rather Art then stuff, to satisfy our greatest Fancies.

After Pillars, the next in my distribution, are Pylasters, mentioned by
Vitruuius, lib. 5. cap. 1. and scant any where else under the name of
Parastates, as Philander conceiueth, which Grammatical point (though perchance
not very clear) I am contented to examine no farther. Always, what we mean
by the thing it self, is plain enough in our own vulgar; Touching which, I
will briefly collect the most considerable notes.

Pylasters, must not be too tall and slender, least they resemble Pillars, nor
too Dwarfish and gross, least they imitate the Piles or Peers of Bridges:
Smoothness does not so naturally become them, as a Rusticke Superficies, for
they aim more at State and Srength, then Elegancie. In private Buildings they
ought not to be narrower, then one Third, nor broader then two parts of the
whole Vacuity, between Pylaster and Pylaster; but to those that stand at the
Corners, may be allowed a little more Latitude by discretion, for strength of
the Angles: In Theaters and Amphi-theaters, and such weighty Works, Palladio
observes them, to have been as broad as the half, and now and then as the
whole Vacuitie: He notes likewise (and others consent with him) that their
true Proportion, should be an exact Square; But for lessening of expense, and
enlarging of room, they are commonly narrower in Flank, then in Front: Their
principal Grace does consist in half or whole Pillars, applied unto them; in
which case it is well noted by Authors, that the Columns may be allowed
somewhat above their ordinary length, because they lean unto so good
Supporters. And thus much shall sufice touching Pilasters, which is a cheap,
and a strong, and a noble kind of Structure.

Now because they are oftener, both for Beauty and Majesty, found Arched, then
otherwise; I am here orderly led to speak of Arches, and under the same head
of Vaults: for an Arch is nothing indeed but a contracted Vault, and a Vault is
but a dilated Arch: Therefore to handle this Piece both compendiously, and
fundamentally, I will resolve the whole business into a few Theoremes.

Theoreme 1.
All solid Materials free from impediment, do descend perpendicularly
downwards, because ponderosity is a natural inclination to the Center of the
World, and Nature performs her motions by the shortest lines.

Theoreme 2.
Brickes molded in their ordinary Rectangular form, if they shall be laid one
by another in a level row, between any Supporters sustayning the two ends,
then all the pieces between, will necessarily sink, even by their own
natural Gravity, and much more if they suffer any depression by other weight
above them, because their sides being parallel* they have room to descend
perpendicularly, without impeachment, according to the former Theoreme*
Therefore to make them stand, we must either change their Posture, or their
Figure, or both.

Theorme 3.
If Brickes molded, or Stones squared Cuncatim (that is, Wedge wise, broader
above then below) shall be laid in a Row level, with their ends supported, as
in the precedent Theoreme, pointing all to one Center; then none of the pieces
between can sink till the Supporters give way, because they want room in
that Figuration, to descend perpendicularly. But this is yet a weak piece of
Structure, because the Supporters are subject to much impulsion, especially if
the line be long; for which reason this Form is seldom used, but over
Windows, or narrow Doors. Therefore to fortify the Work as in this third
Theoreme we have supposed the Figure of all the Materials different from those
in the second: So likewise we must now change the Posture, as will appear in
the Theoreme following.

Theoreme 4.
If the Materials figured as before Wedge-wise, shall not be disposed leuelly,
but in form of some Arch, or portion of a Circle, pointing all to the same
Center: In this case neither the pieces of the said Arch, can sink downwards,
through want of room to descend By the first Theor.
perpendicularly: Nor the Supporters or Butments (as they are termed) of the
said Arch can suffer so much violence, as in the precedent flat Posture, for
the roundnesse will always make the Incumbent weight, rather to rest upon the
Supporters, then to shoue them* whence may be drawn an evident Corolary; that
the safest of all Arches is the Semicircular, and of all Vaults the Hemisphere,
though not absolutely exempted from some natural weakness, Which is the sole
prerogative of perpendicular lines and ^ight Angles.
as Barnardino Baldi Abbot of Guastalla, in his Commentary upon Aristotle's
Mechaniques, does very well prove, where let me note by the way, that when any
thing is Mathematically demonstrated weak, it is much more Mechanically weak:
Errors ever occurring more easily in the management of Gross Materials, then
Lineall Designs.

Theoreme 5.
As Semicircular Arches, or Hemisphericall Vaults, being raised upon the total
Diameter, be of all other the roundest, and consequently the securest, by the
precedent Theoreme: So those are the gracefullest, which keeping precisely the
same height, shall yet be distended, one fourteenth part longer then the said
entire Diameter; which addition of distent will confer much to their Beauty,
and detract but little from their Srength.

This observation I find in Leon-Batista Alberti; But the practice how to
preserve the same height, and yet distend the Arms or ends of the Arch, is in
Albert Durers Geometry, who taught the Italians many an excellent Line, of
great use in this Art.

Upon these five Theoremes, all the skill of Arching and Vaulting is grounded:
As for those Arches, which our Artizans call of the third and fourth point; And
the Tuscan writers diterzo, and di quarto acuto, because they always concur
in an acute Angle, and do spring from division of the Diameter, into three,
four, or more parts at pleasure; I say, such as these, both for the natural
imbecility of the sharp Angle it self, and likewise for their very
Uncomeliness, ought to be exiled from judicious eyes, and left to their first
inuentors, the Goths or Lumbards, amongst other Relics of that barbarous Age.

Thus of my first Partition of the parts of every Fabrique, into five Heads,
having gone through the two former, and been incidently carried into this last
doctrine touching Arches and Vaults. The next now in order are the Apertions;
under which term I do comprehend Doors, Windows, Staire-cases, Chimnies,
or other Conducts: In short, all Inlets or Outlets; To which belong two
general Cautions.

First, That they be as few in number, and as moderate in Dimension, as may
possibly consist with other due respects: for in a word, all Openings are
Weaknings.

Secondly, That they do not approach too near the Angles of the Walls; for it
were indeed a most essential Solecisme to weaken that part, which must
strengthen all the rest: A precept well recorded, but ill practiced by the
Italians themselves, perticularly at Venice, where I have observed diverse
Pergoli, or Meniana (as Vitruuius seems to call them, which are certain
ballised out-standings to satisfy curiosity of sight) very dangerously set
forth, upon the very point it self, of the Murall Angle.

Now, Albeit I make haste, to the casting and comparting of the whole Work,
(being indeed the very Definitive Sum of this Art, to distribute usefully
and gracefully a well chosen Plot) yet I will first under their several Heads,
collect briefly some of the choicest notes belonging to these particular
Ouertures.

Of Doors and Windows.
THese In^lets of Men and of Light, I couple together, because I find their due
Dimensions, brought under one Rule, by Leone Alberti (a learned Searcher) who
from the School of Pythagoras (where it was a fundamental Maxim, that the
Images of all things are latent in Numbers) does determine the comeliest
Proportion, between breadths and heights; Reducing Symmetrie to Symphonie, and
the harmony of Sound, to a kind of harmony in Sight, after this manner: The
two principal Consonances, that most ravish the Ear, are by consent of all
Nature, the fifth, and the Octaue; whereof the first rises radically, from the
proportion, between two and three. The other from the double Interualle,
between One and Two, or between Two and Four etc. Now if we shall transport
these proportions, from Audible to visible Objects; and apply them as they
shall fall fittest (the nature of the Place considered) Namely in some
Windows, and Doors, the Symmetrie of Two to Three, in their Breadth and
Length; In others the double as aforesaid; There will indubitably result from
either, a graceful and harmonious contentment, to the Eye; Which speculation
though it may appear unto vulgar Artizans, perhaps too subtle, and too
sublime, yet we must remember, that Vitruuius himself does determine many
things in his profession; by Musical grounds, and much commends in an
Architect, a Philosophical Spirit; that is, he would have him (as I conceive
it) to be no superficial, and floating Artificer; but a Diuer into Causes, and
into the Mysteries of Proportion; Of the Ornaments, belonging both to Doors
and Windows, I shall speak in other place; But let me here add one
observation; That our Master (as appears by diverse passages, and particularly
lib. 6. cap. 9) seems to have been an extreme Lover of Luminous Rooms; And
indeed I must confess that a Frank Light, can misbecome noe A Edifice
whatsoever, Temples only excepted; which were anciently dark, as they are
likewise at this day in some Proportion. Devotion more requiring collected then
defused Spirits. Lum en est diffusiuum sui and alieni*
Yet on the other side we must take heed to make a House (though but for
civil use) all Eyes, like Argus; which in Northern Climes would be too could,
In Southern, too hot: And therefore the matter indeed imports more then a
merry comparison. Besides, There is no part of Structure either more
expencefull, then Windows; or more ruinous; not only for that vulgar reason,
as being exposed to all violence of weather; but because consisting of so
different and unsociable pieces, as Wood, Iron, Lead, and Glass, and those
small and weak, they are easily shaken; I must likewise remember one thing,
(though it be but a Grammatical note) touching Doors. Some were Fores, and
Some were Valuae. Those (as the very word may seem to import) did open
outward, These inwards; And were commonly of two Leaves or Panes, (as we call
them) thereby requiring indeed, a lesser Circuit in their unfolding; And
therefore much in use among Italians at this day; But I must charge them with
an Imperfection* for though they let in as well as the former, yet they keep
out worse.

Of Staire-cases.
TO make a complete Staire-case, is a curious piece of Architecture: The
vulgar Cautions are these.

That it have a very liberal Light, against all Casualtie of Slippes, and
Falls.

That the space above the Head, be large and Airy, which the Italians use to
call Un bel^sfogolo, as it were good Ventilation, because a man does spend much
breath in mounting.

That the Halfe-paces be well distributed, at competent distances, for
reposing on the way.

That to avoid Encounters, and besides to gratify the beholder, the whole
Staire-case have no nigard Latitude, that is, for the principal Ascent, at
least ten foot in Royal Buildings.

That the breadth of every single Step or Staire be never less then one
foot, nor more then eighteen inches.

That they exceed by no means half a foot in their height or thickness; for
our Legs do labor more in Elevation, then in Distention: These I say are
familiar remembrances, to which let meadde;

That the steps be laid where they join Con un tantino di scarpa; we may
translate it somewhat sloaping, that so the foot may in a sort both ascend and
descend together, which though observed by few, is a secret and delicate
deception of the pains in mounting.

Lastly, to reduce this doctrine to some Natural, or at least Mathematical
ground, (our Master, as we see, lib. 9. cap. 2.) borrows those proportions,
that make the sides of a Rectangular Triangle, which the Ancient School did
express in lowest terms, by the numbers of 3. 4. and 5. That is, Three for
the Perpendicular, from the Staire-head to the ground; Four for the
Ground-line it self, or Recession from the wall; And Five for the whole
Inclination or slopenesse in the ascent, which proportion, says he, will make
Temperatas graduum librationes. Hitherto of Staire-cases which are direct:
There are likewise Spirall, or Cockle stairs, either Circular, or Ouall, and
sometimes running about a Pillar, sometimes vacant, wherein Palladio, (A man in
this point of singular felicity) was wont to divide the Diameter, of the first
sort into three parts, yielding one to the Pillar, and two to the Steps; Of the
second into four, whereof he gave two to the Stairs, and two to the Vacuitie,
which had all their light from above, And this in exact Ouals, is a
Masterpiece.

OF CHIMNIES.
IN the present business, Italians (who make very frugall fires, are perchance
not the best Counselors.) Therefore from them we may better learn, both how
to raise fair Mantels within the rooms, and how to disguise gracefully the
shafts of Chimnies abroad (as they use) in sundry forms (which I shall handle
in the latter part of my labor) and the rest I will extract from Philippe de
l' Orme: In this part of his Work more diligent, then in any other, or, to do
him right, then any man else.

First, he observes very soberly, that who in the disposition of any Building
will consider the nature of the Region, and the Winds that ordinarily blow,
from this, or that Quarter; might so cast the rooms, which shall most need
fire; that he should little fear the incommodity of Smoke, and therefore he
thinks, that inconvenience, for the most part to proceed from some
inconsiderate beginning. Or if the error lay not in the Disposition but in the
Structure it self; then he makes a Logical enquiry* That either the Wind is
too much let in above, at the mouth of the Shafte, or the Smoke stifeled below;
If none of these, Then there is a repulsion of the Fume, by some higher Hill or
Fabrique, that shall ouertoppe the Chimney and work the former effect: If
likewise not this, Then he concludes, that the Room which is infested, must
be necessarily both little and close, so as the smoke cannot issue by a
natural Principle, wanting a succession and supply of new Air.

Now, In these cases he suggesteth diverse Artificial remedies; of which I will
allow one, a little Description, because it sauoureth of Philosophy, and was
touched by Vitruuius himself, lib. 1 cap. 6. but by this man ingeniously
applied to the present use: He will have us provide two hollow brass Balls
of reasonable capacity, with little holes open in both, for reception of
Water, when the Air shall be first sucked out; One of these we must place with
the hole upwards, upon an iron Wire, that shall trauerse the Chimney, a little
above the Mantell, at the ordinary height of the sharpest heat or flames,
whereof the water within being rarefied, and by rarifaction resolved into
Wind, will break out, and so force up the smoke, which otherwise might linger
in the Tunnell, by the way, and oftentimes reuert; With the other, (says he)
we may supply the place of the former, when it is exhausted, or for a need
blow the Fire in the mean while; Which Invention I have interposed for some
little intertainement of the Reader; I will conclude with a note from Palladio,
who observes that the Ancients did warm their Rooms, with certain secret
Pipes that came through the Walls, transporting heat (as I conceive it) to
sundry parts of the House, from one common Furnace; I am ready to baptize them
Caliducts, as well as they are termed Venti-ducts, and Aquae-ducts that convey
Wind and Water; which whether it were a custom or a delicacie, was surely
both for thrift, and for use, far beyond the German Stoues; And I should
prefer it likewise before our own fashion, if the very sight of a fire, did
not add to the Room a kind of Reputation, (...). Hom. Epig.
as old Homer does teach us in a verse, sufficient to prove that himself was
not blind, as some would lay to his charge.

Touching Conducts for the Suillage and other necessities of the House, (which
how base soever in use, yet for health of the Inhabitants, are as considerable,
and perhaps more then the rest) I find in our Authors, this Counsel; That Art
should imitate Nature, in those ignoble conueyances; and separate them from
Sight, (where there wants a running Water) into the most remote, and lowest,
and thickest part of the Foundation: with secret vents passing up through the
Walls like a Tunnell to the wild Air aloft: which all Italian Artizans
commend for the discharge of noisome vapors, though elsewhere to my knowledge
little practiced.

Thus having considered the precedent Appertions, or Ouertures, in seueraltie
according to their particular Requisites, I am now come to the casting and
Contexture of the whole Work, comprehended under the term of Compartition:
Into which (being the mainest piece) I cannot enter without a few general
Precautions, as I have done in other Parts.

First therefore, Let no man that intends to build, setle his Fancy upon a
draugh^ of the Work in paper, how exactly soever measured, or neately set off
in perspectiue; And much less upon a bare Plant thereof, as they call the
Schiographia or Ground lines; without a Model or Type of the whole Structure,
and of every parcel and Partition in Pastboord or Wood.

Next that the said Model be as plain as may be, without colors or other
beautifying, lest the pleasure of the Eye preoccupate the Judgment; which
advise omited by the Italian Architects, I find in Philippe de l' Orme, and
therefore (though France be not the Theater of best Buildings) it did merit
some mention of his name.

Lastly, the bigger that this Type be, it is still the better, not that I will
persuade a man to such an enormity, as that Model made by Antonio Labaco, of
Saint Peter's Church in Rome, containing 22. foot in length, 16. in breadth, and
13 in height, and costing 4184. crowns: The price in truth of a reasonable
Chapel: Yet in a Fabrique of some 40. or 50* thousand pounds charge, I wish
30. pounds at least laid out before hand in an exact Model; for a little
misery in the Premises* may easily breed some absurdity of greater charge, in
the Con^lusion.

Now, after these premonishments, I will come to the Comparti^ion it self; By
which, the Authors of this Art (as has been touched before) do understand, a
graceful and useful distribution, of the whole Ground-plot both for rooms of
Office, and of Reception or Entertainment, as far as the Capacity thereof,
and the nature of the Country will comport. Which circumstances in the present
Subject, are all of maine consideration, and might yield more discourse then an
Elementall Rapsodie will permit. Therefore (to anatomize briefly this
Definition) the Gracefulness (whereof we speak) will consist in double
Analogy, or correspondencie. First, between the Parts and the Whole, whereby a
great Fabrique should have great Partitions, great Lights, great Entrances,
great Pillars or Pylasters; In sum, all the Members great. The next between
the Parts themselves, not only, considering their Breadths, and Lengths, as
before, when we spoke of Doors and Windows; but here likewise enters a third
respect of Height, a point (I must confess) hardly reduceable to any general
precept.

True it is, that the Ancients did determine the Longitude of all Rooms, which
were longer then broad, by the double of their Latitude, Vitruuius lib. 6.
cap. 5. And the Height by the half of the breadth and length summed together
But when the Room was precisely square, they made the Height half as much more
as the Latitude; which Dimensions the modern Architects have taken leave to
vary upon discretion: Sometimes squaring the Latitude, and then making the
Diagoniall or overthwart Line, from Angle to Angle, of the said Square, the
measure of the Height sometimes more, but seldom lower then the full breadth
it self; which boldness of quitting the old Proportions, some attribute first
to Michael Angelo da Buonaroti, perchance upon the credit he had before
gotten, in two other Arts.

The second point is Usefulness, which will consist in a sufficient Number of
Rooms, of all sorts, and in their apt Coherence, without distraction, without
confusion; so as the beholder may not only call it, Vna Fabrica ben raccolta:
as Italians use to speak of well united Works, but likewise that it may
appear airie and spiritous, and fit for the welcome of cheerful Guests;
about which the principal difficulty will be in contriuing the Lights, and
Staire-cases, whereof I will touch a note or two: For the first, I observe that
the ancient Archietects were at much ease. For both the Greeks and Romans (of
whose private dwellings Vitruuius has left us some description) had commonly
two Cloystered open Courts, one serving for the Women's side, and the other for
the Men: who yet perchance now adays would take so much separation unkindly.
Howsoever, by this means, the reception of light, into the Body of the
building, was very prompt, both from without and from within: which we must now
supply either by some open Form of the Fabrique, or among graceful refuges,
by Tarrasing any Story, which is in danger of darkness; or lastly, by
perpendicular lights, from the Roof: of all other the most natural, as shall be
showed anon. For the second dificultie: which is casting of the Stayre-cases;
That being in it self no hard point, but only as they are incombrances of
room for other use: (which lights were not) I am therefore aptly moved here
to speak of them. And first of Offices.

I have marked a willingness, in the Italian Artisans, to destribute the
Kychin, Pantrie, Bakehouse, washing Rooms: and even the Buttrie likewise,
under ground; next above the Foundation, and sometimes Leuel with the plain,
or Floor of the Cellar: raising the first Ascent into the house Fifteen Foot
or more for that End, which besides the benefit of removing such Annoyes out
of sight, and the gayning of so much more room above, does also by elevation
of the Front, add Majesty to the whole Aspect. And with such a disposition of
the principal Stayre-case, which commonly does deliver us, into the Plain of
the second Story, there may be wonders done, with a little room, whereof I
could allege brave Examples abroad; and none more Artificial, and Delicious,
then a House built by Daniele Barbaro Patriarche of Aquileia before mentioned,
among the memorable Commenters upon Vitruuius. But the Definition (above
determined) does call us to some consideration of our own Country, where
though all the other petty Offices (before rehearsed) may well enough be so
remote, yet by the natural Hospitality of England, the Buttrie must be more
visible* and we need perchance for our Raunges, a more spacious and luminous
Kitchen, then the foresaid Compartition will bear; with a more competent
neerenesse likewise to the Dyning Room Or else besides other Inconveniences,
perhapes some of the Dishes may straggle by the way; Here let me note a common
defect, that we have of a very useful Room, called by the Italians Il
Tinello; and familliar, nay almost essential, in all their great Familes. It
is a Place properly appointed, to conserve the meat that is taken from the
Table, till the Waiters eat, which with us by an old fashion, is more
unseemly set by, in the mean while.

Now touching the distribution of Lodging chambers; I must here take leave to
reprove a fashion, which I know not how has prevailed through Italy, though
without ancient examples, as far as I can perceive by Vitruuius. The thing I
mean, is, that they so cast their partitions as when all Doors are open, a man
may see through the whole House; which does necessariely put an intolerable
servitude upon all the Chambers save the Inmost, where none can arrive, but
through the rest; or else the Walls must be extreme thick for secret
passages And yet this also will not serve the turn, without at least Three
doors to every Room: A thing most insufferable, in cold and windy Regions,
and every where noe small weakening to the whole Work; Therefore with us that
want no cooling, I cannot commend the direct opposition of such Ouertures,
being indeed merely grounded upon the fond ambition of displaying to a
Stranger all our Furniture at one Sight, which therefore is most maintained by
them that mean to harbor but a few; whereby they make only advantage of the
vanity, and seldom prove the Inconvenience. There is likewise another def^ct
(as absurdities are seldom solitary) which will necessarily follow, upon such
a servile disposing of inward Chambers. That they must be forced to make as
many common great Rooms, as there shall be several Stories; which (besides that
they are usually dark, a point hardly avoided, running as they do, through
the middle of the whole House) do likewise devour so much Place, that thereby
they want other Galleries, and Rooms of Retreat, which I have often
considered among them (I must confess) with no small wonder; for I observe no
Nation in the World, by Nature more private and reserved, then the Italian, and
on the other side, in no Hanitations less priuacie; so as there is a kind of
Conflict, between their Dwelling, and their Being: It might here perchance
be expected, that I should at least describe (which others have done in
draughts and designs) diverse Forms of Plants and Partitions, and varieties of
Inventions; But speculatiue Writers (as I am) are not bound, to comprise all
particular Cases, within the Latitude of the Subject, which they handle;
General Lights, and Directions, and pointings at some faults, is sufficient.
The rest must be committed to the sagacitie of the Architect, who will be
often put to diverse ingenious shifts, when he is to wrestle with scarsitie of
Ground. As sometimes * The Italians call it vna stanza dannata, as when a
Buttrie is cast under a a stayre-Case, or the like.
to damme one Room (though of special use) for the benefit and beauty of all
the rest; Another while, to make those fairest, which are most in Sight, and to
leave the other (like a cunning Painter) in shadow, cum multis alijs, which it
were infinite to pursue. I will therefore close this Part touching
Compartition, as cheerfully as I can with a short description of a Feasting or
entertayning Room, after the Egyptian manner, who seem (at least till the
time of Vitruuius) from the ancient Hebrews and Phenicians (whence all
knowledge did flow) to have retained, with other Sciences, in a high degree,
also the Principles, and practice of this magnificent Art. For as far as I
may conjecture by our Masters Text, lib. 6. cap. 5. (where as in many other
Places he has tortured his Interpreters) there could no Form, for such a
Royal use, be comparably imagined, like that of the foresaid Nation, which I
shall adventure to explain.

Let us conceive a Floor or Area of goodly length, (For example, at least of
120 foot) with the breadth somewhat more then the half of the Longitude,
whereof the reason shall be afterward rendered. About the two longest sides, and
Head of the said Room, shall run an Order of Pillars, which Palladio does
suppose Corinthian (as I see by his design) supplying that point out of
Greece, because we know no Order, proper to Egypt. The fourth side I will leave
free for the Entrance: On the foresaid Pillars was laid an Architraue, which
Vitruuius mentions alone: Palladio adds thereunto (and with reason) both
Freeze and Cornice, over which went up a continued Wall, and therein, half or
three quarter Pillars, answering directly, to the Order below, but a fourth
Part less, and between these half Columns above, the whole Room was
windowed round about.

Now, from the lowest Pillars there was laid over a Contignation or Floor,
borne upon the outward Wall, and the Head of the Columns with Tarrace and
Pauement, Sub dio (says our Master) and so indeed he might safely determine
the matter in Egypt, where they fear no Clouds: Therefore Palladio (woe leaves
this Tarrace uncovered in the middle, and ballised about) did perchance
construe him rightly, though therein discording from others: Always we must
understand a sufficient breadth of Pauement, left between the open part and the
Windows, for some delight of Spectators, that might look down into the
Room: The Latitude I have supposed contrary to some former Positions, a little
more then the half of the length; because the Pillars standing at a competent
distance from the outmost Wall, will by interception of the Sight, somewhat in
appearance diminish the breadth; In which cases, (as I have touched once or
twice before) Discretion may be more licentious then Art. This is the
description of an Egyptian room, for Feasts and other Iollities. About the
Walls whereof we must imagine entire Satues, placed below, and illuminated by
the descending Light, from the Tarrace, as likewise from the Windows between
the half Pillars above: So as this Room had abundant and aduantageous Light;
and besides other garnishing, must needs receive much State by the very
height of the Roof, that lay over two orders of Columns: And so having run
through the four parts of my first general Division, namely, Foundation,
Walls, Appertions, and Compartition; the House may now have leave to put on
his Hatte: having hitherto been uncovered it self, and consequently unfit to
cover others. Which point though it be the last of this Art in execution, yet
it is always in Intention the first, For who would build but for Shelter?
Therefore obtaining both the Place, and the dignity of a Final cause, it has
been diligently handled by diverse, but by none more learnedly then Bernardino
Baldi Abbot of Guastalla (before cited upon other occasion) who does
fundamentally, and Mathematically demonstrate the firmest Knittings of the
upper Timbers, which make the Roof. But it has been rather my Scope, in
these Elements to fetch the ground of all, from Nature her self, which indeed
is the simplest mother of Art. Therefore I will now only deliver a few of the
properest, and (as I may say) of the naturalest considerations, that belong to
this remaining Piece.

There are two extremities to be avoided in the Cover, or Roof: That it be not
too heavy, nor too light. The first, will suffer a vulgar objection of pressing
too much the vnder-worke. The other, contains a more secret inconvenience;
for the Cover is not only a bare defense, but likewise a kind of Band or
Ligature, to the whole Fabrique, and therefore would require some reasonable
weight. But of the two extremes, a House Top-heauie is the worst. Next there
must be a care of Equality, that the Edifice be not pressed on the one side
more then on the other; and here Palladio does wisely (like a cautelous
Artizan) that the inward Walls might bear some good share in the burden, and
the outward be the less charged.

Thirdly, the Italians are very precise in giving the Cover a graceful
pendence or slopenesse, dividing the whole breadth into Nine parts; whereof two
shall serve for the elevation of the highest Top or Ridge, from the lowest.
But in this point the quality of the Region is considerable: For (as our
Vitruuius insinuates) those Climes that fear the falling and lying of much
Snow, ought to provide more inclining Pentices: and Comeliness must yield to
Necessity.

These are the vsefullest Cautions which I find in Authors, touching the last
Head of our Division, wherewith I will conclude the first Part of my present
Travail. The second remains, concerning Ornaments within, or without the
Fabrique: A Piece not so dry as the mere Contemplation of proportions. And
therefore I hope therein, somewhat to refresh both the Reader, and my self.

OF THE ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTVRE.
The II. part.
EVERY Man's proper Mansion House and Home, being the Theater of his
Hospitality, the Seat of Selfe-fruition, the Comfortablest part of his own
Life, the Noblest of his Sons Inheritance, a kind of private Princedome;
Nay, to the Possessors thereof, an Epitomie of the whole World: may well
deserve by these Attributes, according to the degree of the Master, to be
decently and delightfully adorned. For which end, there are two Arts attending
on Architecture, like two of her principal Gentlewomen, to dress and trim
their Mistress; PICTVRE and SCVLPTVRE: Between whom, before I proceed any
further, I will venture to determine an ancient quarrel about their Precedence,
with this Distinction; that in the garnishing of Fabriques, Sculpture no doubt
must have the pre-eminence, as being indeed of nearer affinity to Architecture
it self, and consequently the more natural, and more suitable Ornament. But on
the other side, (to consider these two Arts as I shall do Philosophically, and
not Mechanichally) An excellent Piece of Painting, is to my judgment the more
admirable Object, because it comes near an Artificial Miracle; to make
diverse distinct Eminences appear upon a Flat, by force of Shadows, and yet
the Shadows themselves not to appear: which I conceive to be the uttermost
value and virtue of a Painter, and to which very few have arrived in all Ages.

In these two Arts (as they are appliable to the Subject which I handle) it
shall be fit first to consider how to choose them; and next, how to dispose
them. To guide us in the choice, we have a Rule somewhere (I well remember) in
Pliny, and it is a pretty observation: That they do mutually help to censure
one another. For Picture is best when it stands off, as if it were carved;
and Sculpture is best when it appears so tender, as if it were painted, I
mean, when there is such a seeming softness in the Limbs, as if not a
Chissell had hewed them out of Stone, or other Material, but a Pensill had
drawn and stroaked them in Oil, which the judicious Poet took well to his
Fancy.

Excudent alij spirantia mollius era. But this generality, is not sufficient
to make a good chooser, without a more particular contraction of his Judgment.
Therefore when a Piece of Art, is set before us, let the first Caution be, not
to ask who made it, least the Fame of the Author do Captiuate the Fancy of
the Buyer. For, that excellent Men do always excellently, is a false
Conclusion; whereupon I observe among Italian Artizans three notable Phrases,
which well decipher the degrees of their Works.

They will tell you, that a thing was done Con diligenza, Constudio, and Con
Amore; The first, is but a bare and ordinary diligence, The second, is a
learned diligence; The third, is much more, even a loving diligence; They mean
not with love to the Bespeaker of the Work, but with a love and delight in the
Work it self, upon some special Fancy to this, or that Story; And when all
these concur (perticularly the last) in an eminent Author, Then perchance
Titianus Fecit, or (...) will serve the Turn, without farther Inquisition;
Otherwise Artizans have not only their growthes and Perfections, but likewise
their Veins and Times.

The next Caution must be (to proceed Logically) that in Judging of the Work
it self, we be not distracted with too many things at once; Therefore first
(to begin with Picture) we are to observe whether it be well drawn, (or as
more elegant Artizans term it) well Designed; Then whether it be well
Colored, which be the two general Heads; And each of them has two
principal Requisites; For in well Designing, there must be Truth and Grace,
In well Coloring, Force, and Affection; All other Praises, are but
Consequences of these.

Truth (as we Metaphorically take it in this Art) is a Just and Natural
Proportion, in every Part of the determined Figure. Grace is a certain free
disposition, in the whole Draught, answerable to that unaffected franknes of
Fashion, in a living Body, Man or Woman, which does animate Beauty where it
is, and supply it, where it is not,

Force consists, in the Roundings and Raisings of the Work, according as the
Limbs do more or less require it; So as the Beholder, shall spy no
sharpness in the bordering Lines; As when Tailors cut out a Suit, which
Italians do aptly term according to that comparison, Contorni taglienti; Nor
any flatnesse within the Body of the Figure, which how it is done, we must
fetch from a higher Discipline; For the Opticques teach us. That a plain, will
appear prominent, and (as it were) embossed, if the Parts farthest from the
Axeltree or middle Beam of the Eye, shall be the most shadowed. Because in all
Darkness, there is a kind of Deepenesse, But as in the Art of persuasion,
one of the most Fundamental Precepts is; the concealment of Art, So here
likewise, the Sight must be sweetly deceived, by an insensible passage, from
brighter colors, to dimmer, which Italian Artizans call the middle Tinctures;
That is, Not as the whites, and yolks of Eggs lie in the Shell, with visible
distinction; But as when they are beaten, and blended, in a Dish: which is the
nearest comparison, that I can suddenly conceive.

Lastly, Affection is the Lively Representment, of any passion whatsoever, as
if the Figures stood not upon a Cloth or Boorde, but as if they were acting
upon a Stage; And here, I must remember, in truth with much marvel, a note,
which I have received, from excellent Artizans, that though Gladness, and
Grief, be opposites in Nature; yet they are such Neighbors and Confiners in
Art, that the least touch of a Pensill, will translate a Crying, into a
Laughing Face; which Instance, besides diverse other, does often reduce unto my
memory, that Ingenious Speculation, of the Cardinal Cusanus extant in his
Works, touching the Coincidence of exextremes. And thus much of the four
Requisites, and Perfections in Picture.

In Sculpture likewise, the Two first are absolutely necessary; The third
impertinent; For Solid Figures need no elevation, by force of Lights, or
shadows; Therefore in the Room of this, we may put (as has been before
touched) a kind of Tenderness, by the Italians termed Morbidezza, wherein
the Chissell, I must confess* has more glory then the Pensill; that being so
hard an Instrument, and working upon so vnpliant stuff, can yet leave Strokes
of so gentle appearance.

The Fourth, which is the expressing of Affection (as far as it does depend
upon the Actiuity, and Gesture of the Figure) is as proper to the Caruer, as to
the Painter; though Colors, no doubt, have therein the greatest Power;
whereupon, perchance, did first grow with us the Fashion of coloring, even
Regal Statues, which I must take leave to call an English Barbarism.

Now in these ^ower Requisites already rehearsed, it is strange to note, that
no Artizan, having ever been blamed for excess in any of the three last;
only Truth (which should seem the most Innocent) has suffered some
Objection, and all Ages, have yielded some one or two Artificers, so
prodigiously exquisite, that they have been reputed too Natural, in their
Draughts; which will well appear, by a famous Passage in Quintilian, touching
the Characters of the ancient Artizans, falling now so aptly into my memory,
that I must needs translate it, as in truth it may well deserve.

The Place which I intend, is extant in the last Chapter save one of his whole
Work, beginning thus in Latin.

Primi, quorum quidem opera non vetustatis modo gratia visenda sunt clari
Pictores fuisse dicuntur; Polygnotus atque Aglaophon etc.

The whole Passage, in English stands thus:

THe first Painters of name, whose Works be considerable for any thing more
then only Antiquity, are said to have been Polygnotus, and Aglaophon; whose
bare Colorings (he means I think in white and black) has even yet so many
followers, that those rude and first Elements, as it were of that, which within
a while, became an Art, are preferred, before the greatest Painters that have
been extant after them, out of a certain Competition (as I conceive it) in
point of Judgment. After these, Zeuxes and Parasius not far distant in age,
both about the time of the Peloponesian War, (for in Xenophon we have a
Dialogue between Parasius, and Socrates) did add much to this Art. Of which
the first is said, to have invented the due disposition of Lights and Shadows;
The second, to have more subtly examined, the truth of Lines in the Draught;
for Zeuxes did make Limbs, bigger then the life; deeming his Figures, thereby
the more stately and Maiesticall; and therein (as some think) imitating Homer,
whom the stoutest form does please, even in Women. On the other side, Parasius
did exactly limit all the Proportions so, as they call him the Law giver because
in the Images of the Gods and of Heroical Personages, others have followed his
Paternes like a Decree; But Picture did most flourish, about the days of
Phillip and even to the Successors of Alexander; yet by sundry habilities; for
Protogenes, did excel in Diligence; Pamphilus and Melanthius in due
Proportion, Antiphilus in a Frank Facility; Theon of Samos, in strength of
Fantasy and conceiving of Passions; Apelles, in Invention, and Grace, whereof
he does himself most vaunte; Euphranor, deserves admiration, that being in
other excellent studies, a principal Man, he was likewise a wondrous Artizan,
both in Painting and Sculpture. The like difference we may observe among the
Statuaries; for the works of Calon and Fgesias were somewhat stiff, like the
Tuscan manner; Those of Calamis not done with so cold strokes; And Myron more
tender then the former; a diligent Decency in Polycletus above others, to whom
though the highest praise be attributed by the most, yet lest he should go
free from exception, some think he wanted solemness; for as he may perchance
be said to have added a comely dimension to humane shape, somewhat above the
truth; so on the other side, he seemed not to have fully expressed the Majesty
of the Gods: Moreover, he is said not to have meddled willingly with the grauer
age, as not aduenturing beyond smooth cheeks: But these virtues that were
wanting in Polycletus, were supplied by Phidias and Al^menes, yet Phidias was a
better Artizan in the representing of Gods, then of Men; and in his works of
Iuorie, beyond all emulation, even though he had left nothing behind him, but
his Minerua at Athens, or the Olympian Jupiter in Elis, whose Beauty seems to
have added somewhat, even to the received Religion; the Majesty of the Work,
as it were equalling the Deity. To Truth, they affirm Lysippus and Praxiteles,
to have made the nearest approach: for Demetrius is therein reprehended, as
rather exceeding then deficient; having been a greater aymer at Likeness, then
at Louelines.

This is that witty Censure of the ancient Artizans, which Quintilian has left
us, where the last Charactar of Demetrius does require a little Philosophical
examination; How an Artificer, whose end is the imitation of Nature, can be
too natural; which likewise in our days was either the fault, or (to speak
more gently) the too much perfection of Albert Durer, and perhaps also of
Michael Angelo da Buonaroti, between whom I have heard noted by an ingenious
Artizan, a pretty nice difference, that the German did too much express that
which was; and the Italian, that which should be: Which severe observation of
Nature, by the one in her commonest, and by the other in her absolutest Forms,
must needs produce in both a kind of Rigidity, and consequently more
naturalnesse then gracefulness: This is the cleerest reason, why some exact
Symmetrists have been blamed, for being too true, as near as I can deliver my
conceit. And so much touching the choice of Picture and Sculpture: The next is,
the application of both, to the beautifying of Fabriques.

First therefore touching Picture, there does occur a very pertinent doubt,
which has been passed over too slightly, not only by some Men, but by some
Nations; namely, whether this Ornament can well become the Outside of houses,
wherein the Germans have made so little scruple, that their best Towns are the
most painted, as Augusta and Norembergh. To determine this question in a word:
It is true, that a Story well set out with a good Hand, will every where take a
Judicious eye: But yet withal it is as true, that various colors on the
Out-walles of Buildings, have always in them more Delight then Dignity:
Therefore I would there admit no Paintings but in Black and White, nor even in
that kind any Figures (if the room be capable) under Nine or Ten foot high,
which will require no ordinary Artizan; because the faults are more visible
then in small Designs. In vnfigured paintings the noblest is, the imitation of
Marbles, and of Architecture it self, as Arches, Treezes, Columns, and the
like.

Now for the Inside, here grows another doubt, whether Grotesca (as the
Italians) or Antique work (as we call it) should be received, against the
express authority of Vitruuius himself, lib. 7. cap. 5. where Pictura (says
he) Fit eius, quod est, seu potest esse, excluding by this severe definition,
all Figures composed of different Natures or Sexes; so as a Syrene or a
Centaure had been intolerable in his eye: But in this we must take leave to
depart from our Master, and the rather because he spoke out of his own
profession, allowing Painters (who have ever bin as little limited as Poets) a
less scope in their imaginations, even then the grauest Philosophers, who
sometimes do serve themselves of Instances, that have no Existence in Nature;
as we see in Platoes Amphisboena, and Aristotle's Hirco-Ceruus. And (to settle
this point) what was indeed more common and familiar among the Romans
themselves, then the Picture and Statue of Terminus, even one of their Deities?
which yet if we well consider, is but a piece of Grotesca; I am for these
reasons unwilling to impouerish that Art, though I could wish such medlie and
motlie Designs, confined only to the Ornament of Freezes, and Borders, their
properest place. As for other Storied Works upon Walls, I doubt our Clime be
too yielding and moist, for such Garnishment; therefore leaving it to the
Dwellers discretion, according to the quality of his Seat; I will only add a
caution or two, about the disposing of Pictures within.

First, that no Room be furnished with too many, which in truth were a Surfeit
of Ornament, unless they be Galleries, or some peculiar Repository for
Rarities of Art.

Next, that the best Pieces be placed not where there is the least, but where
there are the fewest lights; therefore not only Rooms windowed on both ends,
which we call through-lighted; but with two or more Windows on the same side,
are enemies to this Art; and sure it is, that no Painting can be seen in full
Perfection but (as all Nature is illuminated) by a single Light.

Thirdly, that in the placing there be some care also taken, how the Painter
did stand in the Working, which an intelligent Eye, will easily discover, and
that Posture is the most natural; so as Italian pieces will appear best in a
Room where the Windows are high; because they are commonly made to a
descending Light, which of all other does set off men's Faces in their truest
Spirit.

Lastly, that they be as properly bestowed for their quality, as fitly for
their grace: that is, cheerful Paintings in Feasting and Banqueting Rooms;
Grauer Stories in Galleries, Land-schips, and Boscage, and such wild works in
open Tarraces, or in Summer houses (as we call them) and the like.

And thus much of Picture, which let me close with this Note; that though my
former Discourse may serve perchance for some reasonable leading in the choice
of such delights; yet let no man hope by such a speculatiue erudition, to
discern the Masterly and Mysterious touches of Art, but an Artizan himself;
to whom therefore we must leave the prerogative, to censure the manner and
handling, as he himself must likewise leave some points, perchance of no
less value to others; as for example, whether the Story be rightly
represented, the Figures in true action, the Persons suited to their suerall
qualities, the affections proper and strong, and such like observations.

Now for Sculpture, I must likewise begin with a Controversy, as before
(falling into this Place) or let me rather call it a very mere Fancy,
strangely taken by Palladio, who having noted in an old Arch or two at Verona,
some part of the Materials already cut in fine Forms, and some unpolished,
does conclude (according to his Logic) upon this particular, that the
Ancients did leave the outward Face, of their Marbles or Freestone, without
any Sculpture, till they were laid, and Cimented, in the body of the Building;
For which likewise he finds a reason (as many do now and then very wittily,
even before the thing it self be true) that the Materials being left rough
were more managable in the Masons hand, then if they had been smooth; And that
so the sides might be laid together the more exactly; Which Conceit, once
taken he seems to have farther imprinted, by marking in certain Storied
Sculptures, of oulde time* how precisely the parts and Lines of the Figures
that pass from one Stone to another, do meet; which he thinks could hardly
fall out so right, (forgetting while he speaks of ancient things, the ancient
Diligence) unless they had been cut, after the joining of the Materials, But
all these Inducements, cannot counteruaile the sole Inconvenience of shaking,
and Disioynting the Commissures with so many Strokes of the Chissell, be^ides
an Incommodious Working on Scaffolds; especially having no testimony, to
confirm it, that I have yet seen among the records of Art; Nay, it is indeed
rather true, that they did square, and Carue, and Polish, their Stone and
Marble Works, even in the very Cave of the Quarrie, before it was hardened by
open Air; But (to leave disputation) I will set down a few Positive notes,
for the placing of Sculpture; because the choosing has been handled before.

That first of all, it be not too general and abundant, which would make a
House, look like a Cabbinet, and in this point, moral Philosophy which
tempereth Fancies, is the Superintendent of Art.

That especially, There be a due moderation of this Ornament in the first
approach; where our Authors do more commend (I mean about the Principal
Entrance) a Dorique, then a Corinthian garnishment* So as if the great Door,
be Arched, with some brave Head, cut in fine Stone or Marble for the Key of the
Arch, and two Incumbent Figures gracefully leaning upon it, toward one
another, as if they meant to confer; I should think this a sufficient
entertainment, for the first Reception, of any Judicious Sight, which I could
wish seconded, with two great standing Statues on each side of a paued way that
shall lead up into the Fabrique, So as the Beholder at the first entrance, may
pass his Eye between them.

That the Nices, if they contain Figures of white Stone or Marble, be not
colored in their Concauitie too black, For though Contraria iuxta se posita
magis illucescunt (by an old Rule) yet it has been subtly, and indeed
truly noted that our Sight, is not well contented, with those sudden
departments, from one extreme, to another; Therefore let them have, rather a
Duskish Tincture, then an absolute black.

That fine and delicate Sculptures, be helped with Neerenes, and Gross with
distance; which was well seen in the old controversy, between Phidias and
Alcmenes about the Statue of Venus: wherein the First did show discretion, and
save labor, because the Work was to be viewed at good Height, which did
drown the sweet and diligent strokes of his Adversary: A famous emulation of
two principal Artizans, celebrated even by the Greek Poets.

That in the placing of standing Figures aloft, we must set them in a Posture
somewhat bowing forward; bebecause (says our Master, lib. 3. cap. 3. out of a
better Art then his own) the visuall beam of our eye, extended to the Head of
the said Figures, being longer then to the Foot, must necessarily make that
part appear farther; so as to reduce it to an erect or upright position, there
must be allowed a due advantage of stooping toward us; which Albert Durer has
exactly taught, in his fore mentioned Geometry. Our Vitruuius calls this
affection in the Eye, a resupination of the Figure: For which word (being in
truth his own, for ought I know) we are almost as much beholding to him, as
for the observation it self: And let thus much summarily suffice, touching the
choice and use of these adorning Arts. For to speak of garnishing the Fabrique
with a Row of erected Statues, about the Cornice of every Contignation or
Story, were discourse more proper for Athens or Rome, in the time of their true
greatness, when (as Pliny records of his own Age) there were near as many
carved Images, as living Men; like a noble contention, even in point of
Fertility, between Art and Nature; which passage does not only argue an
infinite abundance, both of Artizans and Materials; but likewise of Magnificent
and Majesticall desires, in every common person of those times; more or less
according to their Fortunes. And true it is indeed that the Marble Monuments
and Memories of well deserving Men, wherewith the very high ways were strewed
on each side was not a bare and transitory entertainment of the Eye, or only
a gentle deception of Time, to the Trauailer: But had also a secret and strong
Influence, even into the advancement of the Monarchy, by continual
representation of virtuous examples; so as in that point ART became a piece of
State.

Now as I have before subordinated Picture, and Sculpture to Architecture, as
their Mistress; so there are certain inferior ARTS likewise subordinate to
them: As under Picture, Mosaique; under Sculpture, Plastique; which two, I
only nominate, as the fittest to garnish Fabriques.

Mosaique is a kind of Painting in small Pebbles, Cockles and Shells of sundry
colors; and of late days likewise with pieces of Glass, figured at pleasure;
an Ornament in truth, of much beauty, and long life, but of most use in
pauements and Floorings.

Plastique is not only under Sculpture, but in deed very Sculpture it self:
but with this difference; that the Plasterer does make his Figures by Addition,
and the Caruer by Substraction, whereupon Michael Angelo was wont to say
somewhat pleasantly: That Sculpture was nothing but A purgation of
superfluities. For take away from a piece of wood, or stone, all that is
superfluous, and the remainder is the intended Figure. Of this Plastique Art,
the chief use with us is in the graceful fretting of roofes: but the Italians
apply it, to the manteling of Chimneys, with great Figures. A cheap piece of
Magnificence, and as durable almost within doors, as harder Forms in the
weather. And here though it be a little excursion, I cannot pass unremembered
again, their manner of disguising the shaftes of Chimneys in various fashions,
whereof the noblest is the Pyramidall: being in truth a piece of polite and
civil discretion, to convert even the conduits of soote and smoke, into
Ornaments; whereof I have hitherto spoken as far as may concern the Body of
the Building.

Now there are Ornaments also without, as Gardens, Fountains, Groves,
Conseruatories of rare Beasts, Birds, and Fishes. Of which ignobler kind of
Creatures, We ought not (says our greatest Arist. lib. 1 cap. 5. de part.
Anim. (...).
Master among the sons of Nature) childishly to despise the Contemplation;
for in all things that are natural, there is ever something, that is
admirable. Of these external delights, a word or two.

First, I must note a certain contrariety between building and gardening:
For as Fabriques should be regular, so Gardens should be irregular, or at
least cast into a very wild Regularitie. To exemplify my conceit; I have
seen a Garden (for the manner perchance incomparable) into which the first
Access was a high walk like a Tarrace, from whence might be taken a general
view of the whole Plott below; but rather in a delightful confusion, then with
any plain distinction of the pieces. From this the Beholder descending many
steps, was afterward conveyed again, by several mountings and valings, to
various entertainements of his sent, and sight: which I shall not need to
describe (for that were poetical) let me only note this, that every one of
these diversities, was as if he had been Magically transported into a new
Garden.

But though other Countries have more benefit of Sun then we, and thereby
more properly tied to contemplate this delight; yet have I seen in our own, a
delicate and diligent curiosity, surely without parallel among foreigne
Nations: Namely, in the Garden of Sir Henry Fanshaw, at his seat in Ware-Parke,
where I well remember, he did so precisely examine the tinctures, and seasons
of his flowers, that in their setting, the inwardest of those which were to
come up at the same time, should be always a little darker then the outmost,
and so serve them for a kind of gentle shadow, like a piece not of Nature, but
of Art: which mention (incident to this place) I have willingly made of his
Name, for the dear friendship that was long between us: though I must
confess, with much wrong to his other virtues; which deserve a more solid
memorial, then among these vacant observations. So much of Gardens.

Fountains are figured, or only plain Water'd-workes: Of either of which, I
will describe a matchless pattern.

The first, done by the famous hand of Michael Angelo da Buonaroti, in the
figure of a sturdie woman, washing and winding of linen clothes; in which
Act, she wrings out the water that made the Fountain; which was a graceful
and natural conceit in the Artificer, implying this rule; That all designs of
this kind, should be proper.

The other does merit some larger expressio^; There went a long, straight,
mossie walk of competent breadth, green, and soft under foot, listed on both
sides with an Aquaeduct of white stone, breast-high, which had a hollow
channel on the top, where ran a pretty trickling stream; on the edge
whereof, were couched very thick all along, certain small pipes of lead, in
little holes; so neatly, that they could not be well perceived, till by the
turning of a cock, they did sprout over interchangeably from side to side,
above man's height, in form of Arches, without any intersection or meeting
aloft, because the pipes were not exactly opposite, so as the Beholder, besides
that, which was fluent in the Aquaeducts on both hands in his view, did walk
as it were, under a continual bower or Hemisphere of water, without any drop
falling on him. An invention for refreshment, surely far excelling all the
Alexandrian delicacies, and Pneumatiques of Hero.

Groves, and artificial devices under ground, are of great expense, and little
dignity; which for my part I could wish converted here into those Crypteria,
whereof mention is made among the curious provisions of Ticho Braghe the Danish
Ptolemie, as I may well call him: which were deep concaues in gardens, where
the stars might be observed even at noone. For (by the way) to think that
the brightness of the Suns body above, does drown our discerning of the
lesser lights, is a popular error; the sole impediment being that luster,
which by reflection, does spread about us, from the face of the Earth; so as
the caves before touched, may well conduce, not to a delicious, but to a
learned pleasure.

In Auiaries of wire, to keep Birds of all sorts, the Italians (though no
wastfull Nation) do in some places bestow vast expense; including great scope
of ground, variety of bushes, trees of good height, running waters, and
sometimes a Stoue annexed, to contemper the Air in Winter. So as those
Chanteresses, unless they be such as perhaps delight as much in their wing, as
in their voice, may live long, among so good provisions and room, before they
know that they are prisoners; reducing often to my memory, that conceit of the
Roman Stoicke, who in comparison of his own free contemplations, did think
diverse great and splendent fortunes of his time, little more then commodious
captiuities.

Concerning Ponds of pleasure near the habitation, I will refer my self to
a grave Author of our own (though more illustrious by his other D^ Nugis
Curial. etc.
work) namely Sarisburiensis de Pis^ina.

And here I will end the second part touching Ornaments, both within, and
without the Fabrique.

Now as almost all those, which have delivered the Elements of Logic, do
usually conclude, with a Chapter touching Method; so I am here seized with a
kind of critical spirit, and desirous to shut up these building Elements, with
some Methodical direction how to censure Fabriques already raised: for indeed
without some way to contract our Judgment, which among so many particulars
would be lost by diffusion; I should think it almost harder to be a good
Censurer, then a good Architect: Because the working part may be helped with
Deliberation, but the Judging must flow from an extemporall habit. Therefore,
(not to leave this last Piece without some Light) I could wish him that comes
to examine any noble Work, first of all to examine himself, whether perchance
the sight of many brave things before (which remain like impressed forms)
have not made him apt to think nothing good, but that which is the best; for
this humor were too sour. Next, before he come to settle any imaginable
opinion, let him by all means seek to inform himself precisely, of the Age
of the Work upon which he must pass his Doom. And if he shall find the
apparent decays to exceed the proportion of Time; then let him conclude
without farther inquisition, as an absolute Decree, that either the Materials
were too slight, or the Seat is naught. Now, after these premises, if the
House be found to bear his years well, (which is always a token of sound
constitution) Then let him suddenly run backewardes, (for the Method of
censuring is contrary to the Method of composing) from the Ornaments (which
first allure the Eye) to the more essential Members, till at last he be able
to form this Conclusion, that the Work is Commodious, Firm, and Delightful;
which (as I said in the beginning) are the three capital Conditions required
in good Buildings, by all Authors both Ancient and Modern. And this is, as I
may term it the most Scientificall way of Censuring. There are two other
which I must not forget. The first in Georgio Vassari, before his laborious
Work of the lives of Architects, which is to pass a running examination over
the whole Edifice, according to the properties of a well shapen Man. As whether
the Walls stand upright upon clean footing and Foundation; whether the Fabrique
be of a beautiful Stature, whether for the breadth it appear well burnished,
whether the principal Entrance be on the middle Line of the Front or Face,
like our Mouths, whether the Windows, as our Eyes, be set in equal number
and distance on both sides, whether the Offices like the Veins in our Bodies,
be usefully distributed, and so forth. For this Allegorical review may be
driven as far as any Wit will, that is at leisure.

The second way, is in Vitruuius himself, lib. 1. cap 2. where he summarily
determines six Considerations, which accomplish this whole Art.

Ordinatio. Dispositio. Eurythmia. Symmetria. Decor, and Distributio.
Whereof (in my conceit) we may spare him the first two; for as far as I can
perceive, either by his Interpreters, or by his own Text (which in that very
place, where perchance he should be clearest, is of all other the Clowdiest)
he means nothing by Ordination, but a well settling of the Model or Scale of
the whole Work. Nor by Disposition, more then a neat and full expression of
the first Idea or Designement thereof; which perchance do more belong to the
Artificer, then to the Censurer. The other four are enough to condemn, or
absolve any Fabrique whatsoever. Whereof Eurythmia is that agreeable Harmony,
between the breadth, length, and height of all the Rooms of the Fabrique,
which suddenly where it is takes every Beholder, by the secret power of
Proportion: wherein let me only note this, That though the least error or
offense that can be committed against sight, is excess of height; yet that
fault is no where of small importance, because it is the greatest offense
against the Purse.

Symmetria is the conueniencie that runs between the Parts and the Whole,
whereof I have formerly spoken.

Decor is the keeping of a due Respect between the Inhabitant, and the
Habitation. Whence Palladius did conclude, that the principal Entrance was
never to be regulated by any certain Dimensions; but by the dignity of the
Master; yet to exceed rather, in the more, then in the less, is a mark of
Generosity, and may al ways be excused with some noble Emblem, or
Inscription, as that of the Conte di Beuilacqua, over his large Gate at Verona,
where perchance had been committed a little Disproportion.

Patet Ianua: Cor magis. And here likewise I must remember our ever memorable
Sir Philip Sidney, (whose Wit was in truth the very rule of Congruity) who
well knowing that Basilius (as he had painted the State of his Mind) did
rather want some extraordinary Forms to entertain his Fancy, then room for
Courtiers; was contented to place him in a Star-like Lodge; which otherwise in
severe Judgment of Art had been an incommodious Figure.

Distributio is that useful Casting of all Rooms for Office, Entertainment,
or Pleasure, which I have handled before at more length, then any other Piece.

These are the Four Heads which every man should run over, before he pass
any determinate Censure, upon the Works that he shall view, wherewith I will
close this last part, touching Ornaments. Against which (me thinks) I hear
an Objection, even from some well-meaning man; That these delightful Crafts,
may be diverse ways ill applied in a Land. I must confess indeed, there may
be a Lascivious, and there may be likewise a superstitious use, both of
Picture and of Sculpture: To which possibility of misapplication, not only
these Semi-liberall Arts are subject; but even the highest perfections, and
endowments of Nature. As Beauty in a light woman, Eloquence in a mutinous Man,
Resolution in an Assasinate, Prudent observation of hours and humors, in a
corrupt Courtier, Sharpness of wit and argument in a seducing Scholar; and
the like. Nay, finally let me ask, what ART can be more pernicious, then even
RELIGION it self, if it self be converted into an Instrument of ART:
Therefore, Ab abuti ad non vti, negatur consequentia.

Thus having stitched in some sort together, these Animaduersions, touching
Architecture, and the Ornaments thereof; I now feel that contemplative spirits
are as restless as active; for doubting with my self, (as all weakness is
jealous) that I may be thought to have spent my poor observation abroad, about
nothing but Stone and Timber, and such Rubbage; I am thereby led into an
immodestie of proclaiming another Work, which I have long devoted to the
service of my Country: Namely, A Philosophical Survey of Education, which is
indeed, a second Building, or repairing of Nature, and, as I may term it, a
kind of Moral Architecture; whereof such Notes as I have taken in my foreigne
transcursions or abodes, I hope to utter without public offense, though still
with the freedom of a plain Kentish man. In the mean while I have let these
other Gleanings fly abroad, like the Bird out of the Arc, to discover what
footing may be, for that which shall follow.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. lin, 8. for as, read is. Page 48. lin. 2. for cuncatim, read
cuneatim. Page 77. lin. 6. for (woe, read (who. Page 80. lin. 9. for wisely,
read wish. Page 88. lin. 19. omitted in the Margin the verses following,
touching the coincidence of extreme affections; represented by Homer in the
person of Hoctors wife; as Painters and Poets have always had a kind of
congeniality.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). -- That is,
She took her son into her arms, we^pingly laughing.


