A DEFENSE OF M. PERKINS BOOK, CALLED A REFORMED CATHOLIC: Against the cauils
of a Popish writer, one D. B. P. or W. B. in his deformed Reformation. By
Antony Wotton.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1606.

THE PRINCIPAL POINS HANDLED IN THIS BOOK.
1. Of Antichrist. page 41. 2. Of Freewill. page 64. 3. Of Original sin.
page 95. 4. Of the certainty of salvation. page 124. 5. Of Justification. page
163. 6. Of inherent justice. page 184. 7. Of justifying faith; what it is? page
195. 8. How faith justifies? page 206. 9. That faith alone justifies. page
212. 10. Of good works, how far forth they are required to justification.
page 239. 11. Whether it be possible for a man that is justified to fulfill the
law of God. page 258. 12. Whether good works be stained with sin. page 265.
13. Whether faith may be without charity. page 277. 14. Whether faith may be
without good works. page 285. 15. Of merits. page 287. 16. Of satisfaction.
page 344. 17. Of Traditions. page 399. 18. Of vows. page 469. 19. Of the vow
of single life. page 487. 20. Of wilful poverty. page 508. 21. Of regular
obedience. page 522. 22. Of Images. page 524.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT EARL OF SALISBVRIE, VICOVNT Cranborne, Baron
of Essingdon, Principal Secretary to his Majesty, Master of the Court of
Wards and Liueries, one of his Highness most Honorable Privy Council, and
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge.
RIght Honorable, it has pleased God to vouchsafe your Lordship no small
honor in the profession of Christianity, that you have not only believed the
truth of the Gospel, but also are made partaker of that glory of his children
to suffer for it. To you it is given (says the Apostle to the Philippians) for
Christ, that not only Phil. 1. 24
you should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. Given; as if it were
a special favor, which no man attaines to, but they only to whom it is
granted by privilege from God. To you it is given (says our Matthew. 13. (...).
Savior) to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven. And in another place:
No man can come unto me, except John 6. 6.
it be given him of my Father. This gift the Lord has bestowed upon your
Honor, that they which are enemies to him, should be persecutors of you, even
to the death, if it lay in their power, for his quarrel. But the gracious
providence of God has manifestly showed it self, in this whole action, on
your Lordships behalf, in that not only you are still preserved, in despite
of them, but also that you hold on that noble, and Christian resolution, to
provide for the sasctie of Religion, his Majesty's person, and estate, with the
hazard of your own life, regarding more what your Lordship ought to do, in
duty to God, and your Sovereign, then what you may suffer by men, for so
doing. Now on their part, who can say whether their malice, or their folly is
the greater? when I consider the height of their hatred, that reaches even to
the taking away of life, which is in Gods hands; me thinks I am not able to
look beyond it. But when I remember their desperate resolving to commit such a
murder, so openly, and their extreme indiscretion, in acquainting your
Lordship with their intendment, it seems to me, that the lightness of their
folly exceeds the weight of their malice. So that they give all men just
occasion to suspect, that God has given them over into a reprobate sense, as
to destroy their souls by intending such a bloody sin, so to cast away their
lives also by attempting it, with so great folly. But leaving them to the
mercy and justice of God, for repentance, or confusion; give me leave (Right
Honorable) to put your Lordship in mind of that, which I make no doubt, but
you know, and think on; viz. That the Lord God (having taken your person,
estate, and honor into his protection, against these and such like
conspiracies) looks for continuance, and increase of zeal, and care in your
Lordship, for the securing, as much as may be in your power, of his holy
religion, and his worthy Lieutenant, our gracious Sovereigns person, and
dignity. Now the knowledge of danger being a good help to the avoiding of it,
The Lord himself seems to have taken half the care already, in discovering
those, that have bin, are, and will be the continual practisers of his
Majesty's ruin. I were more than conceited, and foolish, if I could but think
my self either able or fit to advise your Lordship in matters of this nature.
Yet let me humbly entreat your Honor, to vouchsafe the reading of that,
which, in my poor thoughts, I have apprehended. That the safety of Princes
depends upon the good pleasure of God, it is out of all question, especially
in their account, who advisedly, and thankfully remember the late wonderful,
and gracious deliverance, never to be forgotten. Neither can it be doubted, but
it is Gods good pleasure to preserve them, as long as they have care to walk
in obedience to him; especially in providing for his glory, by maintaining and
advancing the true religion of Jesus Christ. So then, the safety of religion
is the security of the Prince; and the decay of Gods true service, the
forerunner of the Kings destruction. As this is true (in general) concerning
all Kings, and Governors; so has it an especial evidence of truth, in his
Majesty's particular. For it is apparent to every man, that the Papists
quarrel to his Majesty is not for hatred of his person, but of his religion.
And therefore so far forth will they plot against the former, as they can
see likelihood of a^chieuing the latter. His danger grows by their hope; and
their despair of bringing in Popish idolatry, must needs be the security of
his life and state. Are we then desirous to rid his Majesty of this danger,
and the whole state of this fear? we see the means of accomplishing that
desire, to be no other, than to provide that true religion may grow and
flourish, and Popish idolatry fade and wither. For neither may we look for
any blessing from God on the Commonwealth, if he be continually dishonored
amongst us, by the increase of Popish heresy; nor reasonably promise our
selves any end of treacherous and bloody enterprises, as long as Papists
conceive hope of prevailing for Antichrist, by such attempts. If their number
daily increase, how should their hope lessen? And how is it possible to keep
it from growing, if thousands in this kingdom, remaining in their ignorance,
be left as pray to seducing Priests and Jesuits? The conclusion is, that if
there be not some religious and wise care taken, as to instruct the people in
the knowledge of Gods truth, which is the principal: so to ferrit out those
lurking Serpents, that breathe Idolatry and treason into the hearts of his
Majesty's people, and to keep out their like from entering into this Island, the
glory of God, the safety of the King, and the prosperity of this kingdom,
are all waining, in the last quarter. For howsoever it be very true, that some
Popish errors hinder not men from remaining good and faithful subjects; yet
(as his Majesty most wisely, and truly observed) None of those, that truly
know and believe the whole grounds and conclusions of their School doctrine,
can ever prove either good Christians, or faithful subjects. For the former,
I refer my self to most of the points handled in this Treatise ensuing: for
the latter, let the doctrine and practice of the Romish Synagogue it self give
sentence. How can he possibly be a faithful subject, that is to be commanded
(in the highest bond of conscience) by foreign authority? Shall we rest upon
the Popes holiness: as if he forsooth would not enjoin any thing, that should
prejudice any Prince in his estate temporal? Let former examples pass; can
any true, or just dealing be hoped for at his hands, whose vassals daily teach
subjects, that it is meritorious to murder Princes. Would not the Pope, if he
had misliked that doctrine, have checked it long before this time, either in
some general Council, or by some definitive sentence of his own; as your
Lordship has prudently observed? And whereas their Archpriest Blackwell
condemns all attempting of ought against Princes by any private authority,
does he not (which is also your Lordships wise observation) reserve thereby a
tacit lawfulnes thereof, in case it be directed by public warrant? So
impossible is it for a Papist (that believes the Pope cannot err, and holds
himself therefore bound in conscience to obey him, in all his commandments)
to be a faithful subject to any Prince in the world whatsoever. But I have
been carried further in this matter, than I purposed; it remains, that I
humbly crave pardon of your Lordship, and commend there my poor labors to
your honorable and g^^tious acceptance; beseeching God to continue your life,
and to increase your zeal, care, and wise lo^ to the glory of his name, the
further adua^ of religion, the prosperi^^^ of the estate, the sa^^^e and honor
of his Majesty, ^d your own present and everlasting comfort through Jesus
Christ.

From my house on the Tower Hill February 18. Anno 16^^ (...) Lord^hips to be
commanded in all C^r^stian duty. A^^ONY WOTTON.

TO THE READER.
WHen I had finished my poor labors in answering, and compared Master Perkins
Treatise, the Papists accusation, and my defense together; I could see no
better course for thy understanding of al three, then to set down all three,
every one in the Authers own words. Now I came at the last to view them all
three together, the greatness of the book drives me into some fear least that
which I intended for thy good in reading of it, should prove an occasion of thy
forbearing to read it. Only my hope is, that knowledge of the truth being the
end of thy reading, thou will not think much of a little more pains or cost,
which necessity has laid upon them, who desire to benefit themselves by
understanding the difference betwixt the Gospel and Popery. That neither my
tediousness nor darkness might offend or stay thee, I have labored for as
much plainenes as I could well attain to, with so much brevity. The skoffing,
reuiling, and slaundering of the Adversary, I have chosen rather to refer to
God the revenger of all such Antichristian dealing, and to thy discreet and
Christian consideration, then to answer in the like measure and kind of
sinning. But if it please thee in reading of the book to compare the testimony
he gives of M. Perkins in his Preface to the Reader, with his carriage toward
him in the whole course of his answering, thou shall easily discern, that
either the one or the other, or both, must needs be without judgment or
conscience. For my course of answering I shall need to say nothing, because I
spoke sufficiently of it in my answer to the twelve Articles. In this present
book thou may know where M. Perkins, the Adversary, and my defense
begins and ends, as well by the difference of the print, as by the great
or capital letters set in the margin; W. P. for William Perkins, D. B. P. for
the Adversary unknown, hiding himself under those three letters, A. W. for
Antony Wotton. And this course is observed throughout the whole book, save a
few places, where the marginall notes would afford no room to those letters. I
have further added some short answers in the margin here and there, which thou
may perceive by the matter and letter. It remains that I humbly and
earnestly entreat thee to examine what we have written without prejudice and
partiality, and to acknowledge the truth with liking, where it shall please God
to make it evident unto thee: which he will certainly do according to his
promise, if thou call upon him in humility and faith, for the assistance of his
holy Spirit; To whose gracious direction I commend thee now and ever.

Tower hill Febr. 18. 1606. Thine in the Lord Jesus, Antony Wotton.

England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
MOst Gracious and dread Souera^gne. Albeit my slenddr skill cannot afford any
discourse worthy the view of your Excellency, neither my deadded, and daily
interrupted, and Not (...) but pers^^s, that study (...) plo^ Treason
persecuted studies, will give me leave to accomplish that little, which
otherwise I ^ght undertake and perform: Yet being ^nbolde^ed, both by your
high (...), and gracious favor, ever showed unto all good litterature,
especially concerning Divinity: and also urged by mine own bounden duty, and
particular affection; I presume to present unto your Highness this sho^ ^ing
^^eatise. For your exceeding clemency, ^es, and rare modesty, in the most
e^inent estate of to mighty a Monarch; as it cannot but win unto you great
love, in the h^arts of all considerate Subjects: so on the other side does it
encourage them confidently to open their minds, and in dutiful manner to
unfold themselves unto their so loving and astable a S^u^rai^ne. And whereas
(...) the no vulgar praise of your Ma^est^es p^e) you have made open and often
profession of your vigilancie and care, to advance the divine honor of our Sa^
Christ, and his most sacred Religion: Then what faithful Ch^an should slagger,
or fear to lay open, and deliver publicly, that which he assures himself to
be ver^ expedient, necessary, and a reeable toward the furnishing, and
se^ting forward of so heavenly a work? Moreover, if I your Majesty's poor
subject, have by study at home, and travail abroad, attained unto any small
talent of learning, and knowledge: to whom is the use and fruit thereof more
due, then unto my so gra^^ous, and withal, so learned a Liege?



A Scotist in faction: therein farther employing my pen in Atvvo-solde
discourse (which I hope has been presented to the view of your Majesty) the
one containing a defense of your Highness honor: the other of your title, and
interest of the Crown of England. And if then my zeal and love of truth, and
obligation to your Majesty, drew me out of the compass of mine own
profession, to treat of law courses: I trust your benign Grace will now
license me, out of the same fountain of ^^ruencie and like zeal unto Gods
truth, no less respecting your Majesty's eternal honor, and heavenly
inheritance, something to say in matters of divinity: having been the best
part of my study, for more then thrice sever, years.

is that you confess so plainly, that both his honor, and his title to the
Crown of England, were not only called into question, but injured, and denied
by your Popish saction. And yet this intelligence you give him, is no news:
for it was discovered before out of a letter of Parsons in (...)
the Jesuits defense, against the Secular Priests.

A Jove principium: conformable to that in holy writ, I (...) (...), and Apoc.
cap. 1. 8.
Omega, that is, The begianing, and the end, says our Lord: And ^ying it unto
Princes, I may be bold to say, that nothing is more expedient, and necessary
for Kings: nothing more honorable, and of be^ assurance for their estate, then
that in the very beginning of their ^a^gne, they take especial o^der, that the
suprea^ne, and most pu^ssa^t M^narch of heaven and earth, be purely, and
uprightly served, as well in their own exemplar lives, as throughout their
Dominions. For of Almighty God his mere bouncde and great grace, they receive
and hold their D^adems and ^cely Seep^ers: and cannot possess and enjoy them
(their mighty Forces, and most prudent Counsels notwithstanding) one day
longer, then during his d^e will and pleasure. Which that wise King witnesses,
speaking in the person of Gods wisdom, Per me Reges regnant, Pronerb. 4. Dan.
4.
By me Kings do reign. And Nabuchodonozer sometime King of Babylon, was
turned out to grase with beasts, for seven years, and made to know and
confess, that the highest does command over the kingdoms of men, and
disposes of them, as pleases his d^uine wisdom. But I need not stand upon
this point, being to well known, and duly confessed by your Ma^es^^e.

Virg Eclog. 3 Theoc^ it. Idyl. 17. (...).
the Poets sentence, or his Majesty's purpose, or your own application? Our
Savior truly professes of himself, that he is R^. (...). 1. 8. 11. and 2. 8.
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was, and which
is to come: the first, and the last: that is eternal. Neither the Poet, nor
the King our of the P^^t intend to speak any thing of Gods eternity. Neither
can you reasonably apply that speech of our Savior, to secure Princes in their
estate, if they begin their government with Providing for obedience to God, by
true religion. But how little agreement there is betwixt Christ's speech and the
Poets, it may easily appear by this; that if his Majesty, in stead of Abs
love Principiu^, should have said, I am Alpha and Omega, or Christ is Alpha and
Omega, no man could have understood his meaning by his words.

One body, one Spirit, as you are called into one (...)
hope of your vocation, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: My most humble suite
and supplication, to your high Majesty is, that you to your eternal good,
will imbra^e, maintain, and set forth that only true, Catholic, and
Apostolic faith, wherein all your most royal progenitors lived and died or if
you cannot be won so soon, to alter that Religion in which it has been your
misfortune, to have been bred and brought up: That then in the mean season,
you will not so heavily persecute, the sincere professors of the other.



Diverse of his Majesty's progenitors lived and died in the profession of true
religion many years before a number of your Popish heresies were hatched.
Neither does he now maintainc it, because, by Gods special providence, he
has been brought up in it; but for that as it appears in the ^ Anno 1580.
June 20.
Confession of Scotland, after long and due examination his Majesty is
thoroughly resolved in the truth by the word and spirit of God.

Who would think that he which a little before justly commended his Majesty
for exceeding clemency, mildnes, louingnes and affablenes, should now
challenge him for persecuting heavily the sincere professors of the only true
Catholic and Apostolic faith?





That no Church ought further to separate it Page 7^.
self from the Church of Rome, either in doctrine or ceremony, then she has
departed from her self, when she was in her flourishing, and best estate.
From whence I deduce this reason: The principal Pillars of the Church of Rome
in her most flourishing estate, taught in all points of Religion, the same
Doctrine, that she now holds and teaches; and in express terms condemns
for error and heresy, most of those Articles, which the Protestants esteem to
be the principal parts of their reformed Gospel: Therefore if your Majesty
will resolutely embrace, and constantly defend that doctrine, which the Roman
Church maintained in her most flourishing estate; you must forsake the
Protestant, and take the Catholic into your Princely protection.

Romans 1. 8.
Scripture: from which no Church ought, or may depart: not because they may not
dissent from the Church of Rome; but because they must hold the true faith: for
which the Apostle commends the Church of Rome, that then was.

The antecedent of your reason is false. The Church of Rome, in the Apostles
time, did not teach many of those points that the Popish Romish Church now
holds; witness the Epistle to the Romans, wherein diverse maine matters of her
faith are recorded.



in the points, this book handles, we shall see in the particulars: All other
writers have those properties in a far inferior degree: from among whom, if
I would deal strictly with you, I might pick the Fathers of the Greek
Churches, and all those of the Latin that were not members of the Roman, as it
was a distinct Church from all other: For so is the Ambros. de sacra lib. 3. c.
1 Prosper de lib. a^b. ad Russin.
Roman Church conceived, and spoken of by his Majesty. But I will not press
you so hard, though I may chance to put you in mind of it now and then.

All points that have been reproved by some of the ancient writers are not
errors, and many times the same words have not the same meaning.

Martin Luther the ringleader of the new pretended reformation, lays for the
groundwork of his Religion, That man is justified by By faith only, or by
faith a^one, were english, so is not, by only faith. Aug. d^ (...) and openbus
cap. ^4. Cap. 20.
only says: and in this he is applauded and followed of all Protestants: and
yet as testifies the most sound witness of antiquity, S. Austin, that only
faith is sufficient to Salvation, was an error sprung up in the Apostles days;
against which, the Catholic Epistles of S. Peter, and S. James, and S. John,
were principally directed. And the author of that error was that infamous
Sorcerer Simon Magus; as the blessed Martyr Ireneus has recorded in his first
book against heresies.

Augustine speaks, it may thus ap^. The faith they so magnified, was a dead
faith The Apostle ((...) De side^ oper. cap. 1^. Non quale (...) (...) (...),
etc.
Austin, in refutation of them) speaks not of every kind ^, by which we believe
in God; but of that wholesome and truly ^angelicall faith, the works whereof
proceed from love. And again: How long therefore will they be deceived that
promise themselves everlasting life by a dead faith? Besides, they despised
good works as needles, either before, or after justification. Hoc Paulum
arbitra^^ sunt dic^re, (...) ^alum, etc.
They thought (says Augustine) that Paul wild us to do evil that good might
come of it. But it was not the Apostles meaning (says he) that by the
professing and inioyning of faith, Vt opera iu stitia contem na^tur.
good works of righteousness should be despised: But that every man might know
that he may be justified, ^iamsi legis opera no^ prae^esterint.
though he have not done the works of the Law before. For they follow him that
is justified, not go before him that is to be justified. Yea (...) cap. 20
Simon the Sorcerer doubted not, blasphemously to affirm, that the
commandments of holy life were given by the Angels, that made the world, who
thereby ^.
brought men into sla^^rie. Of whom (...) D. B. P. (...) cap. (...) (...) Aug.
(...)
Theod^ret says, that because men are saved by grace and faith, therefore he
gave by all means (...) to commit wickedness.

Luthers Religion, con^ niall of free will; wherein he iumpeth with the old
rotten (...) Manes, of whom the Mani^d cans were named.

Manes so denied free will, that he took away all assent of the will, in men's
daily sins, making the necessity of sinning natural, from the creation, as
proceeding from the evil god, or beginning, which he blasphemously and
absurdly devised: August. d^ side contra Manich. cap. 6. 7. and de hares. cap
46.
He (says Augustine) made two diverse beginnings, each contrary to other, and
both eternal. And from these two natures and substances of good and evil; so
that he ascribed the beginning of sin, not to the freedom of will, but to
the substance of the adverse faction. Yea so fair proceeded the Manichees,
that they affirmed Co^. (...) Ma^ich. lib. (...) cap. 8.
(says the same Augustine) that every living creature had two souls, A gente
l^ a gente (...) brarum.
one from light, another from darkness. Manes brought in fatal necessity
Histor. l^b. (...) cap. 10.
(says Socrates) and took away free will. We contrariwise acknowledge that
there is but one God, or author of all things created, that he made us in our
kind perfectly good. That sin came in first by freedom of will both in men
and Angels, and that, by free will, without any necessity of constraint, it is
daily committed. It appears further, to our comfort, in that place of Pr^ ^al.
co^ Pelag^
S. Hierome, that the Catholics, or true Christians in his time, were in like
sort charged by the Pelagians, with the Manichees error, in denying free will;
because they would not confess, that a man may be without sin, if he will:
which is one point of difference betwixt us and the Papists.

Pro^lus an erronius Origenist taught that sin was not taken away (...)
in Baptism, but only covered, as is recorded by that holy man, and ancient
Father E^anius. M. Per^ins (in the name of the Church of England) affirms in
like manner, that original sin remains still, and reigns in the
regenerate, albeit it is not imputed unto them.

Methodius, out of whom Epiphan. tom. 1. lib. 2. haeres. 64. and ibid.
Methodius.
Epiphanius recites Proclus opinions, in many leaves together word for word;
nor Epiphanius himself refute that of the remainders of sin, after Baptism:
rather they both confess, that the (...).
sproutes and branches of concupiscence abide in us; yea that (...).
sin dwells in us, by which the devil preuailes. The Apostle (says
Methodius) Romans 7. seems to make a threefold law. The first, the law of the
mind, according to that good that is ingrafted in us. The second, by the
assault of the devil, urging and distracting the mind, by imaginations (...).
full of passion. The third, which (...).
triumphs in the flesh by sin; which the Apostle calls the law of sin
dwelling in our members. That Hieronym. contra Pelag. lib. 1. in princip.
Hierom is of our opinion in this point, it appears in his book against the
Pelagians.

Iouinian was accounted a Monster by S. Augustine, for defending honest
Marriage to be of equal virtue, and merit with chaste Virginity: and says
further that this heresy was so sottish and fleshly; that it could not deceive
any one learned Priest, but only some few simple and carnal women. Yet this
our English champion blusheth not to affirm that marriage is not only equal,
but better also in diverse respects than Perkin. page 163.
Virginity.

Austin was neither so ancient, nor so holy, as S. Paul: having him on our
side, we need not fear the other. But the report, you make of him, is untrue.
For these are his words in English. August. retract. lib. 2. cap. 22.
This heresy prevailed so much in the city of Rome, that it is said to have
thrown into the estate of marriage even some vowed virgins, of whose chastity
there had been no suspicion before. So far is Augustine from calling them
simple, and carnal. Beside he adds (though you will not be known of it) that
he Frangebat.
weakened and overthrew the holy single life of holy men, by rehearsing and
commending the Fathers, (Abraham, Isaac, Jacob) who were married men. And
whereas he says, it could not come to the deceiving of Aliquorum sacerdotum.
any Priests, (for learned and any one is your gloss, besides the text) he
seems to attribute it to the short continuance thereof. It was August. de
haeres. cap. 82.
(says he) quickly oppressed and extinguished, and could not come to the
deceiving of any Priests.

feasts and fasting days, so do most of our Ministers at this time.

5. Eliz. cap. 5. Ra^^als Abri^ment of Ships and Shipping.
Fish days superstitiously abused by you, are ciuilly retained by us with
less riot than your selves do use.

Vigilantius was sharply reproved by S. Hierome, in a book written against
him, and has been ever since unto this day, esteemed a wicked heretic, for
denying prayer to Saints, and honor to be done unto their Reli^es: And yet,
what point of Doctrine is more current among the Protestants, than this?

In censura sua in illum Hieronymilibrum.
Erasmus, not without cause, finds want of modesty in that treatise of
Hieroms; he might have found want of truth too, if Vigilantius held no worse
opinion, than those you recite. But of the former, namely praying to Saints,
neither the one, nor the other speaks a word. And indeed it was not the
manner in those days to pray to the Martyrs, but to pray O^^phr. de ritu
sepeliendi mortu^^. Eusebius hist. lib. 7. cap. 11.
at their Tombs: which custom, it should seem remained till that time,
according to the former practice of the Christians, who assembled ordinarily
where the Martyrs were (...), dorters, sleeping places. Tertulliano Areae. ad
Sc^pulam. Aug ad q. vul^, haeres. 53.
buried, before they were suffered to have any Churches.

Aerius to the Arrian heresy, added this of his own; That we must not pray
for the souls of our friends departed; as S. Augustine has registered. And do
not all Protestants embrace and earnestly defend the same?

This doctrine of prayer for the dead, the denial whereof is counted an error
in Aerius, has no foundation in the Scripture, but was built upon the
tradition of the Fathers, as Epiphan. lib. 3. Tom. 1. haeres. 75.
he, from whom Austin takes the accusation, confesses.

Arrians, and of other more ancient heretics, to reject all Traditions, and
to rely only upon the written D. B. P. Lib. 3. c. 20. Lib. 1. con. Maximinum.
word, as testifies S. Ireneus and S. Augustine. Do not ours the same,
rejecting all Traditions as Man's Invention.

A perilous error, no doubt, to rest wholly upon the written word: that is, to
believe none but God, in matters of his own worship and religion. Irenaeus
lib. 1. cap. 20.
Ireneus, in the places alleged, has no word of rejecting traditions: rather
he speaks the contrary of Simon Magu^, who rejected the Scripture, to
establish his own devices. S. Austin finds no fault with Maximinus for
resting upon the Scriptures; nor indeed reasonably could: for it is his own
doctrine in that August. cont. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14.
conference with the Heretic, and Cont. Dona tist. lib. 2. cap. 6 and de v^at.
(...). ^les. 2. 3. 6.
other where.

Xea^s a Barba^ous Persian indeed, yet in show a counterfeited Christian; is
noted for one of the first among Christians, that inueyed against the Images of
Saints, and the worship done by true Christians unto them; as both Nicephorus,
and Ced^ comppen^ do record. N^ceph lib. 10. (...).
The reprobate Jews indeed before him, and after even until this day, the
mis^r^an^. Turks (enemies of all Christianity) do dwell still in the same
er^r: And yet is not this most vehemently auer^ed by our Protestants, and all
^alui^^sts; although they cannot deny but that above 900. years ago, in the
second general Council holden at Nice, they are by the con^^nt of the best,
and most learned of the world, for ever accursed that do deny reverence and
worship, to be given unto the Images of Saints?

(...) (...) of this ^ame, Callistus, and Gregores, both writers of histories.
Nicephorus (you should have added Callistus, that the reader might have known
whom you meant, and have quoted Nicephor. Callist. lib. 16. cap. 27.
lib. 16. not 10.) who lived not 400. years since, and C^nus page 290.
Cedrenus, who lived, as it is thought, about the year 1058. are neither of
antiquity, nor credit to auow a history not recorded by any of their
ancients. But how could Xenaias, about the year 478. be one of the first, if
the Commentar^ in Dama^. Orthod. sid. li. 4. cap. 17.
Commentary upon Damascen say true: That the worshipping of Images was
condemned as superstitious, by some, about the beginning of the Gospel
preached? Cedrenus says be was one of the first; Callistus after him more then
200. years, says he was the first.

See ^^y answer in the treatise of images tovvard the end.
second Council of Nice was a conuenticle of Idolaters, neither of the best,
nor of the most learned; and was presently after condemned by the Council of
Frankfort.

I will omit sundry other heads of the Protestants Religion, by all
approved antiquity reproved, aad condemned, that I pass not the bounds of an
Epistle, and seem over tedious unto your Majesty. Especially considering that
these are sufficient, to convince that those points (wherein the Protestants
affirm the present Church of Rome, to have so far degenerate from the
ancient) are the very essential parts of says, then maintained by the
Romans: And the contrary opinions nothing else, but wicked heresies, of old
invented, and obstinately held against the same Roman See, even as they are
now our time: and of old also condemned by the same Church in her most
flourishing and best estate. Wherefore your most excellent Majesty, being
resolute in that singular good opinion, (that no Church ought farther to depart
from the Church of Rome, then she is departed from her self in her
flourishing estate,) must needs recall the Church of England, from such
extrauagant opinions, to join with the Roman Church in the aforesaid articles,
which she in her best time held for parts of pure faith: And in all others
also which they cannot directly prove (in a lawful disputation before your
Majesty) to have been altered by her, particularly naming the point of
Doctrine; the author o^ the change: the time and place, where, and when ht
lived: who followed him, who resisted him, and such other like circumstances,
which all be easily showed in every such reuolte or innovation: because the
vigilant care of the Pastors of Christ's flock, have bin always so great, as
no such things could be unknown, let slip, or vnrecorded.

Thus much for my first reason, collected from the untruth of the Protestants
religion.

Romans 1. 8.
S. Paul commends; nor indeed ever can be.

It is enough for us, if we can show by record of Scripture, that the doctrine
the Church of Rome now holds, is not that she maintained in her best estate:
which we often have done, and always will be ready to do. Is it not a good
plea in law, to prove by ancient evidences and deeds, that the land was mine,
unless I can show when, and how the possession of every house, Meadow, Close,
etc. was lost? yet it stands you upon to prove how you came by it, and by what
right you hold it. Which you must do, when all comes to all, by the Scripture,
or else your title will never be good.

Two monstrous vntr^ (...) have showed else where.
And will besides say nothing of that their blasphemy against our Savior
Jesus Christ, that he overcome with the pains of his passion upon the Cross,
did doubt, (if not despair) of his own salvation: being unwilling to touch
any other points, then such as are afterward discussed in this book.

not our opinions, as has been showed sufficiently In my answer to the 12.
Articles. part. 2. art. 5. and part. 1. art. 4. The disdain is at your
idolagrie, not at the.
elsewhere.

The triumphant Citizens of heaven (who enjoy the presence of God, and happiest
life that can be imagined) are by Protestants disdainfully termed, Dead men,
and esteemed neither to have credit with God to obtain any thing, nor any care
or compassion on men, among whom they once lived and conuersed so kindly.

The Saints departed we love and honor, but are forced to call them dead men,
as De vera relig. cap. 55.
Austin does, by reason of your Idolatry; with the same disdain, in our weak
measure, with which the Phil. 3. 2. Gal. 5. 2.
Apostle disgraced Circumcision. Of their credit with God we doubt not; their
care of men we deny not: but See my answer to 12. Articl. par. 1. art. 4. H.
What does your Po^e, that may release them all and will not?
we know no calling they have to become our mediators, with dishonor to God
and Christ.

And as for the poor souls departed, who in Purgatory fire pay dear for
their former delights and pleasures; they deprive them of all humane succor,
by teaching the world to believe that there is no such matter.

See my answer to 12. Articl. part. 1. art. 4. l. Utterly untrue.
We deprive them of nothing, that God in the Scripture allows them. Prove
your Purgatory thence, and we will confess our error.

Concerning us Christians yet living on earth, there is no less impiety in
their opinions: For they teach that the best Christian is no better in effect,
then a whited Sepulcher, being inwardly full of all wickedness, and mischief;
and only by an outward imputation of Christ's righteousness unto them, are
accepted of God for just. To think that there is inherent in the soul of Man,
any such grace of God, as does cleanse it from sin, and make the man just in
his sight; is with them, to We acknowledge such a grace, though not to
justification.
raze the foundation of Religion, and to make Christ a Pseudochrist: wherein, I
know not whether they be more envious against the good of Man, then they are
injurious, either to the inestimable value of Christ's blood, as though it could
not deserve any better estate for his favorites: or unto the virtue and
efficacy of the holy Ghost; as not being able (by likeliehood) to purge men's
souls from sin, and endue them with such Heavenly qualities. I omit the
disgrace thereby don to the Blessed Godhead it self, making the Holy of
Holies, father willing to cover and cleake our iniquity, then to cure it. And
contrary to his infinite goodness, to love them whom he sees defiled with all
manner of abominations.

1. Cor. 6. 11.
inherent, though imperfect, righteousness; and account none whited sepulchers,
but those that brag or make she of holiness, Matthew. 23. 27
being but hypocrites. We ascribe our justification wholly and only to the
mercy of God, in Romans 4. 3, 4* ^.
forgiving our sins, for Christ's obedience, by accounting ^.
faith to us for rightcousnes. We envy not the good of man, but prefer Gods
truth before man's pride. Our Savior Christ's sacrifice we megnifie, as
infinitely perfect; but we know the whole e^t thereof is not perfected at once
in us, though the holy Ghost be of infinite power, which, in respect of us, is
limited by the gracious and wise providence of God. We teach that God does not
only cover our sins, by forgiving them; but cure our corruption, by
abolishing it wholly, yet 1. Cor. 13* (...). Romans 7. 23. 2. Cor. 12. 9.
by little and little. His love depends not upon our righteousness: for he loved
us, Romans 5. 8. 1. Ioh 4. 10.
when we were most unrighteous: but upon the estate of Gal. 4 6. Romans 8. 15.
being his sons, members of his beloved son Jesus Christ, and Ephe^. 1. 3.
(...)
elected to adoption and salvation by him, before the foundation of the world
was laid.

And ea^e of vn^.
feed the body, as to chastize it by fasting. That it is as holy, to fulfill
the fleshly desires of it by Marriage, as by Continency, to mortify them; yea
that it is flat against the word of God to vow Virginity: And also contrary
to his blessed will to bestow our goods on the poor, and to give our selves
wholly to prayer, and fasting. All which, this Advocate of the English
Congregation teaches express^e

Is this the purity of the Gospel? Or is it not rather the high way to Page
132. 162. 16^*
Epicurisme, and to all worldly vanity, and iniquity?

1. Cor. 9. 27.
necessary: though we acknowledge neither merit, nor satisfaction in it, which
accompany your popish fasts. Mortification of Romans 6. (...) Col. 3. 5.
all kinds of lusts, not only that one, we account a necessary part of
sanctification; neither do we allow marriage to fulfill the lust of the flesh,
1. Cor. 7. 2. (...).
but to remedy it: vowing of virginity we approve not, because a man cannot
be sure that he shall keep his vow always, though for a time he be able:
besides, all lawful vows being things indifferent, 1. Cor 6 12.
charity must give judgment of excediencie in making th^n. See my ansvv^
(...) the (...) of V^.
To make prayer and fasting our whole work, is to live in the world without a
calling. To give away our goods to the poor, so to become chargeable to
others, is to tempt God, and burden the Church: to do it with opinion of
merit, is popish pride against Gods glory.

I deny both your consequences. Borrowed out of the twelve Articles, and
ansvvered by me heretofore. Romans 6.
sin. Wherefore, as good for him to lean all undone, as to do any.

Nay, if this position of theirs were true, it would to low necessarily, that
all men were bound under pain of damnation, never to do any good deed, to
long as they live: for that their good deed being stained with sin, cannot
but deserve the hyre of sin, which according to the Apostle is: Death
everlasting. If your Majesty's important affairs, would once permit you to
consider maturely of these impieties, and many other like absurdities,
wherewith the Protestant Doctrine is stuffed: I dare be bold to say that you
would speedely either command them, to reform themselves, and amend their
errors; or fairly give them their Congie.

See my answer to 12. Articl. part. 2. art. 3.
impossible to keep Gods commandments perfectly to justification; but we
deny, that therefore it is in vain to go about it. Yea we truly affirm,
that we are 1. Cor. 15. 58
bound to do our best endeavor, and shall have acceptance and reward of our
works from God, though not upon any desert of ours. ^o the 12. Art. part. 2.
art. 2.
That our best works are tainted with imperfections we profess plainly: That
they are therefore to be left undone, neither we say, nor you can prove: The
imperfection that cleaues to them, is by all good means to be avoided, but the
works to be performed: for it is not the work, but the imperfection in it
that is forbidden.

Epiphoneme. That it is impossible for a Protestant, firmly cleaning to the
grounds of his own Religion, to hope for any salvation. For they do, and
needs must grant, that no man can be saved without a lively faith; and also
that a lively faith cannot be without charity, for otherwise it were dead: Now
then to the purpose; No Protestant can have charity: for as witnesses Saint
John. This is the charity of God, that we keep his commandments. But it is
impossible (according to the Protestants) to keep the commandments: (...)
Epist. cap. 5. 3
therefore also impossible to have charity; Which is the ^ulnes of Rom 13.
the law: and consequently impossible to have a lively faith, which cannot be
without charity. And so finally through want of that l^uely feeling faith,
whereby they should lay hold on Christ's righteousness, to hale and apply that
unto themselves, they can have no hope at all, of any favor, and grace at Gods
hands: Without which they must needs assure themselves of eternal damnation,
in steed of their pretended certain^ of salvation.



viz. Are we now come to that pass, Page 69.
that we must appeache Constantine of Popery and superstition? Which argues
that your Majesty judges them, to have little regard of either piety or
ciuility, that would admit such a thought into their mind, as that the first
Christian Emperor (our most renowned countriman) should be nousled and
brought up in superstition: wherein your Majesty has great reason, for he was
most carefully instructed, and taught the Christian Religion, by such holy
Confessors, whose sincerity in faith had bin tried in the hot furnace of
many strange persecutions: And he farther had the good hap to see, and hear
together in the first general Council of Nice, many of the holiest, and best
learned Bishops of Christendom. Therefore, is it most unlikely that so Royal
a Person, devoted to Religion, add having so good means to attain to the
perfect knowledge thereof, as no man could have better; should nevertheless in
the purest time of it, be mis-ledde into error, and superstition. If then, it
may be proved, that this most Christian Emperor (the glittering ornament of
our noble Island) did believe such articles of the present Roman Church, as the
Protestants teach not to be believed: Will not your Majesty rather join in
faith with so pee^les a Prince, who by the consent of all antiquity, was for
certain right well informed, then with these, whom (doubtless) most men deem
to be pitifully deceiued' Now that Constantine was of the same opinion, in
matter of Religion, with the present Church of Rome, may evidently be gathered
out of this that follows.

Constantine to have been a worthy, a singular instrument of God, for the good
of his Church, wrongs the worthy Emperor, and sins against God. But the
trial of doctrine is to be fetched, not from the opinions and examples of men,
though never so holy, but from the Holy of Holies. It may not seem strange
if superstition were crept into the Church before Constantines time, when the
2. These. 2. 7.
Apostle witnesses, that even in his days the mystery of iniquity was
already begun.

Eusebius. de vita Constan. lib. 3. cap. 2. Lib. 2. cap. 14: Lib. 4. cap. 26.
Posie: In this sign of salvation, I have delivered the City. W^ it also he
blessed his visage.

With fasting and other corporal affliction, he chastized his body, that he
might please God.

He with incredible admiration, honored prosessed Virgins, and made laws in
their favor.

He builded many Churches in honor of the Apostles, and Martyrs. Ibidem lib.
3. cap. 47. and alibi. Ch^y ^om. 66. ad pop. Antioth.


And as S. Chrysostom records: He that was reuested in purple, went to
embrace the Sepulchers of S. Peter, and S Paul, and all Princely state laid
aside, stood humbly praying unto the Saints, that they would be intercessors
for him unto God.

He farther took order for the burying of his own body, in the midst of the
Tombs of the twelve Apostles, that after his death he might be partaker of the
prayers, which should be there offered in the honor of the Eusebius. in vita
Constable. lib. 4. c. 60 Ibid. cap 71.
Apostles. Neither was he frustrated of his holy desire for as it follows in
the 71. Chapter of the same book, at his funerals, the people joining with the
Priests, with many ^cares, and great sighs, powered out prayers for the good
Emperors soul.

Again, at a (...) feast which he held at the dedication of the Church built
by (...) Jerusalem; some of (...) clergy preached and expounded the holy
Scriptures: and oath (...) me with unbloody Sacrifice, and ^st all
cons^cr^lions, appeased the Godhead, and prayed for the Ibidem de vi^a Constable.
li. 4. ca. 45
h^^lth of he Prince.

Moreover this ^alous E^pero^r reprehended Acasius, (a Nouatian h^ke) (...)
saying, that it was not in the power of Priests, but of Zozom. lib^. 1. hist.
Eccl. cap. 21
God only to forgiuesinnes.

Finally, toward true Bishops, the law full Pastors of Christ's Church, he
carried such a reverend (...) that being in the Council of Nice, he would not
^iue dow^e, before they (...) back^ed unto him so to do. And Socr hist. lib.
1. cap. 5.
was so far (...) upon h^^ to (...) p^came judge, in causes Ecclesiastical;
that he (...) th^re prof ^ied, that it did not belong to him to judge of
Bishops (...) to be iud^ by them.

It was not the (...), but the thing signified, viz. Christ crucified, to which
Constantine showed his affection, and by whom he obtained all his victories;
(...).
by this God, not by this sign.

The chastising of his body was not to please God by the work wrought, but to
fit himself to prayer, whereby he might obtain mercy, Eusebius. de vita
Constant. li. 2. cap. 14. (...).
says Eusebius, appeasing God by supplication. To make virginity a more
divine life than the married estate, as ib. 4. cap. 26
Eusibius in that place calls it, is to say Adam lived a more divine life
before God created Eua^, than he could do afterward; and so to make her not an
help, but an hinderance to him. De ^aud Constant. (...).
Eusebius speaks not of the Apostles, but of the Martyrs, to whom the Churches
were dedicated, but to God only, and were called the Lords houses, Dominicae,
(...).
(...) Kyrch, Churches. They were also named (...), not because they were built
in honor of the Martyrs, but because (as I showed before) the Christians used
anciently to assemble in the places Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 2.
where the Martyrs had been buried; or because of Christ who was accounted the
prince of Martyrs, in respect of whom the Martyrs refused the name, as
belonging properly to him. Therefore Eusebius calls the Church, (...), though
the translator term it Martyrum domum, in stead of (...).

This testimony out of Chrysostom may well be suspected, Plessy de Missa lib.
3. cap. 15.
being in the same words in a Sermon falsely attributed to Austin, de Sancto
Paulo, and alleged out of a later writer one Theodorus Daphnopathus, by Garret
a Chanon at the least, we may well remember that caveat of Biblioth. li. 6.
Annot. 152.
Sixtus Sene^sis, and take the speech to be hyperbolicall.

It Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. honul. 66.
was the Apostles glory, that people in such multitudes came to the places of
their burial to pray, though they prayed not to them; nor thought their
prayers ever a whit the better, because they were made there. And where there
is mention in Eusebius of the peoples praying for the Emperor (with more zeal
than knowledge) there is no mention of honoring the Apostles by prayer.

He should have said with (...).
unbloody sacrifices; which were not Mastes, but (...).
prayers, and perhaps some offerings for relief of the poor, and maintaining
of the Temple.

Your author says that Acasius affirmed this only of the sin that is to
death. Hereupon the Emperor replied; Set up a ladder for thy self (Acasius)
and go alone into heaven: Quae quidem arbitror imperatorem etc. Non quo eum
laudaret.
which (says he) I think the Emperor said to Acasius, not that he might
commend him, but that men might think, that they are not free from the stain
of sin. Sozomen, that writes the history, thinks the Emperor did not
intend to praise Acasius, but to instruct other; you affirm peremptorily that
the Emperor reprehended him.

Socrat hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
It pleased the gracious Emperor so much to honor those worthy and reverend
Fathers; but it becomes not your Bishops or Popes therefore to exact such
behavior of their Sovereigns; and much less to make them As Gregory the 7.
s^raed the Emperor Henry the 4. his vvi^e and eldest son. B^nno.
dance attendance barefooted, or As Frederick the 1. did to Pope Hadrian the 4.
hold their stirrups: as for that profession of the good Emperor, it shows
^is zeal, but proves not that Princes may not judge Bishops, being their
subjects: especially since the reason is strong, for Sovereigns principally,
for Bishops, but as their deputies. Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
You (says the Emperor) are appointed gods to us, and it is not convenient
that man should judge gods; but he only, of whom the Psalm. 82. 1. Ruffi lib.
1. hist. cap 2.
Psalmist says, God sits in the assembly of gods.

If then this right Puissant Emperor, and most sincere Christian, reverenced
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and believed that there was power in Priests to
remitte sins, that Saints were to be prayed unto, and that prayer was to be
made for the dead, and such like, as appears by the evident testimony, o^
most approved Author, that lived with him: has your Majesty any cause to
doubt, but that in matters of faith, he agreed with the present Roman Church?
Wherefore my hope and trust in Almighty God is, that you in your high wisdom,
upon mature and due consideration, how many old condemned errors the
Protestants hold; and with a^lwell weighing that the whole frame of their
Doctrine tends to the disgracing of God, and his Saints, to the
discouragement of men, from well doing, and does (as it were) loosen the reins
unto all fleshly liberty, will in time make a most Godly resolution, to imitate
that famous Emperor Constantine. He contrary to his former education, embraced
with a^h spower that same Roman Religion, which we now profess: And (which is
worthy to be observed) he feared nothing the contrary disposition of the
multitude, or greater part of his subjects, that were wholly led another way.
But following the blessed example of his most virtuous Mother S. Hel^^a,
reposed himself in the powerful assistance of the Almighty, and chas^^ all
other Religions into corners, set ng up and firmly ^stabl shing the Roman
Th^re can b^e no cause aleadged, why your Majesty may not do the like, i^ ^t
shall please God effectually to stir up your gracious mi^^e, and (...) bend
your heart to undertake it: for at that time there was more likelyhoode of
resistance, then now: and no^ much more help at hand, if any resistance should
be offered.







against recusant Catholics, to be put in practice and executed. For how can
it seem comfortable to reason, in your Majesty's deep wisdom, and
judgment? that your loving Subjects should by compulsion and constrainte,
under that intolerable penalty of loss of all their goods, conform
themselves to such articles of Religion, that by the purest antiquity were
censured to be erroneous and execrable? And what misery, and pity were it, to
drive them perforce, either to swallow down the deadly poison of their souls,
or else to endure besides the disgrace of the state, the loss of their worldly
wealth and liberty. Consider, and weigh with your self, ^y most gracious
Liege, whether it will not be thought over great severity, to press men (even
against humane nature and condition,) with patience to hear their own
profession and belief, both untruly slaundered, and most bitterly reviled and
inueighed against: as in most Ministers sermons it is commonly. Yea to give
patient ear to them that blush not publicly, to call our blessed Saviors
body in the holy Sacrament, an abominable Idol; his glorious and immortal
Saints, senseles dead Men; his Vicar and Vicegerent on earth Antichrist, and
every Catholic an Idolater. With infinite other intolerable reproaches; Our
constant hope, even yet, (though against hope) is, that your Majesty out of
your own sweet natural disposition, and most mild carriage in government
hitherto, will not only moderate, but suspende all such extreamitie: And not
suffer it to be extended against them, who in former doubtful times, were (in
manner) the only men, that defended and made manifest to the world, your Title
and interest to the Crown of England; and were no less willing to receive
you, when the time came: and as forward to have assisted you (if need had
required) as any sort of Subjects within the land. And never since w^ingly
offended your sacred Majesty in any thing. It may be objected that they do
not conform themselves unto a statute law, made against their Religion: Be it
so. Then their Religion toward God, not any contempt of their lawful
Superior, does command them from the conformity, which is pardonable.
Considering that they be no inuenters, or followe^s of novelties, but only
hold on and persevere in the ^aith of their forefathers. And what subject is
there among the most dutiful, that does not often transgress and give offense
to one statute law or other: yet for no other law, men are so hardly dealt
withal, albeit they violate many of them together. Only Ca^holikes are for
the tra^ressing of one, hu^peled and handled as though they were some heinous
rebbels, and tray^ors: Who (be it spoken without disparagement to others) are
(by them that live near them) esteemed commonly, the most orderly subjects; as
true of their words, a^ ^^und in their deeds, of as great charity and
hospitality toward their neighbors, and compassion of the poor: briefly,
of as moderate and c^le carriage and behavior, as mo^ men in their Country:
So that to beggar and undo them (as the execution of that law established,
must needs do the poorer sort of them,) would be little less then to undo
and destroy all good order, and Discipline in the common weal.

To an Epistle of a Puritan-Papist. Why not Cui bono?
Master Powels answer, lately published.

Cassian may be diligently examined: Cu^ bo^um? For whose commodity, to what
end and purpose must such numbers of most civil subjects, be so grievously
molested? What is the cause why your peaceable and joyful government, should
be so mingled with such bitter storms of persecution? Is it to extinguish the
Catholic faith? It ^eth not in man's power to suppress and destroy that, which
the Almighty supporteth and maintains. The gates of ^^ll shall not preu^e
against the Catholic Church. And let but those grave and wise counsailers (who
Matthew. 16.
have managed the state in our late Queens days) inform your Majesty
whether all those terrible persecutions that then were most vehemently
pursued, did any whit at all diminish the number of Recusants: or rather did
not greatly multiply and increase them, from one at the first to an hundred
and more in continuance. But it may be, they entend by those penal laws, to
enrich your Majesty, and to fill your coffers: Surely the receipts will fall
our much too short, to g^ovv to any such reckoning. And what delight to en^ich
your treasury, and stuff your coffers with regrets, and outcries of the
husband, wife, children, widow, and poor infants, when as the best and
most assured treasury of a King, is (by the prudent esteemed) to consist in
the love, and hearty affection of his people? Or are these penal laws, and
forfeitures ordained for rewards unto such dependents, as for these or the
like do follovv you? But the revenues, preferments, and offices, belonging to
your Crown of England, are abundantly able to content and revvard them, that
shall deserve well of the common-vveal^, without that so heavy agrie^ance
and heart bleeding of others your Majesty's good subjects. And your Majesty's
high wisdom, and long experience in government, can best remember you, that
such men are not so mindful of benefits received, as the daily want and
misery, will continually renew and revive the memory of the oppressed.

And when they shall see no hope of remedy, the state being now Novv^^^ are
in your right vein.
settled, and a continual posterity like to ensue of one nature and condition:
God knovveth what that forcible vveapon of necessirie may constrain and drive
men unto a^ length.

Catholic faith? or do you dally with him by this question? To the 12. Art.
^art. 1. art. 1. D.
The gates of hell are set open to all men by your catholic faith: so that the
devil will never seek to prevail against it. Either the general opinion of
all men, and the bragges of your own side are very vain and false, or else
for one Papist in her Majesty's days and government, there are three now at
the least, upon the very hope of toleration.

These are matters of estate undutifully propounding to the Popes vassals
occasion of heartburning against their Sovereign, to a worse purpose. Bellarm.
de summo pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. 6. 7
It is not lawful for Christians (says your Cardinal Bellarmine) to endure a
King that is an heretic, if he attempt to draw his subjects to his heresy.

Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. 6. 7. Would you have greater reason of
restraint than idolatry and treason? Matthew. 13. A good reason to suffer all
kind of heretics.
for their conscience: let others conceive as they shall please, I will never
suffer my self to be persuaded, that your Majesty will ever permit it,
before I see it done. If it be further objected, why should not your Majesty
asvvell punish Catholics in your Kingdoms, as Catholics do Protestants in
some other Countries: I answer, that in all Countries where multitudes of
both sorts are mixed, as it is in England: The Protestants are tolerated, as in
France, Polonia, Bohemia, the Catholic States of Germany, and Ca^tounes,
according to that of the Gospel: Suffer both the wheat and co^kle to grow
until harvest. In Spain, and Italy, where s^arse any Protestants be, the
case is otherwise. But what is that to England? where are very many Catholic
Recusants, and Catholikely affected in every degree, not only of the
Temporaltie, but in the Clergy also, hardly of the highest degrees of honor
to be excepted: therefore for their number and quality to be tolerated.



rich rewards of learning, as Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, Deaneries,
Arch-deaconries, Residencies, Prebends, and Benefices: the erecting, and
building of so goodly Schools, Colleges, and Hospitals, and endowing of them
with so ample possessions, which all proceeded out of the bowels of the true
wisdom, piety, and virtue of their Catholic Religion: Is not this much more
then a sufficient motive why their heirs in faith, should be most benignely,
and lovingly dealt with? and not for the profession of the same Religion, so
severely afflicted? Let the Protestants in those countries, where they are most
molested, appear and show, that their predecessors in belief, have been so
beneficial unto the public weal: and I dare undertake, that for their
Ancestors sake, they shall find much more favor, then we sue for. Wherefore
No doubt but you have all Princes and estates at command.
they can have no just cause, to repine at your Majesty's goodness, if upon men
of that Religion, which has been so beneficial unto your whole Realm, you
take extraordinary compassion.



Except the Pope will them.
thereunto compelled by the law of God: or else utterly to beggar and to undo,
both them and theirs, for their constant profession of the ancient Roman
faith. My confidence in the sweet providence of the Almighty is, that he will
mercifully incline your Royal heart, to choose rather to pardon, then to
punish; because the way of mercy, consorteth better with your kind and tender
nature: it is of better assurance to continue your peaceable and prosperous
Reign: it will purchase mercy at Gods hands, according to his own promise:
Blessed be the merciful, Matthew. 5. Thine eye shall not pity him. Deuteronomy. 13.
8. 9.
for they shall obtain mercy.

I need not add what a consolation and comfort it will be to many score
thousands of your subjects, and the greatest obligation that can be devised, to
bind them to you and yours for ever. Now what applause, and congratulation
from foreign Catholic countries, would follow this your famous fact?
Undoubtedly all the glorious company of Kings and Queens (now in heaven) of
whom you are lineally descended: and among all the rest, namely, your most
sacred and dear Mother, that endured so much for her constancy in the same
Catholic faith, cannot but take it most kindly, if for God and their sakes,
you take into your Princely protection their followers in the Roman faith, and
de fend them from oppression.

Thus most humbly craving pardon of your Highness, if I have in any thing
exceeded the limits of my bounden duty, I beseech your blessed Savior to
endue you, both with the true knowledge of his divine verity, and with the
spirit of Fortitude, to embrace and defend it constantly; or at the least,
graciously to tolerate and permit it.

Your most excellent Majesty's, most obedient, and loyal subject, and servant.
W. B.




GEntle Reader, I mean not here to entertayne thee with many words: the
principal cause that moved me to write, was the honor and glory of God, in
defense of his sacred verity, then the employing of his talent bestowed upon
me: as well to sortifie the weaker sort of Catholics in their faith, as to
call back and lead other (who wander up and down like to lost sheep, after
their own fancies) into the right way.

The like reasons have drawn me to this survey of your reformation, with a
resolute purpose to acknowledge any truth, that you shall show me, though it be
against the judgment of all the Churches in Christendom.

I took in hand particularly the confutation of this book, not only for that
I was thereunto requested, by a friend of good intelligence and judgment, who
thought it very expedient: but also because perusing of it, I found it penned
more Schollerlike, then the Protestants use to do ordinariely: For first the
points in controversy, are set down dist^^ctly, and for the most part
truly. Afterward in confirmation of their opinion, the chief arguments are
produced from both Scriptures, Fathers, and reason: Which are not vulgar, but
called out of their Rabbis, Luther, Peter Ma^tir, Calvin, Kemnitius, and such
like, though he name them not. Lastly, he places some objections, made in
favor of the Catholic doctrine, and answers to them as well as he could.
And (which J speak to his commendation) does perform all this very briefly
and clearly. So that (to speak my o^i^^on freely) I have not seen any book
of like quantity, published by a Protestant, to contain either more matter,
or delivered in better method. And consequently more apt to deceive the simple:
especially considering that he withal counterfeiteth to come as near unto the
Roman Church, as his tender conscience will permit him, whereas indeed he
walks as wide from it, as any other noueller of this age.

Fulke, long since, desired to have the matter brought to an issue, and tried
by syllogismes, the very judgment seat of true reason.

If you had known Master Perkins life, as well as you see his learning, you
would never have accused him of counterfeiting: whereof also me thinks he may
easily be acquitted by that cleerenes which you discern and acknowledge in him.

Wherefore I esteemed my spare time best employed about the discovering of it,
being (as it were) an abridgement of the principal controversies of these
times, and do endeavor after the same Scholasticall manner, without all
superfluity of words, no less to maintain and defend the Catholic party:
then to confute all such reasons, as are by M. Perkins alleged for the
contrary.

Read this short treatise good Christian diligently, for thou shall find in
it the marrow and pith of many large volumes, contracted and drawn into a
narrovv revvme. And read it over as it becomes a good Christian, with a
desire to find out, and to follovv the truth, because it concerns thy
eternal salvation: and then judge without partiality, whether Religion has
better grounds in Gods word, more evident testimony from the purest
antiquity, and is more conformable unto all Godliness, good life, and upright
dealing, (the infallible marks of the best Religion) and speedely embrace
that. Before I end this short preface, I must entreat thy patience to bear
with the ^aultes in Printing, which are too too many, but not so much to be
blamed, if it be courteously considered that it was Printed far from the
Author, with a Dutch composer, and ouerseene by an unskillful Corrector, the
greatest of them shall be amended in the end of the book.





Perkins good to see by experience, how vain it is for men to strive against
God, for the Pope: but it would have been little to your advantage, to have had
such an adversary.

Knight, etc. Grace and peace.
RIght Worshipful, it is a notable policy of the devil, which he has put
into the heads of sundry men in this age, to think that our religion and the
religion of the present Church of Rome are all one for substance: and that they
may be reunited as (in their opinion) they were before. Writings to this effect
are spread abroad in the French tongue, and respected of English Protestants
more then is meet, or ought to be. For let men in show of moderation, pretend
the peace and good estate of the Catholic Church as long as they will; this
Union of the two religions can never be made, more then the union of light and
darkness.

MASTER PERKINS IN THE Epistle Dedicatorie.

It is a policy of the devil, to think that our Religion, and the Religion
of the present Church of Rome, are all one in substance, or that they may be
reunited.

BEfore I am to deliver my opinion concerning this point, I had need to be
informed, what this Author means by these words our Religion: For there being
great diversities of pretended Religions current in the world, all contrary to
the Church of Rome, how can I certainly know, whether of them h^ professes?
Wherefore (good Sir) may it please you to declare, what Religion you
understand, when you say our Religion? Is it that which Martin Luther (a
licentious Friar) first preached in Germany? or rather that, which the martial
Minister Zwinglius, contended with sword and shield, to set up in Switzerland?
or perhaps that, which John Calvin, by sedition wrought into Geneua, expelling
the lawful Magistrate thence, and by the aid of Beza (a dissolute turnecoate)
spread into many corners of France? Or if by your Religion, you mean only to
comprehend the Religion now practiced in England. yet are you farther to show,
whether you understand that established by the State, or the other more refined
(as it is thought by many) and embraced by them, who are called Puritanes, for
of their leaven, sauoureth that position of yours: That the article of Christ's
descent into bell, crept into the Creed by negligence; and some other such
like in this book. These principal divisions of the new Gospel (to omit
sundry sub-diuisions) being famous, and received of diverse in England,
according to each man's fantasy, it is meet you express, whether of them you
speak of, that it may be duly considered, how the Roman Religion and it
agree, and what union may be made between them.

Perkins by our religion means, as you say afterward, the religion now
professed in England? For your word (practiced) is too skant for doctrine; some
points whereof fall not into practice. If it be contrary to the Church of
Rome, it is easily answered without any such inquiry, that contraries cannot
be united.

If difference in some points make a diverse religion, how many kinds are there
amongst you Papists? let the Franciscans and Dominicans go, with all the rest
of former times; what say you to these maine points, Justification in Albert.
Pighius controuers. 2.
Pighius, Predestination in Bellarm de great and lib. arb.
Bellarmine, Free will in Lib. 21. c. 9. Barthol. Camerarius de lib. arb.
Bartholomew Camerarius, three pillars of your Church?

The difference betwixt 12. Art. part. 1. Art. 1.
Protestants and Puritanes (as you call them) is not in any essential point of
faith, but in matters of outward government and ceremonies.

Christ, yet in deed they turn him to a Pseudo-Christ, and an Idol of their
own brain.

May there be an union betwixt (...) of the (...) (...) the Church of ^ome?
then there is between light and darkness, faith and insidel^tie, Christ and
Beliall. Notwithstanding I think that the reason by you produced to prove the
impossibility of this union, is of no value, to ^it, that they of the Roman
Church ^aue razed the foundation; for though in words they honor Christ, yet
indeed they turn him into a Pseudochrist, and an ^doll of their (...) brain:
A very sufficient cause (no doubt) of eternal breach and division, if it could
be verisied. But how prove you, that we Roman Catholics, who believe Jesus
Christ to be perfect God, and perfect Man, and the only Redeemer of Mankind,
make him a false Christ, and an Idol? or before you go about to prove it,
tell me I pray you, how this can well stand with your own definition of a
reformed Catholic in your Preface? There you affirm him to be a Catholic
reformed to your liking, that holds the same necessary heads of Religion,
with the Roman Church. Now, can there be any more necessary head of
Religion, than to have a right faith in Christ? can any other foundation be
laid besides Jesus Christ? If then your reformed Catholic must agree with the
Roman Church, in ne^essarie heads 1 Cor. 3.
of Religion, as you hold he must: either the Roman Church ^th not the
foundation, and makes not Christ a Pseudochrist, as you say here, or else you
teach your dis^iples very pernitiously, to hold the same necessary heads of
Religion with it.

Luther, having been a long time kept in the darkness of P^pcrie, could not by
and by discern the truth in all points. Was not your superstition, both for
doctrine and ceremonics, patcht up piece by piece, as it could procure
allowance from time to time? Yea was not the truth of Religion made manifest by
little and little in the Church, as God gave learned men occasion of study,
and a blessing in their study, against the poison of Heretics? Such has
been, and such always will be the course of the Gospel: that truth will be
more and more known, as there is more opposition against it, and as men bestow
more pains in reading, praying, and studying.

To deny the reason or argument, is to deny the consequence, not the
antecedent: but you grant the consequence, viz. That razing the foundation, and
turning Christ into a Pseudochrist, is a sufficient cause of eternal breach:
only you deny the antecedent that the Church of Rome does so.

At the least, as well as you prove, 12. A^^. part. 1. Art. 1.
that the Church of England holding the same opinions of Christ, have no faith,
no religion, no Church, no Christ, etc. But let us see how you disprooue the
antecedent. If your reformed Catholic (say you) must agree with the Roman
Church, in many heads of religion, either the Roman Church razeth not the
foundation, or else you teach your disciples very pernitiously to hold the same
necessary heads of religion with it. But he must agree with it in many heads
of religion. Therefore either the Roman Church razeth not the foundation, or
you teach your disciples very pernitiously to hold the same necessary heads of
religion with it.


I deny the consequence of your proposition; because by paring of the errors,
which Master Perkins requires, he shall keep himself from razing the
foundation, though he hold the same necessary heads: for example he must hold
with you, that a true Christian must have a right faith in Christ, but he must
reject the faith, you profess, as not right. Again, he must hold, that no
other foundation can be laid, but Jesus Christ: not that you lay him aright for
the foundation.

our Lord, but with this condition, that the Servant of Servants of this Lord
may change and add to his commandments: having so great a power, that he may
open and shut heaven to whom he will; and bind the very conscience with his
own laws, and consequently be partaker of the spiritual kingdom of Christ.

That the Church of Rome makes Christ a false Christ: which you go about to
prove by four instances. The first is, because the servant of his servants may
change and add to his commandments, having so great power that he may open,
and shut heaven to whom he will, and bi^de the very conscience with his own
laws, and consequently be partaker o^ the spiritual k^ngdome of Christ. Here
are diverse reasons hu^^^d up in one, but all of (...) moment: for all these
several faculties, which the Pope enjoys, being received by the free gift of
Christ, and to be employed in his service only, and to his honor and glory:
are so far off from making Christ a Pseudochrist that they do highly
recommend his most singular bounty toward his followers, without any
derogation to his own divine prerogatives. ^he particulars shall be more
particularly answered in their places hereafter Now I say in a word, that
Christ's Vicar cannot change any one of Gods commandments, nor add any
contrary unto them: but may well enact and establish some other conformable
unto them, which do bind in conscience: for that power is granted of God to
every sovereign governor, as witnesses S. Paul saying. Let every soul Romans
1^. God birds the conscience as sar^e as the law is gro^nd^d v^on his
Commandments.
be subject to higher powers. And that (as it is in the fifth verse following)
of necessity, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. So that to at
tribute power unto one that is under Christ, to bind our consciences; is not
to make Christ a Pseudochrist, but to glorify him much, acknowledging the
power, which it has pleased him to give unto men. In like manner, what an
absurd illation is that, from the power to open and shut heaven gates, (which
all both Catholics and Protestants, confess to have been given to S. Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles,) to infer: that Christ is made a Pseudochrist;
as who should say, the Master spoiled himself of his supreme authority, by
appoynting a steward over his householde, or a porter at his gates, he must be
both Master and Man too, belike. And thus much of the first instance.



He that can The Po^e may dispense against the lav^ of ^atu^e. Glossa. ad cause.
15. q. 6. c. auto^i^ate^. The Pope (...) pen^eth against the Apostle. Di^^. 3^
^ec^^r. and (...) 82 pr^. and (...) (...) (...). 15. (...). 6 c. (...) (...).
dispense with Gods commandments, so that either a man shall be freed from
doing that which is enjoined: or have liberty to do that which is forbidden;
can change Gods commandments. But such dispensations have been given by Popes,
and may as well be still. In all things enjoined by the commandments of God,
the law of the Magistrate binds men in conscience to obedience by virtue of
the matter commanded. In things indifferent, the conscience is not always
charged with sin, where that which is appointed is not done: but you Papists
( (...). (...) (...) (...). (...).
as it appears by your Catechismes) make the Commandments of the Church
equal, or superior to Gods commandments. The opening and shutting of heaven,
by the work of the Ministry, ^th. 16. 19 Ioh. 20. 23.
which is the power that was given to the Apostles and Ministers of the
Gospel, is not to be executed at their pleasure, but depends upon the people
as much as upon them, if not more. For whosoever will repent and believe shall
be saved, though all the Popes, Priests, and Ministers that ever were, are, and
shall be, would shut him out of heaven. Therefore the Pope has no authority
nor power to open the door to one man more than to another; much less to let
in, and shut out whom he list. He must open it, if he be a Minister of the
Gospel, as much as lies in him, to al; if they will enter, they may, without
any further leave, or power from him.



yet in us, in that he gives his grace to us, that by our merits we may be our
own saviors, etc. I marvel in whom he should be a savior if not in us:
What, is he the Savior of Angels or of any other creatures? I hope not, but
the mischief is, that he gives Js Of and Jn, allone with you? But the matter
is not.
grace to us, that thereby we may merit and so become our own Saviors. This
is a phrase unheard of among Catholics, that any man is his own Savior,
neither does it follow of that position that good works are meritorious; but
well that we apply unto us the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, by good
works; as the Protestants auou^h they do by faith only: In which sense the
Apostle S. Paul says to his dear Disciple Timothy. For this doing thou shall
save both thyselfe, and them that hear thee. And this does no more diminish
the glory of our Sovereign Tim. 4.
Savior infinite merits, then to say that we are saved by faith only: good
works no less depending, if not more advancing Christ's merits, then only
faith, as shall be proved hereafter more at large in the question of merits.
Now that other good men's merits may steed them, who want some of their own,
may be deduced out of an hundred places of the Scriptures, namely out of those
where God says, that for the sake of one of his true servants, he will show
mercy unto thousands, as is expressly said How are there ten then? says
Origin in Exodus Hom. 8.
in the end of the first commandment

1. Cor. 1. 30. Romans 3. 25.
redeeming us, not a savior in us, by making us redeem our selves. Though the
speech be not yours, the matter is: For if Christ be therefore a Savior,
because by his merits we are saved; look how much we merit our salvation, so
much we are saviors of our selves; yea, how much merit there is in our
works, so much there wanted in Christ's satisfaction; or else our salvation is
in part twice merited. 1. Tim. 4. 16.
The Minister saues, not by meriting, but by preaching the word of salvation;
works must needs diminish Christ's glory more than faith, because this saues
not by meriting; they do: the matter cannot be deduced from such places. Exodus
20. 6.
The mercy God shows in that respect, is either for the blessings of this
life, or at the most for the outward means of salvation.



that we suffer here with Christ before we reign with him in his Kingdom.
Romans 8.


Romans 8. 29.
Christ has been afflicted, so should we taste of affliction, it is
proportionable and reasonable. That we should be like him, in making
satisfaction for our sins, by punishment, is to make us redeemers with him,
though not in the highest degree.

Osanna, but indeed they crucify Christ.

Osanna unto him. Whereas we hold it for no small disparagement unto his divine
dignity, to make him our Intercessor; that is to pray him to pray for us, who
is of himself, right able to help Ridiculous: who ever expounded
intercession so?
us in all we can demand; being as well God, as Man. And albeit one in thought
singling out the humanity of Christ from his divine nature and person, might
make it an intercessor for us; Yet that being but a Metaphysical conceit, to
separate the nature from the person; since the Arrian heresy (which held
Christ to be inferior to his Father) it has not been practiced by Catholics,
who always pray our Savior Was it practiced before by Catholics? Your
consequence is ^aught.
Christ to have mercy upon us, never to pray for us. And consequently make him
no mediator of intercession, but of redemption.

And to come to your grievous complaint, that vvithall his Mother must be
Queen of heaven, and by right of a mother command him there: Who can
sufficiently marvel at their unnatural gross pares, who take it for a
disgrace to the Son, to advance his own good Mother? or else who well in
his wits, considering Christ's bounty to strangers and his enemies; will not be
persuaded, that on his best beloved mother, he did bestow his most special
favors? For having taken flesh of her, having sucked her breasts, and received
his nutriture and education of her in his tender years, and being as well
followed of her, as of any other: is it possible that he should not be as good
to her, as to others; unto whom he was not at all beholding? Again the very
place of a mother, requiring pre-eminence, before all servants and subjects, of
what dignity soever: And before sons too, if you will follovv nature.
does not the right rule of reason lead us to think, that Christ the fountain
of all wisdom, reple^^shed the B. Virgin Mary his dear Mother with such
grace as should make her fit for that place? it lying in his hands, and free
choice to do it. And therefore is she truly termed, of holy and learned
Antiquity, our Lady and Queen, exalted above all quyers of Angels. That which
you impute unto us farther, that she must in the right of a mother command her
Son, is no doctrine of the Roman Church, nor said in all her service: We
say. Show thy self to be a mother: but it is not added by commanding thy
Son: that is your gloss, which is accursed, because it corrupts the text,
for it follows in that place, Sumat per te preces, etc. Present our prayers
to him, that vouchsafed to be borne of thee, for us. If any private person by
meditation, pearcing more profoundly into the mutual love and affection, of
such a Son toward so worthy a Mother; do deem her prayers as forcible in
kindness as if they were commandments, and in that sense call them
commandments, according to the French phrase: Vos priers This flattering
speech will not maintain that Blasphemy.
me sont des commandments, that may be done without derogation to Christ's
supreme dignity, and with high commendation of his tender affection, unto his
reverent and best beloved mother.

Ioh. 16. 23.
his love to us, and his graciousnes with God his Father to be such, that
whatsoever we ask of God in his name, by To the 12. Art. par. 1. Art. 4. H.
our own prayers, shall certainly be obtained, as well as if all the Saints in
heaven should entreat him for us. And this is to make him our Mediator of
intercession, not simply as he is man, but as he is the 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Gal. 3.
20.
Advocate betwixt God and man; in which respect the Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25.
Scripture says, that he makes request to God for us: whatsoever was true and
lawful, before the Arian heresy, is so still.

There was as much reason why he should make her head of the Church here on
earth, as that she should be Queen of the Church in heaven, or Queen of
heaven. But whatsoever she may be, once a Mediatrix she may not be, for that is
Christ's office now in heaven. Those hyperbolicall speeches of the ancients show
their zeal, but maintain not your error.

If those words, Roga patrem, iube natum, iure matris impera: Command in the
right of a mother be not in any part of your Romish service; yet these speeches
are in one, that is no mean man: Bonauentur. in Psalte beat. Mariae, Psalm. 35
Incline the countenance of God toward us, compel him to have mercy upon
sinners. And why may she not compel, if (as you term her) she be Idemin
Corona Mariae.. Imperatur.
Empress and Lady of the world? If she be Psalt Psalm 12.
the finder out of grace, if she constrained the uncreated word to take flesh
of her, because she was a most humble Ladis. But will you have the very word of
commanding? Coro Mari.. Imperatr.
O our Empress and Lady, most bountiful, by the right of a mother command
thy most beloved son, that he vouchsafe to lift up our minds to heavenly
desires from the love of earthly things. What doctrine is this? and for what
Churches service? was not Bonauenture the author of all these speeches, In
opuse. scrip opuse.
a Cardinal of your Romish Church, your Seraphicall Doctor, and which is most
of all, is he not Canonizatio Bonauenturae in opuse.
a Saint canonized by your Pope, that cannot err? Is not the Virgin Mary in
your Horae beat. Maryae ad vsum Sarisbur. Eccles. fol. 42.
service, called the promise of the Prephets, the Queen of the Patriarchs, the
schoolmistris of the Evangelists, the teacher of the Apostles, the comforter of
the quick and the dead? Who the saios devoutly this short prayer daily, (says
the Rubric) shall not depart out of this world, without penance, and
ministration of the holy Sacrament. Fol. 46.
In another prayer in the same book, she is called Mag^stra Euangelistarum
veracissima. Doctrix Apostolorum sapien^issima.
the most true schoolmistris of the Evangelists, the most wise teacher of the
Apostles. The book was printed at Paris by Francis Regnault 1526. What
profound piercing into such natural affection can exccuse these speeches? what
French phrase can warrant it? But what should we strive about the forciblenes
of her prayers, when it is not, nor can be proved that she prays at all.



Cambridge, June 28. 1597. Your W. in the Lord, William Perkins.
Wherefore to conclude this Epistle, if there be no waightier cause then this
by you here produced, why you and your adherent, do not reconcile your selves
unto the Church of Rome you may shortly by Gods grace) become new men, for we
are so far off, from making our Savior Christ a Pseudoch^^st, or from
dravving one jot of excellency from his souera^gne power, merits, or
dignity: that we in the very points by you put down, do much more magnify
him then you do, For in maintaining the authority by him imparted unto his
deputies, our spiritual Magistrates, and of their merits and satisfaction: We
first say, that these his servants prer^ be his he gifts, of (...) grace
bestovved on whom he pleases; which is no final praise of his great
liberality: And vvithall affirm, that there is an infinite difference
betvveene his ov^ne power, merits, and satisfaction, and ours: Wherein (...)
his sovereign honor is preserved entire to himself, without any
comparison. Now you make Christ's authority so base, his merits and
satisfaction so mean, that if he ^part any degree of them unto his servants,
he loses the honor of all from himself. Whereupon it follow eth
inuinciblie, if you unfeignedly seek Christ Jesus his true honor, and will
esteem of his divine gifts vvorthelie, you must hold out no longer, but vn^te
your self in these necessary heads of Religion unto the Catholic Church of
Rome, which so highly exalted him, both in his own excellency, and in his
singular gifts to his subjects.

(...)
he cannot communicate any of his royalties to his subjects: That Christ must
needs lose by it, I showed before; for it argues an insufficiency in his
satisfaction.




BY a Reformed Catholic, I understand any one that holds the same necessary
heads of religion with the Roman Church: yet so, as he pares off and reiects
all errors in doctrine whereby the said religion is corrupted. How this may be
done, I have begun to make some little declaration in this small Treatise: the
intent whereof is to show how near we may come to the present church of Rome
in sundry points of religion: and wherein we must for ever dissent.

My purpose in penning this small discourse is threefold. The first is, to
confute all such Politikes as hold and maintain, that our religion, and that
of the Roman Church differ not in substance, and consequently that they may be
reconciled: yet my meaning is not here to condemn any Pacification that tends
to persuade the Roman Church to our religion. The second is, that the Papists
which think so basely of our religion, may be won to a better liking of it:
when they shall see how near we come unto them in sundry points. The third,
that the common Protestant might in some part see and conceive the point of
difference between us and the Church of Rome: and know in what manner and how
far forth, we condemn the opinions of the said Church.

I crave pardon for the order which I use, in handling the sever all points.
For I have set them down one by one, as they came to mind, not respecting the
laws of Method. If any Papist shall say that I have not alleged their
opinions aright, I answer, that their books be at hand, and I can justify
what I have said.

Thus craving thine acceptance for this my pains, and wishing unto thee the
increase of knowledge, and love of pure and sound religion, I take my leave and
make an end.

Preface.
UPON your preface to the Reader I will not stand, because it touches no point
of controversy: let it be declared in your next, what you mean, when you
desire your reformed Catholic to hold the same necessary I have shevved you.
heads of Religion with the Roman Church: for if the Roman. Church does err
in the matter of faith, and justification; in the number and virtue of the
Sacraments; in the books and interpretation of the word of God; if she raze
the foundation and make Christ a Pseudochrist, and an Idol; to omit twenty
other e^rors in substantial points of faith, as in this your small discourse
you would persuade: there will remain very few necessary heads of Religion
for them to agree in. And be you well assured, that you are so wide from
winning Catholics by this your work, to a better liking of your Religion:
that you have taken the high way, to lead them to a far greater dislike of
it; by teaching, that in so many material points it differs so far from
theirs. For all Catholics hold for most assured, that which the most ancient,
learned and holy Doctor Athanasius in his creed delivers in the 2. verse.
The name Catholic, makes not your Religion Catholic.
Which Catholic faith unless every man observe wholly and inuiolably, (not
omitting, or shrinking from any one article of it) without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly. If S. Basil that reverent and blessed Father of the
Church, does hold it the duty of every good Christian, rather to loose his
life, then to condescend to the alteration of any one syllable in matter of
faith: you may be sure that we Catholics cannot but carry a Theod. 4. hist.
cap. 17.
very base conceit of your doctrine: who go about under the ouerworne and
thredbare cloak of reformation, to deface and corrupt the purer and greater
part of Christian Religion: especially when they shall perceive the most points
of your pretended reformation, to be nothing else but old rotten condemned
heresies, new scoured up and furbushed, and so in show made more saleable unto
the unskillful, as in this treatise shall be proved in every Chapter.


THere are many necessary heads of salvation, wherein we and you agree. 1. The
Trinity: 2. Redemption by Christ against all Jews and Heathen: 3. The Godhead
of Christ against Arius: 4. The unity of his person against Nestorius: 5. The
truth of his Manhood (though by consequence you overthrow it) against Eutyches:
6. The Godhead of the holy Ghost against Macedonius: and many other. Which I
allege not, to make any Papist believe, that the differences betwixt us and
you are few, or small: but to show, that Master Perkins speaks not against
reason. We are persuaded, that no man may shrink from the truth of that which
is delivered in Athanasius Creed; though we dare not peremptorily condemn
every man, that has not a distinct knowledge and belief of every one of the
several articles. We are wholly of I asils judgment, that every Th^et. ^es.
lib. (...) cap 17. Qu^ in sa^s (...) e ducati, ne vna^ quidem ^yllabam diuino^
dogma^ prodi ^unt.
one ought rather to lose his life, than to suffer any one syllable of Gods
truth in the Scripture to be betrayed; and therefore we forbear to join with
the Church of Antichrist, which preferres a corrupt translation, before the
text it self.

REVEL. 18. 3. And I heard another voice from heaven say, Go out of her my
people, that ye be not pertakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues.
ANSWER TO THE Prologue.
THE learned know it to be a fault, to make that the entry unto our discourse,
which may as properly fit him, that pleads against us: ^xordium Commune.
but to use that for our proeme, which in true sense has nothing for us, nay
rather bears strongly for our adversary, must needs argue great want of
judgment: Such is the sentence above cited out of S. John by M. Perkins: for
it being truly understood, is so far off from terrifying any one from the
Catholic Roman Church, as it does vehemently exhort all to fire unto it, by
forsaking their wicked company that are banded against it.


IF it fall out, as I make no question but it will do, that the place chosen
by Master Perkins, be proved to belong to the Church of Rome; where is the
fault then?

(...).
of the whore of Babylon, and that at large, as he saw her in a vision
described unto him. In the sixteenth verse of the same chapter, he foretells her
destruction: and in the three first verses of this 18. chapter, he goes on to
propound the said destruction, yet more directly and plainly, withal
alleging arguments to prove the same, in all the verses following. Now in
this fourth verse is set down a caveat serving to forewarne all the people of
God, that they may escape the judgment shall befall the whore: and the words
contain two parts: a commandment, and a reason. The commandment: Come out
of her my people, that is, from Babylon. The reason taken from the event, least
ye be partakers, etc. Touching the commandment, first I will search the right
meaning of it, and then set down the use thereof and doctrine flowing thence.
In history therefore are three Babylons mentioned: one is, Babylon of Assyria
standing on the river Euphrates, where was the confusion of Languages, and
where the Jews were in captinitie: which Babylon is in Scripture reproched for
Idolatry and other iniquities. The second Babylon is in Egypt, standing on the
river Nilus, and is now called Cayr; of that mention is made, 1. Pet. 5. v. 13.
(as some think) though indeed it is as likely and more commonly thought, that
there is meant Babylon of Assyria. The third Babylon is mystical, whereof
Babylon of Assyria was a tipe and figure; and that is Rome, which is without
question here to be understood. And the whore of Babylon, as by all
circumstances may be gathered, is the state or regiment of a people that are
the inhabitants of Rome, and appertain thereto. This may be proved by the
interpretation of the holy Ghost: for in the last verse of the 17. chapter, the
woman, that is, the whore of Babylon, is said to be a city which reigns over
the kings of the B.
earth: now in the days when S. John penned this book of Revelation, there
was no city in the world that ruled over the kings of the earth but Rome; it
then being the seat where the Emperor put in execution his Imperial
authority. Again in the seventh verse she is said to sit on a beast having
seven C.
heads and ten horns, which seven heads be seven hills, verse. 9. whereon the
woman sits, and also they be seven kings. Therefore by the whore of Babylon
is meant a city standing on seven hills. Now it is well known, not only to
learned men in the Church of God, but even to the heathen themselves, that Rome
alone is the city built on seven distinct hills, called Caelius, Auentinus,
Exquilinus, Tarpeius or Capitolinus, Viminalis, Palatinus, Quirinalis. Papists
to help themselves, do allege that old Rome stood on seven hills, but now
is removed further to the plain of Campus Martins. I answer, that howsoever
the greatest part of the city in regard of habitation be not now on seven
hills, yet in regard of regiment and practice of religion it is: for even to
this day upon these hills are seated certain Churches and Monasteries and
other like places where the Papal Authority is put in execution: and thus
Rome being put for a state and regiment, even at this day, it stands upon 7.
hills. And though it be come to pass that the harlot in regard of her latter
days eue^ changed her seat, yet in respect of her younger times in which she
was bred and borne, she sat upon the 7. hills. Others, because they fear the
wounding of their own heads, labor to frame these words to another meaning,
and say, that by the whore, is meant the company of all wicked men in the world
whersoeuer, the devil being the head thereof. But this exposition is flat
against the text: for she is opposed to the Chap. 18. (...).
kings of the earth with whom she is said to commit fornication: and in the
last verse she is called a city standing on seven hills, and reigning over the
Kings of the earth (as I have said) and therefore must needs be a state of men
in some particular place.

purple Harlot in that place is signified (as shall be proved presently,) the
Roman Empire, as then it was, the slave of Idols, and with most bloody
slaughter persecuting Christ's Saints: Those of the Church of Rome being as
nearest unto it, so most subject to that sacrilegious boucherie. Wherefore that
voice which S. John heard say, Go out of her my people, that you be not
partakers of her sins, etc. can have none other meaning; then that all they
who desire to be Gods people, must separate themselves in faith and manners
from them, who hate and persecute the Roman Church, as did then, the Heathen
Emperors, and now do all Heretics: Unless they will be partakers of their
sins, and consequently of their plagues. This shall yet appear more
plainly in Your friendly offer is suspicious. (...). S^phoc. in Aia^^ slagel.
the examination of this Chapter. Where I will deal friendly with my
adversary, and advantage him all tha^ I can; that all being given him, which
is any way probable; it may appear more evidently, how little he has to any
purpose out of this place of the Apocalypse, whereof all Protestants vaunt and
brag so much both in their books and pulpits. Well then I will admit that
in the 17. and 18. Chapters of the Revel by the whore of Babylon, is
understood the Roman state and regiment: which in lawful disputations, they
are not able to prove: the most judicious Doctor S. Augustine, and diverse
others of the ancient Popish you mean.
Fathers, with the learned troop of later Interpreters, expounding it of the
whole corpse and society of the wicked: And as for the 7. h^ll^s on the which
they lay their foundation, they are not to be taken literallie: The Angel of
God in the very text it self interpreting the 7. heads of the beast, to be
as well 7. Kings, as 7. hills: But this notwithstanding to help you forvvaid,
I will grant it you, because some good vvriters have so taken it. And
therefore omit as imperrinent that which you say in proof of it. What can
you infer hereupon? Many that the Roman Church is that vvhoore of Babylon:
fair and soft good Sir, how prove you that? thus. The vvhoore of Babylon is a
state of the Roman regment, ergo the Roman Church is the vvhoore of Babylon.
What some of arguing call you me this? By the like sophistication, you may
prove that Rom^s and R^s were the purple Harlot, which to affinne ^.
were ridiculous, or which is impious) that the most Christian Empe, (...).
(...), and ^^codosius, were the vvh^ore of Babylon, because these. held also
the state of the Roman Empire and regiment, to make short the seeble force of
this reason lies in this: that they who ho^eth the state, and govern in the
same Kingdom, must needs be of like affection in Religion; which if it were
necessary, then did Queen Mary of blessed memory, and her sister E^zabeth
(...)
(...) (...) same nundes toward the true Catholic ^ath, because they (...)
in the same chane of estate, and ruled in the same Kingdom. See I pray you
what a shameful cau^ this is, to raze such (...) (...). A simple Logician
would blush to argue in the par^s so loose and yet they that take upon them to
control the learned in the world, often fall into such open tallacies.

We desire no favor of you, but that you would acknowledge the truth, when you
cannot reasonably gainsay it. What we can prove you shall see by and by; in
the mean while, your reason is naught. For what though S. Austin, and diverse
other ancient writers, with the learned troop of your Popish interpreters do
so expound it; does it follow thereupon, that in lawful disputation the
contrary cannot be proved? Could not they err? May not some other man see
that, which they perceived not? But what if we shall match you in number and
antiquity of writers for our exposition? First Hieron an (...)
Hierome, as you acknowledge afterward, makes for us, and not for you: so by
your confession does Tertul. contra lud^o^ page 131. and contra Mar^ion. lib 3.
page 204.
Tertullian: but what name I several men? The A^etas in Apoc cap. 17.
Greek Scholiast tells us, that diverse Interpreters by the harlot understood
old Rome; and he that so thinks, in his judgment erres not, though (says he)
it may be understood of new Rome, or the time of Antichrists coming. Yea
August de ci^^^ lib 18. cap. 2. ^2. 27. ^^ lib. ^^ c. 17.
Austin himself grants, that Rome, in Greek and Latin writers, is as it were
a second Babylon, and he calls it Babylon of the West. More then that, your
Baptista Regnault in (...) ber^, and. R^be^a in epistola ad lector.
own writers deny those Ho milies on the Apocalypse to be Au^tins, and think
them rather to be written by Ty conius the Donatist, which Ribera the Jesuit
says Certis argumentis deprehendi, eas Tyconij esse, non Augustini.
he has found, by certain arguments and evident reasons. Besides, Babtist.
Regnaul. vbi supra.
Baptista Regnald affirms, that the Commenta^ies of diners of the ancients,
Bid, Ambrose, Aus^ert, Anselme, Prunasius and Austin are mystical and
allegorical, not historical; so that we are not to rest upon any of them,
for the true and proper meaning of the text.

It shows more discretion than plain dealing, to omit that which you cannot
answer; Master Perkins reasons are evident and strong. See Doctor Dovvnam of
Antichrist, lib. 1. cap. 2. ss 3. and Master Povvel de Antichristo lib. 1. cap.
11. ss 22. 23.
The city that in S. John's days reigned over the Kings of the earth, is the
whore of Babylon, Apoc. 17. 18. But Rome that is ( Ciuitas, the state of Rome.
ciuitas) the state of Rome, and Rome only, is that city that reigned over
the Kings of the earth in S. John's days. Therefore Rome, and Rome only is the
whore of Babylon.
2 The city that in S. John's days was seated on seven hills, is the seat of
the whore of Babylon. Apoc. 17. 9. But Rome, that is ( Vibs, the town of Rome.
vrbs) the town of Rome (is that only) is the city, that in S. John's days
was seated on seven hills. Therefore Rome (and Rome only) is the seat of the
whore of Babylon.


To the proposition of the latter reason you answer, that See Doctor Fulk
against Rhem. Testam. Revel. 17. 9. and Down. of Ant^c lib. 1. (...). 2 ss 4.
and R^em. Test. Revel. 17. 9.
the seven hills are not to be taken literally: because the Angel makes the
seven heads as well seven Kings, as seven hills. But surely that rather makes
against you: for as the seven Kings are literally to be understood, so are the
seven hills, both being signified by the seven heads; not that the seven hills
are seven Kings. For the woman, or City, does not sit upon the Kings, but
rather the Kings upon her. Besides, it were a strange interpretation, to
expound heads by hills, and hills by Kings; whereas heads do more resemble
Kings, than hills do.



purpel harlot to signify the Roman state, we do say that the state of Rome
must be taken as it was then, when these words were spoken of it; that is,
Pagan, Idolatrous, and a hot persecutor of Christians. Such it had been a
little before under that bloody Tyrant Nero, and then was under Domitian:
which we confirm by the authority of them, who expound this passage of the
Roman state. The commentary on the Apocalypse, under Saint Ambrose name says
the great where sometime does signify Rome, specially which at that time
when the Apostle vvrote this, did persecute the Church of God: but otherwise,
In cap. 178. It should be in cap. 17. Libr. 2. contra Iouinian.
does signify the whole City of the Devil. And Saint Jerome who applies the
place to Rome affirms, that she had before his days blotted out that
blasphemy written in her forhead, because then the state was Christian, which
before had been Heathen: so that unto the party Pagan, and not unto the
Church of God, he ascribes these works of the wicked Harlot: which also the
very text it self does convince: for it has That she was drunk with the
blood of the Mart^rs of Jesus. Now Verse. 6.
the Church of Rome has not then by the confession of all men drawn any blood
of Christ's Saints, but in testimony of his truth, had powered out abundance of
her best blood. Wherefore it is most manifest, that the harlot could not
signify the Church of Rome, so pure and free from slaughter: but the Roman
Empire, which was then full gorged, with that most innocent and holy blood.
Again that vvhoore is expounded, B.
To be a City which had kingdom, over the Kings of the earth. But the Church
of Rome, had then no kingdom over the earth, or Verse. 18.
any temporal dominion at all; but the Roman Emperors had such sovereign
commandment over many Kings* wherefore it must be understood of them, and
not of the Church. Now to take Kingdom not properly for temporal
sovereignty, but for spiritual I^isdiction, as some shifters do; is to she
without any vvarrant, from the native signification of the word, unto
fantastical, and voluntary imagination. And whereas M. Perkins says, that
Ecclesiastical Rome in respect of state, princely dominion, and cruelty
against the Saints, is Page 5. Spoke of Rome then, as it is now.
all one with the heath^sh Empire; he both seeks to deceive, and is greatly
deceived: he would deceive, in that he does apply words spoken of Rome,
above 1500. years ago, unto Rome as it is at this day: and yet if that were
granted him, he erreth fo^^e in every one of his particulars. For first,
touching princ^^e dominion, the Roman Empire held then, all Italy, all
France, all Spain, all England, a great part of Germany, of Asia, and also
of Afrike: having their Proconsulles, and The Popes Legates have by one means
or other equalled the Proconsuls authority, and the revenues of the Roman
state. Indeed the church of Rome is no persecuter of heretics but of true
Christians.
other principal Officers in all those Countries, drawing an hundred thousand
millions in money, and many other commodities out of them: Wherefore in princely
dominion, and magnificall state, it surmounted Ecclesiastical Rome (which has
not temporal dominion over the one half of that one kingdom of Italy) more
then an hundred degrees. And as for persecution, the Empire slew, and caused to
be slain, more Saints of God in one year; then the Church of Rome has done,
of reprobates and obstinate heretics, in 1600. years.

Having thus proved, that the whore of Babylon, signifies the heathen state
of Rome, and not the Ecclesiastical: let us now hear what you say against it.
Marry that the distinction of the Empire of Rome, and Church of Rome is
foolish, and coined of late to serve our turn* which to be far otherwise, I
prove out of those very Authors, who do interpret that harlot to signify
Rome; who are neither foolish, nor of late days: you have heard it before out
of S. Ambrose commentaries. And farther, we gather it out of S. Hierome, in the
Epistle which you Before it was under his name; have you learned since, that it
was his in deed? What if there be?
cite: for he having resembled Rome unto Babylon, for the multitude of the
wicked, which yet remained in it: points out a more pure part, saying; There
is in deed the holy Church, there are the triumphant monuments of the Apostles
and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ, there is the faith praised
by the Apostle, etc. Be not there expressed two distinct parts of Rome? Again,
Tertullian who lived in the second hundred year, under those persecuting
Emperors, says in one place, that Babylon is a figure of Rome, in respect of
her proud Empire and persecution of the Saints. And in an other, that Rome was
most happy for her holy Lib. cont. Iud. De prasc^pt cap. 16.
Church, unto which the Apostles with their blood had poured forth their
whole doctrine: see a plain distinction between the Heathen Empire and the
holy Church of Rome. Which finally may be gathered out of the express word
of God. Where the Church in Babylon coelect, is distinguished from the rest of
that city, which was Pagan. You say 1. Pet. 5^.
(but without any author) that Babylon there does not signify Rome, but
either a city in Egypt, or Assyria: But Eusebins lib. 2. hist. c. 14. and S.
Jerome. de Eccles. script. verse. Marcus, with other Authors more worthy He
says no more but that which is as likely, and more commonly Thought. Eusebius
only recites it out of Papias.
of credit, do expound it of Rome. And you your selves take Babylon so. Rome,
where you think that any hold may be taken against it, as in the 17. of the
Revel. but in S. Peter's Epistle they will none of it, because it would prove
too plainly, that S. Peter had been at Rome.

Perkins having proved that by Babylon Rome is signified, proceeds to answer
two objections: First, See Fulke Rhem. Testam. Revel. 17. and Dovvnam of
Antichrist. lib. 1. cap. 2. 2.
that the city of Rome stands not now upon seven hills. But it did in S. John's
days, as his reason lies; and at this day popish Churches, or Monasteries, are
situated upon them, under the Popes authority. Secondly, that by the whore the
company of the wicked under their head the devil is understood. Revel. 18. 2.
and 17. 18.
But this the text will not bear; the whore being opposed to the Kings of the
earth, and ruling over them: upon this foundation Master Perkins thus builds
his reason. Either Rome Heathenish, or Rome Christian, is the whore of Babylon:
But Rome Heathenish is not: Therefore Rome Christian is.


This is plainly his reason, and not that which you gather. The proposition is
evident, because the state of Rome was never but either Heathenish, or
Christian. The assumption Master Perkins proves. But I must be feign to leave
his course, and to follow this reformers steps.

The state of Rome must be taken, as it is the Sea Fulke, Dovvnam, Abbot,
Povvel.
seat of Antichrist: but it was not the seat of Antichrist in S. John's days;
for Antichrist, Bellarm. de Romano pon ^if. lib. 3. cap. 2
according to your doctrine, is not yet come. Again, it was no mystery, for
heathenish Rome to be an Idolatrous and bloody persecutor of the Christians.
Thirdly, the state that S. John calls the harlot, continues till the final
destruction spoken of by him, and S. Paul: but the estate of heathenish Rome
was decayed long since. Your proof is insufficient, for you allege but two of
many, that make Rome Babylon: who, as they deserve commendation for discerning
so much of the truth, so may they be excused, if seeing Rome in their time a
Christian famous Church, they did not take it to be the seat of Antichrist.
But Hierome seems rather to make against you, because even then he calls it
Babylon, in respect of Antichrist to come.

Your second and third reasons are of no more force. For S. John, as I have
showed, spoke not of Rome as it was then, but as it was to be afterward, and
now has been almost one thousand years even in temporal authority, to which
one of the Popes swords belongs. Master Perkins rightly applies to Rome the
words, that fifteen hundred years since were spoken of her, as she is now:
the Popes Legates were nothing inferior, either for authority, or exactions,
to the Roman Proconsuls. But, as it was foretold in a mystery, under a color
of spiritual government, ouerruling both in Ecclesiastical and Civil
matters: he that remembers the bloody massacre of so many thousands, in a few
days, not many years ago in France, shall see that the Church of Rome shed
blood enough, at that one time, to make her drunk as long as she shall
continue: and yet what a small part was it, of that, which from time to time
she has bezeled in?

This section is nothing to purpose. For who denies, that there were as well
Christians as Heathen in Rome, in the Emperors days? The distinction, Master
Perkins denies, is, that S. John speaks of Rome, as it was under the
Emperors, and not of it, as it has been, and is under the Popes; which the
authors, you allege, meddle not with.

John writ a prophecy, and therefore might well use allegories: besides, he
describes his Babylon so plain, that Rhem. Test. Revel. 17. Bellarm. de pon^.
Roma. lib. 3. cap. 5. 13.
your selves are forced to confess, he means Rome by it. S. Peter deals as
an Apostle, not as a Prophet; and no where gives any inckling, that by Babylon
Rome should be meant. Eusebius sets it not down as his own opinion, but only
recites it out of Papias; from whom also it is apparent that H^^rome had it,
and in whom ( Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 36.
Eusebius says) there were many fabulous matters.

But let the distinction be as they suppose, yet by their leaves, hereby the
whore must be understood not only heathenish Rome, but even the Papal or
Ecclesiastical Rome: for the holy Ghost says plainly Chap. 17. 3.
that she has made all nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication: yea it is added that she has committed fornication with the Kings
of the earth, whereby is signified that she has indeauoured to entangle all the
nations of the earth in her spiritual idolatry, and to bring the Kings of the
earth to her religion. Which thing cannot be understood of the heathenish Rome,
for that left all the Kings of the earth to their own religion and idolatry:
neither did they labor to bring foreign Kings to worship their Gods. Again
it is said, that the ten horns, which be ten Chap. 18. 16.
Kings shall hate the wh^re, and make her des^late and naked, which must not be
understood of heathenish Rome, but of Popish Rome: for whereas in former times
all the Kings of the earth did submit themselves to the whore, now they have
begun to withdraw themselves, and make her desolate; as the King of Bohemia,
Denmark, Germany, England, Scotland, and other parts: therefore this
distinction is also frivolous. They further allege that the whore of Babylon
is drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, shed not in Rome, but in
Jerusalem, where the Lord was crucified: and the two Prophets Chap. 17. 6.
being slain lie there in the streets. But this place is not Revel. 11. 18.
Epist 17. E^ and P^ ad Marcell^.
meant of Jerusalem, as Hierome has fully taught, but it may well be
understood of Rome: Christ was crucified there, either because the authority,
whereby he was crucified was from the Roman Empire, or else because Christ in
his members was and is there daily crucified, though locally in his own person
he was crucified at Jerusalem. And thus, notwithstanding all which has bin
said, we must here by the whore understand the state of the Empire of Rome,
not so much under the heathen Emperors, as under the head thereof the Pope.

Perkins is content in fine, to allow of that distinction, of Heathenish and
Ecclesiastical Rome, which before he esteemed ^o foolish: And then will prove
that not the Heathenish, but Ecclesi^st^ca^^ (...) is resembled to the purpell
Harlot. See what confidence this man has Show us where if you can. Cap. 18. 3.
in his own shutle wit, that now will prove this, and shortly after disprove
it: but let us give him the hearing. The holy Ghost says plainly, that she
has made all the world drunk v^^th the wine of the vv^ath of her
fornication, and yet adds: that she has committed fornication with the
Kings of the earth: But this cannot be understood of heathenish Rome, for that
left all the Kingdoms of the earth unto their own Religion and Idolatry: and
did not labor to bring them, to worship the Roman Gods. Ergo, it must be
understood of Papal R^me. I answer. The Roman Empire being the head and
principal promoter of all kind of Idolatry, and maintaining, and advancing
them, that most vehemently opposed themselves against the Christian Religion;
who with any show of reason can deny, but they chiefly committed spiritual
fornication with the Kings of the earth, if not by persuading them to forsake
their false Gods, which the Pagan Romans worship asvvell as they; yet by
encouraging and commanding them to persevere in that filthy Idolatry, and to
resist, and oppress the Christians wheresoever? Neither is that true that the
Roman Emperors did not labor to bring other Nations to worship new Gods,
when Nero and Domitian would be worshipped Apol. ad Antonin. Eusebius. lib. 4.
hist cap. 8. It is applied to the Roman Church, vv^^ch now is a strumpet.
Cap. 17. (...). 1^.
as Gods, and for fear of Adrian, one Antinous his servant, was worshipped as
a God of all men: as Justinius Martyr testifies. These words of the text then,
agree very well with the Emperors, who both were Idolaters, and the chief
Patrons of Idolatry: but can in no sort be applied to the Roman Church, which
was th^n (as the Protestants cannot deny) a pure Virgin, and most free from all
spiritual fornication. But that it is now become Idolatrous, M. Perkins does
prove by his second reason, gathered also (I warrant you, right learnedly) out
of the text it self, where it is said, that the ten Horns, which signify ten
Kings, shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked: which (as he
says) must be understood of Popish Rome: For whereas in former times, all the
Kings of the earth did submit themselves, to the whore: now they have begun
to withdraw themselves, and to make her desolate: as the Kings of Bohemia,
Denmark, Germany, England, Scotland, and other parts. In these his words is
committed a most foul fault, by gross oversight and ignorance in the very
text. What, be England, Scotland, Denmark, (as for Bohemia ruled by a
Catholic Emperor it must be omitted, as also many states of Germany,) be
these Kingdoms your principal pillars of the new Gospel, comprehended within
the number of the ten, mentioned there in S. John, which hate the harlot? Yes
marie. Why then they are enemies of Christ, and Satan's soldiers; for in the
13. verse it is said of these, that they shall deliver their power unto the
beast, (which signifies either the Devil or Antichrist,) and shall sight Such
they were when they gave their power to the beast.
with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, because he is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings. Is not this doting in an high degree, to infame so
notoriously them, of whom he would speak most honor? and to make the special
Patrons of their new Gospel, the Devils Captains, and fiercely to wage
battle against Christ Jesus? See, how heat of wrangling blinds men's
judgments. But you proceed and say that we further hold, that the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs, was not shed in Rome, but in Jerusalem. Here is a confusion
of Men, and matters; for Page 7.
we say that the blood of many Saints, reheaised in the Apoc. was shed in Rome,
by the tyrannical Emperors, but the martyring of those two Cap. 17.
principal witnesses, Enoch and Elias, (recorded in the cleauenth of the same)
shall be at Jerusalem, as well, because the text is very plainc for it;
specifying that their bodies shall lie in the streets of that great City,
Verse. 8.
where their Lord was crucified; as for that the ordinary interpreters of that
place do so take it. But M Perkins holds that the place where Christ was
crucified, signifies here not Jerusalem, but Rome; because Christ was
crucified there in his members: so it might as well signify any other place of
persecution as Rome. The reason therefore being naught worth, befort fiath it
with the name of S. Jerome, but cites in the margent a letter of two virtuous
Matrons, Paula and Eustochium. Good Sir, if S. ^^reme had meant that that
Epistle should have had his Epist. 17. Epist. 17. This Epistle is brought by
your self for Jero^e* own in the treatise of Images.
authority, he would have set it out in his own name, which seeing he
thought not expedient, set the authority of it aside, and vige his reasons, i^
you think it vvorth your labor, and you shall be ansvvered. In the mean
season, (I hope) all sober Christians, will take the place where our Savior
Christ was nailed on the Cross, to signify rather Jerusalem, then Rome. And
consequently, all that you have alleged out of Scripture, to prove the whore
of Babylon to figure the Ecclesiastical state of Rome, not to be vvorth a rush.

of salse gods by professed idolatry, but, in a mystery, the false worshipping
of the true God.

Against his reason you except not, but charge him with doting in a high
degree, for making the Kings of England, Scotland etc. Satan's soldiers. And
such in deed they were, Revel. 17. 1^
when they gave their power to the beast, and as long as they continued the
Popes servants, but the Apostle shows, that Revel. 17. 1^.
at the last, after their drunkenness and fornication, the Lord having
discovered their shame unto them; they should hate the whore etc. which they
have happily done; yea even Bohemia, though a Popish Emperor, for this present
gouerns it, and shall in Gods good time wholly consume her flesh with fire.

It is neither divinity, nor reason to imagine, that Henoch, and Eltas, having
been taken from the earth by God, to their reward; should come again into the
world, and be slain by Antichrist. As untrue is it, that, by that great city
Revel. 14. 8. and 16. 19. and 18. 10. 16. 18 19 21
Jerusalem is meant, for that term is never given to it, in all the
Revelation, but to Rome ordinarily, especially Revel. chap. 17. and 18.
chapters 17. 18. yea our Savior himself was not crucified Leuit. 4. 24. Heb.
13. 11. 12.
in Jerusalem, but without it. In the great city, that is in the Roman Empire,
he was indeed crucified: yet is he also daily crucified in his members, by the
instigation and appointment of the Pope of Rome, by whom all the later
persecutions of true Christians have been raised in several countries;
howsoever the secular power has been the instrument of his cruelty.

Perkins brings not only Hieroms name, but his judgment, that Epistle being of
Erasmus in Carol. oper. ^^eronyn^. Ludo^ ^^ues ad Aug ^e ciuit. de^, (...). 18
cap 22. Rhem^^ Revel. 17. 5.
his writing, in the name of those two Matrons: yet we stand nor upon his
authority, though we might well enough against you, and your ordinary
interpreters without name: but upon the reasons before delivered, which prove
that the great city is not Jerusalem, but Rome.

Which exposition, besides the authority of the text, has the savor and
defense of ancient and learned men. Bernard says, They are the ministers of
Sermon. in Cant. 33. Epist. 1. 25.
Christ, but they serve Antichrist. Again, The beast spoken of in the
Apocalypse, to which a mouth is given to speak blasphemies, and to make war
with the Saints of God, is now gotten into Peter's chair, as a lion prepared to
his pray. It will be said, that Bernard spoke these latter words of one that
came to the Popedom by intrusion or usurpation. It is true indeed: but
wherefore was he an usurper? He renders a reason thereof in the same place:
because the Antipope called Innocentius was chosen by the kings of Almaine,
France, England, Scotland, Spain, Jerusalem, with consent of the whole
Clergy and people in these nations, and the other was not. And thus Bernard
has given his verdict, that not only this usurper, but all the Popes, for this
many years, are the beast in the Apocalypse: because now they are only chosen
by the college of Cardinals. To this agrees the decree of Pope Nicholas the
second, ann. 1059. that the C. In nomine, did. 23.
Pope shall afterward be created by the suffrages of the Cardinal Bishops of
Rome, with the consent of the rest of the Clergy and people, and the Emperor
himself: and all Popes are excommunicate and accursed Referente Iuello. 2.
These. 2.
as Antichrists, that enter otherwise, as all now do. Ioachimus Abbas says,
Antichrist was long since borne in Rome, and shall be yet advanced higher in
the Apostolic See. Petrarch says, Once Rome, now Babylon. And Ireneus book
5. chap. last, said before all these, that Antichrist should be Lateinus, a
Roman.

Bernard, who says, that they are the ministers of Christ, but they serve
Antichrist. Of whom speaks that good religious Father? forsooth of some
officers of the court of Rome. Good, who were (as he says) the ministers of
Christ, because they were lavvfully called by the Pope to their places, but
served Antichrist; for that they behaved themselves corruptly in their
callings. And so this makes more against you, then for you, approouing the
lavvfull officers of Rome, to be Christ's Ministers. The second pla^e is
alleged out of him yet more impertinently, your self confessing presently,
that those words were not spoken of the Pope, but of his enemy. The reason
yet there set down, pleases you exceedingly: which you vouch so clearly
that it seems to bear flat against you; for you infer that the Pope, and
all others since that time be usurpers, out of this reason of S. B^^nard.
Because forsooth, that the Antipope called Innocentius, was chosen by the King
of Almaine, France, England, etc and their whole Clergy, and people. For if
fnnocentius were an Antichrist and usurper, because he was elected by so many
Kings and people then belike he that had no such election, but is chosen by the
Cardinals of Rome only is true Pope. This, your words declare, but your
meaning Or else you understand them not. And answered if need require.
(as I take it) is quite contrary. But of this matter and manner of election
shall be treated hereafter, if need require; It sufficieth for this present,
that you find no relief at all in S. Bernard, touching the maine point, that
either the Pope, or Church of Rome, is Antichrist. And all the world might
marvel, if out of so sweet a Doctor, and so obedient unto the Pope, any such
poison might be sucked: specially weighing well, what he has written unto one
of them, to whom he speaks thus. Go to, let us yet enquire more diligently,
who thou art, and what person thou Lib. 2. de Cons. ad Eugen.
bear in the Church of God, during the time. Who art thou? A great Priest,
the highest Bishop: thou art the Prince of Bishops, the heir of the Apostles,
and in dignity, Aaron, in authority, Moses, in power, Peter, thou art he to
whom the Keys were delivered, to whom the sheep were committed: There are
indeed also other Porters of Heaven, and Pastors of flocks; but thou art so
much the more glorious, as thou have inherited a more excellent name above
them: they have their flocks allotted to them, to each man one: but to thee
all were committed, as one flock, to one man: thou art not only Pastor of the
sheep, but of all other Pastors, thou alone art the Pastor. And much more to
this purpose, which being his clear opinion Are there blind places in your
saints ar^tings?
of the Pope, how absurd is it, out of certain blind places and broken
sentences of his to gather, that he thought the Pope of Rome to be neither
sheep, nor Pastor of Christ's Church, but very Antichrist himself.

There is a gross fault, also in the Canon of Pope Nicolas as he cites it,
that the Pope was to be created by the Cardinals, Bishops of Rome. As though
there were some 30. or 40. Bishops at once: but of the matter of election else
where.

M. Perkins having lightly skirmished with a broken sentence or two, out of one
Catholic Author flies to a late here^^ke, called Ioachim, and quoteth Jewel
for relator of it. A worshipful testimony of one heretic, Or rather you the
falsest slanderer.
and that upon the report of an other: and he the most lying Author of these
days. As for the late Poet Petrarke his words might easily be answered, but
because he quoteth no place, I will not stand to answer it. But to close up
this first combat, a sentence is set down out of the famous Martyr Ireneus,
that Antichrist should be Lateinos, a Roman. Here be as many faults, as words.
That learned ancient Doctor discoursing of Antichrist his proper name, out of
these words of the Revel, the number of the beast is 666. And observing the
letters of the Greek Alphabet, Cap. 13.
(by which they do number, as we do by ciphers) says: that among others the
word Lateinos, does contain those letters, which amount just to the number of
666. and consequently that Antichrists proper name perhaps might be Lateinos,
but more likely it is to be Teitan, as he says there, and lastly that it is
most uncertain what his name shall be. See the place (gentle reader) and
learn to beware of such deceitefull merchants, as make no conscience, to
corrupt the best Authors: and Whose is the Index Expurgatorios? He says it is
very likely.
being often warned of it, will never learn to amend. Jreneus leaves it most
doubtful what shall be Antichrists name: And among diverse words esteems
Lateinos, to be the unlikeliest. And yet M. Perkins reports him to say
resolutely that his name shall be Lateinos: and then to make up the matter
turns Lateinos, a proper name with S. Ireneus; into Roman, an appellatiue,
which notes only his country. Fie upon that cause, which cannot be vpholden
and maintained, but by a number of such paltrie shirtes. Thus come we at length
to the end of M. Perkins proofs, and reproves in his prologue, where we
finding little fidelity in his allegations of the Fathers, badde construction
and foul oversight in the text, of holy Scripture, briefly great malice, but
slender force against the Church of Rome, we are to return the words of his
theme to all good Christians. Go out of her my people. Forsake the enemies of
the Roman Church. And as our Ancestors did the Pagan Emperors, who drew out
her most pure blood, so let us file in matters of faith, and Religion, from all
heretakes that of late also spared not to shed abundance of the same most
innocent blood, unless to your greater condemnation, you had leifer be
partakers of her sins, and receive of her plagues.

Bernar. sermon. in Cantic. 33.
They were the Ministers of Christ by their profession, as the Pope calls
himself the servant of servants, though both he is, in truth, Antichrist, and
they his ministers.

M. Perkins reason out of Bernard lies thus. He that gets into Peter's chair,
without the consent of the Princes, Clergy and people of Christendom, is the
beast spoken of in the Apocalypse. But all the Popes, from that schism
hitherto, have so gotten into Peter's chair, viz. with consent of the Cardinals
only. Therefore all the Popes since that schism are the beast in the
Apocalypse.


The proposition is Bernards in effect, though notin words; for Indeed Bernard
makes them both A^tichrists.
he pronounces the Pope to be the Beast in the Revelation, because he was not
chosen by consent of the Princes, Clergy, and people of Almaine, France,
England, etc. And this Master Perkins sets down very plain, at these words;
And thus Bernard, etc. How wide then are you from his meaning, who make the
quite contrary collection in his name? For if Innocentius (say you) were
Antichrist, and an usurper, because he was chosen by so many Kings, and people;
then belike he that had no such election, but is chisen by the Cardinals of
Rome only, is true Pope. He concludes out of Bernard, that he was Antichrist,
because he was not chosen by the Kings, Clergy, and people, but only by the
Cardinals: you, that he was true Pope, because he was not chosen by the Kings,
and but only by the Cardinals.

The reason out of Bernard you answer not, but shift off the matter with
alleging a sentence of his, in commendation of Pope Eugenius, which is so full
of flattery (that I say not impiety) that it can carry no credit with any
modest Christian. It should seem you saw so much your self, and therefore
craftily left out these absurd and vile speeches, viz. Bernard de consider, ad
Eugenium li. 2. Prima^^ Ab^^, gubernatione Noe, patriarcha^u Abraham, ordine
Melc^c, iudica^u Samuel unction Christus.
Thou art Abel in primacie, Noah in government, in Patriarkship Abraham, in
order Melchisedech, in authority of judging Samuel, in unction (that is either
in annoynting, or in being anointed) Christ. If this be not a blind sentence
on Bernards part, and a broken sentence on yours, there is nothing but may
abide the light, be it never so false; and be accounted whole, be it never so
mangled.

It is rather gross ignorance in you, to find fault with that you understand
not. Master Perkins neither says, nor means, that there were many Bishops of
Rome at once, (and yet there have been three Popes together) but, according to
the Did. 23. (...) in nomine.
Canon, calls the Cardinals Bishops of Rome; referring this word (of Rome) not
to Bishops simply, but to Cardinal Bishops. Now all Cardinals were Cardinals
of Rome, or of the Romish Church. The Canon indeed puts not in those words of
Rome; but the sense is nothing altered by the adding of them. For the clear
understanding of the matter, we are to know, that all Cardinals are either
Cardinal Bishops, whom the Canon appoints Inprimis Cardinales Episcopi
diligen^sime simul de electione tractantes.
first to consult about electing of the Pope; or Cardinal Clerks, that is of
some inferior order of the Clergy, the general name whereof is Clerk, whether
it be Priesthood, Deaconship, etc: and these Mox clericos Christi Cardinales
adhibeant; sicque reliquus clerus and populus ad consensum nouae electionis
accedant.
must in the second place be called to the election. Now let men judge whether
Master Perkins, or you are in fault. This Canon is brought to prove the former
proposition, that he is no lawful Pope who is chosen only by the Cardinals,
and not also by the consent of the rest of the Clergy and people.

If you had been as careful to avoid slandering, as that reverend and learned
writer was to take heed of untruths, you would never have raised such a
suspicion of him in this point. For the clearing of him, let his own desence
against Master Hardings reproaches speak. For the present, Set out by the
vvorthie and learned Sir Henry Sauile.
Roger Houeden, Bal. de script. Anglic. cent. 3. cap. 55.
who lived in that time, records the history, and sets Houeden Annal. poster.
in Richard. primo.
down Ioachims words to King Richard; That Antichrist was already borne in
the city of Rome, and that he should be exalted into the Apostolic seat. But
you except against Ioachim as an heretic; so does not Bellarm. Append. de
sumnio pontif. cap. 11.
Bellarmine, but only denies that he writ any such thing. It is true that
Council Lateran sub Innocent. 3.
the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the third, condemned a certain
book that Abbat Ioachim writ against Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris, commonly
called the Master of the Sentences, concerning the unity or essence of the
Trinity; but it did not reject him as an heretic: yea the Council specially
adds, that they will not by their sentence any way derogate from the Abbey of
Florence, whereof he was the Institutor.
orderer, as well because the orders in it were good, as also for that he had
submitted all his writings to the Apostolic see. Therefore Coccius in thesauro
Catholico.
Iodocus Coccius makes him one of his Latin Doctors, out of whom he confirms
your Popish doctrine. And Trithemius de scriptor. Eccles.
Trithemius says, that he was a man studious and exercised in the Scriptures,
and that he writ many things against the Jews, and other adversaries of the
Catholic faith.

Petrark, one of the lights of his age for learning, wrote about 250. years
since, that Petrarc. son. 108. Gia Roma, hor' Babylonia; falla e ria.
Rome was become Babylon; and not only Babylon, but false and wicked Babylon.
Further, in the same place he calls her, The fountain of grief, the lodge of
wrath, the school of error, the temple of heresy, a shameless strumpet,
which having been founded in chastity, humility, and poverty, has lifted up
her horns against her founders, the Emperors. Sonet. 107.
In another place he calls her covetous Babylon, that has filled up the
measure of Gods wrath, with impious and wicked vices, so that it runs over.
Sonet. 92.
In a third he terms her impious Babylon, from whom all shame is fled; the
lodge of grief, and mother of errors, in whom there is no goodness. I set not
down all he speaks against her: somewhat I have touched, that I might see how
easily you will answer his words: but I think he that has read Bellarm de
Roman. pont. append cap. 20
Bellarmine of this point, may guess before hand what you can say in the matter.

Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 25.
Irenaeus, as you truly say, determines not what shall be Antichrists name, and
leanes more to (...) than to (...): yet neither does he allow of that, because
Habet verisimilitudinem vt ex multis coll^gamus, ne forte Teitan vocetur qui
venier.
a man (as he says) may with likelihood gather by many things, that his name
perhaps shall not be (...), and of (...) he affirms that it is Valde
verisimile est quoniam verissinum regnum hoc habet voca^ulum.
very likely: and gives his reason of it; because the most true kingdom had
that name. Master Perkins expounded it not as a proper name, but as an
appellatiue; because neither Revel. 13.
the Evangelist nor Irenaeus do intend to show Antichrists proper name; but
See D^name of (...). l^b. 1. cap. 8.
to make known the name of the Beast, which Antichrist should make all take.
Now the Beast being the Roman or Latin state, the name also must be suitable
thereunto, as we see it is: our Papists calling themselves Roman; that is
Latin Catholics. I will not fall into exhortation hereupon; only I desire all
men, that have care of their salvation, to consider, without prejudice, whether
it be not evident that the state of Rome, whereof the Pope is head, is the
whore of Babylon, prophesied of by S. John, Reuelat. 17.



Thus then we see that the words contain a commandment from God, inioyning
his Church and people to make a separation from Babylon. Whence I observe, That
all those who will be saved, must depart and separate themselves from the
faith and religion of this present church of Rome. And whereas they are charged
with schism that separate on this manner; the truth is, they are not
schismatiks that do so, because they have the commandment of God for their
warrant: and that party is the schismatike in whom the cause of this
separation lies: and that is in the Church of Rome, namely the cup of
abomination in the whores hand, which is, their heretical and schismatic
religion.

Perkins brings against the Catholic doctrine, but some what also in every
Chapter to fortify and confirm it: I will here deliver what some of the most
ancient, most learned, and most holy Fathers do teach concerning joining with
the Church, and Pope of Rome: from whose society Protestants labor tooth and
nail to withdraw us. And because of this we must treat more amply in the
question of supremacy, I will use here their authority, only whom M. Perkins
cites against us. S. Bernard is cited already, S. Ireneus Scholar of S.
Polycarpe, and he of S. John the Evangelist of the Church of Rome writes thus.
To this Church, by reason of her more mighty principality, it is necessary
that every Church, that is the saithfull on all sides, to condescend and agree;
in, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
and by which, always, the tradition of the Aposiles has been preserved of
them, that be round about her.

Saint Jerome writing to Damasus Pope of Rome, says: I following none as
chiefest, but Christ, do in participation join with thy blessedness, that
is, with the chair of Peter, I know the Church to be builded upon that Rock.
Whosoever does eat the Paschall Lamb out of this house, is a profane
fellovv, he that is not found within the Ark of Noah, shall when the floudes
arise perish: And a little after, know not Vitalis, I refuse Meletius, I take
no notice of Paulinus: he that gathers not with thee, scatters; that is,
he that is not with Christ, is with Antichrist. Well sare a good gloss.


Mark and embrace this most learned Doctors judgment, of joining with the Sea of Rome, in all doubtful questions: he would not trust to his own wit
and skill which were singular; nor thought it safe to rely upon his learned
and wise neighbors: he durst not set up his rest with his own Bishop
Paulinus, who was a man of no mean mark but the Patriarch of Antioch: but
made his assured stay upon the Sea of Rome, as upon an immovable Rock, with
which (says he) if we do not communicate in faith and Sacraments, we are
but profane men, void of all Religion: In a word, we belong not to Christ,
but be of Antichrists train. See, how flat contrary this most holy ancient
Father is to M. Perkins. M. Perkins would make us of Antichrists band, Not
because you cleave to Damasus in this point. Lib. 3. de Sacra. cap. 1.
because we cleave unto the Bishop of Rome. Whereas Saint Hierome holds all
to appertain to Antichrist, who be not fast lincked in matters of Religion,
with the Pope and See of Rome. And so to conclude with this point, every true
Catholic must say with Saint Ambrose: I desire in all things to follovv the
Church of Rome. And thus much of his Prologue.

Irenaeus, Hierome, Ambrose, would have all men join with the Church of Rome,
which flourished in their days: therefore no man may separate from it, in these
our days. Who sees not the feeblenes of this consequence? And yet this is all
the force that can be in the reason, till they have proved, that the Church of
Rome either was then, or is not now, the Church of Antichrist.

If that principality, Irenaeus speaks of, were in the Church of Rome, by any
right of authority from God; how should the same Irenaeus be excused, who
Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
reprooues Victor B. of Rome, for taking upon him to excommunicate some of the
Eastern Churches, about observing of Easter? If it be in Nicolas Galas. ad
illum Irenaei^um.
respect of the truth which then flourished at Rome, no doubt all men must
cleave unto it, as far as it cleaues to the truth of God.

Hieron. ad Damasum.
Hierome a Roman, and at that time a young man, living in Syria, being pressed
by an Arian Bishop to allow, by subscription that, which might tend to the
countenancing of Arianisme, writes to Damasus his own Bishop, for his advice
in the matter. But that he did, not in respect of his place, as if he could
not err, because he was Bishop of Rome (for Liberius the very next Bishop
before Damasus, by Descriptor. eccles. in Fortunatiano.
Hieroms own confession, had subscribed to Arianisme) but in regard of his
judgment, which was sound against that heresy: so that whosoever, in that
question, gathered not with him, scattered, and held with Antichrist against
Christ.

Those, all things, that Ambros. de sacra. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Ambrose speaks of, are, according to the place alleged by you, to be
restrained to the Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome. Wherein
though Ambrose profess himself desirous to follow the Church (note by the
way, that the Church of Rome is taken Gabriel Biel in Canon. Missae, lect. 18.
de quotidiana praefatione.
as a particular Diocesan Church, such as the Church of Millan also was at that
time, and not as the universal Catholic Church) yet he did not so follow it,
because reason led him another way: his words are these: In all things I desire
to follow the Roman Church: but Et nos homines ^ensum habemus.
yet we also being men have understanding: therefore that, which is otherwhere
better observed, we also rightly keep: We follow the Apostle Peter himself,
we stick unto his devotion, etc. Out of which speech of Ambrose, these points
are to be observed. First, that the understanding of Christian men is to direct
them, wherein they are to follow the Church of Rome, wherein to leave it.
Secondly, that some other Churches might, and did better observe diverse things,
than the Church of Rome did. Thirdly, that the Church of Rome did not observe
that, which the Apostle Peter (at least in Ambrose his judgment) had devoutly
performed. Thus we see what help there is in the ancient writers to free the
Pope and Church of Rome, that now are, from being the very Antichrist foretold
of in the Revelation.



I hope you vvil note that disorder, when you come to it.
grace to follow him, step by step, although he has made many a disorderly
one, as well to discover his deceits and to disprove their errors, as also to
establish the Catholic Doctrine, the which I will endeavor to perform (by the
help of God) with all simplicity of language, and with as much breuity as
such a weighty matter will permit. Yet (I hope) with that perspicuitie, as
the meaner learned may understand it, and with such substance of proof, both
out of the holy Scriptures and ancient Fathers, as the more judicious (to
whose profit it is principally dedicated) may not contemn it.

Perkins reasons and answers against all your cauils.



I. Our consent.


Perkins has said agreeable to the truth, I will let his whole text in As
far as you think, it makes not against you. You shall find as much kindness
as you offer. You pare off the sense too sometimes. You mean properly. Is this
your perspicuitie?
places indifferent, pass, paring off only superfluous words, with adding some
annotations where it shall be needful, and rest only upon the points in
controversy. First then concerning free will, wherewith he begins, thus he
says: Free will both by them and us, etc.

That Master Perkins was not ignorant of this, it appears in his treatise of
Gods free grace, and man's free will. page 17.
but is a free faculty of the mind and will only, whereby we choose or refuse,
supposing in the understanding, a knowledge of the same before. But let this
definition pass as more populer.

Your correcting of Master Perkins definition passes my understanding: for if
it be a a faculty both of the mind and will, out of doubt it is a mixed
faculty. But it is more strange, that you add only of the mind only, or of
the will only, are speeches that have some reason in them; but of the mind
and will only is a phrase implying a contradiction, unless there be some
third part of the soul unknown to ordinary Philosophers, whereof free will
may be suspected to be a faculty.

I. Conclus. Man must be considered in a fourefold estate, as he was created,
as he was corrupted, as he is renewed, as he shall be glorified. In the first
estate, we ascribe to man's will liberty of nature, in which he could will or
nill either good or evil: in the third, liberty of grace, in the last liberty
of glory.

Where does he deny it. W. P.


All the doubt is of the second estate: and yet therein also we agree, as the
conclusions following will declare.

II. Conclus. The matters whereabout freewill is occupied, are principally the
actions of men, which be of three sorts, natural humane, spiritual. Natural
actions are such as are common to men with beasts, as to eat, drink, sleep,
hear, see, smell, taste, and to move from place to place: in all which we
join with the Papists, and hold that man has free will, and even since the
fall of Adam by a natural power of the mind does freely perform any of these
actions or the like.

III. Conclus. Humane actions are such as are common to all men good and bad,
as to speak and use reason, the practice of all mechanical and liberal arts,
and the outward performance of civil and Ecclesiastical duties, as to come to
the Church, to speak, and preach the word, to reach out the hand to receive
the Sacrament, and to lend the ear to listen outwardly to that which is
taught. And hither we may refer the outward actions of civil virtues; as
namely, Justice, temperance, gentleness, liberality. And in these also we
join with the Church of Rome, and say (as experience teaches) that men have a
natural freedom of will, to put them or not to put them in execution. Paul
says, Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles that have not the law, do the things of the
law by nature, that is, by natural strength: and he says of himself, that
before his conversion touching the righteousness of the law, he was
unblameable. Phil. 3. 6. And for this external obedience, natural men receive
reward in temporal things. Matthew. 6. 5. Ezech. 29. 19. And yet here some
caueats must be remembered. I. That in humane actions (he should have said
moral, says D. B. P.) man's will is weak and feeble, and his understanding
dim and dark; and thereupon he often fails in them. (This caveat is no
caveat of the Protestants, but taken out of S. Thomas of Aquine, says D. B.
P.) And in Sum. 1. 2. q. 109. art. 4. and 8.
all such actions with Augustine (you might have quoted the place, ^aith D. B.
P.) I understand the will of man to be only wounded or half dead.

See M. P. of Gods free grace and man's free will, page 61.
Humane is more general, and more fit; because moral cannot comprehend the
first rank of actions, in the beginning of the section. Besides, it may be
Master Perkins thought it not fit to give that title to any actions of natural
men, because none of them are performed, according to the Arist. Ethic. lib. 2.
cap. 3. and 6.
Philosophers definition of moral virtue, by a habit with due observation of
the circumstances required by him; howsoever they are magnified by you Papists.

The caveat is not taken out Thomas 1. 2. q. 109. art. 4. and 8.
of those places, wherein Thomas shows no more, but that a man cannot, by his
natural strength, either fulfill the law, or avoid sin. The place is quoted
Edition 1598
in the margin Hypognostic. lib. 3. which you shall find in tome 7. of Austins
works; though indeed the book be thought to be none of Austins.

Jeremy says, chap. 10. verse. 23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in
himself, neither is in man to walk or direct his steps. (Who knows not this?
says D. B. P.)

Iere. 10. 23.
Prophet in the place brought by Master Perkins so speaks of it to God, as if
it were not known to all men. O Lord I know that the way of man etc. And to
say the truth, how can any man be said to know it, Bo^^ius de consol.
ph^losoph. lib. 5 pro^^ 6. and Thomas ^bi.
that fetches the knowledge, which God has of things depending on man's will,
from the sight of the things from all eternity, present to him? For the thing
must needs be, in the order of nature at least, before it can be known to be.
But of this point, when just occasion shall be offered, about Predestination.

IV. Conclus. The third kind of actions are spiritual, more nearly
concerning the heart and conscience, and these be twofold: they either concern
the kingdom of darkness, or else the kingdom of God. Those that concern the
kingdom of darkness are sins properly: and in these we likewise join with
the Papists and teach, that in sins or evil actions, man has freedom of
will. Some paraduenture will say, that we sin necessarily, because he that
sins cannot but sin: and that free will and necessity cannot stand
together. Indeed the necessity of compulsion or coaction, and freewill cannot
agree: but there is another kind of necessity which may stand with freedom
of will: for some things may be done necessarily and also freely. A man that is
in close prison, must needs there abide, and cannot possibly get forth and
walk where he will: yet can he move himself freely, and walk within the
prison: so likewise, though man's will be chained naturally by the bonds of
sin, and therefore cannot but sin, and thereupon sins necessarily, yet
does it also sin feely.

What is your certainly but infallibly?
compelled to sin, but his weakness and the craft of the Devil are such,
that he is very often over reached by the Devil, and induced to sin, but
with free consent of his own will.

shall necessarily sin in doing of it: and thus, necessity and liberty are
alike, in both parts of the similitude.

There is nothing in your solution, that was not in Master Perkins distinction,
save that you have put it in other words; you say certainly, he infallibly; you
say man sins with free consent, and is not compelled; he says he sins
freely, and not of compulsion.

V. Conclus. The second kind of spiritual actions or things, concern the
kingdom of God: as repentance, says, the conversion of a sinner, new
obedience, and such like: in which we likewise in part join with the Church of
Rome and say, that in the first conversion of a sinner, man's free will concurs
with Gods grace, as a fellow or co-worker in some fort. For in the conversion
of a sinner three things are required: the word, Gods spirit, and man's will:
for man's will is not passive in all and every respect, but has an action in
the first conversion and change of the soul. When any man is converted, this
work of God is not done by compulsion, but he is converted willi gly: and at
the very time when he is converted, by Gods grace he wills his conversion. To
this end said Augustine, He which made thee without Sermon. 15 de verb. Apost. de
great and l. a. bitr. 1.
thee, will not save thee without thee. Again, that is certain, that our will
is required in this, that we may do any good thing well: but we have it not
from our own power but God works to will in us. For look at what time God
gives grace, at the same time he Posse velle, and a^ velle recipere.
gives a will to des^^e and will the same grace: as for example, when God
works faith, at the same time he works also upon the will, causing it to desire
faith, and willingly to receive the gift of believing. God makes of the
unwilling will, a willing will: because no man can receive grace utterly
against his will, considering will constrained is no will. But here we must
remember, that howsoever in respect of time, the working of grace by Gods
spirit, and the willing of it in men go together: yet in regard of order,
grace is first wrought, and man's will must first of all be acted and moved by
grace, and then it also acts, wills and moves it self. And this is the
last point of consent between us and the Roman Church touching Free will;
neither may we proceed further with them.

You gather that which is not scattered by M. P.
yields unto the principal point in controversy, that is freedom of will,
in civil, and moral works in the state of corruption, and all good works in
the state of grace, for in his first conclusion distinguishing four estates of
man, he affirms that in the third, of man renewed, or (as we speak justified)
there is liberty of grace, that is, grace enableth man's will to do if it please
such spiritual works, as God requires at his hands. Yet lest he be taken to
yield in any thing, he does in show of words contradict Page 16. We shall see
that when we come to it.
both these points in another place: For in setting down the disference of our
opinions, he says: that man's will in his conversion is not active, but
passive, which is flat opposite unto that which himself said a little before in
his first conclusion; that in the conversion of a sinner, man's will concurreth
not passiuely but is co-worker with Gods grace.

The like contradiction may be observed in the other part of liberty That is
just none at all.
in moral actions: for in his third conclusion he delivers plainly man to
have a natural freedom, even since the fall of Adam to do, or not to do the
acts of wisdom, Ius^ce, Temperance, etc and proves out of S. Paul, that the
Gentiles so did: Yet in his first reason, he assirmeth as peremptorily out of
the 8. of Genisis, that the whole frame of man's Page 19.
heart is corrupted, and all that he thinks, deuiseth, or imagines, is wholly
evil, leaving him no natural strength to perform any part of moral duty.

Perkins, whether man have freedom of will in moral works, before grace; and
in all good works after grace. For of the former Master Perkins makes no
question, but only Conclus. 3. Caveat. 1.
gives a caveat, of the feeblenes of the will, and dimnes of the understanding,
in such matters: with the latter he deals not at all, professedly restraining
the question to Conclus. 1. in the end.
our dissent about the second estate. Liberty in the state of grace, to will
spiritual good, we thankfully acknowledge: but neither is it of Romans 7. 18.
so large extent as your exposition makes it; and, Phil. 2. 13.
without the special work of Gods spirit, by it self it brings no good thing
to pass.

He does not say simply, that man's will in his conversion is not active; but
that, in it self it is not active, but passive: Of which his other speech is
not a contradiction, but rather a confirmation; That man's will concurres with
Gods grace, as a co-worker, in some sort: and a little after, man's will is not
passive in all and every respect, but has an action in the first conversion of
the soul. Now what action it has, and in what respect it is active, and
passive, he shows presently after: the words are falsely alleged by you,
viz. that it wills well only, as it moved by grace, being in it self neither
active, nor passive.

This latter contradiction is indeed like the former, that is, no
contradiction at all. For he does rightly expound Genesis 8. 5.
that place of a pronenes to that which is as ill, and to nothing that is fully
good: not simply excluding that which is ciuilly good, but that only which is
properly referred to God himself, the sovereign good: and the other, in
regard of it perfect goodness.

II. The difference, or dissent.
by it self, and by it own natural power; and is only helped by the holy
Chost. We say, that man's will works with grace in the first conversion, yet
not of it self, but by grace. Or thus; They say will has a natural
cooperation: we deny it, and say it has cooperation only by grace, being in
it self not active but pas^; willing well only as it is moved by grace,
whereby it must first be acted and moved, before it can act or will. And that
we may the better conceive the difference, I will use this comparison; The
Church of Rome sets forth the estate of a sinner by the condition of a
prisoner, and so do we: mark then the difference. It supposes the said
prisoner to lie bound hand and foot with chains and fetters, and withal to
be sick and weak, yet not wholly dead, but living in part: it supposes also
that being in this case, he stirs not himself for any help, and yet has
ability and power to stir. Hereupon if the keeper come and take away his
bolts and fetters, and hold him by the hand, and help him up, he can and will
of himself stand and walk and go out of prison: even so (say they) is a
sinner bound hand and foot with the chain of his sins: and yet he is not
dead but sick, like to the wounded man in the way between Jericho and
Jerusalem. And therefore does he not will and affect that which is good: but if
the holy Ghost come and do but untie his bands, and reach him his hand of
grace, then can he stand of himself and will his own salvation, or any thing
else that is good. We in like manner grant, that a prisoner fitly resembles a
natural man, but yet such a prisoner must he be, as is not only sick and
weak but even stark dead: which cannot stir though the keeper untie his
bolts and chains nor hear though he sound a trumpet in his ear: and if the
said keeper would have him to move and stir, he must give him not only his
hand to help him, but even soul and life also: and such a one is every man by
nature; not only chained and fettered in his sins but stark dead therein:
as one that lies rotting in the grave, not having any ability or power to move
or stir: and therefore he cannot so much as desire or do any thing that is
truly good of himself, but God must first come and put a new soul into him,
even the spirit of grace to quicken and revive him: and then being thus
revived, the will begins to will good things at the very same time, when God
by his spirit first infuseth grace. And this is the true difference between us
and the Church of Rome in this point of free will.

As it is very like you will do for your advantage. Page 16. True: but not of
the Popish Church.
mistake him not, he agrees fully in this matter of free will, with the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church: For he putting down the point of difference,
says that it stands in the cause of the freedom of man's will, in spiritual
matters: allowing then freedom of will with us, in the state of grace, whereof
he there treats; for he seems to dissent from us, only in the cause of that
freedom. And as he differs from Luther, and Calvin, with other sectaries, in
granting this liberty of will: so in the very cause also he accords with
Catholics, as appears by his own words. For (says he) Papists say man's
will concurreth with Gods grace by it self, and by it own natural power: we
say that Man's will He differs not from Luther and Calvin.
works with grace; yet not of it self, but by grace: either he understands
not what Catholics say, or else accuses them wrongfully: For we say that Man's
will then only concurreth with Gods grace, when it is stirred and helped first
by Gods grace. So that Man's will by his own natural action, does concur
in every good work, otherwise it were no action of Man: But we farther say,
that this action proceeds principally of grace, whereby the will was made
able to produce such actions: for of it self it was utterly unable to bring
forth such spiritual fruit. And the I take to be that, which M. Perkins does
mean by those his words, that the will must be first moved and acted by grace,
before it can act or will. He mistook^, thinking that we required some outward
help only to the will, to join with it, or rather, that grace did but a it
were untie the chains of sin wherein our will was ^eted, an^ t^en will could
of it self turn to God. No^ understanding how Catholics take that Luk 10.
The hol^ Ghost intended not to describe the state of man in that p^able.
parable of the man wounded in the way, between Jerusalem and Ierico who was
(not as the Papists only say, but as the holy Ghost ^aith) le^te half, and not
stark dead. Now the exposition of Catholics is not, that this wounded man,
(which signifies all Mankind) had half his spiritual strength left him, but
was robbed of all Supernatural riches, spoiled of all his original Justice,
and wounded in his natural powers of both understanding and will, and therein
left half dead, not being able of his own strength, either to know all
natural truth, or to perform all moral duty. Now touching supernatural
works, because he lost all What is bec^me of your m^ of coag^? Luke 15.
power to perform them; not being able so much as to prepare himself
conveniently to them; he in a good sense may be likened unto a dead man, not
able to move one finger that way of grace; and so in holy Scripture the Father
said of his prodigal Son, he was dead, and is revived. Yet as the same son
lived a natural life, albeit in a deadly sin: so man's will after the fall of
Adam, continued somewhat free in actions conformable to the nature of man,
though vvounded also in them, as M. P. shows that the will is passive in
receiving this inward fortifying.
not being able to act many of them, yet having still that natural faculty
of free will capable of grace, and also able, being first both outwardly
moved, and fortified inwardly by the virtue of grace, to affect and do any
work appertaining to salvation: which is as much as M. Perkins affirms.

Luther, Calvin, and generally all Protestant Divines: who in this point thus
dissent from you, that they ascribe the very act of the will, in repenting,
believing, etc. to the especial work of Gods spirit in their hearts, that
repent and believe: whereas you contrariwise, having furnished man with freedom
of will, by nature, or I know not what grace, make his assent (for I must
speak of faith as you do) to proceed, not from the spirit of God, inclining
him certainly to believe, but from the good use of his free will, yielding of
it self to the good motion of Gods spirit: yet so as that it might for all the
motion and operation of Gods spirit forbear to assent, if it were not led to
it by the goodness of free will. In a word, you ascribe no more to God, but the
power that the will has to will that which is good: we acknowledge, that the
very act of willing well, both before and after grace, is caused by the spirit
of God, to, and in every good desire that we bring well to pass.

It is more than Master Perkins affirms, that the will, being outwardly moved,
and inwardly fortified with the virtue of grace, is able to effect, and do any
work appertaining to salvation. For this virtue is not of such strength, but
that it needs the particular assistance of Gods spirit, to incline and frame
it to every good work of that nature.

Cap. 1.
are first these words in effect, concerning the unableness of man to arise
from sin of himself. Every man must acknowledge, and confess, that by Adams
fall we were made so unclean and sinful, that neither the Gentiles by the
force of nature, nor the Jews by the letter of Moses law, could arise out of
that sinful state. After it shows, how our deliverance is wrought, and
how freedom of v^ill is recovered in special, and vvherin it consists,
saying. The beginning of justification, in persons using reason, is taken from
the grace of God, preventing us through Jesus Christ, that is, from his
vocation, whereby without any desert of ours we are called, that we who
were by our sins turned away from God, may be prepared by his grace, both
raising us up, and helping us to return to our own Justification, freely
yielding our consent unto the said grace, and vvorking with it. So as God
touching the heart of man by the light of the Holy Ghost, neither does man
nothing at all, receiving that inspiration, who might also refuse it: neither
yet can he without the grace of God, by his free will, move himself to that,
which is just in Gods sight. And that you may be assured, that this Doctrine
of the Council, is no other then that which was taught three hundred years
before, in the very midst of darkness, as heretics deem: See what Saint
Thomas of Aquine one of her principal 1. 2. q. 109. art. 6.
pillars has written of this point in his most learned Sum. Where, upon
these words of our Savior, No man can come to me, unless my Father dravv
him. He concludes it to be manifest, that man Ioh. 6.
cannot so much as prepare himself to receive the light of grace, but by the
free and undeserved help of God, moving him inwar^ly thereunto.

Sell. 6. cap. 5.
The Council of Trent, as closely as it carries matters, could not but bewray
it self in this point; wherein it leaves to the will of man, enlightened by
the holy Ghost, Inspirationem ^llam: bi^ ce^e potest.
the act of refusing and receiving grace. Which must needs be natural; because
there was no former work of God, whereby this power to receive grace was
bestowed upon it. And this does 1. 2. q. 109. art 6. Ad hoc, quod praepar^^ ^e
homo ad susceptionem h^s don't, non oportet ^nere aliquod aliud donum habituale
in anima.
Thomas by you alleged make more plain, denying that there is any grace in the
will of man, as from God, for the preparing of himself to receive habitual
grace: because then we should need another grace for the former, and another
for that before the former, and so without end. What then does God in this
case? He moves the heart inwardly (says Thomas) or he breathes into us a good
purpose. A man would think that Thomas hereby acknowledged the receite of some
special grace: but it is not so, he means no more but this, that God puts a
good motion into us, for the receiving of habitual grace; which it is in the
power of our will by nature either to receive, or refuse. So that still, in the
matter of justification, the reason that this man is justified, that is not,
shall be from man, and not from God. Are they not in the midst of darkness
that write such things?

III. Our reasons.
^.
measure of man's corruption, which may be distinguished into two parts. The
first is the want of that original righteousness, which was in man by creation:
the second is, a pronenes and inclination to that which is evil, and to
nothing that is truly good. This appears, The frame of man's heart (says the
Genesis 8. 21.
Lord,) is evil even from his childhood: that is, the disposition of the
understanding, will, affections, with all that the heart of man deuiseth,
frames, or imagines, is wholly evil. And Paul says, The wisdom Romans 8. 5.
of the flesh is enmity against God. Which words are very significant: for the
word [(...)] translated wisdom, signifies that the best thoughts, the best
desires, affections, and endeavors that be in any natural man, even those
that come most near to true holiness, are not only contrary to God, but enmity
it self. And hence I gather, that the very heart it self, that is the will and
mind, from whence these desires and thoughts do come, are also enmity unto
God. For such as the action is, such is the faculty whence it proceeds: such
as the fruit is, such is the tree: such as the branches are, such are the
roots. By both these places it is evident, that in man there is not only a
want, absence, or deprivation of original righteousness, but a pronenes also by
nature unto that which is evil: which pronenes includes in it an inclination
not to some few, but to all and every sin: the very sin against the holy
Ghost not excepted. Hence therefore I reason thus. If every man by nature does
both want original justice, and be also prone unto all evil, then wants he
natural free will to will that which is truly good: But every man by nature
wants original justice, and is also prone unto all evil. Ergo: Every man
naturally wants free will to will that which is good.


Reason. II. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. In these words S. Paul sets down these
points. I. that a natural man does not so much as think of the things
revealed in the Gospel. II. that a man hearing, and in mind conceiving them;
cannot give consent unto them, and by natural judgment approve of them: but
contrariwise thinks them to be foolishness. III. that no man can give assent
to the things of God, unless he be enlightened by the spirit of God. And hence
I reason thus.

If a man by nature does not know and perceive the things of God, and when he
shall kn^w them, cannot by nature give assent unto them: then has he no power
to will them.

But the first is evidently true. Ergo.

For first the mind must approve and give assent, before the will can choose or
will: and when the mind has not power to conceive or give assent, there the
will has no power to will.

Reason III. Thirdly the holy Ghost avouches, Ephesians. 2. 2. Coloss. 2. 13. that
all men by nature are dead in sins and trespasses: not as the Papists say,
weak, sick, or half dead. Hence I gather, that man wants natural power not
to will simply, but freely and frankly to will that which is truly good. A
dead man in his grave cannot stir the least finger, because he wants the very
power of life, sense, and motion: no more can he that is dead in sin, will
the least good: nay if he could either will or do any good, he could not be
dead in sin. And as a dead man in the grave, cannot rise but by the power of
God: no more can he that is dead in sin rise, but by the power of Gods grace
alone, without any power of his own.

Reason IV. Fourthly in the conversion and salvation of a sinner, the scripture
ascribes all to God, and nothing to man's free will. John 3. 3. Except a man be
borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works. And chap. 4. verse. 24. The
new man is created to the image of God. Now to be borne again, is a work of no
less importance then our first creation: and therefore wholly to be ascribed to
God as our creation is. Indeed Paul Phil. 2. 12. 13. bids the Philippians
work out their salvation with fear and trembling: not meaning to ascribe unto
them a power of doing good by themselves. And therefore in the next verse he
adds, It is God that works both the will and the deed: directly excluding
all natural free will in things spiritual: and yet withal he acknowledges,
that man's will has a work in doing that which is good, not by nature, but by
grace. Because when God gives man power to will good things, then he can will
them: and when he gives him a power to do good, then he can do good, and he
does it. For though there be not in man's conversion a natural cooperation of
his will with Gods spirit, yet is there a supernatural cooperation by grace,
enabling man when he is to be converted, to will his conversion: according to
which S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 10. I have labored in the faith, but least
any man should imagine, that this was done by any natural power: therefore he
adds, yet not I, that is, not by any thing in me, but Gods grace in me,
inabling my will to do the good I do.

Reason V. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. de corrept. and great.
c. 12.
August. The will of the regenerate is kindled only by the holy Ghost: that
they may therefore be able because they will thus: and they will thus because
God works in them to will. And, Epist. 105.
We have lost our freewill, to love God by the greatness of our sin. Sermon.
2. on the words of the Apostle. Man when he was created, received great
strength in his free will: but by sinning he lost it. Fulg. lib.
Fulgentius, God gives grace freely to the unworthy whereby the wicked man
being justified is enlightened, with the gift of good will, and with a
faculty of doing good: that by mercy preventing him he may begin to will well,
and by mercy coming after, he may do the good he will. Bernard says,
Bernard. de lib. arb.
It is wholly the grace of God that we are created, healed, saved. Council.
Arausic. 2. cap. 6. To believe and to will is given from above by infusion, and
inspiration of the holy Ghost. More testimonies and reasons might be alleged
to prove this conclusion, but these shall suffice: now let us see what reasons
are alleged to the contrary.

Perkins in his pretended dissent auerreth A poor shift.
here, and goes about to prove in his five reasons follovving: the which I
will omit, as being all for us. And if any man desire to see more to that
purpose, let him read the most learned works of that famous Cardinal, and
right Reverend Archbishop Bellarmine.

He that has naturally free will to receive a good motion inspired by God,
has naturally free will to will that which is good: for to receive such a
motion, is to will that which is good. But every man, according to 1. 2. q.
109. art. 6.
Thomas, and Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 5.
the Council of Trent, has naturally free will, to receive a good motion
inspiried by God: for else he cannot receive any, or must have some habitual
grace to prepare him for the receiving of it. Therefore every man has
naturally free will to will that which is good.


This is your conclusion; to which his are contrary, viz. Every man naturally
wants free will, to will that which is good. Secondly, Man, by nature, has no
power to will the things of God. Thirdly, Men naturally have no power to will
the least good. Fourthly, Man cannot naturally will his own conversion. The
testimonies alleged need neither confirmation, nor explication. Bellarmines
disputation shall be examined, if it please God to give leisure and
opportunity.

free will, M. Perkins has quite omitted, which consists in these two
points, expressed in the Council: First, whether we do freely assent unto
the said grace, when it is offered us, that is, whether it lie in our power
to refuse it; And secondly, when we concur and work with it, whether
we could if we listed refuse to work with it. In both which points we
hold the affirmative part, and most sectaries of this time the negative. Of
which our Author is silent: only by the way in his fourth reason, touches
two texts out of S. Paul, which are commonly alleged against free will.

The fir^^. I have (says he) labored more abundantly then all they, yet not
I, but the grace of God, which is in me, attributing the whole work 1. Cor.
15. So does Jerome read it.
to grace. To which I briefly answer, that they do corrupt the text, to
make it seem more current for them: the Greek has only He sun emoi, which
is, with me, not, which is in me, so that the word in true construction
makes much more for us, then against us: Saint Paul affirms the grace of God,
which was vvorking with him, to have done these things: And so Saint
Augustine whom they pretend to follovv most in this matter, expounds it. Yet
not I, but the grace of God with De great. and lib. arb. cap. 15.
me; that is, not I alone, but the grace of God with me. And by this, neither
the grace of God alone: neither he alone, but the grace of God with him: thus
Saint Augustine. The like sentence is in the book of Wisdom. Send that
(vvisdome) from thy holy heaven, that it may be with me, and Cap. 9.
labor with me.

Perkins took that, as the most principal point, which does most diminish the
glory of God, the end of all true religion. See 12. Art. part. 2. Art. 4.
(...).
Now what opinion is more derogatorie to Gods glory, than that which gives
man's will a power (by nature) to receive grace ofered, upon an inward motion of
God, without any inclini^g of the will by him? And this answers your former
quesion; denying that it lies in our own power to refuse gra^e, though we
freely assent unto it. There is a necessity of in^llibilitie, so that it cannot
come to pass, that a man, inclin^d by Gods spirit, should not receive grace;
there is notwthstanding a freedom of will, because the will is not compelled
to assent. The second question is like the former and answered in like sort,
viz. that we might refuse, in re^ect of the nature of our will, which is not
forced to the choice, that in the event we cannot refuse, because God frames
our will ineuitably to make that choice.

You saw it was not for you to deal with Master Perkins reasons, as they were
set down by him, for then it would have been looked for that yo^ should have
answered directly to all the places of Scripture he brings against the
strength of fr^^will by nature. Therefore you shift off the matter, and outof
nine texts alleged in this question, you choose only th^e. Against which you
think you are able to say somewh^. And what is it you say? That Master Perkins
attributes he whole to grace; utterly untrue. For he says plainly, 1. Cor.
15. 10.
^at there is a supernatural cooperation of man's will, with Gods s^rit, by
grace, enabling him to will his conversion. And adds fterwards, Not I, that
is, I by any thing in me; but Gods grace ^e enabling my will to do that good,
I do. Hieron. contra ^ouin. lib. 2.
If that translation ^rrupt the text, Hierome corrupted it, not we: and to
say^e truth, it is all one to us, whether you read in me, or wh^me, so you
acknowledge the strength, whereby the Apole works, to be of God, and not of
nature. But for the prase, the grace of God, in the Scripture, signifies either
the love and favor of God, which is wholly without a man, or some gift of his,
which is a quality in the soul. Now it is a great deal more likely, that the
Apostle speaks of some gift of God within him, whereby he is made able to
labor, than of the favor of God without him, whereby his labor is blessed. We
subscribe to August. de great. and. lib. arb. cap. 15.
S. Austin, That in all our good works we have a part; or rather, that the
work it self is wholieours, though both the grace, whereby we are enabled to
do it, and the inclination whereby we are brought to do i^, proceed from the
spirit of God.

It is God that woreth in us, both to will and to accomplish. We grant that
it is God, bu^ot he alone without us, for in Phil. 2. 13.
the next words before, Saint Paul, says Work your salvation with fear and
trembling. So that God works pincipally by stirring us up by his grace, and
also helping forward our will, to accomplish the work; but Not only helping
forward, but also inclining. Of this if occasion be offered in the point of
Justification.
so sweetly and con^ormablie to our naure, that his working takes not away,
but helps forward our will toconcurre with him. Again, the whole may be
attributed unto God, considering that the habits of grace infused, be from him
as sole efficient cause of them, our actions endued also with grace, being
only disposi^ons and no efficient cause of those habits: but this is an high
point of ^choole Divinity, very true, but not easily to be conceived of the
vnlea^ed.



Perkins third reason, against free will, which is touched, as he says, by the
holy Ghost, in these You need not have troubled your self with collecting
objections, there are five plainly s^t down. Ad Ephesians. 2. 2. He is so like a
dead man, that he is dead indeed spiritually.
words. When we were dead in sins. If a man by sin become like a dead
man, he cannot concur with God, in his rising from sin.

Answer. Sure it is, that he cannot, before God by his grace has quickened,
and as it were revived him, to which grace of God, man gives his free consent.
How can that be, if he were then dead? Marry, you must remember what has been
said before: that albeit man in sin be dead in the way of grace, yet he
lives naturally, and has free will in natural and civil actions: which will
of his being by grace fortified, and as it were lifted up unto a higher degree
of perfection, can then concur and work with grace to faith, and all good
works necessary to life everlasting. As (for example,) a crab-tree ^ocke has
no ability of it self to bring forth apples, and therefore may be termed dead
in that kind of good fruit. Yet let a sian^e of apples be ga^ted into it, and
it will be are apples: even so albeit our sower corrupt naure of it self be
unable to fructify to life everlasting, yet having re^iued into it the
heavenly graft of Gods grace, it is enabled to produce he sweet fruit of good
works: to which alludeth Saint James. Rece^e the ingrafted word, Cap. 1.
which can save our souls: again what more d^d then the earth? and yet it
being tilled and sowed, does bring forth, a^ bear goodly corn: now the word
and grace of God is compared by ^ur Savior himself unto seed, and our hearts
unto the earth that recei^ed it: what marvel Matthew. 13.
then if we otherwise dead, yet revived by this liuelyeed, do yield plenty of
pleasing fruit?

Ephesians. 2. 2.
what a man can do by nature, to his own co^ersion. Master Perkins says, he
is spiritually dead, and there^re can do nothing. You answer, that he can do
something, when God has quickened him. But what can he do^ to the quickening
of himself? give his free consent, you say. Then it must needs follow, that
he has power by name to will his own conversion: for as yet he has received
no grace, but only has had a good motion made to him, or inspired into him by
God: of which by his own free will he takes a liking, and so attaines to
justifying grace.

He propounds none for you, and therefore misapplies none.
objections as may be gathered out of Master Perkins against it, before I come
to his solution of our arguments, I will set down some principal places, both
out of the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, in defense of our Doctrine,
because he proposes but few for us, and misapplieth them too. (...)

God has appointed to bring them, to choose and like of salvation (...) Christ.

Nature, and the ^er under Moses law) let us couple two more out of the new
Testament,

The first may be those kind words of our Savior unto the Jews. Jerusalem,
Matthew. 23.
Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have gathered together thy children as the
hen does her chick^^s under her vvings, and thou would not: Which does
plainly demonstrate that there was no want, either of Gods help inwardly, or
of Christ's persuasion outwardly, for their conversion: and that the whole fault
lay in their own refusing, and withstanding Gods grace, as these words of
Christ do plainly witness, and thou would not.

The last testimony is in the Reuelat, where it is said in the person of God. I
stand at the door and knock, if any man shall hear my voice and Cap. 3.
open the gates, I will enter in to him, and will suppe with him, and he
with me. Mark well the words: God by his grace, knocks at the door of our
hearts, he does not break it open, or in any sort force it, but attends, that
by our assenting to his call, we open him the gates, and then, lo he with his
heavenly gifts will enter in: otherwise he leaves us. What can be more evident
in confirmation of the freedom of man's will, in working with Gods grace?

Matthew. 23. 37
We acknowledge that the fault is wholly in every man, that is not saved: but
we deny, that therefore he has power, by nature, to choose life when it is
offered: he fails indeed in doing of that which he might do, and ought to
do, for his own furtherance, to this choice; as the Jews did, in refusing to
hear, to meditate, to yield to the miracles wrought by our Savior Christ, and
to believe the doctrine; which they could in no reasonable sort gainsay. It was
Perk. of Gods free grace. p. 23 Lombard. 1. senten. did. 45
voluntas signi, not beneplaciti: God offered them the outward means of his
word, not the inward means of his spirit, for their conversion, which Act. 16.
14.
Lydia had.

Revel. 3. 20.
To break open the door, were to use compulsion; to Perk. of Gods free grace.
p. 79
knock, is to use the outward means of converting a man; or if you will, to
inspire a good purpose: upon which if any man open, out of doubt Christ will
enter. But this does no: prove, that a man upon this motion, can yield by the
strength of his own free will, which is the point in question.

of those most ancient Fathers, against whose works the Protestants can take
no exception. The fi^^^ shall be that excellent learned Martyr Justinius in his
Apology, who unto the Emperor Aatonine speaks thus. Unless man by free
will could she from soul dishonest deeds, and follovv those that be fair and
good; he were without fault, as not being cause of such things as were done
But we Christians teach that mankind by free choice, and free will, does both
do well, and sin.

To him we will join that h^ly Bishop and valiant Martyr Jreneus, who of free
will writes thus, not only in works, but in faith also, our Lib. 4. cap. 72.
Lord reserved liberty, and freedom of will unto man: saying, be it done unto
thee, according to thy faith.

Cyprian: who upon those words of our Savior, will you also depart,
discourses thus. Our Lord did Joan 6. Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
not bitterly in^^igh against them, which forsook him, but rather used these
gentle speeches to his Apostles, will you also go your way: and why so?
Marry observing and keeping (as this holy Father declares) that decree by
which man left unto his liberty, and put unto his free choice, Appetite,
des^^es, or at the most, procure; not might deserve.
might deserve unto himself, either damnation, or salvation. These three most
ancient, and most skillful in Christian Religion, and so zealous of Christian
truth, that they spent their blood in confirmation of it, may suffice to
certify any indifferent reader; what was the judgment of the ancient and
most pure Church, concerning this article of free wl specially when the
learned of our Adversaries, confess all An^^quitie, (excepting only S.
Augustine) to have believed and taught free will. Hear the words This is but a
popish slander to charge him with lying. Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 59. They were
not led to this point by the Apostles, if the^ sp^ke of spiritual actions.
S^ny answer in the Epistle ded^atoru.
of one, for all. Mathias Illyricus in his large, long lying history, having
rehearsed touching free will, the testimonies of Iustine Ireneus and others,
says. In like manner ^lement, Patriarch of Alexandria, does every where teach
free will, that it may appear (say these Lutherans) not only the Doctors of
that age to have been in such darkness, but also that it did much increase in
the ages follovving. See the wilful blindness of heresy. Illyricus confessing
the best learned in the purest times of the Church, to have taught free will:
yet had rather believe them to have bin blindly led, by the Apostles and then
best Scholars, who were their Masters: then to espy and amend his own e^ror.
These principal pillars of Christ's Church were in darkness belike as
Protestants must needs say: and that proud Persian and most wicked heretic
Manes (of whom the Manichees are named) who first denied free will, began to
broach the true light of the new Gospel.

Justin Apol. 2. ad Anto^^num.
Justin speaks of natural actions, not of spiritual: for these were utterly
unknown to the Emperor being a heathen. He speaks also, perhaps, against the
imputation of fatal necessity, wherewith the Christians were charged in those
times.

Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 70.
Irenaeus gives a man that freedom, which is contrary to constraint: God
(says he) made man free, from the beginning, etc. Non Coactum a deo.
not constrained by God.

Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3.
Cyprian speaks of using, or not using the outward means; such, as following
Christ to hear the word of him, whereof Ioh. 6. 66.
the Evangelist there entreates. Now that this is in man's power, and that it is
a means to procure salvation, or damnation, who denies? But Cyprian does not
say, that it is in a man's power by nature, to consent to Gods motion for his
conversion.

Austin, Sixtus Senens lib. 5. in praefat. Tolle^us in Ioh. 6. and Romans 9.
Maldonatus in Ioh. 6. Peter. in Romans 9. Number. 33.
spoke liker Philosophers, than Divines; and gave both occasion to Pelagius of
his error, though they favored it not, and also advantage for the confirming
of it; as the place of the Centur. 2. cap. 4. col. 59.
Centuries alleged by you plainly proves. Other of them also spoke not so
plain, as it was to be wished they had done: so that Aug. de not. and great.
cap. 61. and seq. 2. Inst. c. 2. q. 4. It becomes not a divine to write so
skornefully. Not to have spoken so plainly and warily. De spirit. and li^. 34.
De gra. Chri. 14. Ad Simpl. q. 2. Tract. ^2. in Ioh. Ep. ^7.
Austin has much ado to defend them against Pelagius, and in the entrance to
his defense is feign to lay this foundation, that he holds himself free for
yielding to any writings of men whatsoever.

Here I would make an end of citing Authorities, were it not that Calvin
says, that albeit all other ancient vvriters be against him, yet S. Augustine
as he vaunteth, is clearly for him in this point, but the poor man is foully
deceived, asvvell in this, as in most other matters. I will briefly prove, and
that out of those works which S. Augustine wrote after the Pelagian heresy was
a foot; for in his others, Calvin acknowledges him to have taught free will.
Of our freedom in consenting to Gods grace, he thus defines, to consent to
Gods calling, or not to consent, lies in a man's own will. Again: Who does
not see every man to come, or not to come, by free will? but this free will
may be alone, if he do not come, but it cannot be but helped, if he do come.
In another place, that we will (do well) God will have it to be his and
ours; his, in calling us; ours, in follovving him. Yea more: To Christ vvorking
in him, a man does cooperate, that is, works with him, both his own
justification, and life everlasting: will you hear him speak yet more
formally for us? We have dealt with your brethren and ours, as much as we
could: that they would hold out and continue in the sound Catholic faith; the
which neither denies free will, to evil or good life, nor does attribute so
much to it, that it is vvorth any thing without grace. So according to this
most worthy Fathers judgment, the sound Catholic faith does not deny free
will, as the old Manichees and our new Gospellers do; nor esteem it without
grace able to do any thing toward salvation, as the Pelagians did. And to
conclude, hear S. Augustines answer unto them, who say, that he, when he
commends grace, denies free will. Much less Lib. 4. con. ^ul. c. 8.
would I say that, which thou lyinglie do affirm me to say, free will to
be denied, if grace be commended, or grace to be denied, if free will be
commended.

Calvin does not without cause affirm, that Austin is for him; not only in
his writings after the Pelagian heresy, but in those before it also; though in
the former he Aug. Ret. act. lib. 1. cap. 9.
speak not so warily, as in the latter; yet his judgment was all one.

Aug. de spirit. and lit. cap. 34.
Austin says no more, but that assenting, or dissenting, when God calls, is
an action of man's will. That the difference betwixt man and man, why one
believes, and another does not, proceeds from the diverse work of Gods spirit,
not from the choice of the parties, he speaks most plainly in the same place.
Ipsum velle credere deus operatur in homine.
God works in a man the very willing to believe: and yet more; nay, If any man
will draw us to the searching of that depth, Cur illi ita suadeatur, vt
persuadeatur, illi autem non.
why this man is so persuaded, that he yields, he is not, there are only two
things, which I think good to answer. Romans 11. 33. and 9. 14.
O the depth of the riches! And is there iniquity with God? Let him, whom this
answer mislikes, seek for some that are more learned, but let him take heed
that he find not some that are more presumptuous. Imagine then what Austin
thinks of you Papists, who confidently affirm, that the reason of this
difference proceeds from the good use of free will in the believer: not that
you are more learned, but that you are more presumptuous. Aug de gra. Christ.
cap. 14.
If you had added the words that follow immediately in Austin, you should have
needed no further answer. Free will, if a man come to Christ, cannot be but
helped, Et sic adiutum, etc.
and so helped, that not only he must know what is to be done, but do that he
knows: and therefore when God teaches, not by the letter of the law, but by
the spirit of grace, he teaches so, that a man does not only see by knowledge
that which he has learned, but also desire it by willing, and perform it by
doing. And by this divine manner of teaching, even the will and work it self,
not only the natural possibility of willing and working is helped. Si enim
sol^ posse nostrum, etc.
For if only our power were helped by this grace, the Lord would thus speak:
Every one that has heard of the Father, and has learned, can come to me. But
he said not so; but every one which has heard of my Father, and learned, does
come to me. To have power to come, Pelagius Venire posse in natura ponit.
ascribes to nature; or, as of late he has begun to speak, to grace, what
grace soever he mean; by which (as he says) our possibility is helped: but
to come, is in will and work. It follows not, that he which can come, Etiam
veniat, nisi id voluerit, atque fecerit.
comes, unless he will, and do so; but every one that has learned of the
Father, not only can come, but comes. I have set down these words of Austin
at large, as well that it may appear with what conscience this man cites the
Fathers, as that S. Austins judgment of this point may be fully known to all
men.

There is great reason that we should expound Aug. ad Simplicia. q. 2. lib. 1
such short sentences as this, by such large discourses as the former: but if
we knew not that, this place makes nothing against us: for we have granted
already, that to will is our work, but we say further, that Gods calling, as
his teaching, in Aug. de great. Chri. cap. 14.
that other place of Austin, works in us, not only to be able to will, but to
will indeed.

I Aug. in Ioh. tract. 72.
say of this as of the former, that it is not contrary to our doctrine: for we
acknowledge, that in our justification, and salvation after election, we work
with God; but not, as I have often answered, by any natural power of our free
will, nor by any choice of our own, to which we are not inclined and brought
by Gods spirit.

We say with Aug. Epist. 47 Lib. 4. contra ^ulian. cap. 8.
S. Austin, both in words and meaning, that true religion neither denies free
will, either to a good or bad life, nor gives so much to it, that it should be
of any force without grace; and we add, that therefore your religion is false,
because it affirms, that the will of man can, by nature, assent to a good
motion inspired. So to commend free will is indeed to deny grace; but to hold
them both, as I have proved Austin did out of these very places which you
allege for your opinion, and as we do, going not an hairs breadth from him
in this question, is to glorify Gods mercy, and confess our own weakness;
which is the end of his love to us, in the whole work of our salvation.

III. Objections of Papists.
Object. I. First they allege that man by nature may do that which is good,
and therefore will that which is good: for none can do that which he neither
wills nor thinks to do, but first we must will and then do. Now (say
they) men can do good by nature, as give alms, speak the truth, do
justice, and practice other duties of civil virtue: and therefore will that
which is good. I answer, that a natural man may do good works for the
substance of the outward work: but not in regard of the goodness of the
manner: these are two diverse things. A man without supernatural grace may give
alms, do justice, speak the truth, etc. which be good things considered in
themselves as God has commanded them; but he cannot do them well. To think
good things and to do good things are natural works: but to think good
things in a good manner, and to do them well, so as God may accept the action
done, are works of grace. And therefore the good thing done by a natural man
is a sin, in respect of the doer: because it fails both for his right
beginning, which is a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned; as also
for his end, which is the glory of God.

The ^esse you meddle v^ them, the (...) it will be for (...) c^ed^s.
in our names. But misapplieth them.

First Objection. That man can do good by nature, as give alms, do Justice,
speak the truth, etc. And therefore will them without the help of grace.
This argument we use to prove liberty of will in civil and moral matters, even
in the corrupted state of man, and it does demonstrate it: and M. Perkins in
his third conclusion does He graunts no more there, then he does here.
grant it. An ^his answer here is far from the purpose, for albeit (says
he) touching the substance of the work it be good, yet it fails both in the
beginning, because it proceeds not from a pure heart, and a faith unfeigned: and
also in the end which is not the glory of God.

Answer. It fails neither in the one nor other: for that alms may issue
out of a true natural compassion, which is a sufficient good fountain to make
a work morally good: faith and grace do purge the heart, and are necessary
only for good and meritorious works: Again being done to relieve the poor
man's necessity, God his Creator and Master, is thereby glorified. And so albeit
the man thought not of God in particular: yet God being the final end of all
good, any good action of it self, is directed toward him, when the man
puts no other contrary end thereunto.

Perkins, as any man may see, grants a freedom of will in moral actions, but
denies those actions to be good, in regard of the goodness of the manner: and
afterward, A man may give alms, etc. which are good things, considered as they
are commanded of God: but he cannot do them well, that is, so as God may
accept of the action done. If you will reply upon M. Perkins, you must prove,
that such works of a natural man will be accepted of God; but that you cannot
do. Prosper. de vocat. gentium. lib 2. cap 3 Sine cul^u very Dei etiam quod
virtus vi detur esse, peccatum est. Aug in senten. Prosper. cap. 106. Omnis
infidelium vita, peccatum est.
For the person must be accepted before the work; Hebr. 11. 6.
and without faith he cannot be accepted, nor have faith being a natural man.
The sum of the answer is, if it be not done as the law requires, it is not a
good work: if it be, it is meritorious, and so must be accepted of God.

Object. II. God has commanded all men to believe and repent: therefore they
have natural free will, by virtue whereof (being helped by the spirit of God)
they can believe and repent. Ans. This reason is not good: for by such
commandments God shows not what men are able to do; but what they should
do, and what they cannot do. Again, the reason is not well framed, it ought
rather to be thus; because God gives men commandment to repent and believe,
therefore they have power to repent and believe, either by nature or by grace,
and then we hold with them. For when God in the Gospel commands men to repent
and to believe, at the same time by his grace he inableth them both to will or
desire to believe and repent, as also actually to repent and believe.

Object. God has commanded all to believe and repent, therefore they have
natural free will, by virtue whereof being helped by the spirit of God, they
can believe. The force of the argument consists in this, that God being a
good Lord, will not command any man to do that, which he is no way able to
do.

Ans. M. Perkins answers in effect (for his words be obscure) that To him
that will not understand them.
God commands that, which we be not able to perform, but that which we
should do: Then I hope he will admit that he will enable us by his grace
to do it, or else how should we do it? God surely does not bind us by
commandment to any impossible thing, he is no tyrant, but tells us, that his
yoke is sweet, and his burden easy. And S. John witnesses, that his
commandments are not heavy. He was far off Matthew. 11. Ioh. 5.
from thinking that God would tie any man by law, to do that which he was
altogether unable to perform. This in the end M. Perkins himself approves.

Perkins denies the consequence of the enthymem, viz. That therefore men have
free will to believe and repent, because God commands them to believe and
repent; you to help the matter, give a reason of the consequence, God being a
good Lord, will not command any man to do that, which he is no way able to do:
therefore since God commands men to believe and repent, they have free will to
believe and repent. Here the consequence is worse than before; for who sees not
that there may be other means of believing and repenting? namely, inclining
the will by grace. The antecedent also is false: for God being a good Lord, may
inioyne his servant that, which he made him able to perform, Bernard. d^ great.
and lib. arb. fol. 263. Corruit de posse non peccare, in non posse non peccare.
though by his own fault he be now unable.

Object. III. If man have no free will to sin, or not to sin, then no man
is to be punished for his sins: because he finneth by a necessity not to be
avoided. Answer, The reason is not good: for though man cannot but sin, yet
is the fault in himself, and therefore he is to be punished; as a bankrupt is
not therefore freed from his debtes, because he is not able to pay them: but
the bills against him stand in force, because the debt comes through his own
default.

Object. If man have no free will to sin, or not to sin, then no man is to be
punished for his sins, because he sins by a necessity, not to be avoided.

He answers, that the reason is not good; for, though man cannot but sin,
yet is the fault in himself, and therefore is to be punished. Against which, I
say that this answer supposes that which is false, to wit, that a man in
sin, cannot choose but sin: for by the help of 1. Per. 3.
God, who desires all sinners conversion, and thereunto affords grace
sufficient; a sinner in a moment, may call for grace and repent him: and so
choose whether he will sin or no, and consequently has free will to sin or
not to sin: And that example of a bankerupt is not to purpose, for he cannot
when he will, satisfy his creditours, who content not themselves Not to your
purpose, but to his very fit.
with his repentance, without repay of their money, as God does.

Perkins denies the consequence; that therefore a man is not to be punished for
sinning, because he has no free will to sin, or not to sin. The reason of
his denial is that, which I answered in the second objection: he may justly be
punished, though he have not free will not to sin, because it is by his own
fault that he has it not. You reply, that the answer supposes that which is
false. The answer does not suppose it, but, as I have showed, plainly denies
the consequence. How your conceit, that every man has help of God, so that he
may repent and believe when he will, can stand with Austins judgment before
set down, let every man, that has reason, consider. The example of the
bankerupt is fully to the purpose; for which Master Perkins brings it, to show,
that a man is not always therefore to be borne with, for not doing that which
he is enjoined, because he cannot do it: for when it is through his own
fault that he cannot, why should he escape?

Now concerning the force of this argument, hear S. Augustines opinion De
duab. animab. contra Manich.
in these words. Neither are we here to search obscure books to learn, that
no man is worthy of dispraise or punishment, which does not that, which he
cannot do: for (says he) do not shepherds upon the dovvnes, From the doing
whereof he is for^^bly restrained.
sing these things? do not Poets upon the stages, act them? Do not the
unlearned in their assemblies, and the learned in their libraries acknovvledge
them? Do not masters in the schools, and Prelates in the pulpits, and finally
all mankind throughout the whole world, confess and teach this? to wit, that
no man is to be punished, because he did that, which he could not choose but
do. Should he not then (according to S. Augustines Who shall iustisie the
matter of original sin, if no man may be punished for that which he could not
avoid?
censure) be hissed out of all honest company of men, that denies this so
manifest a truth; confessed by all Mankind? How gross is this heresy, that so
hoodeth a man, and hardneth him, that be he learned, yet he blusheth not to
deny roundly, that which is so evident in reason, that even natural sense,
does teach it unto shepherds? God of his infinite mercy, deliver us from this
strange light of the new Gospel.

Austin disputing in that book See my answer about the Manichees in the
Epistle dedicatorie.
against the Manichees, who hold that there were two souls in every creature,
of two diverse substances; the one good, the other bad, by which they are forced
to do good or evil, as either of them could overcome other; refutes them by
this reason, among other, that if men do well or ill, by constraint, they were
neither to be praised, nor dispraised for it. That he is thus to be understood,
not only the course of his disputation shows, but also the definition that he
brings of will: Will (says De duabus animabus contra Manic. cap. 10.
Austin) is a motion of the mind ( Nullo cogente.
no man constraining it) to Ad aliquid vel non amittendum, vel adipiscendum.
the not losing, or to the getting of something. I showed before that we admit
no such necessity of sinning, but only affirm, that whatsoever a natural
man does, it is sinful: so that we grant him liberty from constraint, for
the doing, or not doing this or that action; but deny, that any action he does
is free from sin, and therefore he sins necessarily in all he does.

The second point. Of Original sin.
Original sin after baptism; that is, how farforth it remains after
baptism. A point to be well considered, because hereupon depend many points
of Popery.

I. Our consent.
Conclus. I. They say natural corruption after baptism is abolished, and so
say we: but let us see how far it is abolished. In original sin are three
things; I. the punishment, which is the first and second death. II. Guiltines,
which is the binding up of the creature unto punishment. III. the fault or the
offending of God, under which I comprehend our guiltines in Adams first
offense, as also the corruption of the heart: which is, a natural inclination
and pronenes to any thing that is evil, or against the law of God. For the
first we say, that after baptism in the regenerate, the punishment of
original sin is taken away; There is no condemnation (says the Apostle) to
them that be in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. For the second, that is, guiltines, we
further condescend and say; that is also taken away in them that are borne
anew: for considering there is no condemnation to them, there is nothing to
bind them to punishment. Yet this caveat must be remembered, namely, that the
guiltines is removed from the person regenerate, not from the sin in the
person: but of this more afterward. Thirdly, the guilt in Adams first offense
is pardoned. And touching the corruption of the heart, I avouch two things. I.
That, that very power or strength whereby it reigns in man, is taken away in
the regenerate. II. That this corruption is abolished (as also the fault of
every actual sin past) so far forth as it is the fault and sin of the man
in whom it is. Indeed it remains till death, and it is sin considered in it
self, so long as it remains, but it is not imputed unto the person: and in
that respect is as though it were not; it being pardoned.

Annotations upon our Consent.

What is, but (...) peccadillo ^you must needs show you are spanish.


Romans 5. 12. 1. Cor. 15. 21.
the death of all men in Adam is no punishment, or God punishes without desert.

What vain i^ions are these?
were a substance, subject to law, and capable of punishment: can Original
sin in itself die the first and second death, or be bound up to them? What
senseless imaginations be these?



in one part of the subject at once? can there be light and darkness There can,
though the same t^ing can not be virtue and vice in the same respect. He is not
content it should be subject, and therefore he labors to purge and free it. It
is taken away, that it reigns not: not that it has no sway. And there
ansvvered.
in the understanding, virtue and vice in the will at the same instant? can the
soul be both truly converted to God, and as truly auerted from him at one
time? is Christ now agreed to dwell with Belial? and the holy Ghost oontent to
inhabit a body subject to sin? all which must be granted contrary to both,
Scripture, and natural sense, if we admit the ^ault and deformity of sin to
remain in a man renewed, and endued with Gods grace: unless we would very
absurdly imagine that the fault and guilt of sin were not inherent and placed
in their proper subjects, but were drawn thence, and penned up in some other
odd^ corner.

Perkins affirms the power, whereby the corruption of the heart reigns in
man, is taken away in the regenerate: which is clean contrary to the first
proposition, of his first reason following, as shall be there proved.

Not being imputed, hinders not the being of the thing there, but rather proves
it: for if it were not there, what favor were it not to impute it? Who knows
not that contraries may be in one part of the same subject at once, though not
in the same respect? Do 1. Cor. 13. 9.
we not, while we are here, know in part, and so remain ignorant in part? Is
not our will imperfectly reformed? The holy Ghost is not content that the body
he does inhabit should be subject to sin, and therefore he labors
continually to free it from that subjection: but he is content to inhabit the
man whom he has begun to reform, that he may purge him thoroughly.

II. The dissent or difference.


Papists teach, that Original sin is so far sorth taken away after
baptism, that it cease to be a sin properly: and is nothing else but a
want, defect, and weakness, making the heart fit and ready to conceive
sin: much like tinder, which though it be not fire of it self, yet is it
very apt and fit to conceive fire. And they of the Church of Rome deny it to
be sin properly, that they might uphold some gross opinions of theirs,
namely, That a man in this life may fulfill the law of God: and do good works
void of sin: that he may stand righteous at the bar of Gods judgment by
them. But we teach otherwise, that though original sin be taken away in the
regenerate, and that in sundry respects: yet does it remain in them after
baptism, not only as a want and weakness, but as a sin, and that properly:
as may by these reasons be proved.

Reason I. Romans 7. 17. Paul says directly: It is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me: that is, original sin. The Papists answer
again, that it is so called improperly: because it comes of sin, and also
is an occasion of sin to be done.

Paul, as taken out of that ancient D. B. P. But Saint Paul expounds himself
otherwise. Lib. 1. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 10. Lib (...) de nupt^ and
concup. cap. 23. Is every one a Papist that agrees with you in any one poyn^?
and famous Papist Saint Augustine: who says expressly: Concupiscence, (whereof
the Apostle speaks) although it be called sin, yet is it not so called,
because it is sin, but for that it is made by sin: a^ vvriting is called
the hand, because it is made by the hand. And in an other place repeating the
same, adds. That it may also be called sin, for that it is the cause of
sin: as cold is called sloathfull, because it ma^es a man sloathfull: so that
the most profound Doctor Saint Augustine is styled a formal Papist by M.
Perkins, shall be well coursed by the plain circumstances of the place.

If S. Austin were a Papist in this point, because of this sentence;
questionless he was in the same point a Protestant, because of some other
which I will recite. Do thou not mark ( Aug. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 6.
cap. 5.
says Austin) do thou not perceive, that he who does so vehemently
persecute his body, if he does persecute nothing that displeases God, does
God great wrong, by persecuting his temple Frustra.
without cause? Now what, I pray you, displeases God, but sin? But this
corruption we speak of, is also hated of God, and therefore day by day
consumed. As the Physician (says Aug. in Joan. tract. 41.
Austin) hates the disease of the sick man, and labors, by curing it, to
drive away the disease, and ease the diseased: so does God lab our by his grace
in us to consume sin, and deliver man. And that it is not only sin, as it
comes from sin, and causes sin, but also properly as a disobedience,
Austin shows evidently by this similitude: As blindness of heart ( Aug. contra
Julian P^^^g. lib. 5. cap. 3.
says he) is both a sin, whereby we believe not in God; and a punishment of
sin, whereby the proud heart is worthily punished; and a cause of sin, when
any evil is committed by the error of the heart: so that concupiscence of the
flesh, against which the good spirit lusts is both sin, because there is in
it disobedience against the government of the mind; and a punishment of sin,
because it is Reddita est meritis inobe dientis.
laid by desert upon the disobedient; and the cause of sin, by the Defectione
con^ionis.
fault of consent, or the Contagione na^cen (...).
contagion of birth. Yea Austin doubts not to say (as we do) that the guilt of
concupiscence yet remaining, is pardoned, that it may not be imputed for sin.
In them which are regenerate (says Aug. vbi supra.
Austin) when they receive forgiveness of all sins whatsoever, it must needs
be, that the guilt also of this concupiscence yet remaining is forgiven, that,
as I said, it may not be imputed In peccatum.
for sin. Further it is plain, that Austin acknowledged it to be sin,
because he Aug. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 2.
receives and allows of Ambrose his opinion, who calls it iniquity, because
it is unjust that the flesh should lust against the spirit. This sin Ad Romans
7.
Chrysostom and Theophylact understand, to be our ^lothfull and corrupt will,
and a violent inclination to evil. And Lombard. lib. 3. is it. 19.
Peter Lombard says, that we are not altogether redeemed by Christ from the
guilt or fault, but so that it reigns not in us.

Paul says, that this sin dwelling in him, made him to do the evil which
he hated. And. verse 24. he cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death?

For says he, that S. Paul there takes sin properly, appears by the words
following, That this sin dwelling in him, made him to do the evil which
he ha^^a. How proves this, that sin there must be taken properly: it rather
proves, that it must be taken improperly: for if it He ^ated it (...)
regenerate; he did it vvilling (...) ^s (...) ^ate.
made him do the evil, which he hated: then could it not be sin properly, for
sin is not committed, but by the consent and liking of the will: But S. Paul
did not like that evil, but hated it, and thereby was so far off from
sinning, that he did a most virtuous deed in resisting and ouercomming that
evil. As witnesses S. Augustine, saying: Reason sometimes resists
manfully, and rules raging concupiscence; which Lib. (...). de Genesis cont.
M^nic^. cap. 14.
being done, we sin not, but for that conflict are to be crowned.

This first circumstance then alleged by M. Perkins, does rather make against
him, than for him.

Arist. Ethi^ lib. 7. cap. 3.
even natural men do, that are overcome of their affections. Witness Medea in
Meta^or. lib. 7. -- Video me^^ora proboq^ deteriora ^^quor. --
Ovid: I see what is good, and like it, and do that is evil. Otherwise such
actions of theirs should not be sin. I deny not that the regenerate have a
greater hatred of the sins they fall into, and upon a better ground; but yet
the natural men also oftentimes do that, which they mislike in general,
though they do it willingly. That this was the Apostles meaning, he that will
read the Romans 7. 15. Verse. 23. 25.
chapter may easily perceive: I allow not (says he) that I do: that is, I
know it to be evil, and I would feign leave it undone: but the strength of my
corruption is such, that I am carried away to the doing of it; and so, because
I am but in part regenerate, in part I serve God, and in part sin. As for
that you add out of De Genes. contra Mani^. lib. 2 cap. 1^
S. Austin, it makes not any whit against us, who acknowledge that reason,
especially being regenerate, oftentimes ouercomes concupiscence and shall have
reward for it. Yet are not Austins words as you report them; but thus: Reason
sometimes manfully Ref^t, atque compe^^^t.
bridles and restraines concupiscence Etiam com^.
even when it is stirred: when it so happens we fall not into sin, but Cum
aliqua^ta luctatione, corona^^ur.
with some little wrestling are crowned. But sometimes again, as Romans 7. 2^.
the Apostle plainly confesses, it is vanquished by sin, or natural
corruption, and drawn to the committing of some actual sin inward or
outward; which being evident, Master Perkins reason is not answered, as the
sight of it may prove. That which dwelling in S. Paul made him do that he
hates, is sin properly. Indeed why should he hate it if it be not sin? But
original sin dwelling in him, made him do that he hates. Therefore
original sin is properly sin.


O wretched man that J am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Here
is no mention of sin: how this may be Sin is implied in that body of death.
drawn to his purpose, shall be examined in his argument where he repeateth
it: so that there is not one poor circumstance of the text which he can find,
to prove S. Paul to take sin there properly.

Chemnit. exam. part. 1. de reliq. orig. pecca Whitak. de orig. peccat. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
properly, our Divines prove by the description the Apostle makes of it in Romans
7. 18. Verse. 15. Verse. 23.
that chapter: It is not good. It hinders us from doing good. It draws us to
the doing of evil. It makes the Apostle cry out, Oh wretched man that I am!
To which they add out of other places, Heb. 12. 1.
It is an evil that does compass us about. Gal. 5. 14. Rom 7. 8.
It fights against the Commandment, Thou shall not lust. Col. 3. 5. 9. D. B.
P. This conclusion is faulty.
It is an evil to be crucified and mortified. Upon al these descriptions of it
we conclude, that it is truly and properly sin.



First, by the former part of the same sentence: It is not I that do it: ^l^
sin is done and committed properly by the person in whom it is: but this
was not done by S. Paul. Ergo.

Let us now see your proofs to the contrary: the first whereof you frame
thus; All sin is done and committed properly by the person in whom it is:

But this was not done by S. Paul. Ergo.



First, your proposition is false: secondly, your conclusion is either false,
or not to the purpose. Your proposition has two faults: the one, that in stead
of saying, All that is sin properly is done, etc. You say, All that is sin,
is done properly; applying properly to the committing of sin, and not to the
nature of it. The other fault is, that the matter of your proposition is
untrue. For there is some sin, namely original, which is not done by him, in
whom it is, but is bred with him. If in your assumption you mean, that the
Apostle does not properly do the evil which he hates, you are deceived. For
whether it be an inward action of the mind, or an outward of the body, it
must needs be performed by some nature that has a true being: but there is no
third nature in man, besides the soul and body, and what is done by either of
these, is done by the man, of whom they are parts. If you say, it is done by a
vicious quality in man, that quality having subsistence in man, as in the
subject of it, is not properly the doer of the action, but the faculty, by
which a man is fitted for the doing of it. To your proof I answer, that Romans
7. 1^.
the Apostle consefleth he did it; I allow not that which I do. What I hate,
that do I. I do that which I would not. The evil which I would not, that
Verse. 16. Verse. 19. Verse. 25. (...).
do I. And at last he concludes: I my self in my mind serve the law of God,
but in my flesh the law of sin. Where he teaches us to expound, his doing,
or not doing. I do not the evil, which I hate, that is, in my mind, or in
respect of my regeneration; I do, that is, in regard of my corruption. In my
mind, I my self serve the law of God; in my flesh, I my self serve the law
of sin. I do both my self; but the one in my mind regenerate, the other in
my flesh unregenerate.

If you will conclude (for that you leave at large in this reason, it should
seem of purpose, because in the other two you set down your conclusion
expressly) Therefore it is not properly sin, your conclusion is false:
because it contains more than is in the antecedent. If your meaning be, either
that original corruption is not sin, or that the evil which S. Paul hates,
is not sin (as one of these two you must needs mean) your conclusion is
from the purpose. For the question is not, whether original sin be sin,
which both parts grant, but whether it be properly sin, or no: neither do
you undertake to prove, that the evil which the Apostle did, with hatred of
it, is not sin. So that this first proof of yours is neither for you, nor
against us.

I know there is not in me, that is in my flesh, any good: And after. I see an
other law in my members, resisting the D. B. P. The flesh and the soul are not
contrary, but the flesh and the spirit.
law of my mind. Thus, sin properly taken is seated in the soul: but that
was seated in the flesh, ergo it was no sin properly. Sin properly taken
is seated in the soul: But that was not seated in the soul: but in the flesh.
Therefore it was no sin properly.


As the image of God, after which we were created, was though principally, yet
not only in the soul: so the corruption of nature, whereby that image is
defaced, has place both in soul and body, and therefore your proposition is
not simply true. But your assumption is simply false. For by saying it was
seated in the flesh, you must needs deny that it was seated in the soul, or
else your syllogism will be nothing worth. Now by flesh the Apostle means
nature unregenerate, both soul and body. Romans 8. 7. (...).
The wisdom of the flesh is ^nmitie against God; signifying the very best
part of a man's soul. Hence it is that he calls a natural man, (...),
animalem, and wills us to Ephesians. 4. 23. Col. 2. 18.
be renewed in the spirit of our mind, affirming that some are puffed up with
their fleshly mind: and I pray you consider whence these works of the flesh
arise; Gal. 5. 20.
Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, heresies, etc. The Apostle ( Aug. de
ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. c. 3
says Austin) ascribes those sins to the flesh, which bear principallsway
in the devil, who, it is certain, has no flesh: for he says, enmity,
contention, emulation, envy, are works of the flesh, the head and fountain
whereof is pride, which reigns in the devil, though he have no flesh. Yea De
amiss. gra. lib. 5. c. 15
Bellarmine himself grants, though with much ado, that concupiscence, though
it be (as he says) principally in the sensual part, yet has place also in
the mind.

There is now therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that
walk not according to the flesh, etc. Whence I thus argue: there is no
condemnation to them, that have that sin dwelling in them, if they walk
not according unto the fleshly desires of it: therefore it is no sin properly:
For the wages of sin is death, that is eternal Romans 6.
damnation. If (say you) there be no condemnation to them that have original
sin dwelling in them, so they walk not according to the fleshly desires of
it, then it is not properly sin. But there is no condemnation to them that
have original sin dwelling in them, so they walk not according to the
fleshly desires of it. Therefore it is not sin properly.


If by these words, there is no condemnation, you mean they shall not be
condemned, I deny the consequence of your proposition. For it may be properly
sin, though they in whom it is have it not imputed to them to condemnation. I
deny your assumption, whether you mean they are not condemned, de facto, or
they deserve not condemnation, de iure. In the former sense you teach, that all
infants which die unbaptized, are shut out of heaven: and yet none of them
walk according to the fleshly desires of original sin. In the latter sense
we and you are wholly of opinion, that original sin is a just cause of
condemnation, even to infants, who actually sin not. The Romans 8. 1.
place alleged by you, serves not to prove either of your propositions, as
you have set them down: for the Apostle says not, that there is no
condemnation to them, which walk not according to the fleshly desires of
original sin; but to them which are in Christ Jesus. I grant that all, but
they which are in Christ, do walk according to such desires; yet it is not
all one to say the one and the other. For you seem to bring that as a reason,
why there is no condemnation to them: whereas the Apostle adds these words to
show, that they which are in Christ, do not walk after the flesh, but after the
spirit; therein concluding his former disputation, of Romans 2. 4. 5.
justification, and Romans 6. 7.
sanctification.



That which once was sin properly, and still remaining in man makes him to
sin, and intangleth him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable:
that is sin properly.

Ergo.

Now to Master Perkins Argument in form as he proposes it. That which was
once sin properly, and still remaining in man, makes him to sin, and
intangleth him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable, that is
sin properly: But Original sin does all these ergo.

Ma^or, which (as the learned know) should consist of three words, contains
four several points, and which is vvorst of all, not It may consist of 40.
points, and yet but three words according to Logic.
one of them true.

If you mean three words, as Grammar speaks of words, that you say, is false:
for any proposition may contain three hundred such words, and yet not offend
against Logike. If you understand three words, as a Logician, there may be
forty several points in a proposition, and yet but three words, viz. The
antecedent part, or subject: secondly, the consequent part, predicate, or
attribute: and thirdly, the bond, by which they are coupled together. So that
herein you have showed either little skill, or little honesty, to blame him
for four several points, in stead of three words, as if his syllogism had
(as Logicians speak) four terms, and so were false in the form of it. The
four several points are these. 1. That which was once sin properly, 2. makes
him to sin, 3. intangles him in the punishment of sin, 4. makes him
miserable: all which make the first word, or antecedent of the proposition: the
consequent is, sin properly; the 3. bond that ties these two together, the
verb, is. Now let both learned and unlearned judge, whether the fault be in
Master Perkins, or in your ignorance, or cauilling.

the deprivation of Original justice, and a voluntary auersion from the law
of God, the which is cured by the Grace of God, given to the baptized, and so
that which was principal in Original sin, does not remain in the
regenerate.

Romans 7. 7. Gal. 5. 16.
Apostle speaks of, against the commandment. If you do not, what have we to
do with it in this question? Concupiscence, or the faculty of desiring, is no
otherwise affected to sin, than reason is: but the blindness of the
understanding, and the vitiousnes of the will, which the Apostle calls
concupiscence, are part of original sin. The natural faculties are not the
parts, but rather the seat of it, or the subject, which in some respect may be
said to be the matter. Sure the form is (as of all sins in general) the
aberration from, or the contrarines of it to the law of God. The deprivation
(you should say the absence) of original justice, is comprised in the
aberration I spoke of, and so is that voluntary auersion from God, and
goodness; besides which, there is also an evil quality (I know not how else to
call it) whereby we incline to that which is against the law of God. This we
call original sin, or natural corruption, because we have it from Adam, the
original of all mankind, and that from our first being, together with our
nature, and in our nature; though by creation it was not in our nature. This is
helped by the power of Gods spirit, through the grace of sanctification, both
in the principal point, and in the accessories; yet is not the concupiscence
wholly taken away, but being deadly wounded, dies by little and little in the
children of God, as they are assured it shall by the outward and inward
baptism, through the power of Christ's death and resurrection. Notwithstanding
as long as we live in this world, it remains the same thing it was before
baptism, even sin properly; but the hurt it has is unrecoverable, and the
strength abated.

to constrain him to it, as Master Perkins also himself before confessed.



and intangleth him in the punishment of sin: how does Original sin
entangle the regenerate in the punishment of sin; if all the guiltines of it be
removed from his person, as you taught before in our Consent? Mendacem memorem
esse oportet: Either confess that the guilt of Original sin is not taken
away from the regenerate, or else you must unsay this, that it intangleth him
in the punishment of sin.



Paul takes not the word so here, but for an unhappy man exposed to the
danger of sin, and to all the miseries of this world, from which we should
have been exempted, had it not been for Original sin, after which sort he
uses the same word, If in this life only we were hoping in Christ, we were
more miserable then all men: not that the good Christians were 1. Cor. 15.
farthest out of Gods favor, and more sinful then other men: but that they
had fevvest vvorldly comforts, and the greatest crosses, and thus much in
confutation of that formal argument.

1. Cor. 15. 19. (...). Romans 7. 24. (...).
Apostle does not use the same word, but another, that signifies to be pitied,
We were of all men most to be pitied. But that the Apostle complains of
misery in respect of sin by that word, the use of it otherwhere may prove.
The Revel. (...). 17.
holy Ghost says of the Church of Laodicea, that she was (...).
miserable and wretched (the word (...) signifying there, either the misery of
sin, or pity for that misery) and beggarly and blind, and naked; Houle ye
rich men (says Iam. 5. 1.
S. James) for the (...).
miseries that shall come upon you. The Apostle speaks not a word of any
worldly miseries (as you expound him) but of the misery he was in by the law
of sin, which he served; and surely if in it self it be not sin, why
should the Apostle so much complain of it, since by the trouble it put him to,
it did but occasion him to show his valor (and as you Papists say) was a means
to make him deserve a crown of glory?

Reason II. Infants baptized and regenerate, die the bodily death before they
come to the years of discretion: therefore original sin in them is sin
properly: or else they should not die, having no cause of death in them: for
death is is the wages of sin, as the Apostle says, Romans 6. 23. and Romans 5.
12. Death entered into the world by sin. As for actual sin they have none,
if they die presently after they are borne before they come to any use either
of reason, or affection.

Answer. The cause of the death of such Innocents, is either the
distemperature of their bodies, or external violence: and God who freely
bestowed their lives upon them, may when it pleases him as freely take their
lives from them, especially when he means to recompense them with the happy
exchange of life everlasting. True it is, that if our first parents had not
sinned, no man should have died, but have bin both long preserved in Paradise,
by the fruit of the wood of life, and finally translated without death into the
Kingdom of heaven: and therefore A ridiculous translation. VVood is not vv^ont
to bear f^uite. Romans 5. Romans 6.
is it said most truly o^ S Paul. Death entered into the world by sin. But the
other place, the wages of sin is death, is foully abused, for the Apostle
there by death understands eternal damnation, as appears by the opposition
of it to life everlasting: and by sin there means not Original, but
Actual sin, such as the Romans committed in their infidelity, the wages
whereof if they had no^ repented them, had b^n hell fire: now to infer that
Innocents are punished with corporal death, for Original sin remaining in
them: because that eternal death is the due hire of Actual sin, is either
to show great want of judgment, or else very strangely to pervert the words of
holy Scripture. Let this also not be forgotten, that he himself acknowledged
in our Consent: Every one baptized is no^ regenera^e.
that the punishment of Original sin was taken away in Baptism from the
regenerate: how then does he here say, that he does die the death for it?

Perkins reason is thus to be framed: That, which is the cause of bodily death
to infants Baptized and regenerate, is sin properly: But Original sin is
cause of bodily death to infants Baptized and regenerate. Therefore it is sin
properly.


The proposition he proves by two Romans 6. 23. and 5. 12.
places of Scripture: the assumption by showing, that they have no actual
sin; and therefore, since death is not, but where sin is, original sin
is cause of bodily death to infants, that dye before they come to any use of
reason or affection. First you deny the assumption, viz. that original sin
is the cause of bodily death to infants. But the reason of your denial is
insufficient. For it does not follow, that original sin is not the cause of
death to them, because the means of their death is distemperature, or
external violence. For then the death of many reprobate men, were no judgment
of God against sin: and though God, of his absolute power, may take away any
man's life, because he gave it him: yet it pleased his Majesty to bind
himself to a course in the creation, that death should be the consequent of
sin. Genesis 2, 17.
The day thou eatest thou shall dye; so that wheresoever we see death, we may
conclude there is sin, either really, as in all Adams posterity, or by
imputation, as in Christ.

Then you come to the proof of the proposition, where you grant the Romans 5.
12.
one place to be rightly alleged, because death indeed had not found any
place of entry, had it not been for sin. Romans 6. 23.
The other text you say is fo^lly abused; first, because the Apostle
understands by it eternal damnation: he does so principally; but why may not
death be taken as largely here, as Genesis 2. 17.
it is there, from whence all these phrases of Scripture come? But there it
signifies both kinds of death. Here S. Paul chiefly puts them in mind of the
greater, having showed before, that bodily death came into the world by the
means of sin; and although the Apostle be occasioned to deliver that speech,
by reason of the Romans actual transgressions; it does not abate, but sharpen
the edge of his exhortation, to expound the place of all sin whatsoever: for
if there be no sin, no not original, but shall have death for wages,
certainly these actual transgressions shall be punished with it.

Master Perkins in In our Consent.
the place alleged speaks of that punishment, which is condemnation, as the
very words following declare; in which he proves, that the punishment is taken
away, by that of the Apostle: Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus. It is true, that
bodily death also is changed from being a punishment; yet the reason of that
death is the dwelling of sin in the regenerate, which, by the dissoluing of
the body through death, must be abolisht. If it had pleased God to have given
Master Perkins life, that he might have seen this your exception, being better
acquainted with your sleights, and his own meaning, he would have answered you
more fully, as in other points, so in this also.

Reason III. That which lusts against the spirit, and by lusting tempts,
and in tempting intiseth and draws the heart to sin, is for nature sin it
self; but concupiscence in the regenerate lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.
17. and tempts as I have said, Iam. 1. 14. God tempts no man, but every man
is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is enticed:
then when lust conceiueth, it brings forth sin. And therefore it is sin
properly: such as the fruit is, such is the tree.

Answer, The first proposition is not true: for not every thing that intiseth
us to sin, is sin: or else the Apple that allured Eve to sin, had been by
nature sin: and every thing in this world one way or an other tempts us to
sin: according unto that of S. John. All that is in the world, is the
Concupiscence of the flesh, and the Concupiscence of 1. Epist. 2.
the eyes, and Pride of life: So that it is very gross to say, that every
thing which allureth to sin, is sin it self, and as vvide is it from all
moral But not from spiritual.
vvisdome to affirm, that the first motions of our passions be sins. For
even the very heathen Philosophers could distinguish, between sudden passions
of the mind and vices: teaching that passions may be bridled by the
understanding, and brought by due ordering of them into the ring of reason, and
so made virtues rather then vices. And that same text which M. Perkins
brings to persuade these temptations to be sins, proves the quite
contrary. God tempts no man; but every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away by his own concupiscence, and is allured: afterward when
concupiscence has conceived, it brings forth Jacob. 1.
sin: Mark the words well. First, Concupiscence tempts, and allureth by
some evil motion, but that is no sin, until afterward it do conceive, that
is, obtain some liking o^ our will, in giving ear to it, and not expelling it
so speedely as we ought to do the suggestion of such an enemy.

Eve to sin, did not lust against the spirit, which is the first and chief
point of Master Perkins proposition, whereof you make no mention.

Arist. Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Philosophers speak according to their ignorance, granting to a man seeds and
sparks of virtue by nature, not understanding, that it was sin to lust,
because Romans 7. 7.
the law of God, which forbad it, was unknown unto them. Besides they spoke of
the passions, as natural things, and so they are not sin, but good, as being
created by God: but our question is of them, as they are degenerated from their
nature, and corrupt; a mere mystery to natural men.

Augustine, si^^eth out very profoundly in these words. When the Apostle S.
James says, every man Lib. 6. in Iud. cap. 5.
is tempted, being drawn away and allured by his Concupiscence, and
afterward Concupiscence, when it has conceived, brings forth sin: Truly in
these words, the thing brought forth is distinguished, from that which
brings it forth. The damme is concupiscence, the fool is sin. But
concupiscence does not bring sin forth, unless it conceive, (so then it is
not sin of it self) and it conceiueth not, unless it dravv us, that is,
unless it obtain the consent of our will, to commit evil. The like
exposition of the same place, and the difference between the pleasure
tempting, that runs before, and the sin which follows after, Unless we
resist manfully, may be seen in S. Cyrill, so that by the judgment of the
most Lib. 4. in. Johan. cap. 51.
learned ancient Fathers, the text of S. James cited by M. Perkins, to prove
concupiscence to be sin, disproueth it very soundly: to that reason of his,
Such as the fruit is, such is the Tree: I answer, that not concupiscence, but
the will of man is the Tree: which brings forth, either good, or bad fruit,
according unto the disposition of it: concupiscence is only an intiser unto
badde.

Austin and Cyril speak as the Apostle does of actual sin, which is
committed by those degrees: and surely if concupiscence be not sin, without
consent, because the Apostle says it brings forth sin, when it has
conceived, by the like reason consent makes not sin deadly, because the
Apostle says also; that sin when it is finished brings forth death. Now we
know consent (even with you) may be deadly sin, and with us always is: so
concupiscence is of it self sin, though not in that height and kind that
outward actual sins are. The first motion to wickedness is sin, because it
is an action against the commandment, Exodus 20. 17. Romans 7. 7.
Thou shall not lust, consent increases the wickedness of it: The outward act
makes up the sin which the Apostle and the Austin, Cyril.
Fathers here speak of. It should seem the author of your gloss saw this;
who expounds, Brings forth sin, Glossa ordin. Jacob. 1. 14. Perducit ad actum.
Brings it to the act, or into action. If the Apostle says (as he does) That
concupiscence brings forth sin, out of doubt concupiscence is the tree: and
as in the tree the naughtines of the sap is blamed for the badnes of the
fruit; so is the sinfulnes of the will for the evil actions: though
(properly) neither the sap, but the tree, brings forth the fruit, nor
concupiscence, but the will, is the mother of sin: But that concupiscence is
properly sin, I showed before.

Concupiscence against which the spirit lusts, is sin, August. cont. Iu^.
lib. 5. cap. 3
because in it there is disobedience against the rule of the mind: and it is
the punishment of sin because it befalles man for the merits of his
disobedience: and it is the cause of sin.

Augustine says, That concupiscence is sin, because in it there is Lib. 5.
cont. Iulianum c. 3.
disobedience against the rule of the mind, etc. I answer, that S. Augustine
in more then twenty places of his works teaches expressly, that
concupiscence is no sin, if sin be taken properly: wherefore when he once
calls it sin, he takes sin largely as it comprehends, not only all
sin, but also all motions and inti^ements to sin; in which sense
concupiscence may be termed sin: but is so called very seldom of S.
Augustine, but more commonly an evil, as in the same w^^ke, is to be seen
evidently: where he says; That grace in Baptism does renevve Lib 6. cap. 5.
a man perfectly, so far forth as it appertains to the deliverance of him
from all manner of sin; but not so as it freeth him from all evil: so that
concupiscence remaining after baptism, is no manner of sin, in S. Augustines
judgment: but may be called evil, because it provoke us to evil. To this
place of S. Augustine I will join that other like, Tract. 41. in Johan.
which M. Perkins quoteth in his 4. reason: where he says, That sin dwells
always in our members. The same answer serves, that sin there, is taken
improperly: as appears by that he seats it in our members: for according
unto S. Augustine and all the learned, the subject of sin being properly
taken, is not in any part of the body, but in the will This was ansvvered
before.
and soul, and in the same passage he signifies plainly, that in Baptism
all sins and iniquity is taken away, and that there is left in the
regenerate, only an infirmity or weakness.



Reason V. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. epist. 29. Charity in
some is more, in some less, in some none: the highest degree of all which
cannot be increased, is in none, as long as man lives upon earth. And as long
as it may be increased, That which is less the^ it should be, is in fault: by
which fault it is, that there is no just man upon earth that does good and
sins not: by which fault none living shall be justified in the sight of God.
For which fault, if we say we have no sin, there is no truth in us: for which
also though we profit never so much, it is necessary for us to say, Forgive us
our debts, though all our words, deeds, and thoughts be already forgiven in
baptism.

Ans. That here is never a word touching concupiscence, or to prove Original
sin to remain after Baptism, which is in question but only hat the best men
for want of perfect Charity, do often sin venially, which we grant.

By which fault none living shall be justified in the sight of God. For which
fault if we say we have no sin, there is no truth in us, there is not much to
prove the point; but your etc. has cut off that which is most material, viz.
By reason of our defect or failing in charity, which comes from our natural
corruption, no man can say he is without sin, and by reason of which, we must
call upon God for pardon of our sins.

Augustine in sundry places seems to deny concupiscence to be sin after
baptism: but his meaning is, that concupiscence in the regenerate is not the
sin of the person in whom it is. For thus he expounds himself, Ad Valor. l.
1 c. 24.
This is not to have sin, not to be guilty of sin. And, Lib. 2. cont. Iul.
The law of sin in baptism is remitted and not ended. And, Tract. 42. in Job.
Let not sin reign: he says not, let not sin be, but let it not reign.
For as long as thou live, of necessity sin will be in thy members: at the
least, look it reign not in thee, etc.

Perkins having thus strongly (as you see) fortified his position with that one
sentence of S. Augustine (which has also nothing for his purpose) instead of
all antiquity: confesses ingenuously, that S. Augustine in sundry places
denies concupiscence to be sin: but expounds him to mean, that it is not sin
in that person, but in it self: which is already confuted: for sin that is
an accident, and, so properly inherent in his subject, cannot be at all, if it
be not in some person, and the sin of And already ansvvered.
the same person.

Perkins, as the places he brings out of Austin, show, does not deny it simply
to be the sin of the person, in whom it is, but to be his to condemnation; of
it self it deserves to be punished with eternal death, but in him it is not a
sin procuring this punishment. August. ad Vale^ian. lib. 1. cap. 24. Lib. 3.
Instit. cap. 3. number. 10.
This is not to have sin, not to be guilty of sin.

Augustines opinion in this point: let him see what their Patriarch John Calvin
says of it: where thus he writes. Neither is it needful to labor much in
searching out what the old writers thought of this point, when one Augustine
may serve the turn: who with great diligence has faithfully collected
together all their sentences. Let the readers therefore take out of him, if
they desire to have any certainety of the judgment of antiquity. Hitherto
somewhat honestly: What follows? Moreover between him and us, there is this
difference: that he truly dares not call the disease of concupiscence a sin,
but to express it, is content to use the word of infirmity, then lo does he
say, that it is made sin, when the act of our consent does join with it.
But we h^ld that very thing to be sin, wherewith a man is in any sort
tickled. Observe first, good Reader, that S. Augustines opinion with him
carries the credit of all antiquity: Which is the cause that I cite him more
In some questions of which he did collect their opinions; as Calvin expounds
himself in the former sentence.
often against them. Secondly, that he is ^^^tly on our side: teaching
concupiscence not to be sin, unless we do consent unto it. Lastly, learn
to mislike the blind boldness of such Masters: who having so highly commended.
S. Augustines judgment in this very matter, and advised all men to follow it:
Does notwithstanding fly from it himself. Presuming that some would be so
shalovv-vvitted as not to epsy him, or else content to rely more upon his
only credit, then upon the authority of all the ancient Fathers. For a taste
of who^e consent with S. Augustine in this question, I will here put the
sentences of some few, that I need not hereafter return to rehearse them.

Calvin says not (as you translate him) Between him and us there is this
difference; but this Videri potest interesse.
may seem to be the difference; because he was loath to speak so plain, as we
now are forced to do, though in Calvin his opinion, his judgment was all one
with ours.

Chrysostom says, Passions be not sins of themselves, but the unbridled
excess of them does make sins: And that J may for example sake Homil. 11. in
epist. ad Romans
touch one of them: concupiscence is not a sin; but when passing measure it
breaks his bounds, then lo it is adultery; not in regard of concupiscence,
but in respect of the excessive and unlawful riot of it.

S. Bernard (whom M. Perkins often cites against us, and therefore may
sometimes be alleged for us) has these words: Sin is at the Sermon. de sex
tribul.
door, but if thou do not open it, it will not enter in: lust tickleth at
the heart; but unless thou willingly yield unto it, it shall do thee no
hurt: vvith^old thy consent, and it prevails not.

Augustine and S. Cyrill, have been cited already, S. Hierome and S. Gregory
shall be hereafter: who with the confession of Calvin, may serve sufficiently
to prove, that approved antiquity is wholy for us. And And ansvvered already.
if any desire to know the founder of our adversaries Doctrine in this point:
let him read the 64. heresy recorded by that ancient and holy Bishop
Epiphanius: where he registreth one Proclus an old rotten sectarie to have
taught, that sins are not taken away in Baptism, but See my answer to the
Epistle dedicatorie, and to the Prologue.
are only covered, which is as much to say, as sin remains still in the
person regenerate, but is not imputed to him. Which is just M. Perkins, and our
Protestants position.

Chrysostom speaks of the affections, as they are natural; in which respect
indeed they are not sins, but only as they are disordered against the law of
God in their creation. The concupiscence he names, is not original sin,
whereof we dispute, but the natural desire which Adam had by creation, and
which is not in it self evil; but, as by our corruption, it inclines now to
evil, and has evil mingled with it in the act of desiring.

Any man may see, that Bernard intends not to prove, that original sin is
properly sin, but that it shall not prevail to make us commit gross sin
outwardly, unless we consent to it: and thereby incourageth Christian men to
resist it, affirming that it shall not hurt them to condemnation; in which
respect Austin denies it to be sin. See my answer to the Epistle
dedicatorie, and my defense of the Prologue.
Proclus, howsoever deceived by Origin he erred in the point of the
resurrection, yet in this matter taught nothing but that which he sufficiently
confirmed by S. Paul's authority, of whom he had learned the doctrine: neither
do Epiphanius or Methodius bring any good proof against his opinion, or for
their own, as you write before of Hierome: urge their reasons, and you shall
have answer.

Objections of Papists.
Object. I. In baptism men receive perfect and absolute pardon of sin; and
sin being pardoned is taken quite away: and therefore original sin after
baptism cease to be sin. Answ. Sin is abolished two ways: first in
regard of Quoad imputationem.
imputation to the person: secondly in regard of Quoad existentiam.
existing and being. For this cause, God vouchsafes to man two blessings in
baptism, Remission of sin, and Mortification of the same. Remission or
pardon abolisheth sin wholly in respect of any imputation thereof unto man,
but not simply in regard of the being thereof. Mortification thereof goes
further, and abolisheth in all the powers of body and soul, the very
concupiscence or corruption it self, in respect of the being thereof. And
because mortification is not accomplished till death, therefore original
corruption remains till death,, though not imputed.

Perkins answers, that it is abolished in regard of imputation, And I hope
sufficiently defended. A small sum. Ioh. 13. Neither ours, nor any Apostle a^
all. Lib. 9. epist. 39
that is, is not imputed to the person, but remains in him still. This answer
is sufficiently (I hope) confuted in the Annotations upon our consent: In
confirmation of our Argument, I will add some texts of holy Scripture: First,
He that is vvashed, needs not but to vvash his feet, for be is wholy
clean. Take with this, the exposition of S. Gregory the great, our Apostle; He
cannot (says he) be called vvhaly clean in whom any part or parcel of sins
remains: But let no man resist the voice of truth, who says, he that is
washed (in Baptism) is wholly clean: therefore there is not one dram of the
contagion of sin left in him, whom the cleanser himself does profess to be
wholly clean.



The place you bring is allegorical, and therefore being not expounded in the
Scripture, unfit to prove any matter in controversy. But if we take it as
spoken of baptism, it makes more against you, than for you: as appears by
this syllogism. He that has foul feet, is not wholly clean: But he that is
washed has foul feet. Therefore he that is washed is not wholly clean.
So that our Saviors speech must be thus understood: He that is washed, lackes
but only making clean of his feet, and then he is wholly clean. This Gregory
was next neighbor to Boniface the third, the first Pope, in whom Antichrist
was discoue^ed.
Gregory's speech (for it is more than I know that he is a Saint, and I am sure
he was none of our Apostle, that never bestowed any pains to teach us) auowes
the proposition of my syllogism, that they which need to have their feet
washed, are not wholly clean. Now the assumption our Savior makes, affirming
that he which is washed, has yet need to have his feet washed, that he may be
wholly clean: so that your proofs confirm my reason.

Jerome affirm: saying. Epist. ad Oceanum. Psalm. 50.
How are we justified and sanctified, if any ^inne be le^t remaining in us?
Again if holy King David say. Thou shall vvash me, and J shall be vvhiter then
snow: how can the blacknes of hell still remain in his soul?

Hierome disputes there, not of original, but of actual sin, viz. of that
which was thought to be a sin, but indeed, as he plainly shows, was none;
the marying of a second wife after baptism. Besides, he speaks not of rooting
out sin, but directly, as we do; of taking it away by pardoning of it. So
also does Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Romans 4. 6, 7. 8.
David, as it is manifest. Neither did he mean, that God should wash by
baptism, and so cleanse him from original sin, but that he should take away
the guilt and stain of the murder and adultery that he had committed.

Adams transgression was of force to infect us. Yea the Apostle teaches us
directly, that we recover more by Christ's grace, then we lost through Adams
fault, in these words: But not as the offense, so also Romans 5.
the gift, for if by the offense of one, many died; so much more the grace of
God, and the gift in the grace of one, man Jesus Christ, has abounded upon
many. If then we through Christ, receive more abundance of grace, then we lost
by Adam, there is no more sin left in the newly Baptized man, then was in
Adam in the state of innocence, albeit other defects, and infirmities do
remain in us, for our greater humiliation, and probation: yet all filth of
sin is clean scoured out or our souls, by the pure grace of God powered
abundantly into it in Baptism: and so our first Argument s^ands insoluble.

If we through Christ (say you) receive more abundance of grace, than we lost
by Adam, there is no more sin left in the newly baptized man, than was in
Adam in the estate of innocence: But we through Christ receive more abundance
of grace, than we lost in Adam: Therefore there is no more sin left in the
newly baptized man, than was in Adam in the state of innocence.


I deny the consequence of your proposition. For though we receive more
grace, yet it is not bestowed upon us at once, but grows by little and little,
receiving perfection at our death, and not before. Your assumption is true, in
respect of the assured continuance of grace, which Adam had not, but the
measure is not greater. For Adam was created in true holiness and righteousness,
perfect according to his, nature. But the place you allege, proves not the
point. The Romans 5. 16.
Apostle speaks not there of inherent righteousness, but of grace, that is, the
favor and mercy of God; and of the gift by grace, that is, forgiveness of
sins, as I will show (if it please God) hereafter, upon another occasion.

Object. II. Every sin is voluntary: but original sin in no man after
baptism is voluntary: and therefore no sin. Answ. The proposition is a
politic rule pertaining to the courts of men, and must be understood of such
actions as are done of one man to another: and it does not belong to the court
of conscience, which God holds and keeps in men's hearts, in which every
want of conformity to the law is made a sin. Secondly I answer, that
original sin was voluntary in our first parent Adam: for he sinned, and
brought this misery upon us willingly; though in us it be otherwise upon just
cause. Actual sin was first in him, and then original corruption; but in us
original corruption is first, and then actual sin.

Reply. Full little knows this man what belongs to the Court of conscience:
there secret faults in deed be examined, but nothing is taken for sin by any
one learned in that faculty, which is done without a man's free consent: all of
them holding with S. Augustine. That sin is so voluntary an evil, that it
cannot be sin, which is not voluntary: And Lib. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 17.
to say with M. Perkins that any want of conformity to reason in our body is
sin, is so absurd: that a man might (if that were true) be damned for a
dream, how well soever disposed he went to sleep: if he chance to dream of
uncleanness, whereupon does ensue any evil motion in his flesh. This paradoxe
of sinning without a man's consent is so contrary unto both, natural, and
supernatural reason that S. Augustine auerreth Lib. de vera Relig. cap. 14.
Neither any of the small number of the learned, nor of the multitude of the
unlearned do hold, that a man can sin without his consent. What unlearned,
learned men then are start up in our miserable age, that make no bones to deny
this, and greater matters too?

Perkins has truly answered, that although men know no sin, but that which
is voluntary, because they make all sin to be in the act: yet in Gods
judgment it is otherwise, who condemns all for sin, that is any way against
his just and holy law. The place you allege out of Austin proves no more, but
that those actions that are not voluntary, are not sin: which we easily
grant. But A second answer of Master Perkins omitted.
Master Perkins adds a ^ond answer, which you craftily, according to your
custom, omit; because you know not what to say to it. The answer is, that
original sin may be called voluntary, because Adams sin was voluntary,
and so ours in him: as Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. Bellarm. de amiss great. lib.
4. cap. 10.
Austin truly affirms. Those dreams that are occasioned by any fault of ours,
or by our natural corruption, are our sins, and to them that are not in
Christ, damnable.

Object. III. Where the form of any thing is taken away, there the thing it
self cease also: but after baptism in the regenerate, the form of
original sin, that is, the guilt, is quite removed: and therefore sin
cease to be sin. Answ. The guilt, or obligation to punishment, is not the
form of original corruption, but (as we say in schools) an accident or
necessary companion thereof. The true form of original sin, is a defect
and deprivation of that which the law requires at our hands in our mind,
will, affections, and in all the powers both of soul and body. But they urge
this reason further, saying, where the guilt and punishment is taken away,
there is no fault remaining: but after baptism the guilt and punishment is
removed: and therefore, though original corruption remain, it is not as a
fault to make us guilty before God, but only as a weakness. Answ. Guilt is
removed, and not removed. It is removed from the person regenerate, which
stands not guilty for any sin original or actual: but guilt is not removed
from the sin it self; or, as some answer, there be two kinds of guilt,
actual, and potentiall. The actual guilt is, whereby sin makes man stand
guilty before God: and that is removed in the regenerate. But the potentiall
guilt, which is an aptnes in sin, to make a man stand guilty if he sin,
that is not removed: and therefore still sin remains sin. To this or
like effect says August. Contra Iul. lib. 6. c. 6.
We say that the guilt of concupiscence, not whereby it is guilty (for that is
not a person) but that whereby it made man guilty from the beginning, is
pardoned, and that the thing it self is evil, so as the regenerate desire to
be healed of this plague.

Perkins shifteth in assigning a wrong form: affirming us to say that the
form of Original sin is the guiltines of it: which we hold to be neither
the form, nor matter of it, but as it were the proper passion following it.
S^e S. Thomas: who delivers for the form of Original sin, the privation
of Original justice, which justice made the 1. 2. q. and art. 3
will subject to God.

The deordination then of the will, Mistres and commander of all other points
in man, made by the privation of Original justice: is the Original sin is
in all parts of the ^inde.
form of Original sin, and the deordination of all other parts of man,
(which by a common name is called concupiscence, as that learned Doctor
notes,) is but the material part of that sin, so that the will of the
regenerate being by grace through Christ rectified, and set again in good
order toward the law of God, the form of original sin, which consist^d in
deordination of it, is taken quite away by Baptism, and so consequently the
sin it self, which cannot be without his proper form, as the argument
does convince.

inclination to evil; which is not wholly taken away in this life, but only by
degrees diminished, and in death utterly abolished.

Object. IV. Lastly, for our disgrace they allege that we in our doctrine
teach, that original sin after baptism is only clipped or pared, like the
hair of a man's head, whose roots still remain in the flesh, growing and
increasing after they are cut, as before. Answ. Our doctrine is abused: for in
the paring of any thing, as in cutting of the hair, or in lopping a tree, the
root remains untouched, and thereupon multiplieth as before. But in the
mortification of original sin after baptism, we hold no such paring: but
teach, that in the very first instant of the conversion of a sinner, sin
receives his deadly wound in the root, never afterward to be recovered.

Here sin is deadly vvounded in the root, there it remains still with all
the guiltines of it, although not imputed, there it still makes the man to
sin, intangleth him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable: All
this he comprehended before in this first reason, and yet blusheth not here to
conclude, that he holds it as at the first: Neither clipped nor pared, but
pulled up by the roots: Indeed Wounded in the ^oot^, not plucked up by the
roots.
they do him a favor, who say that he holds sin to be clipped, and as it
were razed, for albeit hair razed grow out again, yet is there none for a
season: but this Original sin of his is always in his regenerate, in vigor
to corrupt all his works, and to make them deadly sins. But let this suffice
for this matter.

Perkins; original sin has all these effects, and yet is not wholly rooted
up, as you falsely make him speak, but wounded in the root so deadly, See 12.
Art. part. 1. art. 4. (...)
as that it neither shall, nor can recover, though it live and bring forth
fruits of sin, for the time of our continuance in this mortal carcass.

The third point: Certeintie of salvation.
I. Our consent.
I. Conclus. We hold and believe that a man in this life, may be certain of
salvation: and the same thing does the Church of Rome teach and hold.

II. Conclus. We hold and believe that a man is to put a certain affiance in
Gods mercy in Christ for the salvation of his soul: and the same thing by
common consent holds the foresaid Church: this point makes not the
difference between us.

III. Conclus. We hold that with assurance of salvation in our hearts is joined
doubting: and there is no man so assured of his salvation, but he at sometime
doubts thereof, especially in the time of temptation; and in this the Papists
agree with us, and we with them.

To this conclusion the Papist answers, Not so Sir. But he shows not what
it is he mislikes in it.

IV. Conclus. They go further and say, that a man may be certain of the
salvation of men, or of the Church by Catholic faith: and so say we.

V. Concl. Yea they hold, that a man by faith may be assured of his own
salvation through extraordinary revelation, as Abraham and others were; and so
do we.

Here he ads, that, In this sense only the first conclusion is true: viz that
there is no assurance but by revelation. We answer, that this revelation is
common to all true believers in their several proportions.

VI. Conclus. They teach that we are to be certain of our salvation by Bellar.
lib. 3. page 1. 129. cl.
special faith in regard of God that promises; though in regard of our selves
and our indisposition we cannot: and in the former point they consent with us.

II. The dissent or difference.
The very maine point of difference lies in the manner of assurance.

I. Conclus. We hold that a man may be certain of his salvation in his own
conscience even in this life, and that by an ordinary and special faith. They
hold that a man is certain of his salvation only by hope: both of us hold a
certeinty, we by faith, they by hope.

II. Conclus. Further, we hold and avouch that our certeinty by true faith is
infallible: they say, their certeinty is only probable.

III. Conclus. And further though both of us say, that we have confidence in
Gods mercy in Christ for our salvation, yet we do it with some difference. For
our confidence comes from certain and ordinary faith: theirs from hope,
ministering (as they Here he adds false: but what he means by it he does not
express.
say) but a coniecturall certeinty.

Thus much of the difference: now let us see the reasons to and fro.

III. Objections of Papists.
Object. I. Where there is no word there is no faith: for these two are
relatiues: but there is no word of God saying, Cornelius believe thou, Peter
believe thou, and thou shall be saved. And therefore there is no such ordinary
faith to believe a man's own particular salvation. Ans. The proposition is
false unless it be supplied with a clause on this manner. Where there is no
word of promise, nor any thing that does counteruaile a particular promise,
there is no faith. But (say they) there is no such particular word. It is true
God does not speak to men particularly, Believe thou, and thou shall be saved.
But yet does he that which is answerable hereunto, in that he gives a general
promise, with a commandment to apply the same: and has ordained the holy
ministry of the word to apply the same to the persons of the hearers in his
own name: and that is as much as if the Lord himself should speak to men
particularly. To speak more plainly: in the Scripture the promises of
salvation be indefinitely propounded: it says not any where, if John will
believe, he shall be saved; or if Peter will believe, he shall be saved, but
whosoever believes shall be saved. Now then comes the minister of the word,
who standing in the room of God, and in the stead of Christ himself, takes
the indefinite promises of the Gospel, and lays them to the hearts of every
particular man: and this in effect is as much as if Christ himself should say,
Cornelius believe thou, and thou shall be saved: Peter believe thou, and thou
shall be saved.

Perkins contrary to his custom, gives the first place to our reasons, which
he calls objections, and endeavors to supplant them: and afterward planteth
his own. About the order I will not contend, seeing he acknowledges in the
beginning that he observes none, but sets down things as they came into his
head. Otherwise he would have handled Justification before Salvation. But
following his method, let us come to the matter.

Reply. Good Sir, seeing every man is a liar, and may both deceive, The
Ministers assurance is but conditional, as absolution is, if it be true. So is
he as far as he agrees with the truth of the Gospel. Luke 16. 16,
and be deceived, and the Minister telling may err: how does either the
Minister know, that the man to whom he speaks is of the number of the elect?
or the man be certain that the Minister mistaketh not, when he assures him of
his salvation? To affirm as you do, that the Minister is to be believed
as well as if it were Christ himself, is plain blasphemy. Equalling a blind
and lying creature, unto the wisdom and truth of God. If you could show out
of Gods word, that every Minister has such a commission from Christ, then had
you answered the argument directly, which required but one warrant of Gods
word: but to say that the assurance of an ordinary Ministers word
counteruailes Gods word, I cannot see what it wants of making a pelting
Minister Gods mate. On the otherside to auerre that the Minister knows who is
predestinate (as it must be granted he does, if you will not have him to lie
when he says to Peter, thou art one of the elect) i^ to make him of Gods
privy Council, without any warrant for it in Gods word: Yea S. Paul not
obscurely signifying the contrary in these words. The sure foundation of God
stands having this seal: our Lord knows who be his. And none else, except
he reueile it unto them.

Perkins, who does not say, that the Minister is to assure any man of his
salvation, but to apply the general promises of Scripture to every man
particularly, upon condition of believing. The general is, Whosoever believes,
shall be saved; the Ministers particular application, Cornelius believe thou,
and thou shall be saved. This is so plainly set down by Master Perkins, that I
wonder how you could mistake him; and so certainly grounded upon the general,
that there can no question be made of it. Neither does this equal the Minister
to Christ, but, as Master Perkins truly says, is as much in effect, as if
Christ himself should say, Cornelius believe thou, and thou shall be saved.
For if it be true, that whosoever believes shall be saved, it is as true that
Cornelius shall be saved, if he believe. So that your discourse of the
Ministers knowledge, and the man's election, is nothing to Master Perkins
answer.

Answ. Indeed this manner of applying is false in all hypocrites, heretics,
and unrepentant persons: for they apply upon carnal presumption, and not by
faith. Nevertheless it is true in all the elect having the spirit of grace,
and prayer: for when God in the ministry of the word being his own
ordinance, says, Seek ye my face: the heart of Gods children truly answers,
O Lord I will seek thy face. And when God shall say, Psalm. 17. 8. Zach. 13. 6.
Thou art my people, they shall say again: The Lord is my God.

Perkins then flies from the assurance of the Minister, and leaves him to
speak at ^andon, as the blind man casts his clubbe; and attributes all this
assurance unto the party himself, who hearing in Gods word, Seek ye my
face, in his heart answers, Lord I will seek thy face: And then hearing God
say, Thou art my people, says again, The Lord is my God. And then lo without
all doubt he has assurance of his salvation. Would ye not think that this
were rather some seely old Woman's dream, then a discourse of a learned Man?
How know you honest man, that those words of God spoken by the Prophet 2000.
years past, to the people of Israel, are directed to you? Mine own heart,
good Sir, tells me so. How dare you build upon the persuasion of your own heart
any such assurance? When as in holy writ it is recorded. Wicked is the heart of
man, and who shall know it? Are you ignorant how Saul before he Ierem. 17.
was S. Paul, being an Israelite, to whom those words appertained, persuading
himself to be very assured of his faith, was notwithstanding foully deceived,
and why may not you far more unskillful then he be in like manner abused?
Moreover suppose that this motion comes of the holy Ghost, and that he truly
says, The Lord is God, how long knows he that he shall be able to say so
truly? When our Savior Christ Jesus Matthew. 22.
assures us that many be called, but few of them are chosen to life
everlasting. How knows he then assuredly, that he being once called, is of
the predestinate?

Perkins answer: he does not say, that those places of the Prophet belong to
every man; but that all the elect yield obedience to God, in the ministry of
the word, believing as he commands them, and so, upon the knowledge of their
belief, come to the assurance of their salvation. As for the doubt, that a man
may be called, and be none of the predestinate, he, that truly believes the
Scripture, casts it quite away; having learned of God that whosoever believes
shall be saved: which could not be true, if it were possible that a man should
believe, and not be predestinate.

And it is a truth of God, that he which believes knows that he believes:
and he that truly repents knows that he repents: unless it be in the
beginning of our conversion, and in the time of distress and temptation.
Otherwise what thankfulness can there be for grace received?

Perkins says, that he who believes, knows that he believes Be it so; if
he believe aright, and meddle no further then with those things, which be
comprehended within the bounds of faith But that the certainty of salvation is
to be believed, is not to be begged, but proved, being the maine question, he
says further that he who truly repents, knows that he repents: he
knows indeed by many probable conjectures, but not by certainly of faith: as
wit^ ^l^^h that holy person. If God come to me, (as he dot^ (...) all repentant
sinne^^,) I shall not see him, Job. 9.
and if he depart away from me, I shall not understand it: Which is sufficient
to make him thankful, yea i^ he received no grace at all, yet were he much
beholding unto God, who offered him his grace, and would have freely bestowed
it upon him, if it had not been through his own default. And thus our first
Argument stands in his full strength and virtue, that no man can assure
himself by faith of his salvation, because there is no word of God that
warranteth him so to do.

2. Cor. 13. 5.
he that believes aright know he believes, and withal is sure, that no Act.
13. 48. Romans 8. 30.
man does believe but he that is predestinate, because that Marc. 16. 16. Ioh.
1. 12. Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.
whosoever believes shall be saved, and Romans 8. 30. Ephesians. 1. (...). 4. Rom 9.
11.
none shall be saved but they that are predestinate, it is out of doubt that
assurance of salvation by faith may and must be had. Now why, or how should it
be more impossible to know we repent truly, then that we believe truly;
especially since that and this necessarily and certainly go together? Every
man that has true faith, and no man but he that has true faith, does repent
truly. That of Job. 9. 10.
Job is not spoken of man's repentance, but of his inabilitie to comprehend the
works of God, as the whole discourse shows; neither are the words, If ye come
to me, but (as also Arias Montanus and Pagnin. ibi.
Arias Montanus, and Pagnine expound them) Behold he passes by. Non
cognosc^^us illum per opera. (...)
Vatablus understands the place of not knowing God by his works. Master
Perkins asks what thankfulness there can be for grace received, if a man cannot
know that he has received any? As for the conjecture you speak of, it is
likelier to breed fear, than thankfulness, being so uncertain: or at the least
thankfulness by halues, because we can be but half persuaded that we have
received grace.

Object. II. It is no article of the Creed, that a man must believe his own
salvation: and therefore no man is bound thereto. Ans. By this argument it
appears plainly, that the very pillars of the Church of Rome do not
understand the Creed: for in that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed,
every article implies in it this particular faith. And in the first article, I
believe in God, are three things contained: the first, to believe that there is
a God: the second, to believe the same God is my God: the third, to put my
confidence in him for my salvation: and so much contain the other articles,
which are concerning God. When Thomas said, Ioh. 20. 20. My God, Christ
answered, Thou have believed Thomas. Where we see that to believe in God, is to
believe God to be our God. And Psalm. 78. 22. to believe in God, and to put
trust in him are al one, They believed not in God, and trusted not in his help.

Perkins be no longer ignorant (...) Catholic knowledge of the creed,) that
we must also love him D. B. P. You may be sure of your love, if you ^e sure of
your faith. 1. Ioh. 3.
wi^^ a (...) heart and strength: thus we understand it more fully then he: Yet
find not out that thirteenth article, Thou must believe thine own particular
salvation. For albeit, I believe and trust in God, yet not being sure of my
love toward him, I am not assured of salvation, for as S. John ^estifieth. He
the ^th not a^ideth in death.

A man may be bound to believe his own salvation, though it be not among
those twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, 12. Art. part. (...). Art. 4. D.
which your selves deny to be the limit of belief. Master Perkins knew, as
well as you, that by one part of Gods worship the whole was signified; and, for
the point in question, denies your assertion, viz. that he cannot be sure of
his love toward God: For he that can be sure he has faith, may be as sure he
has love; because no man is justified, but he that is also Romans 8. 9. 10.
sanctified.

Remission of sins, and Life everlasting, do include, and we in them
acknowledge our special faith concerning our own salvation. For to believe
this or that, is to believe there is such a thing, and that the same thing
belongs to me: as when David said, I should have fainted except I had believed
to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Psalm. 27. 13.

Perkins, that is, I believe that God of his infinite mercy, through the merits
of Christ's Passion does pardon all those, who being heartily sorry for their
sins, do humbly confess them, and fully purpose to lead a new life: that I
my self am such a one, I do verily hope, because I have as farreforth as I O
lying Pharisie.
could, to my knowledge, performed those things, which God requires osme but
because I am but a frail creature, and may perhaps not have done all that so
well as I ought, or am not so well assured of that, which by Gods help I have
done, I cannot believe it, for in matter of faith (as you shall hear shortly,)
there can be no fear or doubt.



Ans. This indeed is the exposition of many, but it stands not with common
reason. For if that be all the faith that is there confessed, the devil has
as good a faith as we. He knows and believes that there is a God: and that
this God imparteth remission of sins, and life everlasting to his Church. And
to the end that we being Gods children, may in faith go beyond all the devils
in hell, we must further believe, that remission of sins, and life everlasting
belongs unto us: and unless we do particularly apply the said articles unto
our selves, we shall little or nothing differ from the devil, in making
confession of faith.

Matthew. 19.
that I shall have life everlasting, if I fulfill that which our Savior taught
the young man demanding what he must do to have life everlasting: to wit, if
I keep all Gods commandments, but because I am not assured that I shall so
do (yea the Protestants (though falsely) assure us that no man by any help of
Gods grace can so do.) I remain in fear. But (says M. Perkins) the Devil
may so believe the articles of the creed, Utterly untrue: we say Adam might
have kept them, and any man may now by the like measure of grace.
unless we do apply those articles to our selves. First, I say the Devils,
know to be true all that we do believe, and therefore are said by Saint James
to b^leeue, but they want a necessary condition of faith, that is a godly and
deuou^ submission of their understanding unto the obedience of faith, and so
have no ^aith to speak properly. Again they trust not in God for salvation,
no^ endeavor not any manner of way to obtain salvation, as Christians do, and
so there is great difference between their bel^ in the articles of the creed,
and ours.

Ma^^. 16. 16.
whosoever believes shall be s^au^d; That Matthew. ^9. 17.
speech of our Savior, is not a direction how to come to life everlasting by
the Gospel. For it contains not sorgiuenes of sins, nor faith in Christ,
Matthew. 1. 21. Act. 10. ^3.
the chief matter of it, but a le^^on for that proud Pharisie, that he might
be convinced by his own confidence. Which appears by that Matthew. 19. 21
second answer of our Savior, wherein he shows, that the law requires per
fit obedience, which he had not attained to. Indeed you Papists, and some, I
grant, before Popery brake out, dream of a perfection beyond the law; but we
account the law so perfect, that if the man's answer had been true, he might
well have gone away assured of heaven, though he had given never a penny more
to the poor, but died the richest man in all the world. Our claim to
everlasting life is not by the law, Romans 10. 5. 6 11.
Do this, but by the Gospel, Believe and thou shall be saved.

That which you bring of the devils believing, does not any way overthrow
Master Perkins answer. You propound two differences, that you have conceived,
betwixt the faith of Christians and Devils; as if you would thereby refute
Master Perkins, who says not that their faith and ours is all one, but that if
no more be required but to believe remission of sins, and life everlasting to
be vouchsafed to the people and Church of God, their faith is as good as ours.
You reply, that there are two differences; but this does not weaken Master
Perkins consequence: if there be no more required, their faith is as good as
ours. You deny the assumption, viz. That the devils faith is as good as ours,
and so dispute for him, against the objection.

Perkins in his first exception graunts, That commonly men do not Page 54.
believe their salvation, as infallibly as they do the articles of the faith
(yet says he) some special men do.

In it self, because of Gods word; to v^ according to the measure of our
^aith. Js revelation from God but for ^ope, and not for assurance.
as infallible as the word of God, which assures us of it. The^ if the common
sort of the faithful do not believe their salvation, to be as infallible as
the articles of our creed, yea as Gods own word, they are not by faith
assured of it. Now that some special good men, either by revelation from God,
or by long exercise of a virtuous life, have a great certainty of their
salvation, we willingly confess: but that certainty does rather belong to a
well grounded hope then to an ordinary faith.

Your answer upon Master Perkins grant is insufficient; Commonly (says Master
Perkins) men do not believe their salvation, as they do the Articles of faith.
Therefore (say you) by his own confession, our particular salvation is not to
be believed by faith. I deny the consequence: your conclusion is not rightly
inferred: men do not commonly; therefore they are not bound to do: or
therefore it is not possible they should. Either of both the means you name,
is sufficient to breed assurance of faith. For the former, who ever durst
imagine that revelation from God breeds not certainty of faith? The latter
also passes hope: for a life truly virtuous, argues true sanctification, and
that justification, which is not attained to but by true faith; and whosoever
believes shall be saved. As for falling away from faith, it is impossible: as,
if need be, shall be proved when occasion is offered.

Object. III. We are taught to pray for the pardon of our sins day by day,
Matthew. 6. 12. and all this were needelesse, if we could be assured of pardon
in this life. Ans. The fourth petition must be understood not so much of our
old debts or sins, as of our present and new sins: for as we go on from day
to day, so we add sin to sin: and for the pardon of them we must humble
our selves and pray. I answer again, that we pray for the pardon of our
sins, not because we have no assurance thereof, but because our assurance is
weak and small: we grow on from grace to grace in Christ, as children do to
man's estate by little and little. The heart of every believer is like a vessel
with a narrow neck, which being cast into the sea, is not filled at the first;
but by reason of the straight passage receives water drop by drop. God
gives unto us in Christ even a sea of mercy, but the same on our parts is
apprehended and received only by little and little, as faith grows from age
to age: and this is the cause why men having assurance pray for more.



We give God thanks for those gifts, which we have received at his bountiful
hands, and desire him to increase, or continue them if they In such measure
assured of.
may be lost. But to pray to God to give us those things we are assured of by
faith, is as fond, and frivolous, as to pray him to make Christ our Lord to be
his Son, or that there may be life everlasting to his Saints in heaven, of
which they are in full and assured possession. And so these three Arguments by
M. Perkins propounded here for us, are very substantial and sufficient, to
assure every good Christian, that he may well hope for salvation doing his
duty, but may not without great presumption, assure him by faith of it.

12. Art. par. (...) art. 1.
daily to crave pardon, although before we were assured of it in some measure:
first, because we have a commandment, which must be simply obeyed: secondly,
because we must renew our repentance, as we renew our sins. Our assurance,
though it be weak, is the assurance of faith, failing not in truth, for the
nature of it, but in quantity, for the measure: it should be without doubt,
but it is not.

Perkins afterward D. B. P. And been replied upon. A disorderly order.
seeks to salve, by his exceptions as he terms them. ^o his first exception,
I have answered before. The second I will put last for orders sake, and answer
to the third.

Master Perkins having answered the popish objections propounded by him,
proceeds to confirm our doctrine by six reasons: whereof the five first are
drawn from the Scriptures. Against which the Papists except three ways. To
those exceptions Master Perkins answers in their order and place. That order
this Papist alters, and to serve his own turn, answers the exceptions, before
he propound the reasons, to which they are taken. Afterward he shifts off the
reasons as well as he can. The plainest course for me is, to set down Master
Perkins words, and by A. B. C. to refer the reader to the Papists answers,
and replies, as they belong to Master Perkins disputation.

Our reasons to the contrary.
Reason I. The first reason may be taken from the nature of faith, on this
manner. True faith is both an infallible assurance and a particular assurance
of the remission of sins and of life everlasting. And therefore by this
faith, a man may be certainly and particularly assured of the remission of
sins, and of life everlasting. And therefore by this faith a man may be
certainly and particularly assured of the remission of sins, and life
everlasting. That this reason may be of force, two things must be proved:
first, that true faith is a certain assurance of Gods mercy to that party in
whom it is. Secondly, that faith is a particular assurance thereof. For the
first, that faith is a certain assurance, Christ says to Peter, Matthew 14.
31. O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Where he makes an
opposition between faith and doubting: whereby giving us directly to
understand, that, To be certain, and to give assurance, is of the nature of
faith. Romans 4. 20. 22. Paul says of Abraham, that he did not doubt of the
promise of God through unbelief: but was strengthened in faith, and gave
glory to God, being fully assured, that he which had promised was able to
do it: where I observe first, that doubting is made a fruit of unbelief: and
therefore infallible certainty and assurance, being contrary to doubting, must
needs proceed from true faith: considering that contrary effects come of
contrary causes: and contrary causes produce contrary effects. Secondly I
note, that the strength of Abraham's faith did stand in fulness of assurance: for
the text says, he was strengthened in the faith, being fully assured: and
again, Heb. 11. 1. true saving faith is said to be the ground and subsistence
of things hoped for: and the evidence or demonstration of things that are not
seen: but faith can be no ground or evidence of things, unless it be for
nature certainty it self: and thus the first point is manifest. The second,
that saving faith is a particular assurance, is proved by this, that the
property of faith is to apprehend and apply the promise, and the thing
promised, Christ with his benefits. Ioh. 1. 12. As many, says Saint John, as
received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, namely to them
that believe in his name. In these words to believe in Christ, and to receive
Christ, are put for one and the same thing. Now to receive Christ, is to
apprehend and apply him with all his benefits unto our selves, as he is
offered in the promises of the Gospel. For in the sixth chapter following,
first of all he sets forth himself not only as a Redeemer generally, but also
as the bread of life, and the water of life: secondly, he sets forth his best
hearers, as eaters of his body, and drinkers of his blood: and thirdly, he
intends to prove this conclusion, that to eat his body, and to drink his
blood, and to believe in him, are all one. Now then if Christ be as food, and
if to eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, be to believe in him, then
must there be a proportion between eating and believing. Look then as there
can be no eating without taking or receiving of meat, so no believing in
Christ without a spiritual receiving and apprehending of him. And as the body
has his hand, mouth, and stomach whereby it takes, receives, and digesteth
meat for the nourishment of every part: so likewise in the soul there is a
faith, which is both hand, mouth and stomach to apprehend, receive, and apply
Christ and all his merits for the nourishment of the soul. And Paul says yet
more plainly, That through ^aith we receive the promise of the spirit, Gal. 3.
14.

Now as the property of apprehending and applying of Christ belongs to
faith, so it agrees not to hope, love, confidence, or any other gift or grace
of God. But first by ^aith we must apprehend Christ, and apply him to our
selves, before we can have any hope or confidence in him. And this applying
seems not to be done by any affection of the will, but by a supernatural act
of the mind, which is to acknowledge, set down and believe that remission of
sins, and life everlasting by the merit of Christ, belong to us particularly.
To this which I have said agrees Augustine, Why preparest thou Tract. 25 in
Ioh.
teeth and belly? Believe, and thou have eaten. And, tract 50. How shall I
reach my hand into heaven, that I may hold him sitting there? Send up thy
faith, and thou la^est hold on him. And Bernard says, Homil. in Cant. 76.
Where he is thou can not come now: yet go to follow him and seek him;
believe and thou have found him: for to believe is to find. Chrysostom. on Mark,
homil. 10. Let us believe, and we see Jesus present before us. Ambr. on Luke
lib. 6. cap. 8. By faith Christ is touched, by faith Christ is seen. Tertul.
de resurrect. carnis: He must be chewed by understanding, and be digested by
faith.

Reason II. Whatsoever the holy Ghost testifies unto us, that we may, yea that
we must certainly by B.
faith believe: but the holy Ghost does particularly testify unto us our
adoption, the remission of our sins, and the salvation of our souls; and
therefore we may and must particularly and certainly by faith believe the
same. The first part of this reason is true, and cannot be denied of any. The
second part is proved thus: Saint Paul says, Romans 8. 15. We have not received
the spirit of bondage to fear: but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry
Abba, father: adding further, that the same spirit bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the children of God. Where the Apostle makes two
witnesses of our adoption: the spirit of God, and our spirits, that is, the
conscience sanctified by the holy Ghost. The Papists to elude this reason,
allege that the spirit of God does indeed witness of our adoption, by some
comfortable feelings of Gods love and favor, being such as are weak and
oftentimes deceitful. But by their leaves, the testimony of the spirit is
more then a bare sense or feeling of Gods grace: for it is called the pledge
and earnest of Gods spirit in our hearts, 2. Cor. 1. 21. and therefore it is
fit to take away all occasion of doubting of our salvation: as in a bargain,
the earnest is given between the parties, to put all out of question. Bernard
says, That the testimony of the spirit is a most sure testimony: Epist. 107.

Reason III. That which we must pray for by C.
Gods commandment, that we must believe: but every man is to pray for the
pardon of his own sins, and for life everlasting: of this there is no
question: therefore he is bound to believe the same. The proposition is most of
all doubtful: but it is proved thus. In every petition there must be two
things: a desire of the things we ask, and a particular faith whereby we
believe, that the thing we ask shall be given unto us. So Christ says,
Whatsoever ye desire when you pray, believe that you shall have it, and it
shall be given unto you. And S. John further notes out this particular faith,
calling it our assurance that God 1. Job. 5. 14.
will give unto us, whatsoever we ask according to his will. And hence it is,
that in every petition there must be two grounds: a commandment to warrant us
in making a petition, and a promise to assure us of the accomplishment thereof.
And upon both these, follows necessarily an application of the things we ask
to our selves.

Reason IIII. Whatsoever God commands in D.
the Gospel, that a man must and can perform: but God in the Gospel
commands us to believe the pardon of our own sins, and life everlasting:
and therefore we must believe thus much, and may be assured thereof. This
proposition is plain by the distinction of the commandments of the law, and
of the Gospel. The commandments of the law show us what we must do, but
minister no power to perform the thing to be done: but the doctrine and
commandments of the Gospel do otherwise: and therefore they are called
spirit and life: God with Ioh. 6. 36.
the commandment giving grace that the thing prescribed may be done. Now this
is a commandment of the Gospel, to believe remission of sins: for it was
the substance of Christ's ministry, repent and believe the Gospel. And that is
not generally to believe that Christ is a Savior, and that the promises made
in him are true (for so the devils believe with trembling:) but it is
particularly to believe that Christ is my Savior, and that the promises of
salvation in Christ belong in special to me, as Saint John says. This is his
commandment that we believe in the name of Jesus Christ: now to believe in
Christ is to put confidence in him: which none can do, unless he be first
assured of his love and favor. And therefore in as much, as we are enjoined to
put our confidence in Christ, we are also enjoined to believe our
reconciliation with him, which stands in the remission of our sins, and our
acceptance to life everlasting.

Reason V. Whereas the Papists teach, that a man E.
may be assured of his salvation by hope: even hence it follows, that he may
be vnfalliblie assured thereof. For the property of true and lively hope is
never to make a man ashamed. Romans 5. 5. And true hope follows faith and ever
presupposes certeintie of faith; neither can any man truly hope for his
salvation unless by faith he be certainly assured thereof in some measure.

Exception I. The Popish Doctors take exception to F.
these reasons on this manner. First they say, it cannot be proved y^ a man is
as certain of salvation by faith, as he is of the articles of the creed. I
answer, First they prove thus much that we ought to be as cert^ine of the one
as of the other. For look what commandment we have to believe the articles of
our faith: the like we have inio^ning us to believe the pardon of our own
sins, as I have proved. Secondly, these arguments prove it to be the nature or
essential property of faith, as certainly to assure man of his salvation, as it
does assure him of the articles which he believes. And howsoever commonly men
do not believe their salvation as infallible, as they do their articles of
faith: yet some special men do: having Gods word applied by the spirit as a
sure ground of their faith, whereby they believe their own salvation, as they
have it for a ground of the articles of their faith. Thus certainly was Abraham
assured of his own salvation: as also the Prophets and Apostles, and the
Martyrs of God in all ages: whereupon without doubting they have bin content to
lay down their lives for the name of Christ: in whom they were assured to
receive eternal happiness. And there is no question, but there be many now,
that by long and often experience of Gods mercy, and by the inward certificate
of the holy Ghost, have attained to full assurance of their salvation.

II. Exception. Howsoever a man may be assured of his present estate, yet no
man is certain of his perseverance G.
unto the end. Ans. It is otherwise: for in the sixth petition, lead us not into
temptation, we pray that God would not suffer us to be wholly overcome of the
devil in any temptation: and to this petition we have a promise answerable, 1.
Cor. 10. That God with temptation will give an issue: and therefore howsoever
the devil may buffit, molest, and wound the servants of God, yet shall he
never be able to overcome them. Again, he that is once a member of Christ,
can never be wholly cut off. And if any by sin were wholly severed from Christ
for a time, in his recovery he is to be baptized the second time: for baptism
is the sacrament of initiation or ingrafting into Christ. By this reason we
should as often be baptized as we fall into any sin, which is absurd. Again,
Saint John says, 1. John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of
us: for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. Where he
takes it for granted, that such as be once in Christ shall never wh^ly be
severed or fall from him. Though our communion with Christ may be lessened, yet
the union and the bond of conjunction can never be dissolved.

III. Exception. They say, we are indeed to believe H.
our salvation on Gods part: but we must needs doubt in regard of our selves:
because the promises of remission of sins are given upon condition of man's
faith and repentance. Now we cannot (say they) be assured that we have true
faith and repentance, because we may lie in secret sins; and so want that
indeed, which we suppose our selves to have. Answ. I say again, he that does
truly repent and believe, does by Gods grace know that he does repent and
believe: for else Paul would never have said, Prove your selves whether you be
in the faith or not: and the same Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12. We have not
received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might
know the things which are given of God: which things are not only life
everlasting, but justification, sanctification, and such like. And as for
secret sins they cannot make our repentance void: for he that truly repents
of his known sins, repents also of such as be unknown, and receives the
pardon of them all. God requires not an express or special repentance of
unknown sins: but accepts it as sufficient, if we repent of them generally:
as David says, Psalm. ^9. Who knows the errors of this life? forgive me my
secret sins. And whereas they add that faith and repentance must be
sufficient: I answer that the sufficiency of our faith and repentance, stands
in the truth and not in the measure or perfection thereof; and the truth of
both where they are, is certainly discerned.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient I.
Church. De verbis De^ Sermon. 28.
August. Of an evil servant thou art made a good child, therefore presume not
of thine own doing, but of the grace of Christ: it is not arrogancy but
faith: to acknowledge what thou have received, is not pride but devotion. And,
Tract. 5. in Epist. Ioh.
Let no man ask another man, but return to his own heart: if he find
charity there, he has security for his passage from life to death. Hilar. in
Matthew. 5. The kingdom of heaven which our Lord professed to be in himself,
his will is that it must be hoped for, without any doubtfulnesse of
uncertainty will at all. Otherwise there is no justification by faith, if
faith it self be made doubtful. Bernard in his epist. 107. Who is the just
man but he that being loved of God, loves him again? which comes not to pass
but by the spirit revealing by Faith the eternal purpose of God of his
Salvation to come. Which revelation is nothing else but the infusion of
spiritual grace: by which, when the deeds of the flesh are mortified, the man
is prepared to the kingdom of heaven --.Together receiving in one spirit that
whereby he may presume that he is loved and also love again --.

To conclude, the Papists have no great cause to dissent from us in this point.
For they teach and profess, that they do by a special faith believe their
own salvation certainly and infallibly in respect of God, that promises. Now
the thing which hinders them is their own indisposition and unworthiness (as
they say) which keeps them from being certain otherwise then in a likely
hope. But this hinderance is easily removed, if men will judge indifferently.
For first of all, in regard of our selves and our disposition we cannot be
certain at all, but must despair of salvation even to the very death. We
cannot be sufficiently disposed so long as we live in this world, but must
always say with Jacob, I am less then all thy mercies, Genesis 32. and with
David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for none living shall
be justified in thy sight: and with the Centurion, Lord I am not worthy, that
thou should come under my roof, Matthew. 8. Secondly God in making promise of
salvation respects not men's worthiness. For he chose us to life everlasting when
we were not: he redeemed us from death being enemies: and intitles us to the
promise of salvation, if we acknowledge our selves to be sinners, Matthew. 9. If
we labor and travail under the burden of them. Matthew. 11. If we hunger and
thirst after grace. Ioh. 7. 37. And these things we may certainly and sensibly
perceive in our selves: and when we find them in us, though our unworthiness
be exceeding great, it should not hinder our assurance. For God makes manifest
his power in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12. and he will not break the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoking flax. Isai, 42. Thirdly, if a man love God for
his mercies sake, and have a true hope of salvation by Christ, he is in Christ,
and has fellowship with him: and he that is in Christ, has all his
unworthiness and wants laid on Christ, and they are covered and pardoned in his
death: and in respect of our selves thus considered, as we are in Christ; we
have no cause to waver, but to be certain of our salvation, and that in regard
of our selves.

The Catholics say, we are indeed to believe our salvation on Gods part, who
is desirous of all men's salvation, very rich in mercy, and able to save us, but
our fear rises in regard of our selves, because the promises of remission of
sins depend upon our true repentance: Unless you do Penance, ye shall all
perish. And the promises of salvation, are made upon condition of Luke 13.
keeping Gods commandments. If thou will enter into life keep the
commandments. Again, No man shall be crowned, except he combat Matthew 19. 2.
Tim. 2.
lavvfullie. Now we not knovving whether we shall well perform these
things required by God at our hands, have just cause to fear, least God do
not on his part, perform that which he promises upon such conditions.

M Perkins answers, That for faith, and true repentance, every man that has
them, knows well that he has them. To which I reply, that for F. Justifying
faith is in the will, if not wholy, yet principally.
faith being rightly taken, it may be known of the party that has it, because
it is a light of the understanding, and so being like a lamp, may be easily
seen: but true repentance requires besides faith, both hope, and charity,
which are seated in the dark corners of the will, and cannot by faith be seen
in themselves, but are known by their effects: which being also uncertain do
make but conjectures and a probable opinion.

Perkins answered, whereas you should have disproued it. There is no less
doubt of faith than of repentance, by your own reason: for that also has it
seat in the will, being a resting, or relying upon God, for salvation by
Christ. The effects both of the one and of the other are as certainly discerned
by a Christian, as ordinary trust in men, and worldly sorrow, by a natural
man.

Paul may be omitted where he says. Prove your selves whether you be in says
or no.. Because we accord that it may be 2. Cor. 13.
tried by us, whether we have faith or no: although I know well, that S. Paul's
words carry a far different sense. But let that pass as impertinent.

2. Cor. 13. 5.
makes so plainly against you, the Apostle speaking there of such a faith, as
necessarily has hope and charity joined with it. When you show another sense,
you shall have another answer.

That we have received the spirit, which is of God, that 1. Cor. 2. 12.
we might know the things which are given of God. What things these are
which the spirit reuealeth to us, S. Paul teaches in the same place, That
which the eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, etc. God has prepared for
them, that love him: but to us, God has revealed by his Spirit: All this is
true: but who they be that shall attain to that blessed Banquet by God so
prepared. God only knows, and by his spirit reuealeth it to very few. And
will you learn out of S. Jerome that ancient Doctor, the cause why? Therefore
(says he) it is put ambiguous and left uncertain, In 3. capu^ Ioh.
that while men are doubtful of their salvation, they may do Penance more
manfully, and so may move God to take compassion on them.

An other reason of this uncertainty, yields S. Augustine in these De cor.
and gra. cap. 13. Lib. 9. moral. cap. 17.
words: In this place of temptation, such is our infirmity, that assurednes,
might engender pride. To this agrees S. Gregory, saying: If we know our
selves to have grace, we are proud.. So that to strike down the pride of our
hearts, and to humble us, and to make us travail more carefully in the works
of mortification, God does not ordinarily assure men at the first of their own
salvation: but to cheer up their hearts on the otherside, does put them in
great hope of it, like to a discreet and good Lord, who will not at the first
entrance into his service, infeafe his servant in the fee simpleof those lands,
which after upon his good deserts he means to bestow on him.

1. Cor. 2. 12.
there spoken of, are by the spirit of God made known to true Christians, not
only that they are prepared for some, but that they themselves have their part
in them. Neither does S. Hierome say any thing to the contrary; but only
shows, that God does not give men knowledge how he will deal with them
concerning outward punishment; because he would have them the more earnest to
repent, and cry for mercy. It is saftie he speaks of, such as the Ninevites
obtained by prayer and fasting, not everlasting salvation. But let it be
understood of everlasting life: none of these ancient writers say, that either
we ought not, or cannot be assured by faith of our salvation; but only thus
much may be concluded out of them, that the measure of our assurance is not
perfect, to the end we may be more careful to pray for pardon, and in less
danger of being puffed up.

Perkins in his last supply delivers, to wit: That if we regard our own
indiseosition, we must despair, because we be not worthy of his mercy. Not
so good Sir, Because we know that he bestows mercy upon the unworthy, at
the first justification of a sinner, but will not admit into the Kingdom of
heaven any unworthy, but gives men grace while they live to work, that they
are made worthy of his heavenly Kingdom according to that: They shall walk
with me in vvhites, because they are worthy, but of this more fully in the
chapter of merits. Apoc. 3. 4.


Perkins speaks not of unworthiness only, but of indisposition also; which is
a reason to make every one despair, in regard of himself, though in respect
of Gods mercy he may conceive some hope. For if no man should find favor, but
he that is disposed or fitted for it perfectly, sure we must needs despair
of attaining to that fitnes; how can we, in respect of that, look for
salvation? the worthiness which is in them that shall come to heaven, is both in
Christ, by whom they are worthy, as members of his mystical body, and also
in themselves, who, departing out of this world, are made perfectly righteous
by inherent righteousness, which before was begun in them.

G. 1. Cor. 10.
an issue forth: then the assurance depends upon prayer, and not upon our
former faith. What then if we do not pray so as we should? may not the enemy
then, not only wound, but kill us to? it cannot be denied: and therein, as in
diverse other works of piety, many have been too too slack as the pitiful
fall of thousands have taught us.

Perkins does not say, that prayer does assure us of perseverance; but that we
resting upon God by faith, and calling on him, are vpheld from falling away;
not because our prayer is, for the manner and measure, such as it ought to be
(for all should be perfect) but because God-hath promised to keep his
children, and, that he may fulfill his promise, stirs them up to pray,
according to his will, though with many imperfections.

Oh says M. Perkins, it cannot be, that he which was once a member of
Christ, can ever after be wholy cut off. O shameless assertion, and contrary
O ^dle and salse exclamation!
to many plain texts, and examples of holy Scriptures: Does not our Savior
say in express words, That every branch in me not bearing f^, he will take
it away? And again, If any abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as the
branch, and shall wither, and be cast into the fire: which Ioh. 15.
does demonstrate, that some which were members of Christ, be wholly cut off,
and that for ever. Are we not by faith made members of Christ by our
adversaries own confession? and does not our blessed Savior say, expounding
the Parable of the sower, That the seed which fell upon the rock, does
signify them, who with joy receive the word, and these I^ke 8.
(says he) have no root, but for a time they believe, and in time of
temptation, revolt. Does not S. Paul in express terms say, That some having
1. Tim. 1. 19.
faith and good conscience, expelling good conscience, have made shipvvrack of
their faith: of whom were by name, Hymenaeus, and Alexander. The like, That in
the last days, some should revolt from the faith: Again, That 1. Tim. 4. 1.
Tim. 6.
some for covetousness sake, had erred from the says.

Ioh. 4. 13. 14.
He that drinks of that water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but
it shall be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting life. Again,
Ioh. 10. 27. 28
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give them
eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out
of my hand. And in another place, Ioh. 6. 35. Verse. 40.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger; and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst. This is the will of him that sent me, that
every one that sees the Son, and believes in him, should have everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Now the places you allege
prove no more, but that, if any man fall away from Christ, he shall perish:
and that some may forsake the truth of doctrine, or, having had some show of a
justifying faith for a time, may afterward manifest themselves not to have
believed in Christ to justification. Of the former kind are those two places
of John: of the latter all the rest.

Saul the first King of Israel, There is no such testimony of him any where.
1. Reg. 19. 1. Reg. 15. and 16 Act. 8.
who was at his election (as the holy Ghost witnesses) so good a man, that
there was no better then he in Jsraell, and yet became reprobate, as is in the
Scripture signified. The like is probable of Solomon, and in the new Testament
of Judas the traitor, and Simon Magus whom S. Luke says, that he also
himself believed, and after became an Arch heretic, and so died: the like
almost may be verified of all Arch-heretikes, who before they fell, were of the
faithful.

Saul is utterly false: for the Scripture neither in that text, nor any where
else, speaks so of him. And indeed how could it, Samuel being then alive, so
holy and good a man? But the place you mean is in 1. Sam. 9. 20.
the ninth chapter, where Samuel says to him, whose shall all the best things
of Israel be? as your translation reads it. That is (says Cuius enim optima
quaeque Israel? Lyra ibi.
your gloss) the dignity of the King, who may take the best things of the
people subject to him. (...).
The goodly things, says the 70. All that is to be desired, Pagnin. What
soever is to Expedibile, Pagnin, Vatablns.
be desired in Israel (says Vatablus) and in his marginall note; All the
desire of Israel: as if he should say, Thou shall be King of Israel. And this
agrees both with the word, and with the context: Care not for the asses, says
Samuel, for they are found, and besides, whose shall all the wealth of Israel
be? Thus have you graced Saul, and belied the holy Ghost; so have you disgraced
Solomon, whom the holy Ghost honored with speaking by his mouth, and writing by
his pen the great mysteries of God. Every Papist has not power, like the
Pope, to make whom he will a Saint, and whom he list a reprobate. Judas, Simon,
Hymeneus, Alexander, and the rest, believed the truth of the Gospel, at least
in part, for a time, but never any one of these had at any time true justifying
faith, to rest upon Christ for salvation.

Iouinians erroneous articles, condemned, and registered by S. Hierome, Heraes.
82. li. 2. cont. Iouin.
and S. Augustine, who held, that just men after Baptism could not sin, and if
they did sin, they were indeed washed with water, but never received the
spirit of grace: his ground was, that he which had once received the spirit of
grace, could not sin after, which is just M. Perkins M. Perkins has no such
proposition.
proposition: so that to uphold an error, he falls into an old condemned
heresy.

Iac. 3. 9.
He that is borne of God sins not, for his seed remains in him: neither
can he sin, because he is borne of God.

And if by sin one were vvhol^ severed from Christ for a time, in his recovery
he is to be baptized the second time. Where you have first rebaptizing, which
is the And that condemned by M. Perkins; so far is he from favoring it. M.
Perkins says no such thing, you make an absurd collection. Time, say we.
principal error of the Anabaptists, and withal the heresy of the Nouatians,
who held that if any in persecution denied Christ after baptism, there was no
remedy left in Gods Church, for their recovery: but must be left to God; so
says M. Perkins, for that of rebaptizing he seems to bring in ex absurdo: so
that the common saying is verified in him, (one absurdity being granted, a
thousand follovv after.) But does he know no other means then Baptism to
recover one cut off from Christ? has he forgotten that corrupted sentence of
the Prophet, wherewith they begin their common prayer? What hour soever a
sinner does repent him of his sin, etc. With them repentance, and with us the
Sacrament of Penance, serve a man at any time of his life to be reconciled to
Christ.

12. Art. part. 2. Art. 4. F.
Baptism being the sacrament of imitating and ingrafting men into Christ, must
needs be equally necessary for all that are out of Christ. As for repentance,
upon which God forgiues a sinner, it is common to the baptized with the
unbaptized: now you hold it needful at the first (as doubtless it is, so that
the wilful neglect of it is damnable, though a man have repented) why should
it be needless afterward, when a man is wholly out of Christ, as in the
beginning he was? Your superstitious and proud satisfactorie penance, we
reject as Antichristian, neither allowing any second baptism, nor excluding
them that fall never so grievously, either from heaven, or the Church in this
world, if they repent.

John. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had bin of
us, they would have continued 1. Ioh. 2.
with us. I answer. If they went out from us, they were before with us: which
confirms our assertion, that men may depart from their faith, and Christ's
profession: but such men were not indeed of the number of the elect, of which
S. John was, for then either they would have continued with them in the
Christian faith, or else by hearty repentance would have returned unto it back
again, which is S. Augustines own exposition. And these be the Arguments for
the Catholics, which M. De bono perse. c. 8.
Perkins through his confused order touches here, and there.

12. Art. part. 2. Art. 1. C.
but either into the congregation of the faithful, or, into Gods favor, in
respect of their own feeling.

Paul. But thou Romans 11 20. Phil. 2. 12.
by faith do stand, be not too highly wise, but fear, if God has not
spared the natural boughs lest perhaps he will not spare thee neither. And
again. Work your salvation, with fear and trembling. There be above an
hundred such texts in holy write, wherein the holy Ghost exhorts us to
stand in fear of our salvation, out of which I thus frame my argument.

No man must stand in fear of that, of which he is by faith assured. But the
faithful must stand in fear of their salvation. Ergo, they be not assured of
it by says.

The Minor or second proposition is plainly proved by these places, cited
before; the Mayor is manifest: there is no fear in faith, he that fears,
whether the thing be assured or no, cannot give a certain assent thereunto:
Dubious in side in fidelis est. Put the case in another article, to make it more
evident: He that fears, whether there be a God or no, do we esteem that
he believes in God? So he that fears whether Jesus Christ be God, is he a
Christian? has he a true faith? You must needs anssvere no. So he that fears
whether he shall be saved or no, can have no faith of his salvation.

12. Art. part. 1. Art. 5. and part. 2. art. 1.
are not ordinarily assured of their salvation by such a faith as has no
doubting annexed unto it. Yet is our assertion true, that they are assured of
it by such a faith as shall never deceive them. And again, yet they ought to
be assured without doubting. But I will answer to your syllogism: first by
distinguishing on your proposition, no man must, nor indeed can, stand in fear
of that of which he is assured by such a measure of faith, as admits no doubt;
but his faith being weak, he may and must: for this fear is an especial
means to keep him from falling away. In which respect the holy Ghost exhorts
to it, by reason our faith is not perfect. Secondly, for your assumption, I
say, the faithful are not simply willed to be afraid that they shall not be
saved, but only are appointed to use the means of securing of themselves by
warines: because else it will come to pass, that they shall fall away in their
own sense and feeling. Your example proves nothing, the measure of faith
being so diverse: and further, he may truly believe in God, that in some
temptation falls into doubting, for a time, whether there be a God or no: as
you must needs know, if you have any experience of the temptations, which
sometimes befall the dear children of God.

of the ancient Fathers. First, what can be more manifest to warrant us, that
the faithful have not assurance infallible of their salvation, then these
words of the Holy Ghost. There be just (and therefore faithful) and wise men,
and their works be in the hand of God, and nevertheless a Eccles. 9.
man does not know whether he be worthy of hatred er love, but all things are
kept uncertain for the time to come. Where is then the Protestants Are,
Pagnine, Vatablus, and Arias Montanus heretics? Comment. in hunc locum.
certainety? And because one heretic cauilleth against the Laten translation,
saying that a word or two of it may be otherwise turned, hear how S. Jerome,
who was most cunning in the Hebrew text, does understand it. The sense is,
(says he) J have sound the works of just men, to be in the hand of God, and
yet themselves not to know, whether, they be loved of God or no.

Pa^nin. Vatablus, Arias M^ntanus.
your own men. For the sense, our interpretation is confirmed by the course of
the text, that a man cannot know by the outward things that befall him here,
whether he be loved of God, or hated; because these happen alike both to the
elect, and to the reprobate. He that will read the expositions of learned
men, and weigh the likelihood of their reasons, shall see that the place is not
clear enough to prove a controversy.

Paul, where he shows that it is not in us to judge of our own justice, but
we must ^aue to God the judgment of it: these be the words. I am not guilty
in conscience of any thing, but I am not justified herein, but he that judges
me is our 1. Cor.
Lord, therefore judge not before the time until our Lord do come, who also
will lighten the hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the counsel of
the heart, and then the praise shall be to every man of God. So that before Gods
judgment by S. Paul's testimony, men may not assure themselves of their own
justice, much less of their salvation, how innocent soever they find
themselves in their own consciences. See upon this place S. Ambrose, S.
Basil, Th^doret on this place, who all agree, that Sermon 5* in Psalm. 1^8.
(...). (...) mo^a^ c. 2.
men may have secret faults, which God only sees, and therefore they must live
in fear, and always pray to be delivered from them.

upon which it does not depend. We acknowledge with those worthy men, that we
must call upon God for pardon of our secret sins, with fear and humblenes of
mind.

Augustines testimony, (whom our adversaries acknovvledge to be the most
diligent and faithful register of all antiquity) be sufficient. This most
judicious, and holy Father thus defines this matter: As long as we live here,
we our selves cannot judge of our selves, I do not say what we shall be to
morrow, but what we are to day. And De verb. Dom. Sermon. 35. De ciuit. Dei,
lib. 11. c. 12.
yet more directly. Albeit holy men are certain of the revvard of their
perseverance, yet of their own perseverance, they are found uncertain. For
what man can know that he shall persevere, and hold on in the action and
increase of justice until the end, unless by some revelation he be assured of
it from him, who of his just, but secret judgment does not inform all men of
this matter, but deceives none? So no just man is assured of his salvation
This is not in Austin quoted by you.
by his ordinary faith: by extraordinary revelation, some man may be assured,
the rest are not. Which is just the Catholic sentence.

Austin speaks not Aug. de verbis dom. sermon. 35. misquoted for, Aug. homil.
50. homil. 35.
there of the assurance of salvation, but persuades men to give no credit to
flatterers, because we our selves cannot judge of our selves: and indeed we
are oftentimes faulty in those things, wherein we suppose we have done very
well.

In Aug de ciuit. dei. lib. 11. c. 12
the other place he denies that knowledge which is wholly without doubting, and
to which we grant few or none attain ordinarily.

Bernard is by our adversaries, cited for them in this point, take his
testimony in as precise terms as any Catholic at this time speaks. Thus he
vvriteth. Who can say, I am one of the elect, I am one of the predestinat to
life, I am one of the number of the children? Who Sermon. 1. de Septuag. Eccles.
9.
(I say) can thus say, the Scripture crying out against him. A man knovveth
not, whether he be worthy of love or hatred. Therefore we have no certeinty,
but the confidence of hope does comfort us, that we be not vexed at all with
the perplexity of this doubt. The word of God (according to S. Bernard,)
cries out against all them, that certainly assure themselves of their
salvation: vvhereon then do they build their faith that believe it?

Bernard was by profession a member of the Popish Church, and therefore against
us his testimony is nothing; but against you it is of great weight. For the
point in question, first he is of opinion, Sermon. 1. in Sep^^ages.
in that place by you quoted, that a Quales sumus nosse possumus, vel ex pa^te.
man may know in what estate he is for the present, at least in part: because
God has given certain manifest signs and tokens of salvation, Vt indub^ bile
sit.
that it cannot be doubted, but that he is in the number of the elect, in whom
those signs shall continue. Secondly, the reason why he denies the latter, is,
because ye signs he speaks of, being in outward obedience principally, may
fail, and so breed some cause of doubting. The Eccles. 9. 1.
scripture he alleges for the ground of his uncertainty, has nothing in it
to that purpose.

Lutherans and Caluinists as you tear me them, do not think each other damned.
their salvation, and yet each sect holds every one not of his own band
assured of damnation: so that by the sentence of the Lutherans, all Caluinists,
and Anabaptists, are miserably deceived when they assure themselves of their
salvation: In like manner if the Anabaptists be true censurers, both Lutherans,
and Caluinists and all other, not of their heresy, err foully, when they
bear themselves in hand that they shall be saved. Certain it is therefore by
the consent of all the world, that very many who assure themselves of
salvation, are indeed assured of damnation.

Calvin. Bulling^^.
we, not you, have from time to time confuted; till of late you began to tread
upon them, when we had beaten them down. Caluinists and Lutherans (as you
maliciously call them) agree in this point, for the most part, and neither make
any question but the other may be saved, for all their differences in some
opinions: but both have very just cause to doubt of you, who fight against the
maine foundation, as in the next article.

Page 57. De verb. Dom. Sermon. 28.
Reader, confer those which M. Perkins in his sixth reason alleges against
us. First, S. Augustine in these words. Of an evil servant, thou art made a
good child, therefore presume not of thine own doing, but of the grace of
Christ. It is not arrogance, but faith to acknovvledge, what thou have
received, it is not pride, but d^u^tion. What word is here of certeinty of
salvation? but that it belongs to a faithfullman, to confess himself much
bound to God, for calling of him to be his. Which every Christian must do,
hoping himself so to be, and being most certain, that if he be not in state
of grace, it is long of himself, and no want on Gods part. The second place
has not so much as any show of words for him, thus he speaks. Let no man
ask another man, but return to his Tract. 5. in Epist. Johan.
own heart, and if he find Charity there, he has security for his passage,
from life to death. What need was there to seek charity in his heart, fer
security of his salvation, if his faith assured him thereof? therefore this
text makes flat against him.



Not so much as a show of words: yet is there substance of matter: for if
charity be a security for passage from life to death, and if a man may know
whether it be in his heart or no, doubtless there is assurance of salvation to
be had. But you will say, not by faith: else what need he seek for charity?
as if it were amiss to have more proofs than one. He that has tried the
devils temptations, knows that all is little enough. But this assurance by
charity is assurance by faith, because it proves we have such a faith, as
shall certainly bring us to everlasting life.

Hilarie in these words. The Kingdom Sup. 5. cap. Mat. Of yours, not of M.
Perkins who has it not.
of heaven which our Lord professed to be in himself, his will is that it be
hoped for, without any doubtfulnes of uncertain will (at all, is an
addition) otherwise there is no justification by faith, if faith it self be
made doubtful. First, he says, but as we say, that the Kingdom of heaven is
to be hoped for, without any doubtfulnes; for we profess certainty of hope,
and deny only certainty of faith, as M. Perkins confesses before. And as for
faith, we say with him also it is not doubtful, but very certain. What makes
this to the purpose, that a man must believe his own salvation when S. Hilary
speaks there of faith of the resurrection of the dead?

Hilar. in Math. ca. 5. Spes bonorum aeternorum.
Hilary requires such a hope as is grounded upon faith, and has the same
nature with faith, but that it particularly respects the time to come; whereas
faith rests absolutely upon God for the present also. Neither speaks he of
the resurrection from the dead in particular, but of every man's trust
concerning his own enjoying of all heavenly felicity.

Bernard: Who is the just man, but he that be^^g Ep^^. ^07.
loved of God, loves him again? which comes not to pass^ but by the s^t,
revealing by faith the eternal (...) says (...) Perk^ns out of Bernard.
promise of God, of his salvation to come, which revelation is nothing else,
but the infusion of spiritual grace, by which the deeds of the flesh are
mortified, the man is prepared to the Kingdom of heaven, together receiving in
one spirit, that, whereby he may presume, that he is loved, and loves again.
Note that he says the revelation of the spirit, to be nothing else, but the
infasion of spiritual graces, and comfort, whereby a man has some feeling of
Gods goodness toward him, by which (as he says) he may presume, but not
believe certainly, that he is loved of God. But let S. Bernard in the same
place interpret himself, there he speaks thus, as I cited once before. It is
given to men to taste before hand, somewhat of the bliss to come, etc. Of the
which knowledge of our selves now in part perceived, a man does in the mean
season glory in hope, but not yet in security. His opinion then is expressly,
that for all the revelations of the spirit made by faith unto us, we are not
assured for certainty of our salvation, but feel great joy, through the hope
we have hereafter to receive it.

Bernard have a man presume that God loves him, without warrant? or would he
have him not believe the testimony of the spirit, which assures him of that
love by such a pledge? Aug. de verb* dom. sermon. 28.
Austin taught us before, that it is no arrogancy, but faith, to know what we
have received: and Bernard teaches us now, that the end of receiving is, that
we may presume we are beloved of God: that is, that we may know it by faith.
He adds further afterward, that this is the holy and secret counsel of God,
which the Son has received from the Father by the holy Ghost, and
communicates to those that be his, so that they begin to know as they are
known, it being granted to them to feel before hand somewhat of their
blessedness to come, as it has been hidden from all eternity in him that did
predestinate, and shall appear more fully in him, In beatificante.
when he shall make us blessed. We believe with Bernard, that we have here but
a taste of the joy to come, and that our security is not (ordinarily) without
doubting. So that the certainty he speaks of, and that we say Christians
have, is all one.

Perkins produces in defense of their opinion.

The first reason is this, That in faith there are two things, the one is an A.
insallible assurance of those things which we believe: This we grant, and
there hence prove (as you heard before) that there can be no faith of our
particular salvation, because we be not so fully assured of that, but that we
must stand in fear of losing of it, according to that, Hold that which thou
have, least perhaps another receive thy crown. Apoc. 3.




For (says M. Perkins) it does assure us of remissission of our sins, and of
life everlasting in particular. Prove that Sir, and we need no more. It is
proved out of S. John. As many as received him, he gave them poeer to be made
the sons of God, namely, to them that believe in his name. This text comes
Ioh. 1
much too short he gave them power to be the sons, that is, gave them such
grace, that they were able, and might if they would, be sons of God, but did
not assure them of that neither, much less that they should so continue unto
their lives end. I omit his unsavory discourse of eating, and believing
Christ, and applying unto us his benefits, (which he might Take your relish, be
not merely natural. He proves that he brings, by the Scriptures alleged.
be ashamed to make unto us, that admit no part of it to be true.) I confess
that therein faith has his part, if it be joined with charity, and
frequentation of the Sacraments.

Perkins proves that faith is a particular assurance; because it is a
particular applying of Christ by every man to himself. That it is so he
shows, in that it is a receiving of Christ and all his benefits. The place of
Ioh. 1. 12.
John is brought to prove, that to believe in Christ, and to receive Christ, is
all one; to which your answer is altogether impertinent. So also is your
exposition false: for the holy Ghost speaks not of a (...), not (...).
power to be the sons of God; but of a privilege, whereby all true believers
are the sons of God: Ye are all (says the Gal. 3. 26.
Apostle) the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. That discourse, so
unsavory to your corrupt taste, serves to manifest this point, that to
receive, or believe in Christ, is to apply him particularly, as meat and
drink are applied by eating and drinking. If you could as easily have
disproued, as disliked that discourse, we should have seen the one, as we have
the other.

Paul teaches, That not by the works of Moses Gal. 3. This is your gloss.
law, but by faith in Christ Jesus we receive the promises of the spirit, and
shall have hereafter the performance, if we observe those things which Christ
has commanded us. But what is this to certeintie of Salvation?

S. Paul speaks of receiving the spirit by faith, and no where vouchsafes any
such privilege to works; which indeed have not to do in that matter: Gal. 3.
2.
Received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

Augustine and such like authorities, I answer, that we Tract. 25. in Ioh.
find Christ, we hold Christ, we see Christ, by faith, believing him to be the
Son of God, and redeemer of the world, and Judge of the quick and the dead:
and we understand, and digest all the mysteries of this holy word. But where
is it once said, in any of these sentences, that we are assured of our
salvation? we believe all these points and many more: but we shall be never the
near our salvation, unless we observe Gods commandments, The servant which
knovves his Masters will, and does Luke 12. Ioh. 15.
it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Then you are my friends (says our
Savior) when you shall do the things which I command you: which we being
uncertain to perform, assure not our selves of his friendship, Mere
Phar^saisme.
but when to our knowledge we go as near it as we can, and demand pardon of
our wants, we live in good hope of it.

Austin, as Master Perkins desires: but that you restrain this believing
(against Austins words) to a belief of the truth; whereas the use of eating
and drinking Christ, is not only to establish our judgment, but also, and
that principally, to confirm the assurance of our salvation by his death and
sacrifice. It is a strange kind of answering, to require the maine conclusion
in every pro syllogism, and not to understand to what purpose every several
reason is alleged.

The believing of never so many points brings neither assurance nor salvation;
but the resting upon Christ for salvation, gives us assurance that we are the
children of God, and shall continue so, receiving at the last the inheritance
of sons, because of our adoption; not the wages of servants, for our
imperfect labor, in which we use our best endeavor to do the will of our
father, not the task of our master.

Perkins thought wisdom to B.
conceal. For. S. Paul says that the Spirit witnesses with our spirits, that
we are the sons of God, and coheires with Christ, with this condition, If yet
we suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him. So that the
testimony is not absolute, but conditional, and then if we fail in
performance of the condition, God stands free of his promise, and will take his
earnest back again. And so to have received the earnest of it, will nothing
avail us, much less, assure us of salvation.

Paul sets down no condition at all, in Romans 8. 15. 16 Verse. 17.
the place alleged by Master Perkins; the next verse propounds the course that
God has appointed to bring his children to glory: which depends not upon us,
but upon God himself, who Romans 8. 29.
makes all his sons conformable to their eldest brother Christ, according to
his predestination, Heb. 12. 6.
and chastise all his children, by one kind of suffering or another.

Perkins would refute, by the authority of Saint Bernard, in the place before
cited, see the place, and my answer there.

And my Reply. Epist. 107.
we are the children of God: the comfort and joy you mention, is an effect
arising from that testimony of his, and our feeling; not the foundation of our
assurance. We rejoice, because the spirit bears witness that we are the sons
of God; not contrariwise because we rejoice, therefore we have hope that we
are Gods children, though this also be a secondarie proof of our assurance.

We must pray for salvation, therefore we are not C. Not fully assured as we
ought to be.
yet assured of it: For who in his wits prays God to give him that, whereof
he is assured already? And a godly act of faith it is, in that prayer to
believe that God will give that, which he is assured of before hand: such
foolish petitions cannot please God, and therefore after their doctrine it is
to be denied, that any faithfulman may pray for his salvation, but rather
thank the Lord for it. But to answer directly, he who prays must believe he
shall obtain that which he prays for, if he observe all the due
circumstances of prayer, which be many, but to this purpose, two are required
necessarily: the one that he who prays be the true servant of God, which
first excludes all those that err in faith, touched in these words. What you
of the faithful shall desire when you pray, shall be given you: The other is,
when we request matters of such moment, that we persevere in prayer, and
continue our suit day by day, of these suites of eternal salvation, we must
take these words of our Savior to be spoken. We must alvvaies pray, and never
be weary. And Lu^e 18.
(...) to doubt, but we shall in the end receive it. But because we are in
Then belike there are degrees of assurance.
doubt, whether we shall observe those necessary circumstances of prayerer no,
therefore we cannot be so well assured to obtain our suite, although we be on
Gods part must assured, that he is most b^ful, and readier to give, then we
are to a ^e.

12. Art. part. 2. Art. 1.
our faith is not without some doubting, and our feeling not so strong, as it
should and may be.

If that were the condition, we could never look to obtain any thing of God:
for we are sure that we never observe all the circumstances required; but we
are out of all doubt, that God will grant our requests, in his good time, if we
make them in Christ's name, though we fail in circumstances, and pray not every
day as we ought. For the Romans 8. 26.
spirit we have received will rouse us up from our deadnes, and teach us so to
pray, that we shall speed, as it may be most for Gods glory, and our own
salvation.

Perkins, S. John notes out this particular faith, calling it, Our assurance,
that God will give unto us, whatsoever we ask according 1. Ioh. 5.
to his will. But where find we that it is Gods will, to assure every man
at the first entrance into his service, of eternal salvation? is it not
sufficient to make him an assured promise of it, upon his faithful service and
good behavior toward him?



D.
God commands us to keep his commandments, and they hold that to be
impossible: but to the assumption: That God commands us to believe our
salvation, is proved (says M. Perkins) by these words: Repent and believe the
Gospel: Spectatum admissi, risum teneatis amici: Where is it written in that
Gospel, believe your own particular salvation? thevv us once but one clear
text for it, and we will believe it. I do believe in Christ, and hope to be
saved, through his mercy and merits, but know well, that unless I keep his
words, I am by him likened Matthew. 7. Matthew. 26. Matthew. 25.
to a fool, that built his house upon the sanas. He commands me to vvatch and
pray, least I fall into temptation: and else where, vva^neth me to prepare
oil to keep my lamp burning against his coming, or else I am most certain
to be shut out with the foolish Virgins. An hundred such admonitions find we
in holy Scriptures, to shake us out of this security of our salvation, and to
make us vigilant to prevent all temptations of the enemy, and d^gent to train
our selves in godly exercises of all virtue.

Perkins has answered your objection against his proposition, that it is not a
commandment of the Gospel, but of Romans 10. 5, 6
the law: Do this, and thou shall live.

His proof is easilier laughed at, than answered. To believe (says he) is
particularly to acknowledge Christ to be my Savior: that is, to put my
confidence in him for my salvation: which I cannot do, unless I be resolved
of my reconciliation with him. To this you answer not a word, but barely
allege the first proof, and deny it.

All these things, and such like our Savior commands, and assures me that God
will enable me to the performing of them, because I rest upon him for this
grace in Christ.

E.
storms of persecution, and not to be ashamed of Christ's Cross, but to
profess his faith most boldly before the most bloody tyrants of the world, our
hearts being by charity fortified and made invincible. And this is that which
the Apostle teaches in that place: and says before, that the faithful glory
in the hope of the sons of God. And do not vaunt Verse. 2.
themselves of the certainty of their salvation. This certainty of hope, is
great in those that have long lived virtuously, specially when they have also
endured manifold losses, much disgrace, great wrongs and injuries for Christ's
sake, for he that cannot fail of his word, has promised to requite all such
with an hundred fold: But what is this to the certainety of faith, which the
Protestants will have every man to be endued with at his first entrance into
the service of God? When as S. Paul in^th, that godly men pa^ takers of the
holy Ghost, yea after they Heb. (...). They never had a justifying faith.
have tasted the good word of God, and the power of the world to come, that is,
have received besides faith, great favors of Gods spirit, and felt as it were
the joys of heaven, have after all this so fallen from God, that there was
small hope of their recovery.

everlasting life, and glory in this hope of theirs. Now the Romans 5. 3. 5.
Apostle says they shall not be ashamed of this hope: and therefore it must
needs be that they shall have everlasting life. This interpretation your own
Gloss. Interlin.
gloss auowes; Non facit erubes^, quiae impletur.
Hope makes not a man blush, because it is fulfilled: and expounding that which
follows of the love of God, it says, It is certain it shall be fulfilled,
because we have the spirit to pledge. So does Lyra ibid.
Lyra also interpret that hope: so Theodoret, Chrysostom, Theophylact.
Theodoret, so Chrysostom, so Theophylact, etc. And wherein, I pray you,
differs this from the assurance of faith, which we teach, and you condemn?
This grows every day in the hearts of true believers, who never fall away,
though they are sometimes shaken. Those that the Hebr. 6. 3. 4.
Apostle speaks of, never had true faith to justification, as I will prove
otherwhere.

The fourth point: Touching the justification of a sinner.


Our doctrine touching the justification of a sinner, I propound in four rules.

Rule I. That, justification is an action of God, whereby he absolueth a sinner
and accepts him to life everlasting for the righteousness and merit of
Christ.

Rule II. That justification stands in two things; first in the remission of
sins by the merit of Christ his death; secondly in the imputation of Christ
his righteousness; which is another action of God whereby he accounts and
esteems that righteousness which is in Christ, as the righteousness of that
sinner which believes in him. By Christ his righteousness we are to
understand two things: first his sufferings specially in his death and passion,
secondly his obedience in fulfilling the law: both which go together: for
Christ in suffering obeyed, and obeying suffered. And the very shedding of his
blood to which our salvation is ascribed, must not only be considered, as it
is passive, that is, a suffering, but also as it is active, that is, an
obedience, in which he showed his exceeding love both to his father and us,
and thus fulfilled the law for us. This point if some had well thought on, they
would not have placed all justification in remission of sins as they do.

Rule III. That, justification is from Gods mere mercy and grace, procured
only by the merit of Christ.

Rule IV. That, man is justified by faith alone: because faith is that alone
instrument created in the heart by the holy Ghost, whereby a sinner l^ieth hold
of Christ his righteousness, and applies the same unto himself. There is
neither hope, nor love, nor any other grace of God within man, that can do this
but faith alone.

The doctrine of the Roman Church touching the justification of a sinner is on
this manner.

I. They hold that before justification there goes a preparation thereunto:
which is an action wrought partly by the holy Ghost, and partly by the power of
natural free will, whereby a man disposes himself to his own future
justification.

In the preparation they consider the ground of justification, and things
proceeding from it. The ground is says, which they define to be a general
knowledge, whereby we understand and believe that the doctrine of the word of
God is true. Things proceeding from this faith, are these; a sight of our
sins, a fear of hell, hope of salvation, love of God, repentance and such
like: all which when men have attained, they are then fully disposed (as they
say) to their justification.

This preparation being made, then comes justification itself: which is an
action of God, whereby he makes a man righteous. It has two parts: the first,
and the second. The first is, when a sinner of an evil man is made a good man.
And to effect this, two things are required: first the pardon of sin, which
is one part of the first justification: secondly, the infusion of inward
righteousness whereby the heart is purged and sanctified: and this habit of
righteoutnes stands specially in hope and charity.

After the first justification, follows the second; which is, when a man of a
good or just man is made better and more just: and this say they, may proceed
from works of grace; because he which is righteous by the first justification,
can bring forth good works: by the merit whereof, he is able to make himself
more just and righteous: and yet they grant that the first justification
comes only of Gods mercy by the merit of Christ.

Perkins sets not down well the Catholics opinion, I will You should have
shevved
help him out, both with the preparation and justification it self, and that
taken out of the Council of Trent. Where the very words concerning preparation
are these. Men are prepared and disposed to this justice, wherein he failed.
Seff. 6. c. 6.
when being stirred up, and helped by Gods grace, they conceiving faith by
hearing, are freely moved to ward God, believing those things to be true,
which God does reveal and promise, namely, that he of his grace does justify
a sinner through the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus. And when knowledging
themselves to be sinners, through the fear of Gods judgments, they turn
themselves to consider the mercy of God, are lifted up into hope, trusting that
God will be merciful unto them for Christ's sake: and beginning to love him as
the fountain of all justice, are thereby moved with hatred and detestation of
all sins. Finally they determine to receive baptism, to begin a new life,
and to keep all Christ's commandments.

After this disposition, or preparation, follows Justification, and for that
every thing is best known by the causes of it, all the causes* of
Justification are delivered by the Council in the next Chapter, which briefly
are these. The final cause of the justification of a sinner, is the glory of
God, the glory of Christ, and maas own justification: the efficient is God,
the meritorious, Christ Jesus Passions, the isntrumental, is the Sacrament of
Baptism, the only formal cause, is inherent justice, that is, Faith, Hope,
and Charity, with the other gifts of the Holy Ghost, povvred into a man's
soul, at that instant of justification. Of the justification by faith, and the
second justification shall be spoken in their places.

So that we agree in this point, that justification comes of the free grace
of God, through his infinite mercies, and the merits of our Saviors Passion,
and that all sins, when a man is justified, be pardoned him.

Perkins has truly delivered the sum of that which you set down, out of the
Council of Trent; and that more plainly for every man's understanding, than it
is in the Council.

I. Our consent and difference.


The first maine difference is in the matter thereof, which shall be seen by
the answer both of Protestant and Papist to this one question: What is the
very thing, that causes a man to stand righteous before God, and to be
accepted to life everlasting: we answer, Nothing but the righteousness of
Christ, which consists partly in his sufferings, and partly in his active
obedience in fulfilling the rigor of the law. And here let us consider, how
near the Papists come to this answer, and wherein they dissent.

Consent I. They grant, that in justification sin is pardoned by the merits
of Christ, and that none can be justified without remission of sins: and that
is well.

II. They grant, that the righteousness whereby a man is made righteous before
God, comes from Christ, and from Christ alone.

III. The most learned among them say, that Christ his satisfaction, and the
merit of his death is imputed to every sinner that does heleeue, for Bellarm.
de Iustif. lib. 2. c. 7.
his satisfaction before God: and hitherto we agree.

The very point of difference is this; we hold that the satisfaction made by
Christ in his death, and obedience to the law, is imputed to us, and becomes
our righteousness. They say, it is our satisfaction, and not our righteousness,
whereby we stand righteous before God: because it is inherent in the person of
Christ as in a subject. Now the answer of the Papist to the former question is
on this manner; The thing (says he) that makes us righteous before God, and
causes us to be accepted to life everlasting, is remission of sins, and the
habit of inward righteousness, or charity with the fruits thereof. We
condesend and grant that the habit of righteousness, which we call
sanctification, is an excellent gift of God, and has his reward of God: and is
the matter of our justification before men; because it serves to declare us to
be reconciled to God, and to be justified: yet we deny it to be the thing,
which makes us of sinners to become righteous, or just before God.

The Catholics affirm, that those virtues povvred into our souls, (speaking
of the formal cause of justification) is our justice, and that through that, a
man is justified in Gods sight, and accepted to life everlasting. Although as
you have seen before, we hold that God of his mecre mercy through the merits
of Christ Jesus our Savior, has freetie be^lovved that justice on us.

Fulk against Martins discovery, chap. 8. Against the Rhem. Luc. 1. 6.
Doctor Fulke, against Gregory Martin, and the Rhemists. The true reason why
our translators chose rather to say, righteous, and righteousness, than just and
justice, was, because the former words are more general, the latter (for the
most part) restrained in common use to one particular virtue betwixt man and
man. We deny not that Christians being justified, are truly righteous by
inherent righteousness; but that we are to plead our own imperfect
righteousness before God, to our justification.

Perkins comes to short in his second rule, when he attributes the merits of
Christ's sufferings to obedience; whereas obedience if it had been without
charity, would have merited nothing at Gods hands.

Perkins comes as near the mark, as you: acknowledging the love of Christ in
his obedience, distinctly both to God and us. And indeed it were ridiculous to
imagine obedience without love, though the Phil. 2. 8.
Apostle mentions the one without the other.

us from uniting of our religions: for hereby the Church of Rome does race the
very foundation.

Perkins does say, that therein we raze the foundation, that is as he
interprets it in his preface, we make Christ a Pseudochrist, we auerre,
that herein we do much more magnify Christ, then they do, for they take
Christ's merits to be so mean, that they do Are they mean merits, that appease
Gods wrath, and procure e^^^lasting glory?
but even serve the turn to deface sin, and make men vvorthie of the joys
of heaven. Nay it does not serve the turn, but only that God does not impute
sin unto us. We contrariwise, do so highly esteem of our Saviors
inest^mable merits, that we hold them well able to purchase at Gods hands, a
far inferior justice, and such merits as mortal men are capable of, and to
them do give such force and value, that they make a man just before God, and
worthy of the Kingdom of heaven, as shall be proved.



Luther says, Where?
That the justified can by no sins whatsoever, (except he refuse to believe)
lose their salvation. Wherein, first they make their righteous man, Like (as
our Savior speaks) to sepulchers vvhited on the out side, with an imputed
justice, but within, full of iniquity, and disorder. Then the wisdom of God
must either not discover this mass of iniquity, or his goodness abide it, or
his justice either wipe it away, or punish it: But (say they) he sees it well
enough, but covers it with the mantle of Christ's righteousness. Why? can any
thing be hid from his sight? it is madness to think it.

Luther says, as the truth is, that he which believes shall be saved; and that
faith is not destroyed by any sin, but infidelity. A man justified (as I
have said often) is righteous by inherent righteousness, and therefore not like
a whited sepulcher. Our corruptions and sins God sees, and mislikes: but
having punished them in Christ, he lays them not to our charge.

He does, but not all at once.
loves and make it worthy of his love and kingdom. What? is it because Christ
has not deserved it? So to say, were to derogate from the infnite value of his
merits. Or is it, for that God cannot make such justice in a pure man, as may
be worthy of his love and his kingdom? And this were to deny Gods power in a
matter that can be done, as we confess that such virtue was in our first
Father Adam, in state of innocence. And M. Perkins seems to grant, That man
in this life at his last gasp, may have such righteousness. If then we had no
other reason for us, Page 77.
but that our justification does more exalt the power, and goodness of God,
more magnify the value of Christ's merits, and brigeth greater It exalts man's
pride above Gods mercy.
dignity unto men: our doctrine were much better to be liked, then our
adversaries, who cannot allege one express sentence, either out of holy
Scriptures, or ancient Fathers, teaching the imputation of Christ's
righteousness unto us, to be our justification, as shall be seen in the reasons
following, and do much abase both Christ's merits, and Gods power, wisdom, and
goodness.





Our reasons.
Reason I. That very thing which must be our righteousness before God, must
satisfy the justice of the law, which says, Do these things, and thou shall
line. Now there is nothing can satisfy the justice of the law, but the
righteousness or obedience of Christ for us. If any allege civil justice, it is
nothing: for Christ says, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

This answer is less vvorth. Gal 5. Gal. 5.
must satisfy the justice of the law, I demand what law he means? If Moses
law: of which those words, Do this and thou shall live, are spoken: Then I
answer with the Apostle. That you are euacuated, or abolished from Christ,
that are justified in the law. That is, he is a Jew and no Chri stian, that
wuld have Christian Justice answerable to Moses law.

If M. Perkins would only that men justified, must be able to fulfill Christ's
law, I then grant, that they so be, by the help of Gods grace, which will
never fail them, before they fail of their duties.

Gal. 5. 3.
Apostle speaks of joining the law with Christ to justification, not of making
Christian justice answerable to Moses law. But is there any likelihood, that
he which came to bring perfect righteousness, would destroy the law of
righteousness? Are you they that find fault with us, because we say it is
impossible for us to keep the Commandments so fully, as God requires? Does
Moses law contain any other, or greater righteousness, than the perfect love of
God, and of our neighbor? Is it not your common doctrine, that faith makes us
able to keep the law? Nay, do you not teach, that our Savior has propounded
greater perfection to his followers, than was required by the law of Moses?
Beside, is not the law the very law of nature? And can any man be righteous
that keeps not the law of nature? You must prove that God by Christ has
either abrogated the moral law, or dispensed with Christians for the breaches
of it; not by pardoning of them, as the Apostle teaches, but by freeing them
from obedience to it. If this be false, then whosoever will be justified by any
law, must fulfill Moses law, to which only the promise is made, Do this, and
thou shall live.

sanctification, whereby we are renewed to the image of God in righteousness and
true holiness? that also is imperfect and cannot satisfy Gods justice
required in the law: as Isai has said of himself and the people, All our
righteousness is as a menstruous cloth.

Perkins. That justice of man is imperfect, and cannot satisfy Isay 64.
the justice which God requires in his law, and proves it out of Esaias, who
says, All our righteousness is as a menstruous, or defiled cloth. I answer
that the holy Prophet speaks those words in the person of the wicked, and
therefore are madly applied unto the righteous. That he speaks of the wicked,
of that nation, and of that time: appears plainly by the text it self. For
he says before, But lo thou have been angry, for we have offended, and have
been ever in sin: and after; There is no man that calls upon thy name, and
stands up to take hold by thee. And although the words be general, and seem
to the unskillful to comprehend himself also, yet that is but the manner of
preachers, and specially of such as become Intercessors for others, who use to
speak in the persons of them, for whom they sue: for if he had reckoned
himself in that number, he had lied, when he said: There is none that call
upon thy A foul and unmannerly speech. Luther and Calvin on this place.
name, when as he immediately calls upon him in most vehement sort for mercy,
all which the best learned among them marking, confess that this sentence
cannot be alleged against the virtue of good works. Hence, gather how
dexterously M. Perkins handles holy Scripture. That which the Prophet spoke of
some evil men, of one place, and at one time: that he applies unto all good
men, for all times, and all places.



Luther and Calvin. in illum locum Esaiae 64. 6.
Luther and Calvin are of opinion, that the place does not properly belong to
the proof of this doctrine; but they deny not that the Prophet speaks of the
faithful and their works. Yea Calvin plainly affirms, that he does speak of
them: The faithful (says he) go forward in their complaint. And, The
faithful must confess their guiltines. So does Caietan ad 2. Cor. 3. 21.
Caietan understand the place, alluding to it, Christ merit is called our
righteousness, because it is true righteousness, before Gods judgment seat: to
make a difference betwixt it and our righteousness, which (at Gods judgment
seat) is as the cloutes of a menstruous woman. De verb. Esaiae ser. 5.
Our humble righteousness, if it be any, is true perhaps (says Bernard) but not
pure; unless perchance we think our selves better than our fathers, who no
less truly than humbly said: All our righteousness is as the cloutes etc.
Therefore Bernard and Caietan expound this place of the righteousness of
justified men, as Master Perkins does.

Paul in his own person says thus, I am privy to nothing by my self, yet am
I not justified thereby, 2. Cor. 4. 4. Therefore nothing can procure unto us an
absolution and acceptance to life everlasting, but Christ's imputed
righteousness.

Paul, that a clear conscience (which is a great part of inherent justice,)
can nothing 1. Cor. 4.
help to our justification. I am privy to nothing by my self, and yet J am
not justified thereby. Here is a very pretty piece of cousinage. What, does the
Apostle say that he was not justified by his clear conscience? nothing less:
but that alb^it, he saw nothing in himself to hinder his justification yet God
who has sharper eyesight, might epsy some iniquity in him, and therefore
durst not the Apostle affirm himself to be justified, as if he should say, if
there be no other fault in me in Gods (...), then I can find by mine own
insight, I am justified, because I am (...) of nothing, and so the place
proves rather the uncertain knowledge of our justification, as I have before
showed.

Perkins) confesses, even then when he was not p^^uie to himself of any
gross breach thereof. This is Master Perkins reason: to which you answer
nothing, but frame another argument to your self out of the Apostles speech.



Perkins adds, that we must remember, that we shall come to judgment, where
rigor of justice shall be showed. We know it well, but when there is no
condemnation to those that by Baptism be purged from original sin, as he
confesses himself, the Apostle to teach in Page 28.
our consents, about original sin, what then needs any justified man
greatly fear, the rigorous sentence of a just Judge? And Saint Paul says
himself in the person of the just: That he had ran a good race, etc. and
therefore, there was a crown of justice laid up for him, by that just Judge,
and not only to him, but all them that love ^Crists coming.

Paul does not: but being justified by faith in Christ, looks for a reward of
his holy labors, according to the promise of God.

Sermon. 18. de verb. Apost.
the law; And what Iaw, hear this one sentence of S. Augustine.

He that believes in him, he has not that justice, which is of the law,
albeit the law be good, but he shall fulfill the law, not by justice which
he has of himself, but which is given of God, for charity is the fulfilling
of the law, and from him is this charity povvred into our barts, not
certainly by our selves, but by the holy Ghost which is given us.

Aug. de verbis Apost. ser. 15.
no man's authority to prove, that he which is justified has inherent
righteousness. For the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 1. 30. and 6. 11.
Christ is made sanctification to us, and that by him we are sanctified:
neither do we deny, that this inherent righteousness is such, as might enable
us to keep the law, and shall, when it is perfect: but to keep the law, is
not only to have charity, or righteousness, but to use it as the law commands.
Righteousness (says Aug. ser de temp. ^er. 5^.
Austin) is nothing else but not to sin: not to sin, is to keep the
commandments of the law: that is (as himself presently expounds it) to do
none of those things that are forbidden, and to do all those things that are
commanded. But the chief point is, what law he means: out of doubt the law of
Moses, which is always meant, when it is put alone without any addition or
explication, as it is here. What law understands he, when he says, that
justice which is of the law? Of the same he says, he shall fulfill Legem ipsam.
the law it self: besides, what Romans 13.
law does charity fulfill? questionless the law of Moses: the sum whereof
is the love of God and man.

Reason II. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He which knew no sin was made sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God which is in him. Whence I reason thus.
As Christ was made sin for us, so are we made the righteousness of God in him:
but Christ was made sin, or, a sinner by imputation of our sins, he being in
himself most holy: therefore a sinner is made righteous before God, in that
Christ's righteousness is imputed and applied unto him. Now if any shall say,
that man is justified by righteousness infused: then by like reason, I say
Christ was made sin for us by infusion of sin, which to say is blasphemy.

Perkins vain gloss, without any liklyhood in the text. The other proposition
is also false, for Christ was not made sin by imputation, for sin in that
place is taken figuratively, and signifies according to the exposition Why
do you not bring a better vvarrant from the Hebrew phrases
of ancient Fathers, An host or sacrifice for sin: Which Christ was truly
made: his body being sacrificed on the Cross for the discharge of sin, and
not by imputation.

Aug. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap 41.
Austin: He therefore was made sin, that we might be made righteousness; not
ours, but Gods; not in us, but in him; as he Demonstrauit.
made show of sin, not of his own, but of ours; not Constitutum.
resting in him, but in us.

Lombard. Thomas, Caietan. Catharin Gloss. Interlin.
your own writers show: He made him to be counted a sinner, says Thomas; and
Catharin more fully, In illo posuit peccata nostrum omnium.
He laid upon him the sins of us all, and especially that original sin,
out of which, as out of a root, the other spring.

And the exposition of this place by S. Hierome is not to be despised. Christ
(says he) being offered for our sins, took the name of sin that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him, Not ours nor in us. If this
righteousness of God be neither ours nor in us, then it can be no inherent
righteousness, but must needs be righteousness imputed. And Chrysostom. on this
place says, It is called Gods righteousness, because it is not of works, and
because it must be without all stain or want: and that cannot be inherent
righteousness. Anselme says, He is made sin as we are made justice: not
ours, but Gods: not in us, but in him: as he is made sin, not his own, but
ours: not in himself, but in us.

Justice of God, are to be understood, see Saint Augustine. One place I will
cite for all. The justice of God (says Tract. 26. in Johan. Item Epist. 120.
ad honorat. cap. 30. Item in Psalm. 30. Con^. 1. de spirit. and lib. c. 9.
he) through the says of Christ Jesus, that is by faith wherewith we believe
in Christ: for as that faith is called Christ's, not by which Christ believes,
so that Justice is called Gods, not whereby God is just: both of them, faith
and justice, be ours, but therefore they are termed Gods, and Christ's, because
through their liberality they are given to us. Which interpretation may be
confirmed out of that place of S. Chrysostom, which M. Perkins cites, saying:
It is called Gods Justice, because it is not of works, but of his free gift. So
that it is, not that which is in God himself, but such as he bestows upon
us. And that justice of it self is pure, and wants no virtue to work that,
for which it is given, to wit, to make a man righteous. S. Anselme a A poor
shift. What say you to Jerome?
right virtuous and learned Catholic Archbishop of ours shall be answered,
when the place is quoted.

the forgiveness of sins, especially upon your interpretation. For what is it
that Christ Romans 3. 25. 26
procures by his sacrifice but pardon, the wrath of God being appeased? It is
indeed called the righteousness of God, because it is given us by God, and
chiefly because it is appointed and approved of God. They that make it
inherent in us (as it cannot be proved by this place that S. Austin does)
stretch it further than the Apostle uses to do, and make it comprehend
sanctification also. It is but a shift to put off Anselm. ad 2. Cor. 5. 21.
A^s^lme, whom you cannot answer: it had been casie for you to conceive, that
he means his Commentary upon that place. But how chance Hierome is past over
too? we must have some other excuse, for the place is quoted.

Reason III. Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so
by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: mark here is a
comparison between the first and second Adam. And hence I reason thus. As by
the disobedience of the first Adam men were made sinners: so by the obedience
of the second Adam, are we made righteous. Now we are not only made sinners by
propagation of natural corruption, but by imputation. For Adams first sin
was the eating of the forbidden fruit: which very act is no personal
offense, but is imputed to all his posterity, in whom we have all sinned. The
I^^n. l^br. 5. cap. ^7. Ch^ (...). ad Neop^.
Fathers call this very sin Adams handwriting, making us debtors unto God.
And therefore in like manner the obedience of Christ is made the righteousness
of every believer, not by infusion but by imputation.

Adams fault. And say that every one descended of Adam by natural propagation,
has his own pe^^onal iniquity stieking in them, which is commonly called
O^^ginal sin, and an high point of Pelagiamsme is it, to deny it. For albeit
we did not (...) of the forbidden fruit in proper person, yet receive we the
nature of man, polluted with that infection really, and not by imputation. And
so the comparison serves not at all M. Perkins turn, but bears very strongly
against him, it being thus framed: As by Adams disobedience many were made
sinners, even so by Christ's obedience many shall be justified: This is his
Mayor. Now to the Minor. But by Adams disobedience they were made sinners, by
drawing from him, every one his own proper inherent iniquity, First, by
having his sin imputed to them. See how they are saine to disgrace
arguments, that can not answer them.
in like manner we are justified by Christ, not by imputation of his justice,
but by our inherent justice, which is povvred into our souls, when (...)*
are in Baptism borne a new in him. See what penury of poor arguments they
have, that to make some show of store are forced to propound such as make
manifestly against them.

viz. that that sin of Adams makes us debtors to God; whereof we are all
guilty, as having committed it in his loins. All men (says Aug. contra
Julian. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Austin) are understood to have sinned in the first man, because all men were
in him when he sinned: yea more then that, he says, All men committed that sin
in him, because all were that one man. As Leui (says Dominic. Soto ad Romans
cap. 5.
Domingo a soto) many years before he was borne paid tithes in Abraham; in
like sort we sinned in the loins of Adam. We deny not that we receive from
Adam inherent unrighteousness by propagation; but affirm, that Adams sin is
imputed to us to our just condemnation.

Reason IV. A satisfaction made for the want of that justice or obedience which
the law requires at our hands, is accepted of God as the justice it self. But
Christ obedience is a satisfaction made for the want of that justice or
obedience which the law requires, as the Papists themselves avouch. Therefore
this satisfaction is our justice. And me thinks, the Papists upon this
consideration have little cause to dissent from us. For if they make Christ's
obedience their satisfaction, why should they not fully close hands with us,
and make it their justice also?

Mayor he cites Bellarmine. I have read the Chapter, and find Lib. 2. de
Iusti^. cap. 7.
no such words: further I say, there is a great difference between
satisfaction for mortal sins, and justification: for satisfaction cannot be
done by us; for the guilt of mortal sin is infinite, being against an
infinite Majesty, and so no creature can make full satisfaction for it:
wherefore the infinite valor of Christ's satisfaction is necessarily required,
who having taken away the guilt of eternal punishment, due to sinners, leaves
us his grace to satisfy for the temporal pain of it, as shall be in his And
answered as largely as shall be needful.
due place, declared more at large.

Adam in the state of Innocence, and of all the blessed souls in heaven who be
just in Gods sight. Neither is it necessary to be infinite, for to be worthy of
the joys of heaven, which be not infinite as they are The joys of heaven are
as infinite as the pains of hell.
enjoyed of Men or Angels, either who have all things there in number, weight,
and measure.

Master Perkins argument is wholly omitted by you; and a consectarie, which he
draws from it, propounded in stead of it. The argument is this: A satisfaction
made for the want of that justice or obedience which the law requires at our
hands, is accepted of God as justice it self. But Christ's obedience is a
satisfaction, made for the want of that justice, or obedience, which the law
requires. Therefore Christ's obedience is accepted of God, as the justice it
self.


Upon this he concludes yet further. If the Papists make Christ's obedience
their satisfaction, why should they not make it their justice? The reason of
the proposition is, because God accepts such satisfaction for justice. But they
make Christ's obedience their satisfaction. Therefore why should they not make
it their justice?


Your answer must be applied to the consequence of the proposition; the proof
whereof, as I have showed, is fetched from the former syllogism; to which you
answer nothing at all.

But let us take it as it is; and it is thus much in effect, that you have
need of Christ's satisfaction, but no need of his justice. So then belike you
will not accept of his righteousness as yours, because you are loath to be any
more beholding to him than needs you must. That you need it not, you prove,
because a mere man is capable of sufficient lighteousnes to justification. But
that will not serve the turn, unless also he have as much as he is capable
of: to which estate no man attaines in this life, by your confession, who admit
an increase of justice every day.



Adams sin is mads ours by imputation? But God (you say) whose judgment is
according to truth, will not repute a man just, who is full of iniquity.
Indeed God cannot be deceived, to hold a man not to be wicked that is wicked:
but God can justify, that is, forgive and acquit him, though he know him to
be wicked; and can take him for righteous in Christ, of whom he is a member,
though in himself he be not righteous. So may the man, that will not take a
black Moore for white, accept of him, as if he were white, without any error.

Reason V. The consent of the ancient Church. Bernard says, epist. 190. The
justice of an other is assigned unto man: who wanted his own, man was indepted
and man made payment. The satisfaction of one is imputed to all. And why may
not justice be from an other as well as guiltiness is from another. And in
Cant. sermon. 25. It suffices me, for all righteousness to have him alone
merciful to me, against whom I have sinned. And, Not to sin is Gods justice,
man's justice is the mercifullnesse of God. And sermon. 61. Shall I sing mine own
righteousness, Lord I will remember thy righteousness alone: for it is mine
also: in that even thou art made unto me righteousness of God. What, shall I
fear least that one be not sufficient for us both? it is a short cloak that
cannot cover two: it will cover both thee and me largely, being both a large
and eternal justice.

Perkins last reason, is taken from the consent of the ancient Which shows
Austins judgment.
Church, And yet cites (saving one two lines) nothing out of any ancient
writer, not out of any other, but out of only S. Bernard, who lived 1000.
years after Christ, so that he signifies that there is little relief to be
had in Antiquity.

This (says In concio. de humilitate.
Basil) is perfect and sound rejoicing in God, when a man does not brag, no
not of his righteousness, but knows himself unworthy of true righteousness,
and that he is justified only by faith in Christ. And in Basil. in Psalm. 114.
another place: Everlasting rest remains for them, which in this life have
striuen lawfully, not for the desert of their works, but by the favor of the
most bountiful God, in whom they have hoped. Charity (says Aug. epist. 2^ ad
Hietonym.
Austin) in some is greater, in some less, in other none at all: but so great
charity, as cannot be increased, is in no man so long as he lives here. Now,
so long as it may be increased, surely that which is less than it should be,
is faulty. By reason of which fault, there is not a righteous man upon earth,
that does good, and sins not: by reason of which fault, no man living shall
be justified in the sight of God: because of this fault, if we say we have no
sin, the truth is not in us: and for this also how much soever we have done,
it is necessary for us to say, Forgive us our debts; though all our words,
deeds and thoughts were forgiven in baptism. I will not boast (says De
Jacob. and vita beata ca. 6
Ambrose) because I am righteous, but because I am redeemed: I will boast, not
because I am void of sins, but because my sins are forgiven me.

Calvin declares more plainly, for he commonly setting light ^ib. 3. insti^.
ca. 11. number. 15
by all other in this question, rejects also S. Augustine saying. Yea not the
sentence of Augustine himself is to be received in this matter, who
attributes our samctification to grace, wherewith we are regenerate in newnes
of life by the spirit. And Kemnitius in the first part of his examination of
the Council of ^rent, says: We contend not how the Fathers take
justification: and a little after. I am not ignorant that they spoke otherwise
then we do of it. Therefore M. Perkins had reason to content himself with
some few broken sentences of later vvriters.

Calvin does not commonly reject the Fathers in this point; but both he and
Chemnitius allege diverse things out of them, in this question of
justification. For Chemnit. de iustif. tit. I estimonia.
Chemnitius look in the place you have named, in his disputation of
justification. Calu. Instit. lib. 3. c. 11.. 15
Caluins words will clear him sufficiently, if they be truly reported. Yea not
the sentence of Austin himself, or at the least not his manner of speech, is
Per omnia.
in all sorts to be received. For although he notably spoil man of all
commendation of righteousness, and pass over all to Gods grace, yet he referres
grace to sanctification, whereby we are regenerate into newnes of life, through
the spirit. Indeed it is usual with Austin, and the Latin Fathers, to speak
of Iustificare, (...) facere.
justification, as the word seemed to lead them; and so to comprise under it
sanctification also. In which respect Calvin, and Chemnitius say, they are the
less to be received. But as for justification, they spoke ordinarily, as you
heard before, when they speak properly, acknowledging even the charity of men
regenerate (as I showed out of Aug. epist. 29 ^d Hieron.
Austin) by which the law is fulfilled, to be imperfect, and unable to justify
us in the sight of God.

Bernard trow you in this one point a Protestant? Nothing Ep^s^. 190.
less, his words be these. The justice of another is assigned unto man, who
wanted his own: man was indebted, and man made payment, etc. But let his own
reason there cited, serve for exposition of his former words, which is this.
For why may not justice be from another, as well as guiltines is from another?
Now guiltines from Adam is not by imputation, but every one contracts his own,
by taking flesh from him, even so justice (...) The (...) is double.
from Christ powered into every man, that is borne again of water and the holy
Ghost. In the second place he says: That man's justice is the mercifulnes of
God: that is, by Gods free grace and mercy it is bestovved upon us.

Bern. ^pi. 19^
first place of Bernard was refuted before, when I proved that Adams sin was
made ours by imputation.

How will that agree with the former part of the sentence; Bernard. in Cant.
ser. 25.
The justice of God is not to sin, but the justice of man is bestowed by Gods
free mercy? There is a poor difference betwixt these two, when as God may
bestow such righteousness upon a man, that he shall be free from sinning. But
thus stands the opposition; not to sin, is Gods righteousness; not to have
sin imputed, through Gods mercy, is man's righteousness.

Bernard in the third place, we acknowledge that we have no justice of our
own, that is from our selves, but from the goodness of God, through the
merits of our blessed Saviors Passion: read his first sermon, upon these words
of the Prophet Jsaie. Vid^ Dominum, etc. There you shall see him speak
plainly of inherent justice, and how it Ser. 1. super Esaiam.
is a distinct thing from the justice of Christ.

Bernard. in Cantic. ser. 61.
Thou art made unto me righteousness of God: he speaks of such a righteousness,
as is both his and Christ's; Shall I fear (says he) least that one be not
sufficient for us both? It is not a short cloak that cannot cover, it will
cover both thee and me largely, being both a large and eternal justice. In
Bernard. ser. 1 super Esai.
the place, by you quoted, he speaks not a word of any righteousness: but in
Ser. 5. super Esai.
the fifth sermon upon that text, he compares the righteousness of men and
Angels with Gods; not inherent with imputed. But what if he speak of inherent
righteousness, as he does in many places? do we deny it? or is there, because
of that, none imputed? or is that inherent righteousness sufficient to justify
us in Gods sight? Let Bernard. ser. 5. de verb. Esaiae.
Bernard speak for himself: Our humble righteousness, if there be any, is
Recte forsit (...).
true (perhaps) but not pure; unless perchance (says Bernard upon that very
place of Esaias) we think our selves better than our fathers, who said, no less
truly than humbly, All our righteousness is as the cloutes of a menstruous
woman. For how can there be pure righteousness, whereas yet there cannot be
fault wanting? It is no marvel then if you now make light of Bernard, whom
otherwise you magnify. His testimony must needs be accounted of, that is so
plain for us, and against you; whereas he was a member of your own Church,
and erred with you in many points of Antichristianisme.

August. on Psalm. 22. He prays for our faults, and has made our fault: his
faults, that he might make his justice our justice.

Augustine. In Psalm. 22. Tract. 27. in Joan.
Christ made his justice our justice. That is, by his justice, he has merited
justice for us, as he expounds himself. What is this, the justice of God,
and the justice of man? The justice of God is here called that, not whereby God
is just, but that which God gives to man, that man may be just through God.

Christ (says August. in Psalm. 22.
Austin) made his justice our justice: that is (say you) by his justice he has
merited justice for us. He has made his ours: that is, he has by his
purchased other for us. Who can bear such an exposition? Sure the words will
not, nor the sense. For how shall we expound the former part of the sentence,
which you craftily leave out? He has made our sins his sins. Have our
sins merited sin for him? If this be absurd, as it is, how shall your
interpretation be auowed, the latter part depending upon the former? As for the
exposition you bring out of Aug. tract. 27. in Ioh.
another place; where the justice of God is said to be that which God gives
man; this proves that, which before I delivered, that the Fathers sometimes
make justification to comprehend sanctification too: but where they speak
properly of justification, there they teach as we do.

Objections of Papists.
God, are these. Object. I. It is absurd, that one man should be made
righteous by the righteousness of an other: for it is as much as if one man
were made wise by the wisdom of another. Answ. It is true, that no man can
be made righteous by the personal righteousness of another, because it
pertaines only to one man. And because the wisdom that is in one man, is his
altogether wholly, it cannot be the wisdom of another: no more then the health
and life of one body, can be the health of (...). But it is otherwise with
the righteousness of (...): it is his indeed because it is inherent in him,
as in a subject: it is not his alone, but his and ours together by the tenor
of the Covenant of grace. Christ as he is a Mediator is given to every
believer as really and truly, as land is given from man to man: and with him
are given all things that concern salvation: they being made ours by Gods free
gift: among which, is Christ his righteousness. By it therefore as being a
thing of our own, we may be justified before God, and accepted to life
everlasting.

This formalitie is a bare word.
the wisdom of another.

to us, as members of his mystical body: we do not offer them to God, but
entreat him for his Sons sake (who was so and so qualified, and did such and
such things; and, above all, who is so beloved) to be merciful unto us, and to
accept us for his children. As for any formal wisdom, or justice, which
should make any real change in us, we look not for it in justification, but
in sanctification; and that is not Christ's, but ours personally.

Object. II. If a sinner be justified by Christ his righteousness, then every
believer shall be as righteous as Christ: and that can not be. Ans. The
proposition is false: for Christ his righteousness is not applied to us
according as it is in Christ: neither according to the same measure, nor the
same manner. For his obedience in fulfilling the law, is above Adams
righteousness, yea above the righteousness of all Angels. For they were all
but creatures, and their obedience the obedience of creatures: but Christ his
obedience is the obedience or righteousness of God: so termed, Romans 1. 17.
18. 2. Cor. 5. 21. not only because God accepted of it, but because it was in
that person which is very God. When Christ obeyed, God obeyed: and when he
suffered, God suffered: not because the Godhead suffered or performed any
obedience, but because the person which according to one nature is God,
performed obedience and suffered. And by this means his righteousness is of
infinite value, price, merit and efficacy. Hence also it comes to pass, that
this obedience of Christ serves not only for the justifying of some one person
( Namely for himself.
as Adams did) but of all and every one of the elect: yea it is sufficient to
justify many thousand worlds. Now to come to the point, this righteousness
ousnesse that is in Christ, in this largenes and measure; is pertaining to us
in a more narrow skantling: because it is only received by faith As any one
s^ar pa takes in the whole light of the (...) with (...) of the (...) ^^r
sorth as (...) said light (...) it to sin.
so farforth, as it serves to justify any particular believer. But they urge
the reason further, saying; If Christ his righteousness be the righteousness of
every believer, then every man should be a Savior: which is absurd. Answ. I
answer as before, and yet more plainly thus: Christ his righteousness is
imputed to the person of this, or that man, not as it is the price of
redemption for all mankind, but as it is the price of redemption for one
particular man: as for example, Christ his righteousness is imputed to Peter,
not as it is the price of redemption for all, but as it is the price of
redemption for Peter. And therefore Christ his righteousness, is not applied
to any one sinner in that largeness and measure, in which it is in the person
of Christ: but only so sarreforth as it serves to satisfy the law for the
said sinner, and to make his person accepted of God as righteous, and no
further.

There is none at all po^^red in, but impu^ed.
that man, as in his own example, The light of every star is received from
the Sun beams. Yet is not the light in the star, the same which is in the
Sun, for one accident cannot be in two subjects so far distant, neither is it
of like virtue to lighten the skies, as it is evident: but is a far d^mmer
light, somewhat like unto that of the Sun from whence it came. Even so in our
justification from the Son of justice Christ Jesus, certain beams of
particular justice are conveyed into this, or that man's soul, whereby it is
both lightened by faith, and inflamed by charity: but there is exceeding
difference between their two justices, more then there is between the light
of the Sun, and the light of a star; which S. Augustine in express terms
delivers, saying. How much difference there Lib. 12. cont. cap. ^5.
is betvveene the light that does lighten, and that which is sightened, that
is the sun and the star light, so much difference is there betvveene the
justice that does justify, and that justice which is made by that
justification: to wit, betvveene the justice of Christ, and that which is in
eue^ good Christian.



You wholly mistake the matter. For Master Perkins does not mean, that there is
any part of Christ's righteousness inherently made ours, as the light of the
star, received from the Sun, remains in it; but brings that similitude
only to show, that the whole is applied to every one that is justified, in his
several proportion. As for inherent righteousness, that is rather an effect,
than an application of Christ's righteousness. It may be also Master Perkins was
of opinion, that the stars (as the Moon) have no light in themselves, but
only reflect the light of the Sun shining on them; and then it is true, that
the light which comes from them is the very light of the Sun, varied
according to the nature and position of each several star. Austin speaks of
justification and justice, as they are largely taken, for sanctification also:
neither does he compare Christ's righteousness (as he is man) with ours, but
shows how infinitely Gods wisdom and justice exceed man's; as he does Aug.
epist. 85 ad Consenti^^.
elsewhere, by the same similitude.

Object. III. If we be made righteous by Christ his righteousness truly, then
Christ is a sinner truly by our sins: but Christ is not indeed a sinner by
our sins. Answ. We may with reverence to his majesty in good manner say,
that Christ was a sinner, and that truly: not by any infusion of sin into
his most holy person, but because our sins were laid upon him.

Per^ answer is, that we may say Christ was a sinner truly, not because he
had sin in him, but because our sins were laid on his shoulders. That
reason is naught, for he is not truly a sinner, that paies the debt of sin,
which What is it to str^ke by imputation?
an innocent and most just person may perform: but he that either has sin
truly in him, or is so by imputation stricken, that the sins are made his own
really, and he in all cases to be dealt vvithall, as if he sinned himself: as
they hold that one justified by imputation of Christ's justice, is really in
Gods sight just, and is both loved in this life, and shall be revvarded in the
next, as if he were truly just indeed: But to avouch our Savior Christ to be
so a sinner, is to say that he was auerted from God, the slave of the devil,
and son of perdition, which is plain b^a^^hemie.

12. Art. part. 1. Art. 4.
It is no blasphemy at all to auow, that our Savior Christ, having taken our
sins upon him, was, in that respect, to God for us, as every one of us is, in
himself, to God. Does not the Gal. 3. 14.
Apostle say, that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, becoming
a curse for us?

was made sin for us, and he was counted with sinners, Isa. 53. 13. yet so,
as even then in himself he was without blot, yea more holy then all men and
Angels. On this manner said Chrysostom 2. Cor. 3. God permitted Christ to be
condemned as a sinner. Again, He made the just one to be a sinner, that he
might make sinners just.

He was counted ^vith sinners, is Isay 53.
expounded by the ^uang^lists, that he was so taken indeed, but by a wicked
Judge, and a reprohate people. And theefore if you allow of their sentence,
range yourselfe with them, asoneof their number. S. (...) by him produced,
confirms the same, saying that God permitted him to be condemned as a sinner
not that he was one truly Ch^ I know is called sin by S. (...), but by a
figure, ^ng that he as a sacrifice for sin, as has been before declared. The
same blessed Apostle when he speaks properly, affirms in plain terms,
that Christ was tempted like unto us, in all things excepting sin. Heb. 4.


Leuit. 16. 21.
sins of the people were, in a type, laid on the escape goat.

Object. IV. If a man be made righteous by imputation, then God judges sinners
to be righteous: but God judges no sinner to be righteous, for it is
abomination to the Lord. Answ. When God justifies a sinner by Christ his
righteousness, at the same time, he cease in regard of guiltiness to be a
sinner: and to whom God imputes righteousness, them he sanctifies at the
very same instant by his holy Spirit: giving also unto original corruption his
deadly wound.

If a man be righteous only by imputation, he may together be full of
iniquity, vvhereupon it must needs follovv, that God does take for just and
good, him that is both unjust and wicked: but that is absurd, when Gods
judgment is according to truth. Here M. Perkins yields, That when God does
impute Christ's justice unto any man, he does together sanctify the party,
giving original sin a deadly vvound. And yet else where he said, Of
original sin page 31.
That original sin, which remained after justification in the party, did
bear such sway, that it infected all the works of the said party, and made
him miserable, etc. But it is good hearing of amendment, if he will abide in it.

Perkins objection and answer, are almost in as few words as you make the
objection. Is this to pare off superfluity? Here is nothing altered, that
before was delivered: original sin remains the same it was, and so defiles
our actions still, but it has not the same strength.

Object. V. That which Adam never lost, was never given by Christ: but he never
lost imputed righteousness: therefore it was never given unto him. Ans. The
proposition is not true: for saving faith, that was never lost by Adam, is
given to us in Christ: and Adam never had this privilege, that after the first
grace should follow the We have and posse and velle, he had no more but posse
(...) vellet, and ^^e vvanted velle quod posset. August. de corrept. and great.
cap. 11.
second: and thereupon being left to himself, he fell from God: and yet this
mercy is vouchsafed to all believers, that after their first conversion God
will still confirm them with new grace: and by this means, they persevere unto
the end. And whereas they say, that Adam had not imputed righteousness: I
answer, that he had the same for substance though not for the manner of
applying by imputation.

Perkins, but may be rightly framed thus. Christ restored us that justice
which we lost by Adams fall, but by him we lost inherent justice, ergo By
Christ we are restored to inherent justice. The Mayor is gathered out of S.
Paul, who affirms, that we receive Romans 5. Lib. 3. c. 20. lib 6. de Genesis 24.
26. 26.
more by Christ, then we lost by Adam: And is Saint Jreneus, and Saint
Augustines most express doctrine, who say, How are we said to be renewed,
if we receive not again which the first man lost, etc? Jmmortality of body
we receive not, but we receive justice from the which he sell through sin.

Perkins conclusion was to the purpose, though one of the propositions (as he
has proved, and you grant by not answering) was false. But the reason as you
frame it is nothing at all against us: for we deny not that we receive
inherent justice by Christ, but that to be justified is to be righteous in
Gods fight by inherent righteousness.

Object. VI. Justification is eternal: but the imputation of Christ his
righteousness is not eternal, for it cease in the end of this life:
therefore it is not that which justifies a sinner. Answ. The imputation of
Christ's righteousness is everlasting: for he that is esteemed righteous in
this life by Christ his righteousness, is accepted as righteous for ever; and
the remission of sins granted in this life, is for ever continued. And though
sanctification be perfect in the world to come, yet shall it not justify: for
we must conceive it no otherwise after this life, but as a fruit springing
from the imputed righteousness of Christ, without which it could not be. And a
good child will not cast away the first garment, because his father gives a
second. And what if inward righteousness be perfect in the end of this life,
shall we therefore make it the matter of our justification? God forbid. For the
righteousness whereby sinners are justified, must be had in the time of this
life, before the panges of death.

The justice of the faithful is eternal, ^uieth after this life, and is ^ned
in bea^en, but Christ's imputed justice cease in the end of this life. eigo.

M. Perkins answers. First, that imputed righteousness continues with us for
ever, and that in heaven, we all have no other. Secondly, that perhaps in the
end of this life, in ward righteousness shall be perfect, and then without
perhaps it shall be most perfect in heaven. So that one part of this answer,
overthrows the other. Wherefore I need not stand upon it, but will pro^eed to
fortify our party, with some authorities, taken both forth of the holy
Scriptures, and ancient Fathers.

Perkins denies the assumption; which you leave so overthrown, and run to
fortify your own party. Secondly, he gives the reason of his denial, That
acceptance of us, as righteous, and forgiveness of sins shall be continued in
heaven. Thirdly, he says not that we shall have no other righteousness in
heaven, but the quite contrary, viz. sanctification, which is inherent
righteousness, here imperfect. Fourthly, he puts it not to perhaps, but
resolutly affirms, that sanctification shall be perfect in the end of this
life. Fifthly, there is not in his speech so much as a show of any
contradiction; which arises wholly from that clause foysted in by you; we shall
have no other. Lastly, as any man may discern, you change Master Perkins
conclusion, and so his whole reason.

Paul, And these things 1. Cor. 6.
certes, were you, (Dronkers, Covetous, Fornicators. etc.) But you are
VVashed, you are Sanctified, you are Justified in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ and in the spirit of our Lord: Here justification by the best
interpreters S. Ch^ysost. Ambro. and Theophyl. (...) hunclo^um.
judgment is defined, to consist in those actions of washing us from our sins,
and of infusion of Gods holy gifts by the holy Ghost in the name, and the sake
of Christ Jesus.

Bellarm de Iustif. lib. 2. c. 3.
Bellarmine, out of whom you take this, has deceived you. Chrysost^ad. 1. Cor.
6. 11.
Chrysostom does not make justification consist in those actions of washing,
etc. his words are these: God has washed us; and not that only, but has
sanctified us; neither that only, but has justified us. Now if washing and
sanctifying be justifying, in Chrysostoms judgment, how does he rise from one
to another, as diverse things? Theophy^* ibid.
Theophylact makes them diverse, at least in nature: God has cleansed you from
them (says Theophylact) yea and sanctified you. How? By justifying you, faith
he, for he has washed you: then afterward, justifying he has sanctified you.
Theodor. ibid.
Theodoret expounds the place of forgiveness of sins in baptism. Your Glossa
ordin. ibid.
ordinary gloss applies washing to baptism; sanctifying to the holy Ghost
given us, that we may work well; and justifying, to our working well. Ambros.
ibid.
Ambrose says, that in baptism he that believes is washed, is justified in
the name of the Lord, and is adopted a son to God, by the spirit of our God.
But never a one of these says, that justification consists in these actions of
washing, and infusion of Gods gifts.

Paul. Of his mercy he Tit. 3.
has saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost,
whom he has povvred into us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior,
that being justified by his grace, we may be heirs in hope (and not in
certainety of faith) of life everlasting. Where the Apostle inferring that This
is your gloss.
being justified by his grace, declares that in the words before he had
described the same justification, to consist in our new birth of Baptism, and
the ^enewing of oursoules, by the infusion of his heavenly gifts, which God
of his mercy did bestow upon us for his Son Chrsts sake.

This is but your gloss. For the grace of God, in that place, signifies the
favor of God: as Rom 3. 24. 1. Cor. 15. 10. Heb. 2. 9.
otherwhere the same phrase does; or the love of Christ: who (as Lyra ad Tit 3.
Lyra there says) makes us the adopted sons of God. aietan. ibi.
Caietan makes an opposition betwixt Gods grace and our works, as the Romans 11.
6.
Apostle does: If it be of grace, it is no more of works. So does Chrysostom.
and Theoph. ad Tit. 3.
Chrysostom and Theophylact understand it, of favor, not of debt: For if he
saved us Per grariam.
by favor, When we were desperate and cast away; much more (says Theophylact)
shall he give us those good things to come, now we are justified, as the Romans
5. 10.
Apostle says; If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

D. B. P. You threaten kindness on your adversaries. De peccat. merit. and
remiss. cap. 15. Epist 85. Lib. 12. de Trinit. cap. 7. Lib. 6. de Trin.
cite few Fathers, because the best learned of our adversaries do confess that
they be all against them, as I have showed before.

First, S. Augustine says, That this justice of ours, (which they call
righteousness) is the grace of Christ, regenerating us by the holy Ghost; And is
a beauty of our inward man. It is the renewing of the reasonable part of our
soul. And twenty other such like, whereby he manifestly declares, our justice
to be inherent, and not the imputed justice of Christ. Let him suffice for the
Latin Fathers. And S. Cyrill for the Greeks, who of our justification writes
thus. The spirit is a heat, who as soon as he has povvred charity into us,
and has with the fire of it, inflamed our minds, we have even then obtained
justice.

In the Aug de pecca^. merry. and rem^ss. cap. 15
first place alleged by you, there is no such matter: only Austin proves
against the Pelagians, that we are not sinners from Adam, by imitation alone;
because then we should also be righteous from Christ by nothing but imitation.

In the Aug. epist. 85. ad Comentiu.
Epistle to Consentius he speaks not of that righteousness, whereby we are
justified, but of that which is inherent. What other thing (says he) is
justice in us, or any other virtue, by which we live orderly, and wisely, than
the beauty of the inward man? This is true of those graces we receive by
sanctification.

August. de Trinit. lib. 12. cap. 7.
He does not say, that the grace by which we are justified is the renewing of
the reasonable part of our soul, but that the renewing of Gods image in us, is
the renewing of that part. Now this is done by sanctification, not by
justification properly taken.

I can find no such thing in that book of Cyril de Trinit. lib. 6.
Cyrill; but if ever he spoke so, what is that against us? who easily grant
that we are inherently righteous, as soon as the sanctifying spirit of God
has kindled the fire of love in our hearts.

II. Difference about the manner of Justification.

The Papist asks where: J answer in handling the certainty of salvation.
proved before: but I will add a reason or twain.

Reason I. The faith whereby we live, is that faith whereby we are justified:
but the faith whereby we live spiritually, is a particular faith whereby we
apply Christ unto our selves, as Paul says, Gal. 2. 20. I live, that is,
spiritually, by the faith of the son of God: which faith he shows to be a
particular faith in Christ, in the very words following, who has loved me,
and given himself for me, particularly: and in this manner of believing Paul
was and is an example to all that are to be saved. 1. Tim. 1. 16. and Phil. 3.
15.

Ans. The ^aior I admit, and deny the Minor: and say that the proof is not to
purpose. For in the Minor he speaks of faith, whereby we apply Christ's
merits unto ourselves, making them ours, in the proof S. Paul says only, that
Christ died for him in particular. He makes no mention of his apprehending of
Christ's justice, and making of it his own, which are very distinct things. All
Catholics believe with Saint Paul, that Christ dyed, as for all men in
general: so for every man in particular, yea and that his love was so
exceeding great toward mankind, that he would willingly have bestovved his
life, for the redemption of one only man. But hereupon it does not follovv,
that every man If God had appointed him so to do.
may lay hands upon Christ's righteousness, and apply it to himself (or else
Tu^s. Iovves, Heretics, and evil Catholics, might make very bold with him)
but must first do those things which he requires at their hands, to be made
partakers of his inestimable merits: as to repent them heartily of their sins,
to believe and hope in him, to be baptized, and to have a full purpose to
observe all his commandments. Which M. (...) also confesses that allmen have
not only promised, but also ^ov^ed in Baptism. Now because we are not
assured that we Page 152.
shall perform all (...), therefore we may not so presumptuously apply unto
oursel^es, Christ's righteousness, and life everlasting, although we believe
that he died for every one of us in particular.

Perkins has no color of probability: that S. Paul in this manner of belief,
that is, in applying to himself Christ's merits: was an example to all that
are saved. See the places 1. Tim. 1. 16. Phil. 3. 15. The vain pride of
Papists.
good Reader, and learn to bevvare the bold unskillfulness of sectaries. For
there is not a word sounding that way, but only how he having received
mercy, was made an example of patience.

Master Perkins proves his minor thus: The faith, by which Paul lived, was a
particular faith, whereby he applied Christ to himself. But the faith, by
which we live, is the faith by which Paul lived. Therefore the faith by which
we live, is a particular faith, whereby we apply Christ to our selves.


The proposition Master Perkins proves by the Gal. 2. 20.
Apostles testimony; where he does particularly apply Christ to himself, as
having loved him, and died for him. You answer, that S. Paul makes no mention
of his apprehending of Christ's justice; no more does Master Perkins in his
proposition. But the Apostle mentions such a particular faith, as Master
Perkins speaks of, viz. a persuasion that Christ's benefits belong to him in
particular, and that Christ has particularly loved him; which is to apprehend
Christ. And this is another manner of matter, than to hold that Christ died for
every particular man; which the devils no doubt do acknowledge.

The assumption is evident of it self: for there is no question, but that all
which are justified, have and live by the same faith. But Master Perkins sets
out the matter by two places of scripture: in the former whereof, 1. Tim. 1. 16
the Apostle propounds himself to all men, as an example of Gods mercy, that
they may assure them selves, that if they will believe in Christ, as he did,
they should have forgiveness of their sins, as he had. In Phil. 3. 15.
the latter, having showed that he cast off all confidence in his own
righteousness, and accounted it as dung, resting only upon God for his
righteousness, by faith in Jesus Christ; he exhorts all men to follow his
example, both in faith and holiness.

Reason 11. That which we are to ask of God in prayer, we must believe it
shall be given us, as we ask it: but in prayer we are to ask the pardon of
our own sins, and the merit of Christ's righteousness for our selves:
therefore we must believe the same particularly. The proposition is a rule of
Gods word, requiring that in every petition we bring a particular faith,
whereby we believe, that the thing lawfully asked, shall be given
accordingly, Mark. 11. 24.

Mayor much has been said before, here I admit it, all due circumstances Yea
though they be not observed.
of prayer being observed, and deny that we must pray, that our Savior Christ
Jesus merits may be made ours in particular, for that were greatly to abase
them: but good Christians pray, that through the infinite value of those his
merits; our sins may be forgiven, and a justice proportionable unto our
capacity, may be powered into our souls, whereby we may lead a virtuous life,
and make a blessed end.



minor is also evident, neither can it be denied: for we are taught by Christ
himself to pray on this manner, Forgive us our debts: and to it we say, Amen,
that is, that our petitions shall without all doubt be granted unto us.
August. sermon. de temp. 182.

Perkins proves that we must pray, that Christ's righteousness may be made our
particular justice, because says he, We are taught in the Pater noster, to
pray in this manner: forgive us our debts, and to this we must say Amen,
which is as much to say as our petition is granted. I think the poor man's
wits were gone a pilgrimage, when he vvrote thus. Good Sir, cannot our sins
or debts be forgiven, without we apply Christ's righteousness to us in
particular? we say yes. Do not then so simpl^ beg that which is in
question, nor take that for given, which will never be granted.

Adam, so all men satisfy for sin in Christ, namely all men, that by faith are
one with Christ.

Pater nos^er (sorgiue us our debts) for he is well This has been already
refuted.
assured, that his debts be already pardoned. For at the very first instant
that he had faith, he had Christ's righteousness applied to him, and thereby
assurance both of the pardon of sins, and of life everlasting. Wherefore he
cannot without infidelity, distiust of his former justification, or pray for
remission of his debts: but follovving the famous example of that formal
Pharisie, in lievv of demanding pardon, may vvell^ay. O Luke 18.
God (...) give thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners,
v^^ust, A r^diculous affectation of an obsol^te word.
aduo^t^re^s, as also these Papists: Fearing the remission of my sins, or the
certainty of my salvation, but am well assured thereof, and of Christ's own
righteousness too, and so forth.





Perkins own confession, Catholics have true knowledge of the means of
salvation, d^en h^* and his fellows err miserably.





D. B. P. You confess as much as you are charged with. You make God store of
sins against the holy Ghost.
of obtaining salvation, through the mercy of God, and me^^ts of Christ's
Passion. So they perform their duty toward God, and their neighbor, or else
die with true repentance. But for a man at his first conversion, to ass^e
himself by says of Christ's righteousness, and life everlasting; without
condition of doing those things, he ought to do, that we Catholics affirm to
be, not any gift of faith, but the heinous crime of presumption, which is a
sin against the Holy Ghost, not pardonable, neither in this life, nor in the
world to come.

Neither do we teach any such assurance, as this man so often harps upon: and if
we did, it cannot be a sin against the holy Ghost, being of ignorance, and
not of malice.

Reason III. The judgment of the ancient Church. * August. I demand now,
do thou believe in Christ, O sinner? Thou say, I believe. What beleeuest
thou? that all thy sins may freely be pardoned by him. Thou have that which
thou have believed.

Perkins third reason, is drawn from the consent of the ancient See S. Tho.
22. q. 21. art. 1. De verbis Domi^i. sermon. 7.
Church, of which for fashion sake to make some show, he often speaks, but
can seldom find any one sentence in them, that f^^s his purpose, as you may
see in this sentence of Saint Augustine, cited by him. Augustine says. J
demand now, do thou believe in Christ, O sinner? thou sa^st J believe:
what beleeuest thou, that all thy sins may freely be pardoned by him? thou have that which thou beleeuest. See, here is neither applying of Christ's
righteousness, unto us by faith, nor so much as believing our sins to be
pardoned through him, but that they may be pardoned by him. So there is not one
word for (...). Perkins.

Aug. de verbis Dom. ser. 7
There is this for Master Perkins, though you will not see it, that he which
believes in Christ, for the pardon of sins, has that which he believes: that
is, upon this faith is pardoned.

The Apostle thinks that a man is justified freely by faith. If thou
beleeuest that thy sins cannot be remitted but by him alone against whom
they were committed: but go further and believe this too, that by him thy
sins are forgiven thee. This is the testimony which the holy Ghost gives in
the heart: saying, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Bernard says plainly: That we must believe that our sins are pardoned us.
But he adds not by the imputed righteousness of Christ. No more do we.
Again, he adds conditions on our part, which M. Perkins crastelie
concealeth. For S. Bernard grants that we may believe our sins to be
forgiven, if the truth of our conversion meet with the mercy of God
preventing us, for in the same place he has these words: So therefore shall
his mercy dwell in our earth, that is, the grace of God in our souls, if mercy
and truth meet together, if justice and peace embrace and kiss each other.
Which is as S. Bernard there expounds it, if we stirred up by the grace of
God, do truly bewail our sins and confess them, and afterward follow
holiness of life and peace. All which M. Perkins did wisely cut off, because
it dashed clean the vain gloss of the former words.

Perkins proves it to be such a faith by the judgment of Berna. ser. 1. de
Annuntiat.
Bernard; in citing whereof, first the Printer did him wrong by leaving out
these words, Thou do well: which are the consequent part of the sentence,
and without which there is no sense in it, as any man may see that reads it.
This (which is strange in a man so desirous to cavil) you pass over, and
omitting the principal matter, for which this place of Bernard was alleged,
go about to answer that which Master Perkins urges not: namely, that we are
not justified by the imputed righteousness of Christ, neither does he for that
purpose bring this testimony, but to show what that faith is by which we are
justified. Secondly, you accuse Master Perkins for cutting off certain
conditions added, on our part, by Bernard: but where are these conditions
added? The words you allege, are above thirty lines after those that he
cites, and depend not upon them; but are spoken concerning the certainty of
salvation. So therefore (says Bernard) does this glory, viz. the inward
glory and witness of our conscience, as in the words immediately before, dwell
here in our earth, if mercy and truth meet together, and righteousness and
peace kiss each other. For it is necessary that the truth of our conversion
meet with mercy preventing it. And that afterward we follow holiness and
peace, without which no man shall see God. This, and such like sentences
declare, that it is in vain for a man to promise himself justification
without sanctification. But they answer not the former testimony, which
shows, that justifying faith is a particular applying of Christ, by believing
the forgiveness of our sins.

Sermon. de Natal.
Cyprian. God promises thee immortality, when thou go out of this world,
and do thou doubt? This is indeed not to know God, and this is for a member
of the Church in the house of faith not to have faith: If we believe in Christ,
let us believe his words and promises, and we shall never die, and shall come
to Christ with joyful security, with him to reign for ever.

Cyprian encourages good Christians dying, to have a full confidence in the
promises of Christ, and so do all Catholics, and bid them be secure too on
that side, that Christ will never fail of his word and promise, but say that
the cause of fear lies in our own infi^mities: and yet bids them not to
doubt, as though they were as likely to be condemned as saved, but animats
them, and puts them in the good way of hope, by twenty kinds of reasons. But
what they be you can s^arce tell.


Cyprian. ser. de Natal.
Cyprian affirms confidently, that God has promised every true Christian
immortality when he goes out of the world: so that if he believe this
promise, and rest upon God for the performance of it by Christ, he shall
certainly be made partaker of it. Your comfort is so cold, that a man were as
good be without it, when his hope shall depend especially upon the good use of
his own free will, in believing and keeping the law of Christ.

Perkins having thus confirmed his own party, why does he not after his manner
confute those reasons, which the Catholics allege in favor of their
assertion? Was it because they are not wont to produce any in this matter?
Nothing less* It was then beli^e, because he knew not how to answer them. I
will out of their from^ take that one principal, Belive then he knevve some
better then those you bring.
of the testimony of holy Scripture, And by that alone ^ly prove, that the
faith required to justification, is that Catholic faith, whereby we believe
all that to be true, which by God is revealed, and not any other particular
believing Christ's righteousness to be ours.





If the faith of all them, who are said in Scripture to be justified by faith,
was a belief of the truth of all that which was reueiled by God, and not any
other particular believing Christ's righteousness to be theirs; then justifying
faith is so. But the faith of all them, who are said in Scripture to be
justified by faith, was a belief of the truth of all, which by God is
reueiled, etc. Therefore a justifying faith is a belief of all that which is
reueiled by God, and not any other particular believing Christ's righteousness to
be theirs.


First, we must remember that we speak of that faith by which they were
justified: for else the consequence of the proposition may be doubted of. This
being understood, I deny the assumption: and to the proof of it I answer,
first in general, that your examples are either effects of justifying faith,
or the way and means to it, but not the faith it self.

Paul says of Noe, That he was instituted heir of the justice, which is, by
faith. What faith had he? That by Christ's righteousness he was assured Heb. 11.
7.
of salvation? No such matter, but believe that God according to his word and
justice, would drown the world, and made an Arc to save himself, and his
family, as God commanded him.

Heb. 11. 7.
Noe was justified. For it is apparent that he Genesis 6. 8, 9, 13
was justified, before he believed that God would drown the world. Add
hereunto, that this faith of his was also a resting upon God for safety,
according to his promise. The Apostle in this, and the like, propounds not the
means of justification, but some notable effect of faith. Neither does he
declare what this righteousness of faith was, but says, that the righteousness
of faith remained (as Lyra ad Heb. 11.
Lyra expounds it) in him only, and his children: in which respect he is
called the heir of it. Chrysostom. ad Heb. 11.
Chrysostom says, By this he appeared to be just, because he believed God.

Abraham the Father of believers, and the Pattern and example of justice by
faith, as the Apostle disputes to the Romans: What (...) he Romans cap. 4.
was justified by. Let S. Paul declare, who of him and his faith, has these
words. He contrary to hope believed in hope, that he might be made the Father
of many Nations, according to that which was said unto him. So shall thy seed
be as the stars of heaven, and the sands of the sea: and he was not
weakened in faith, neither did he consider his own body, now quite dead,
whereas he was almost an hundred years old, not the dead Matrice of Sara, in
the promise of God he staggered not by distrust, but was strengthened in says,
giving glory to God, most fully knovving, that vvha^soe^e^ he promised, he
was able also to do, therefore was it reputed to him to justice. Rather
because he tru^ed to God for that blessing upon himself and his wife Sa^^h.
Lo, because he glorified God in believing, that old and barren persons might
have children, if God said the word, and that whatsoever God promised, he was
able to perform, he was justified.

Abraham I answer, as of Noe, that he was iustisied long before God made him
that promise, yea Sander. de (...).
before he came out of the land of Canaan. For Heb 11 8.
by faith he obeyed God, when he was called to go out into a place, which he
should afterward receive for inheritance. And this faith of his was not a bare
believing that which God spoke, but a resting upon him accordingly: and so was
that the Rom 4. 11. 12
Apostle speaks of, whereby God was especially glorified: for this reposing
himself upon God, argued the account he made of the favor of God to him. Now
the belief in that promise was not only for the maltiplying of his natural
seed, but for salvation by Christ to his spiritual children, that P should
believe, as he had done: and therefore it is called the Gal 3. 8.
Gospel that he believed. This Romans 4. 3.
faith was counted to him for righteousness, as every act is, whereby a man
believing in Christ, rests upon the promise of God. But the particular thing
that is accepted to his justification, is his believing in God for
justification by Jesus Christ. I will use no other proof but the phrase it
self, (...).
To believe in God, which necessarily implies a relying upon God, for that we
desire being promised.

That he had not found so great faith in Israel? What faith was that? Mary,
that he could with a word cure his servant absent. Say the word only (quoth
he) and my servant shall be healed. Matthew. 8. ^ Matthew. 8. 9.


Marc. 1. 24. Math. 16.
the devils have, acknowledging Christ's power.

Peter's faith so much magnified by the ancient Fathers, and highly rewarded
by our Savior, was it any other, Then that our Savior was Christ, the Son
of the living God?

Peter's confession Matthew. 16. 16
in that place, was no more in words, but of Christ's office, Thou art Christ;
and his nature, The son of the living God. But if he had not also by faith
rested on him to justification, this confession would have done him but little
pleasure: for Luc. 4. 34.
Satan himself believes as much, and is damned.

John that great secretary of the Holy Ghost, tell us Ioh. 20.
what faith is the final end of the whole Gospel. These things, (says he)
are written that you may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and
that believing you may have life in his name.

Ioah. 6. 35.
believe in him, or rest upon him for salvation, and thereby attain to
everlasting life.

Paul accords very well, saying: Romans 10
This is the word of faith which we preach, for if thou confess with thy
mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him
from death thou shall be saved. And in another place. I make known 1. Cor. 15.
unto you the Gospel, which I have preached, and by which you shall be
saved, unless perhaps you have believed in vain. What was that Gospel? J
have delivered unto you that which I have received, that Christ died for our
(...), according to the Scriptures, was buried, and rose again the third day,
etc. So by the verdite of S. Paul, the belief of the articles of the cre^d, is
that justifying faith, by which you must be saved.

Paul. For it is more than apparent, that a man may believe in his heart, that
God raised Christ from the death, and yet deny many necessary heads of
religion, and be wholly cast away. But the Apostle in this implies the rest, and
namely that Romans 10. 13. (...)
which follows, believing in God: that is, if I may so often repeat the same
thing, resting upon him for justification, by our Savior Jesus Christ. The
same answer I make to the other place; the point of the resurrection is of
necessity to be believed of as many as look to be saved: but that is not all
that is required. For if it be, neither your preparations to justification, nor
your merits after justification, are to any purpose.

Paul, nor any other place of holy Scriptures is it once taught, that a
particular faith whereby we apply Christ's righteousness to our selves, and
assure our selves of our salvation, is either a justifying or any Christian
man's faith, but the very natural act, of that ougly Monster presumption: Which
being laid as the very corner stone of the You speak like a hired servant, not
like a son.
Protestants irreligion, what moral and modest conversation, what humility and
devotion can they build upon it?

Credere Deum.
there is a God, and give Credere Deo.
credit, as to a certain truth, to all that God reueales, and yet not Credere
in Deum.
believe in God to justification. But he that performs this latter, must needs
also acknowledge the former. This then being the height of faith, is in the
Scripture counted a justifying faith.



Perkins handles as it were by the way, cuttedly. I will be as short as he,
the matter not being great. The Catholics reach as you have heard out of the
Council of Trent, in the beginning of this question, that many acts of faith,
fear, hope, and charity do go before our justification, preparing our soul
to receive into it from God, through Christ that great grace. It is your proud
Synagogue that does magistraliter determinare.




Perkins Doctor like resolves otherwise, That faith is an instrument created
by God in the heart of man, at his conversion, whereby he apprehends and
receives Christ's righteousness, for his justification.

This ioyly description is set down without any other probation, then his own
authority that delivered it: and so, let it pass as already sufficiently
confuted. And if there needed any other disprofe of it, I might gather one more
out of his own explication of it, where he says that the covenant of grace is
communicated unto us, by the word of God, and by the Sacraments. For if faith
created in our hearts, be the only sufficient Tou should add as supernatural
instruments.
supernatural instrument, to apprehend that covenant of grace, then there
needs no Sacraments for that purpose, and consequently I would feign know by
the way, how little infants, that cannot for want of judgment, and discretion
have any such act of faith, as to lay hold on Christ his justice, are
justified? Must we without any warrant in Gods word, contrary to all
experience, believe that they have this act of faith before they come to any
understanding?

Perkins reason, and not have iested at his authority: I will plainly propound
it for all men to judge of your dealing. That Ioh. 1. 12. and 6. 35.
whereby Christ is to be received, is an instrument to apply Christ. But faith
is that whereby Christ is to be received. Therefore faith is an instrument to
apply Christ.


To this you answer nothing, but frame an argument against the question, as
you would have it thought out of Master Perkins his own explication of it.
Your argument is: If faith created in our hearts, be the only sufficient
supernatural instrument to apprehend the covenant of grace, then there need no
Sacraments. You should add, as supernatural instruments to that purpose. But
there is need of the Sacraments. Therefore faith is not the only sufficient
supernatural instrument to apprehend the covenant of grace.


First there is more in your conclusion, than in the question. The question is,
whether faith be a supernatural instrument created to that purpose or no: your
conclusion is, that faith is not that only supernatural instrument. Secondly,
I deny the consequence of your proposition: you may as well say (for that
Master Perkins sets down too) that if faith be the only instrument, then the
word is needless. The Word and Sacraments apply Christ outwardly, as means
on Gods part; faith receives it in on our part; the holy Ghost inlightening
and inclining our hearts thereunto.

Little infants (in my poor opinion) have no act of faith, but are justified,
without any thing done by them; God for Christ's sake (according to his
everlasting election) forgiving their sins, and adopting them for sons and
heirs of glory.



Perkins finds two faults with it, one that we teach faith to go before
justification, whereas by the word of God (says he) at the very instant, when
any man believes first, he is then both justified and sanctified. What word of
God so teaches? Marry this. He that believes, eats and drinks the body
and blood of Christ, and is already passed from death to life. I answer that
our Savior in that text speaks not of believing, but of Ioh. 6. 54.
eating his body in the blessed Sacrament, which who so receives worthily,
obtains thereby life everlasting, as Christ says expressly in that place.
And so this proof is vain.

Perkins reproof of your opinion truly, as he has delivered it, that you make
faith go before justification, not only in order of nature only, which we
grant, but in time also, which we deny.

If I should only say the contrary, Ioh. 6. 51. 54.
that our Savior does not speak there of the Sacraments, I might conclude by
as good reason, as you do; and so this answer is vain. But I oppose to your
authority, not mine own, which is nothing worth, but Gabr. Biel. in Canon.
Miss. lect. 84. Nicol. Cusan. epist. 7. ad Bohemos. Caietan. in 3. q. 80. art.
vlt. Tapper. in explic. artic. 15. Louan. Hestelius de com. sub vna specie.
Iansen concord. Euang. cap. 59.
your own writers; yea Council. T^id. sess. 21. cap. 1.
the Council of Trent, which leaves it free to al men to expound that chapter,
either of the spiritual eating of Christ by faith only, or of eating him
really in the Sacrament. And this Greg. de valentia de legit. vsu Euchar. cap.
4. page 489.
liberty is grounded upon the diversity of opinions among the Fathers,
concerning the sense of that chapter. This is sufficient to make Master Perkins
reason good, against your denial.

Romans 10.
justification, first by that of S. Paul, Whosoever calls on the name of our
Lord, shall be saved, but how shall they call upon him, in whom they do not
believe, how shall they believe without a preacher? etc. Where there is this
order set down to arrive unto justification. First, to hear the preacher,
then to believe, afterward to call upon God for mercy, and finally mercy is
granted and given in justification: so that prayer goes between faith and
justification.

Romans ^0 13. 13
Prayer comes between in nature, but not in time: for he that rests upon
God for salvation in Christ, does withal call upon God for pardon of his
sins: whereupon justification follows immediately, though not always in a
man's own feeling.

Augustine observed when he said. Faith is given first, by which we obtain
the rest. And again: By the law is knowledge of s^nne, by D. B. P. De
praedes. sanct. cap. 7. De spirit. and lit. cap. 30.
faith we obtain grace, and by grace our soul is cured.

The rest, that Aug. de praedest. cap. 7.
Austin speaks of, are graces of sanctification, or (as he calls them there)
good works, in which we live: and these are supplied every day by God, or at
least the increase and use of these virtues, whereby we live godly in the
world: such is the cure of ye soul by grace, to the loving of righteousness,
and doing the works of the law.

Peter's Sermon, were stricken to the hearts and believed, yet were they not
straight way justified, but asked of the Apostles what they must do, who
willed them to do penance, and to be baptized, in the name of Jesus, in
remission of their sins, and then lo, they were justified, so that penance
and baptism went between their faith, and their justification.

Act. 2. 37, 38.
S. Luke there speaks of, were not yet come to a justifying faith, when they
asked the Apostle what they should do; no nor to the knowledge of the Gospel:
but only to Verse. 23. 36.
a sight of their own sins, in consenting to the murdering of Christ.

Candaces Eunuch, having heard S. Philip It is kindly to have as well strange
vvord^ as strange doctrines. Act. 8. Act. 9.
announcing unto him Christ, believed that Jesus Christ was the Son of God
(no talk in those days of applying unto himself Christ's righteousness,) yet
was he not justified, before descending out of his chariot he was baptized. And
three days passed between S. Paul's conversion and his justification, as does
evidently appear by the history of his conversion.

Act. 8. 35.
Eunuch had heard the Gospel expounded out of Esa. 53. 7, 8, 11
Esaias, and namely, that men were to be justified by the acknowledging of
Christ: his desire of baptism was a proof of his faith, according to that he
had learned; and baptism Romans 4. 10. 11
the seal of his pardon, or justification, upon that his belief of forgiveness
by Christ's sufferings.

It appears by the Act. 9. 9. 18.
story, that there were three days betwixt the vision and the baptism of the
Apostle; but it is not any way showed, that he had justifying faith the first
day, and yet was not justified till the third day; it is but your conceit, that
tie justification to baptism.

righteousness and life everlasting, is given to Gods Church and people by
Christ. The condition is, that we for our parts, are by faith to receive the
foresaid benefits: and this condition is by grace as well as the substance. Now
then, that we may attain to salvation by Christ, he must be given unto us
really, as he is propounded in the tenor of the foresaid Covenant. And for
the giving of Christ, God has appointed special ordinances, as the preaching
of the word, and the administration of the sacraments. The word preached is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes: and the end of the
Sacraments is to communicate Christ with all his benefits to them that come to
be partakers thereof: as is most plainly to be seen in the supper of the
Lord, in which the giving of bread and wine to the several communicants, is a
pledge and sign of Gods particular giving of Christ's body and blood with all
his merits, unto them. And this giving on Gods part, cannot be effectual
without receiving on our parts: and therefore faith must needs be an instrument
or hand to receive that which God gives, that we may find comfort by this
giving.

Perkins) is as much to say, that dead men only helped, can prepare themselves
to their resurrection. Not so good Sir, but that men spiritually dead being
quickened by Gods spirit, may have many good motions, for as our spirit gives
life unto our bodies; so the spirit of God by his grace animateth, and gives
life unto our souls. But of this it has been once before spoken at large, in
the question of free will.

Council. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 6.
Council of Trent be judge, as your self alleged it before.



Reason. I. Luke 7. 47. Many sins are forgiven her, Particula non causalis:
sed illatiua vel rationalis.
because she loved much. Whence they gather that the woman here spoken of, was
justified and had the pardon of sins by love. Ans. In this text, love is not
made an impulsive cause to move God to pardon her sins, but only a sign to
show and manifest that God had already pardoned them. Like to this, is the
place of John, who says, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren: where love is no cause of the change, but a sign
and consequent thereof.

the inward burning charity which she bare him. Which noble affection of hers,
toward her divine Redeemer, no question, was most acceptable unto him, as by
his own word is most manifest: for he said, That many sins were forgiven
her, because she loved much. But M. Perkins says, that her love was no cause
that moved Christ to pardon her, but only a sign of pardon given before:
which is so contrary to the text, that a man not past all shame, would blush
once to affirm it.



Because D. B. P. He proves that many sins were forgiven her, he does not
show why they were forgiven.
she had loved much.

Perkins has answered you, that our Savior says not so, and has proved his
answer by the like place of 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
S. John, where (...).
the same word is used, and no cause propounded, but a sign only. Would you
not have taken away this answer, if you had could? But the text it self cleeres
the matter: first by Luc. 7. 41, 42 Verse. 43. Verse. 44. Verse. 47.
the parable propounded, with Simons answer, and our Saviors approbation: then
by the application of it: lastly, by the general doctrine gathered out of it;
to whom a little is forgiven, he does love a little. To this purpose Basil. de
baptismo.
Basil says, That he that owes much, has much forgiven him, that he may love
much more.

Secondly, that her love went before, is as plainly declered, both by
mention of the time past: Because she has loved, and by the ^^^dence of her
fact of washing, wiping and anointing his feet: for ^h^ which says our
Savior, then already performed: Many si^ are forgiven her. So that here can be
no impediment of believing the Catholic Doctrine, so clearly delivered by the
holy Ghost, unless one will be so blindly led by our new Masters, that he
will believe no words of Christ, be they never so plain, otherwise then it
please the Ministers to expound them. And this much of the first of those
reasons which M. Perkins said were of no moment.

Verse. 47.
overthrow so certain proof, out of the whole course of the text: especially
since that notable conclusion is delivered immediately upon the former words, in
the present time; to whom a little is forgiven, (...).
he does love a little. Neither does our Savior tie the pardon of her sins
to that present time, but then gives her knowledge of that which was done
before, saying first to Simon: Many sins are forgiven her: and then to her
self, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

Reason II. Gal. 5. 6. Neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any
thing, but faith that works by love. Hence they gather, that faith does
justify together with love. Ans. The property of true faith is, to apprehend
and receive something unto it self: and love, that goes always with faith, as
a fruit and an inseperable companion thereof, is of an other nature. For it
does not receive in, but as it were give out it self in all the duties of the
first and second table toward God and man: and this thing faith by it self
cannot do: and therefore Paul says, that faith works by love. The hand has
a property to reach out it self, to lay hold of any thing, and to receive a
gift: but the hand has no property to cut a piece of wood of it self without
saw or knife, or some like instrument: and yet by help of them, it can either
divide or cut. Even so it is the nature of faith, to go out of it self and to
receive Christ into the heart: as for the duties of the first and second table,
faith cannot of it self bring them forth; no more then the hand can divide or
cut: yet join love to faith, and then can it practice duties commanded
concerning God and man. And this I take to be the meaning of this text, which
speaks not of justification by faith, but only of the practice of common
duties, which faith puts in execution by the help of love.

Reply. That charity has the chiefest part, and that faith is rather the
instrument and hand ma^id of charity. My proof shall be out of the very text
alleged, where life and motion is given to faith by charity, as the Greek
word Euergoumene being passive, does plainly show, that faith is moved, led,
and guided by charity.

Gal. 5. 6. (...).
The Greek word is not of the passive, but of the middle voice; as it is in
many other places of Scriptures: Romans 7. 5. (...).
The affections of the flesh did work in our members, operabantur, in your own
translation. 2 Cor. 4. 12. (...).
Death works in us, but life in you operatur: Ephesians. 3. 20. (...).
According to the power that works in us operatur: Col. 1. 29. (...).
According to his working, which he works in me; quam operatur in me. And in
this very place operatur, which cannot be taken passiuely, as every Grammar
scholar knows. In the Interlinear, faith, which is Effi^ax.
effectual. Pagnin, Agens.
working by love. Faith (says Theophyl ad Gal 5. 6.
Theophylact on that place) works by love; that is (says he) ought always
Viuax and efficax commonstrari.
to be showed to be alive, and effectual by love to Christ. And a little
after, Learn therefore, that faith works by charity, that is (says he) is
showed to be alive. Lombard. Thomas. Caietan. Catharin. D. B. P. The place is
of works not of charity.
The best of your own writers expound it, as we do.

James does demonstrate most manifest, saying that. Even as the body is dead
without the soul, so is faith without charity: Making charity to be the
life, and as it were the soul of faith. Now no man is ignorant, but it is
the soul that uses the body, as an instrument, even so then it is charity,
that uses says as her instrument and inferior, and not contrariwise.

First the word, Iam. 2. 26. (...).
in that place, does not signify the soul, but breath, as Caietan says.
Secondly, the Apostle says not, without charity, as you do, but Sine operibus
without works: which cannot be taken for the life of faith, but are only
effects of it. Thirdly, for the meaning of the place, let us here your own
Cardinal Caietan speak. By the name of Spiritus.
spirit (says Caietan) he understands not the soul, but the breath. And he
fitly compares works to breath: for as the body of a living creature, Sinon
spirat.
if it breathe not, is dead: so faith, Sinon parit opus.
if it bring forth no works, is dead: for breathing is an effect of a live
body, and likewise working is the proper effect of a living faith: whereby it
appears (says he) in what sense Iam. 2. 17. 20
the Apostle said above, that faith without works was dead: not because he
thought that works were the form of faith, but because he thought that works
Concomitantia fidem.
accompany faith, as the breath accompanies the life of the body. You see
both his judgment and his reason, which is confirmed by that the Iam. 2. 17.
Apostle said before: Faith, if it have not works, is dead. So that the
meaning is, faith without works, that is, faith that has not works, is dead.

Paul confirms at large in the whole Chapter, proving charity to be a more
excellent gift then faith, or any other, concluding with these words. Now
there remains faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the greater of these
is charity. Whereupon S. Augustine resolves 1. Cor. 13.
thus. Nothing but charity makes faith it self available, for faith (says
he) may be without charity, but it cannot be auailable without it: Lib. de
Trinit. cap. 18.
So that first you see that charity is the mouer, and commander, and faith,
as her instrument, and handmaid.

1. Cor. 13. 1. 2.
Apostle speaks not of that faith, by which we believe in God to
justification, but of that by which miracles are wrought. Besides it does not
follow, that love uses faith as an instrument to justify us, because in some
respect it is superior; namely in the present use, for the good of our
brethren: to which the Apostles exhortation tends, as it ^y appear by his
discourse, both in that chapter, and in the 12. going before, and the 14. that
follows.

Austin, bringing the Apostles words, speaks of the same faith that he
meant: which may be indeed without charity, and cannot rise to the height of a
justifying faith, but must needs be accompanied by charity, without which it
is dead.

A senseless question.
be done, for the love of God, and to his honor or no? If not, as it is void
of charity; so it is a wicked and sinful act, no justification, but infection,
our own interest being the principal end of it: now if it comprehend and
conclude Gods glory, and service in it, that is, if they apply Christ's
righteousness to them, to glorify God thereby, then has charity the principal
part therein: for the directing of all, to the honor and glory of God, is the
proper office and action of charity.

I demand whether that work of justification by faith, be done for the love of
God, and to his honor, or no. That which follows, in respect of God, is
blasphemous, at least absurd: That the work of justification is a wicked act.
To your reason: It is no wicked act to believe in God for justification by
Christ, though in the particular act of believing, we think not upon the
glorifying of God, but only respect our own salvation. For to believe in
Christ is no act enjoined by the law of nature, or of Moses, whereby we should
justify our selves; but an extraordinary matter appointed by God, who
respects nothing in it, on our parts, but that we believe. Not as if we might
therefore neglect the glory of God, but that we may afterward give so much the
more glory to him, the less cause there was he should pardon us, there being
such a defect against our general duty in that act of believing. Further, if
it were true that we desired to glorify God by believing in Christ, and that
that desire proceeded from love; yet had not love either the principal, or any
part in procuring our justification. Because God does not justify us, for
seeking to glorify him by belief, which is simply a work of the law, but
only accepts Ioh. 6. 29.
our believing for working; and, as Romans 4. 5.
the Apostle speaks, counts faith to us for righteousness.

D. B. P. Sermon. 22. de verbis Apostol.
as principal, S. Augustine confirms in these words: The house of God, (that
is, a righteous and godly soul,) has for his foundation faith, hope is the
wales of it; but charity is the roof and perfection of it.

Austin speaks not of justification only, but of the whole building of Gods
house in the soul of man; which ( Aug. de verbis Apostoli Ser. 20.
says he) is built with singing, founded with believing, set up with hoping,
perfected with loving. The end of our election, justification, and
sanctification, is holiness, without which a man is no true Christian; but
justification is not the building of the soul.

Reason. III. Faith is never alone, therefore it does not justify alone. Answ.
The reason is naught, and they might as well dispute thus. The eye is never
alone from the head, and therefore it sees not alone: which is absurd. And
though in regard of substance the eye be never alone, yet in regard of seeing,
it is alone: and so though faith subsist not without love and hope and other
graces of God, yet in regard of the act of justification it is alone without
them all.

D. B. P. You have suited them with answers accordingly.
M. Perkins thus. Faith is never alone, therefore it dothnot justify alone:
That this argument is fondly framed, appears plainly in that, that Catholics
do not deny, but affirm that faith may be without charity, as it is in all
sinful Catholics.

The argument is framed upon our opinion: who maintain, that a justifying
faith is never without hope, and charity. Hence it may seem to follow, that
it does not justify alone: but because you disclaim this reason, I will let
it pass.

ergo, it is not the whole cause of justification. The first proposition cannot
be denied of them, who know the nature and propriety of causes, for the entire
and total cause of any thing, being (as the Philosophers say) in act, the
effect must needs follow, and very sense teaches the simple, that if any thing
be set to work, and if it do not act that, which it is set too, then there
wanted some thing requisite. And consequently that was not the whole cause of
that work.



But their imagined faith cannot apply to themselves, Christ's righteousness
without the preseace of hope and charity. This assumption is a great deal
scanter then the former And before ansvvered.
For else he might be justified without any hope of heaven, and without any
love toward God, and estimation of his honor, which are things most absurd in
themselves: but yet very well fitting the Protestants justification, which is
nothing else but the plain vice of presumption, as has been before declared:
Yet to avoid this inconvenience which is so great, M. Perkins grants that
both, hope and charity must needs be present at the justification, but do
nothing in it, but faith does all, as the head is present to the eye, when it
sees, yet it is the eye alone that sees. Here is a worthy piece of
Philosophy, that the eye alone does see, whereas in truth it is but the
instrument of seeing, the soul being the principal cause of sight, as it is
of all other actions, of life, sense, and reason: and it is not to purpose
here, where we require the prefence of the whole cause, and not only of the
isntrumental cause.

Romans 4. 3. 5.
only our believing in Jesus Christ. The similitude is true, and fit. True,
because the eye does see, though as an instrument fitted to that office by God:
and thus Philosophers, Poets, Orators, and all kind of people do speak. He
that would be more curious than wise, might find fault with you also, and say;
that the act of seeing also is man's, and the soul the instrustrument whereby
he does see; as the hand is the instrument with which he reaches.

The fitnes of the similitude appears thus; It is man that believes, as it
is man that sees. The general instrument (as I may speak) for both these
actions is the soul, though by diverse faculties; the particular for sight is
the eye, for believing, faith, outwardly there is none. The eye severed from
the head sees not; and yet it is the eye that sees, and not the head: so
says, that is without hope and charity, justifies not; and yet hope and
charity does not justify. You answer that it is not to purpose; because we
require the presence of the whole cause, and not only of the isntrumental.
But you deceive your self: for the question is not of the whole cause, or
principal efficient, which is God, (for Romans 8. 33.
it is he only that justifies) but of the instrument, if we may so call it.
To speak plainly, the matter is (as I have often said) what it is that God
respects in us to our justification. We say it is only our believing in
Christ: you say it is our believing, loving, and hoping; because we teach, that
together with faith, by which (on our part) we are justified, we receive hope,
charity, and other graces of sanctification, which are all present in the
heart, when it believes to justification, but are no way any causes of it.



Romans 4. 3. 5.
counting it for righteousness. And whereas we say that such a faith only
justifies, as has hope and love for companions, it is not our meaning that
these make says acceptable, but that he which believes, and has not these
virtues, idly presumes of faith, when he has it not; because the spirit of
God, together with true faith, powers these graces also into our souls. But
of this whole point of justification, I shall one day (if it please God) write
more distinctly and fully.

Reason IV. If faith alone do justify, then we are saved by faith alone: but
we are not saved by faith alone: and therefore not justified by faith alone.
Answ. The proposition is false: for more things are requisite to the maine end,
then to the subordinate means.

ergo. M. Perkins first denies the proposition, and says, That it may
justify, and yet not save: because more is required to salvation, then to
justification. Which is false, for put the case that an Innocent babe dye
shortly after his baptism wherein he was justified, shall he not be saved for
want of any thing? I hope you will say yes: even so any man that is justified,
if he depart in that state, no man makes doubt of his salvation, therefore this
first shift was very frivolous.

the reason is sound; that justification, being but the subordinate means to
the maine end, salvation, more is required to this, than to that: not that any
man can fail of salvation, Romans 8. 30.
which has attained to justification, but because God has appointed to make
supply of other graces, that we may come by degrees to glorification. Your
reason is nothing worth. For the comparison of equality and likeness, is
insufficient. For though infants need no more to salvation; yet men of
discretion do. I appeal to your own doctrine: Do not you teach, that good
works are necessary to salvation? and yet you grant, that infants may be
saved without them; yea and men of years too, if they have no time to do them,
after their first justification. Therefore more may be required to salvation
than to justification, though infants want nothing after they are once
justified: yea infants are justified without faith, as many as are justified.



Perkins perceiving, flies to a second; that for faith alone we shall also be
saved, and that good works shall not be regarded at the day of our judgment.
Then must those words of the holy Ghost M. Perk. has not a word of not
regarding works.
so often repeated in the Scriptures be razed out of the text. God at that time
will render unto every man, according to his works. But of this more amply in
the question of merits.

Perkins error, that good works shall not be regarded at the day of our
judgment.

Reason V. We are saved by hope, therefore not by faith alone. Answ. We are
saved by hope, not because it is any cause of our salvation. Paul's meaning is
only this: that we have not salvation as yet in possession, but wait
patiently for it, in time to come to be possessed of us, expecting the time of
our full deliverance: that is all that can justly be gathered hence.

He that is without fear, cannot be justified. We are saved by hope. Unless
you do psnance, you shall Ecclesias. 1. Romans 8. Luke 13. 1. Joan. 3.
all in like sort perish. We are translated from death to life, (that is
justified) because we love the brethren. Again of baptism. Unless you be
borne again of water, and the holy Ghost, you cannot enter into the Kingdom
of heaven: Lastly we must have a resolute purpose to amend our evil lives. For
we are buried together with Christ by baptism into death, that as Christ is
risen again from the dead, etc. S^ we may also walk in nevvnes of Romans 6.
life.

Perkins answered as much as he propounded: that which you have brought I will
examine, and, I trust, satisfy. Ecclesiastic. 1. 28.
He that is without fear, cannot be justified. It is a strange course of
proving, to bring that against us for scripture, which you know we deny to be
scripture, and that with the consent of the ancient writers, and your own of
late. Interlin. Bibl.
Arias Montanus, and they that joined with him, have left all the Apocryphal
out of the Interlinear Bible. The Greek, which is the original, is far
otherwise, (...), iracundus.
An angry man: and so it is translated in Bibl. Reg. Hispan.
the great Bible, set out by Arias Montanus; and before that, by Pa^nin.
Pagnin, who also interprets it, shall not be justified, Non poterit censeri
iustus.
cannot be thought just, referring it to man's judgment, rather than to Gods.
Vatablus.
Vatablus also so translateth it, and adds in the margin, that some copies
read (...).
unjust anger: and for your being justified, he translateth (as Pagnin does)
cannot be counted just. Besides I deny the consequence; he that is without
fear cannot be justified: therefore justification is ascribed in Gods word to
some other virtue, and not to faith only. For though a man that is without
fear cannot be justified, yet he is not justified in respect of his fear.

To omit the absurdity of the translation, Luke 13. 3. (...).
do penance, for repent; who makes any doubt that they shall perish, that
repent not? What will you conclude thence? Therefore repentance justifies, and
not faith only? I deny your consequence, see the reason in the former section.

The 1. Ioh 3. 14.
Apostle makes not the love of our brethren the cause, but the proof of our
justification; as it is apparent by his words: We know we are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren: he that loves not his brother,
abides in death. We are not translated by reason of our loving: for indeed we
must be translated before we can love them; but we know by loving them that we
are translated. And that is the scope of the Apostle: In this are the children
Verse. 10, (...)
of God known, and the children of the devil: whosoever does not righteousness
is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother: Let us not love in word,
nor in tongue, but indeed and in Verse. 18. 19
truth. For thereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall before him
assure our hearts.

First, you take that as granted which is full of doubt, that our Savior
Christ speaks Ioh. 3. 5.
in that place of baptism. Secondly (admitting that) I deny absolute
necessity of baptism, as well as of the other Sacrament: for which, in your
judgment, those words are as strong, Ioh. 6. 5^.
Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. Thirdly, I say we are justified by baptism, Romans 4. 10. 1^
as Abraham was by Circumcision. Fourthly, I deny the consequence here also:
None can enter into heaven, except they be borne again of water and the holy
Ghost. Therefore not only faith, but also some other virtues are respected by
God in our justification.

The end of baptism is our sanctification, by dying to sin, and living to
righteousness: therefore justification and salvation are ascribed to other
virtues, beside faith. I deny the consequence. For Romans 6. 4, 5.
though we must have a resolute purpose to amend our lives; yet God does not
justify us, in regard that we have such a purpose, but only in respect of our
believing; neither, to speak truly, does this purpose go before
justification, but follow it.

Perkins to make answer in that one. You are saved by hope: to wit; Romans 8.
He ansvvered all he propounded.
that Paul's meaning is only, that we have not as yet salvation in possession,
but must waire patiently for it, until the time of our full deliverance, this
is all. Now whether that patient expectation, which is not hope, but issues
out of hope, of eternal salvation, or hope it self be any cause of salvation,
he says neither yea nor nay, and leaves you to think as it seems best unto
your self. S. Paul then affirming it to be a cause of salvation, it is best to
believe him: and so neither to exclude hope or charity, or any of the foresaid
virtues, from the work of justification, having so good warrant as the word of
God, for the confirmation of it.

Romans 8. 24.
S. Paul does not affirm, that it is any cause of salvation, but only says
(as Master Perkins has truly answered) that we must come to the possession of
salvation, by continuing our hope of it with patience. To which purpose Heb.
10. 36.
the Apostle says, that we had need of patience, that after we have done the
will of God, we may receive the promise. Neither is the question of salvation,
but of justification: so that here the consequence may justly be denied, we are
saved by hope, therefore we are not justified by faith only. For more is
required to salvation, than to justification.

Perkins cites some for him. The most ancient and most valiant Martyr S.
Ignatius, of our justification writes thus. The beginning of life is faith,
but the end of it is charity, but both Epist. ad Philip.
united and joined together, do make the man of God perfect.

Ignatius ad Philip.
Epistle to the Philippians; and if there were, the matter were not great. Such
an author, as he shows himself to be, that writ those epistles in Ignatius
name, is an unfit judge in controversies of Divinity. But for the sentence it
self, if it be any where to be found, it may well be answered, that
sanctification is required to the perfection of a Christian, and not only
justification: and this is all that is here affirmed. What proof is there in
this, that faith only does not justify?

Clement Patriarch of Alexandria says. Faith goes before, but fear does
build, and charity brings to perfection. D. B. P. Libr. 2. strom.


Clemens Stromat. lib. 2.
Clement speaks not either of justification, or of justifying faith; but (as
the former author) describes some of the means, and, as it were, the parts of
Christian sanctification.

John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople has these words: Hom. 70. in
Math.
Least the faithful should trust that by faith alone they might be saved, he
disputes of the punishment of evil men, and so does he both exhort the
Jnfidels to faith, and the faithful to live well.

Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 70.
Chrysostom speaks of that faith, whereby we give assent to the truth of the
Gospel, not of that whereby we live in Christ. Neither entreats he of
justification, but of salvation. Further, he rejects such a faith as has
not good works: and so do we.

Augustine cries out as it were to our Protestants, and says: Hear Lib. 3.
hypognost.
O foolish Heretic, and enemy to the true faith. Good works, which (that
they may be done, are by grace prepared, and not of the merits of free will)
we condemn not: because by them, or such like, men of God have been
justified, are justified, and shall be justified.

Hypognost. lib. 3.
Austins. But for the sentence alleged by you, it cannot be to the purpose;
because our question is now only of the first justification, as you speak; to
which the works of grace, that follow afterward, and of which Austin
professedly speaks in that place, cannot belong. Beside, there is no doubt
but he speaks as S. James does, saying, that Iam. 2. 21.
Abraham was justified by works: that is, approved and acknowledged for just,
both by God and man: as a man is known to be alive by his breathing.

Now let us see that which is to be shaken out of the hearts of the D. B. P.
De fide and oper. c. 14.
faithful: Least by evil security they lose their salvation, if they shall
think faith alone, to be sufficient to obtain it.

The words immediately following after those you have set down, and being a
part of the sentence, make it manifest, that Aug. de fide and oper. cap. 14
Austin speaks of a dead faith, which neglects good works. If they shall
think (says he) faith alone to be sufficient to obtain it, but shall neglect
to live well, and hold on the way of God by good works. This (as he
professes August. de doctr. Christ. cap. 13.
otherwhere) he knew to be the course of some, who thought that faith, which
(says he) they feign they have, should avail them before God, without good
works; and being deceived with this kind of error, commit heinous sins
without fear, while they believe that God is a revenger of no sin, but
Persidiae.
infidelity. And these were the Gnostickes, against whom such speeches are
intended.

That a sinner is justified before God by faith: yea, by faith alone. The
meaning is, that nothing within man, and nothing that man can do, either by
nature or by grace concurreth to the act of iustistcation before God, as any
cause thereof, either efficient, material, formal, or final, but faith
alone. All other gifts and graces, as hope, love, the fear of God, are
necessary to salvation, as signs thereof, and consequents of faith. Nothing
in man concurres as any cause to this work, but faith alone. And faith itself
is no principal, but only an instrumental cause whereby we receive,
apprehend, and apply Christ and his righteousness for our justification.

Perkins teaches, is clean contrary. For (says he) A sinner is justified by
faith alone, that is, nothing that man can do by nature or grace, concurreth
thereto as any kind of cause, but faith alone. Farther he says, That faith it
self is no principal, but rather an isntrumental cause, whereby we
apprehend and apply Christ and his righteousness for our justification. So that
in fine, we have that faith so much by them magnified, and called the only and
whole cause of our justification, is in the end become no true cause at all,
but a bare condition, It is no where so called by us.
without which we cannot be justified.

Perkins teaches, is not contrary, but the very same. For he holds that no
man can be saved, who either neglects, or endeavors not to bring forth
good works: though he allow these no place, as causes of a man's justification.

At the last, you understand, that we make not faith the principal, much
less the whole cause of our justification. To speak properly, we make it no
true cause at all; but only, as you say, a condition, required by God on our
part; which he accepts in stead of fulfilling the law, and thereupon
forgiueth us our sins, for Christ's sake.

D. B. P. Conditio sine qua non. Neither of them.
cause, whose instrument faith is; and choose whether he had liefer to have
charity, or the soul of man without any help of grace.

Your disjunction is naught. For neither charity, nor the soul, are the
principal efficients, but man himself; not without any help of grace, but by
such a special grace, as certainly produces that effect in us, to our
justification.

Reason I. Ioh. 3. 14. 15. As Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so
must the son of man be lift up: that whosoever believes in him shall not
perish but have eternal life. In these words Christ makes a comparison on this
manner: when any one of the Israelites were stung to death by fiery serpents:
his cure was not by any physic surgery, but only by the casting of his eye up
to the brasen-serpent, which Moses had erected by Gods commandment: even so in
the cure of our souls, when we are stung to death by sin, there is nothing
required within us for our recovery, but only that we cast up and fix the
eye of our faith on Christ and his righteousness.

As Ioh. 3.
Moses lift up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son of man be lift up,
that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have life everlasting.
True, if he live accordingly, and as his faith teaches him: but what is this
to justification by only faith? Mary M. Perkins draws it in after this
fashion. As nothing was required of them who were stung by serpents, but that
they should look upon the brazen serpent: So nothing is required of a sinner,
to deliver him from sin, but that he cast his eyes of faith upon Christ's
righteousness, and apply that to himself in particular. But this application
of the similitude is only man's foolish invention without any ground in the
text. Similitudes be not in all points alike, neither must be streatched beyond
the very point wherein the similitude lies, which in this matter is, that like
as the Israelites in the Wilderness stung with serpents, were cured by looking
upon the brazen serpent: so men infected with sin, have no other remedy,
then to embrace the faith of Christ Jesus: All this we confess, but to say
that nothing else is necessary, that is quite besides the text, and as easily
rejected by us, as it is by him obtruded without any authority, or probability.



Reason II. The exclusive forms of speech used in scripture prove thus much.
We are justified freely, not of the law, not by the law, without the law,
without works, not of works, not according to works, not of us, not by the
works of the law, but by faith. Gal. 2. 16. All boasting excluded, only
believe. Luke 8. 50. These distinctions, whereby works and the law are
excluded in the work of justification, do include thus much: that faith alone
does justify.



Romans 3. 28.
By faith without the works of the law. Gal. 2. 16.
Not by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2. 8.
By the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law. Verse. 9.
Through faith, not of works. But this can never be showed of them.

By reason of the opposition, I speak of, faith cannot be taken for a work
of the law: neither is it any work, required by the law, to believe in Christ
for justification; because the law says, Leuit. 18. 5. Romans 10. 5.
Do this, and thou shall be saved: namely, as an hired servant. But the
Gospel says, i Believe, and thou shall have thy sins forgiven thee by
justification. Now the law commands no suit for pardon, but calls for either
obedience, or damnation. Hope indeed (as I showed before) differs little from
faith, but depends upon it: fear and love are proper duties of the law, and so
always performed.

Paul's meaning in those places is, to exclude all such works, as either Jew
or Gentile did, or could brag of, as done of themselves, and so thought that
by them, they deserved to be made Christians. For A n^ of in^cation.
he truly says, that all were concluded in sin, and needed the grace of
God, which they were to receive of his free mercy, through the merits of
Christ, and not of any desert of their own: And that to obtain this grace
through Christ, it was not needful, nay rather hurtful to observe the
ceremonies of Moses law, as Circumcision, the observation of any of their
feasts, or fastes, nor any such like work of the law, which the lews reputed
so necessary. Again, that all moral works of the Gentiles could not deserve
this grace, which works not proceeding from charity, were nothing worth in Gods
sight. And so all works, both of Jew and Gentile, are excluded from being any
meritorious cause of justification, Boasting is not excluded by Popish
justification.
and consequently, all their boasting of their own forces, their first
justification being freely bestowed upon them.

Paul speaks not of deserving to be made Christians, but of attaining to
salvation: as it is apparent by his disputation in the Epistle to the Romans.
Romans 3. 19.
By the works of the law no man living shall be justified. What is justified?
shall be made a Christian, after your interpretation. So afterward, Romans 3. 28.
a man is justified, that is made a Christian, by faith, and not by the works
of the law. So have we a new interpretation of justification by faith. Besides,
it would be remembered, that you distinguish betwixt works of nature, and
works of grace; denying justification to them, and granting it to these: how
will this stand with your answer?

Neither does the Apostle dispute, how they were to attain to the grace of
Christ, but how they were to receive pardon, and acceptance to everlasting
life; which he truly ascribes, on our part, to belief in Christ, by which we
obtain Romans 3. 28. Gal. 3. 26.
both these privileges: As for meriting of justification, there is not a
letter of it in any place of the new or old Testament. And though there be no
meritorious cause of it in works, before grace; yet boasting by your doctrine,
is not excluded. For may I not justly boast, that my self, being enlightened
by Gods spirit, and having a good motion inspired into me, by the power of mine
own free will accepted of the grace of God offered me, and so am justified?
where my cause of boasting is the greater, because many other men, who might
have been justified as well as I, have not employed their free will so well as
I have done, and therefore are damned.



Act. 2. 28. and 16. 30.
bring a sinner to believe in Jesus Christ to justification: yet so, as that
neither these dispositions proceed from the free will of man, but from the
spirit of God inclining them, that God will justify, to these actions, nor any
of these, but only believing is respected of God, on man's part, to his
justification.

Luke, believe only, is nothing to the purpose. For he was bid believe the
raising of his daughter to life, and not that Christ's righteousness was his: and
faith alone may be a sufficient disposition to obt^aine a miracle, but not to
obtain justification, of which the question on y is.

Luke 8. 50.
Luke shows thus much (as also the ordinary course of the old Testament
does) that the thing God regards and requires of man, to the obtaining of
any favor, is resting upon him for that he stands in need of. Fasting,
praying, and such like exercises, are means to make a man discern truly of
his own unworthiness, and so the rather to trust to Gods mercy and power: but
the thing respected by God is, resting on him, and referring himself wholly to
his will and pleasure.

Consider now good Reader, whether of our interpretations agree better, with
the circumstances of the text, and the judgment of the ancient Fathers. The
texts see thou in the Testament. Take for a taste, of the Fathers judgment, S.
Augustines exposition of those places of S. Paul, of one of the chiefest of
which, thus he speaks Men not understanding De gra. and lib. arb. cap. 7.
that which the Apostle says, We esteem a man to be justified without the
law, thought him to say, that faith sufficed a man although he lived evil, and
had no good works: which God forbid, that the vessel of election should
think.

Romans 2^.
Apostle, as the Gnostickes did, utterly mistake him. We are altogether of
Hypognost. lib 3.
S. Austins opinion that faith cannot justify him that lives euilly, and has
no good works. For (as De side and oper. cap. 14.
he truly says) Though they go not before justification, yet they accompany
it: every justified man being also sanctified. Neither is the faith, he
speaks of such a faith as we understand, because it works not by love: but
such, as the devil has, who (says Austin in the same place) has not the
faith, by which the just man lives, which works by love, that God may give him
life everlasting, according to his works.

Therefore the Apostle says, that a man is justified by faith, De predest.
sanct. cap. 7.
and not of works, because faith is first given, and by it the rest (which are
properly called works, and in which we live justly) are by petition obtained.

Aug. de side and oper. cap. 14
Austin takes justification for the whole fitting of a Christian to a holy
conversation; to which, justification indeed is but a foundation, the building
being finished by sanctification.

Paul excluding the works of the law, Not from the conversation of a
Christian, but from his justification.
and the works done by our own only forces, does not mean to exclude good
works, which proceed from the help of Gods grace.

He must of necessity, according to his course of disputing, exclude good
works from that justification he there speaks of, but not from the life of a
Christian man.

Reason III. Very reason may teach thus much. W. P.


Man's reason is but a blind mystris in matters of faith, and he that has no
better an instructor in such high mysteries, must needs know little.

see the diverse use of that, from other graces and virtues.



^.
rather teaches the contrary. For in common sense, no man apprehends and
enters into the possession of any thing, by believing that he has it. For if
a man should believe that he is rich, of honor, wise, or virtuous: Does he
thereby become presently such a one? nothing less. His faith and persuasion is
no fit instrument to apply and draw these things to himself, as all the world
sees. How then does reason teach me, that by believing Christ's righteousness to
be mine own, I lay hand on it, and make it mine. Again Christ's righteousness
(according to their own opinion) is not received into us at all, but is ours
only by Gods imputation, what need we then faith, as a spiritual hand to
receive it? If they say (as M. Perkins does) that faith is as it were a
condition required in us, which when God sees in us, he presently imputes
Christ's righteousness to us, and makes it ours: then will I be bold to say,
that any other virtue is as proper as faith, to have Christ applied unto us:
there being no other aptness requisite in the condition it self, but only the
will and ordinance of God: then every thing that it shall please him to
appoint, is alike apt: and so M. Perkins had small reason to say, that faith
was the only apt instrument to apply to us Christ's righteousness.





Hope more particular then faith is vain.
do much more apply unto Christians all Christ's merits, and make them ours
then faith: For what faith assures me of in general, that hope applies unto
me in particular: by faith I believe Christ to be the Savior of all mankind:
by hope I trust to be made partaker of that salvation in him.



Of the difference betwixt faith and hope, I have spoken 12. Art. part (...).
Art. 1.
otherwhere; now I say only thus much, that to hope without faith is vain. If
I believe, I may not hope alone, but be sure I am justified: if I do not
believe, I may be sure of the contrary.

This is to plead de^e^t, not mercy.
the rule of true charity, as I dedicate and employ my life, labors, and all
that I have to the service of God, so all that God has is made mine, so far
forth as it can be made mine: according unto that sacred law of friendship:
Amicorum omnia sunt communia. And therefore in true reason, neither by faith,
nor any other virtue, we take such hold on Christ's merits, nor have such
interest in his inestimable treasures, as by charity.

Ex congr^o.
equity at the least) deserve his justification at Gods hands. But what Prince
would be so dealt withal by a traitor, especially if he meant to manifest the
riches of his mercy in affoording favor? Would he, trow you, have his
traitorous subject plead an interest to his love, kindness and bounty, by
employing his life and labors to do him service, and so to receive all
benefits from him, Romans 5. 10.
as a friend from a friend, by the law of mutual good will? who sees not how
directly this runs against the whole course of the new Testament?

Augustine understood well, when he made it the model, D. B. P. De not. and
gra. cap. vlt.
and measure of justification: saying, That Charity beginning, was Justice
beginning: Charity increased, was Justice increased: great Charity was great
justice: and perfect Charity, was perfect justice.

Aug. de nature. and great. cap. vlt.
Austin speaks not of justification, but of walking cheerfully in obedience
to Gods commandments, after we are justified: which we cannot do, unless the
love we bear to God, make all difficulties that we shall meet with, light and
easy to us. In this respect charity beginning, is justice beginning; because
he that has begun to love, has also begun to walk in the way of
righteousness, making light of all hindrances, by reason of his love; and as his
love grows, so does his righteousness in his whole conversation.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. Ambr. on Romans 4. They are
blessed to whom without any labor or work done iniquities are remitted and
sin covered: no works or repentance required of them, but only that they
believe. And cap. 3. Neither working any thing, nor requiting the like, are
they justified, but by faith alone through the gift of God. And 1. Cor. 1. this
is appointed of God that whosoever believes in Christ, shall be saved without
any work by faith alone, freely receiving remission of sins.

Ambroses.

Ambroses, which were never heard of, till within these last 80. years, should
not have made a doubt of these on the Romans, that have been received for his
so many hundreds of years. But I will not strive about the matter. Once this
is out of doubt, that they are very ancient, and generally held to be True for
doctrine.
orthodoxall.

Moses law, which the Jews held to be necessary: as circumcision, and such
like, see the place, and confer with it, that which he has written in the
same work, upon the fourth to the Hebrews: where he has these words. Faith
is a great thing, and without it, it is not possible to be saved, but faith
alone does not suffice: but it is necessary, that faith work by charity, and
converse worthy of God.

Ambros. ad Rom 4. verse. 7. Nulla ab his requisita poe niten^iae opera
No works, or repentance required of them. But he means, not works of the
Ceremonial law only. He means both Ceremonial and Moral. Ad verse 2.
That law which the Gentiles had by nature; which if a man keep, he shall
live: Ad verse. 3.
Abraham had not whereof to boast, because he was circumcised, or because he
abstained from sin, but because he believed: Ad verse. 4.
To him that works, that is, to him that is subject to the law of Moses, or
of nature: Ad verse. 5. Ob^oxius p^cca^is.
To him that works not, that is, to him that is guilty of sin, because he
does not that which the law commands. Ambros. ad Hebr. cap. 4.
In that place upon the Hebrews, he speaks not of justification, as in the
other, but of our entering into rest, or heaven; to which no man shall come,
that does not live holily, beautifying (as he there speaks) his faith with
works.

De verbis Dom. sermon. 40
August. There is one propitiation for all sins, to believe in Christ. Hesyc.
on Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 2. Grace which is of mercy is apprehended by faith
alone, and not of works.

Perkins next authority is gathered out of S. Augustine. There is De verb. Ap.
sermon. 40. Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 2.
one propitiation for all sinners to believe in Christ; True, but where is it,
that we need nothing else, but to believe?

3. Hesychius says, Grace which is of mercy, is apprehended by faith alone,
and not of works: that is, we do not merit by our works done before grace,
any thing at Gods hand, but of his mercy receive both, faith and justification.

Austin, and the next of Hesychius, are answered by roate, and not by
judgment. For they are both misquoted; which he must needs have observed, and
then would have reproved, if he had looked for them in the places cited. The
former I cannot find, and therefore let it pass without any answer.

If Hesych in Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 14.
this interpretation may go for current, I know not what may be refused, as
counterfeit. Grace, which is of mercy, is apprehended by faith alone, and not
of works: that is (say you) we do not merit by our works, done before
grace, any thing at Gods hand; but of his mercy receive both faith and
justification. Hesychius says, that grace is apprehended by faith alone: you
make him say, that we receive both faith and justification of Gods mercy: he
speaks of attaining to grace by faith; you expound him of receiving faith by
Gods mercy. But indeed Hesychius in his own speech makes a distinction,
affirming of grace, that it is Praebetur.
given us (viz. on Gods behalf) of mercy and compassion, and is received on
our part by faith alone, and not by works.

Supra Can^. ferm. 22.
Bernard. Whoseeuer is pricked for his sins and thirsts after
righteousness, let him believe in thee, who justifies a sinner, and being
justified by Faith alone, he shall have peace with God.

Bernard has: Whosoever thirsts after righteousness: let him believe in
thee: that being justified by faith alone, he may have peace with God. Sup.
Cant. ^e^m. 22.


Ans. By faith alone, he excludes all other means, that either levv, or
gentile required, but not charity: Which his very words include, for how can we
abhor sin, and thirst after justice, without charity? and in the same work
he declares plainly that he comprehends always charity, when he speaks
of a justifying faith: saying. A right faith does not make a man righteous, if
it work not by Charity. And again: Neither works without faith, nor faith
without works is sufficient Sermon. 24.
to make the soul righteous.

Bernard. in Cant. ser. 24.
those places you bring, he shows what faith he means, even as we do, who
say that no faith can justify, but that which works by love; not in the very
act of justifying, but in the course of our conversation. Therefore Bernard. in
Cant. ser. 24.
in the former place, when he has said, that being justified by faith alone,
we shall have peace with God, he does afterward distinguish justification from
sanctification. They therefore that being justified by faith, Desiderant
deliberantque ^^ctari.
desire, and resolve to follow after holiness, etc. And in the latter he says,
that faith without works is dead; to sever love from faith, is to kill it. But
none of these things prove, that Bernard gave the habit, or the act of love
any place of a cause in our justification, or any respect with God to our
justification. For then, how could he have said, by faith only?

They said, he which rests on faith alone, is cursed: but Paul shows, that
he is blessed which rests on faith alone.

^oses law: the Apostle contrariwise denounces them accursed, who would join
the ceremonies of Moses law, with Christian religion, and so faith alone,
there excludes Gal. 5.
only the old law, not the works of charity.

Chrysostom. ad Gal. 3.
Chrysostom speaks of the Moral law, any man may see, that marks how he
urges the Apostles reason, to prove them accursed, who will join the law
with faith to justification: namely, that they are accursed, because they
cannot fulfill every part of the moral law; for of it is that Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
sentence uttered.

Let man acknowledge himself to want true justice, and that he is justified
only by faith in Christ.

Basils, saying: Let man acknowledge De humil. How I pray you?
himself to want true justice, and that he is justified only by faith in
Christ: If a man know himself justified by faith in Christ, how can he
acknovvledge that he wants true justice? His words truly repeated are these.
Let man acknovvledge that he is unworthy of true justice: and that his
justification comes not of his desert, but of the mere mercy of God through
Christ. So that by says alone S. Basil treating of humility, excludes all
merit of our own, but no necessary good disposition, as you may see in his
Sermon, de fide, where he proves by many texts of holy Scripture, that charity
is as necessary as faith.

That is (says Basil) perfect, and full rejoicing in Gods sight, when a man is
not lifted up, no not for his own righteousness, but acknowledges himself
indeed to be destitute of true righteousness, and to be justified only by faith
in Christ. Basil. in Ascet. de fide. Fides est a^^esus indubitatus ad ea^quae
a^tur.
Basil in that place speaks of faith, as it is an assent to those things that
are taught by the grace of God, requiring works not to justification, but in
our carriage here to salvation.

We think that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law: and
he says that justification, by faith alone suffices, so as a man only
believing may be justified. And, Therefore it lies upon us --,to search who
was justified by faith without works. And for an example, I think upon the
thief who being crucified with Christ cried unto him, Lord remember me when
thou come into thy kingdom: and there is no other good work of his
mentioned in the Gospel: but for this alone faith, Jesus says unto him, This
night thou shall be with me in paradise.

Origin excludes no good disposition in us to justification, but says, that a
man may besaued, without doing ourvvardly any good works; If he want time
and place: as the Thief did, who presently upon his conversion was put to
death, which is good Catholic Doctrine: but that you may perceive how
necessary the good dispositions before mentioned be to justification, you shall
find if you consider well al circumstances, not one of them to have bin wanting
in that good Theefes conversion. First, that he stood in fear of Gods just
judgment, appears by these his words, to his fellovv, Do thou not fear
God, etc. He had hope to be saved by Christ, out of which he said: O Lord
remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom: By both which speeches is
shevved also his faith both in God, that he is the governor and just judge of
the world, and in Christ, that he was the Redeemer of mankind. His repentance
and confession of his fault, is laid down in this: And we truly suffer
vvorthilie: His charity toward God and his neighbor, in reprehending his
fellows blasphemy, in defending Christ's innocence: and in the midst of his
greatest disgraces, and raging enemies, to confess him to be King of the
world to come: out of all which we may gather also, that he had a full
purpose to amend his life, and to have taken such order for his recovery, as it
should please Christ his Savior to appoint. So that he lacked not any one of
those dispositions, which the Catholic Church requires to justification.

Perkins allegation; but, if it do any thing, condemns Origens judgment of
him. As for the dispositions you often mention, doubtless if Origin had
thought that any such had been necessary, or respected by God, in the
justification of that thief, he would never have said, that he was justified
without works, that did so many good works in so short a time.

Origin meant not to exclude any of these good qualites out of the companies of
faith; is apparent: by that which he has written on the next Chapter: where
he says. That faith cannot be imputed to justice, to such as believe in
Christ, unless they Romans 4.
do withal put off the old man, and a little before more plainly saying: I
think that faith is the first beginning of salvation, hope is proceeding in
the building, but the top and perfection of the whole work, is charity.

faith which is without sanctification, cannot instifie; that faith is not all
that is required to salvation; but all graces of regeneration are to be
labored for and obtained, before we can come to heaven. And by this we may
see, that as the Fathers, so Origin also makes a difference betwixt
justification, where faith only is respected, and salvation, to which all
virtues are required.

III. Difference.


The doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that there be two kinds of
justification: the first and second, as I have said. The first is, when one of
an evil man is made a good man: and in this, works are wholly excluded, it
being wholly of grace. The second is, when a man of a just man is made more
just. And this they will have to proceed from works of grace: for (say they)
as a man when he is once borne can by eating and drinking make himself a
bigger man, though he could not at the first make himself a man: even so a
sinner having his first justification, may afterward by grace make himself
more just. Therefore they hold these two things: I. That good works are
meritorious causes of the second justification, which they term Actual: II.
that good works are means to increase first justification, which they call
Habitual.

Now let us see how far forth we must join with them in this point. Our
consent therefore stands in three conclusions.

I. That good works done by them that are justified do please God, and are
approved of him, and therefore have a reward.

II. Good works are necessary to salvation two ways: first, not as causes
thereof, either conseruant, adiuvant, or procreant: but only as consequents of
faith: in that they are inseparable companions and fruits of that faith, which
is indeed necessary to salvation. Secondly, they are necessary as marks in
a way, and as the way it self directing us unto eternal life.

III. We hold and believe, that the righteous man, is in some sort justified
by works, for so the holy Ghost speaks plainly and truly, Iam. 2. 21. That
Abraham was justified by works.

Perkins first grants, that good works do please God, and have a
temporal revvard. Temporal is of your foysting in as if we denied good works
revvarded in heaven.


2. That they are necessary to salvation, not as the cause thereof, but either
as marks in a way to direct us toward salvation: or as fruits and signs
of righteousness, to declare one to be just before men: all which he
shuffleth in, rather to delude our arguments, then for that they esteem much
of good works, which they hold to be no better then deadly sins.

Before men, to make the world believe, that we give no place to good works in
the sight of God: whereas Page 93. 88.
Master Perkins professes, that Abraham was justified by works even before
God; not only before men, as you write.

12. Art. part. 2. art.
against your own knowledge, that we hold good works to be no better than
deadly sins: whereas we teach, that those that are indeed good works, are
able to justify a man perfectly in the presence of God, and to deserve
everlasting life. Yea we maintain, that the imperfect works of the
regenerate, are brought forth by the grace of Gods spirit, and, for all their
imperfection, are accepted, and shall be rewarded by God our Father in heaven.

James be understood, that Abraham was justified, that is, declared and made
manifest to be just indeed by his obedience, and that even before God. Now
that our doctrine is the truth, it will appear by reasons on both parts.



Perkins propounds it, is, whether we be justified by works, as by causes
meritorious of our justification; not, whether they be the true cause of our
second justification; which he denies wholly, as a device of yours. And indeed
they Sander. de iustif. lib. 6. c. 4. page 647.
that have more nearly sifted this branne, have found that there is but one
justification; because faith and works make one righteousness, begun by ^aith,
and increased and perfected by works. Justification (says Andrad Orthod. e
plic. lib. 6. page 462.
Andradius the great champion of the Council of Trent) consists of two parts;
forgiveness of sins, and obedience to the law. Stapleton. promptu. Cathol. ad
Ioa. 8. 57.
Stapleton speaks more plain: The Catholics say, that a man is justified by
faith, and works, as by the formal cause. So that, according to your popish
divinity, works are not only the meritorious efficient cause of our
justification, but the formal cause also; as Stapleton directly affirms.

Perkins pretends to prove, that they are no cause of the increase of our
justice: and yet frames not one argument directly to that purpose: but repeates
those objections, and proposes them now at large, which he made before,
against the first justification: the which although impertinent to this place,
yet I will solue them first, and then set down our own.

Perkins understanding your opinion, better than your self will be known to
do, frames his reason against this position; That works are part of that
righteousness, which we must plead before God, for the deserving of everlasting
life: or, that our justification before God, is partly of works, and partly of
faith: which is the doctrine of your Church, howsoever by you it be blanched.

Our reasons.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law.
Some answer, that ceremonial works be excluded here: some, that moral
works: some, works going before faith. But let them devise what they can for
themselves: the truth is, that Paul excludes all works whatsoever, as by the
text will appear. For verse. 24. he says, We are justified freely by his
grace: that is, by the mere gift of God: giving us to understand, that a
sinner in his justification is merely passive, that is, doing nothing on his
part whereby God should accept him to life everlasting.

Ans. The Apostle there speaks of the justification of a sinner: for he says
before, that he has proved both Jew, and Greek, to be under sin; and that
all have sinned, and need the glory of God: Wherefore this place appertains
not unto the second justification: and excludes only either works of the law,
as not necessary unto the first justification of a sinner: against the Jews
who thought and taught them to be necessary: of else against the Gentiles any
work of ours, from being any meritorious cause of that first justification:
for we acknovvledge ve^^e willingly (as you have heard often before) that
every sinner is justified freely of the mere grace of God, through the merit
of Christ only, and See the point of free will.
without any merit of the sinner himself.

Perkins proves, that justification is wholly of faith, because Romans 3. 28
the Apostle excludes works from it: whereas you teach, that faith and works
together make up that justice or righteousness, whereby a man is justified
before God.

Perkins very ab^urdly says: for in their own opinion he must believe (which
is an action:) and in ours not only believe, but also Hope, Love, and Repeet.

Perkins makes not a sinner merely passive in his justification, but in
receiving the gift of faith; and in being stirred up to believe. And yet is he
not in these neither passive, as fondly you imagine we say: for he hears, and
sometimes meditates, fears, hopes etc. but in this respect he is said to be
passive, because his yielding to believe, proceeds not from any strength of
his free will, upon the good motion inspired, but from the spirit of God
inclining him ineuitably, to believe freely.

excludes all boasting, and therefore all kind of works are thereby excluded:
and specially such as are most of all the matter of boasting, that is, good
works. For if a sinner, after that he is justified by the merit of Christ,
were justified more by his own works, then might he have some matter of
boasting in himself.

think of the rest of those good preparations, which we hold to be necessary,
that we cannot truly bpast of them, as though they came of our selves, but we
confess all these good inspirations, as all other good, to descend from the
bounteous liberality of the ^ather of lights: and For the yielding of our
consent to them; we can no more vaunt, then of consenting unto ^aith, all which
is no more then if a man be mired in a lake, and unable of himself to get out,
would be content that another of his goodness should help him out of it.



Paul forbids not all glorying or boasting: For he ^orieth in the hope of
glory of the Son of God, and in Romans 5. 2. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 12.
his tribulations: Again, He defiueth that vve^ may glory in measure, and
that he might glory in his power. And that he was constrained to glory in his
visions and reuolations: So that a good Christian may glory in our Lord, and in
his heavenly gifts, so it be in measure, and due season. Acknowledging them
from whence they come. But to boast and say that either God needed us, or that
our good parts were cause, that God called us first to his service, is both
false, and utterly unlawful.

Romans 5. 23.
though in the midst of tribulations he break out into this boasting. But
how proou^^ this, that therefore all boasting is not forbidden in the matter of
justification? To which 2. Cor. 10. ^3.
the next place alleged, no way belongs, being spoken by the Apostle of
himself, in respect of those gifts that God had bestowed upon him, for the
work of his ministry. The 2. Cor. ^.
last being of the same nature, is so far from proving the lawfulnes of
boasting, that the Verse. 1. 5. 1.
Apostle is saine to excuse himself for it, as a thing inexpedient. But
howsoever, it can by no means prove, that the Apostle shuts not all boasting
out of justification.

Paul's meaning, consider and read Ephesians: 2. 8. 9. By grace (says he) you are
saved through faith: and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of
works, least any man should boast himself. Here Paul excludes al and every
work, and directly works of grace themselves; as appears by the reason
following, For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works: which God has ordained that we should walk in them. Now let the
Papists tell me, what be the works which God has prepared for men to walk
in, and to which they are regenerate, unless they be the most excellent
works? and let them mark, how Paul excludes them wholly from the work of
justification and salvation.

Ephesians. 2. is nothing against our Doctrine of justification, but too too
ignorantly or maliciously cited against it: and note also with S. Austin, that
faith is there mentioned, to exclude all merits of our works, which Lib. 83.
q. 76.
went before and might seem to the simple to have been some cause why God
bestovved his first grace upon us: but no virtuous dispositions requisite for
the better preparation to the same grace.

Austin; first, Aug. lib. qq. 83. q. 76.
that in the place you name, there is never a word of the sentence in question.
Secondly, that his scope in that treatise is no more, but to show that they
falsely understood such Romans 3. 27. 28.
places of the Apostle, as speak against justification by works, who think,
that when once they have believed in Christ, they shall be saved by faith,
though they live never so wickedly. Thirdly, to refu^e that lewd conceit, Aust^
adds, that the Apostle Ad hoc potius.
rather therefore says, that a man is justified by faith, without the works of
the law; because he would have no man imagine, that he has obtained
justification by faith, upon the merit of his former works. This we grant to
be true; but not all that the Apostle intends. For it cannot be doubted, but
that he confuteth the opinion of the Jews and Heathen, concerning
justification; as it is plain by the Romans 1. and 2. and 3.
three first chapters. Now they did not make account to deserve the grace of
justification at Gods hands, by their holy and virtuous living, but to inherit
heaven by it. Neither could they that did believe, so much flatter themselves,
as to dream, that their good deeds in particular had procured that favor;
when it was easy for them to see, that many thousands both Jews and Gentiles,
as good, or better than 1. Cor. 6. 10. 11.
diverse of themselves, for virtuous behavior, notwithstanding attained not to
this justification. Besides, if we mark the reasons, by which the Romans 1. and
2. and 3.
Apostle beats down their pride, they are such as generally concern all both
Jews and Gentiles. Add hereunto, that Austin speaks no further for the use
of good works, but to show, that they are necessary for a Christian man, as
Vacuam esse side^, si non been operetur.
without which his faith is void and idle: and that no man may dream, that if
he believe, it Non ad eum pertineat been operari.
pertaines not to him to work well: which are the words that immediately go
before these you bring.

Perkins infer, that in that sentence S. Paul speaks of works of grace:
because in the text follovving he mentioned good works. Whereas the Apostle
puts an evident distinction betvveene those two kind of works, signifying
the first. To be of ourselves: The second, ^o proceed from us as Gods
vvorkmansh^o, created in Christ Jesus, and the first, he calls Works
simply: the second, Good works, prepared of God for us to walk in after our
first justification. What gross ignorance then was it, to take these two so
distinct manner of works, for the same, and to ground himself so boldly upon
it.

Perkins says, that the Apostle bars all works before and after grace. He
proves it by the very text it self. The reason may be thus more plainly
propounded; We are not saved by works (says Ephesians. 2. 7. 8. Verse. 9. Verse. 10.
the Apostle) that no man may boast. His proof follows: For good works are
appointed by God for us to walk in, for which purpose he has made us anew in
Jesus Christ. That this tenth verse is a proof of the former, the conjunction
(for) declares. But how it can serve to that purpose, if the two verses speak
of diverse kinds of works, some justifying, some not justifying, neither I see,
nor (I think) you can show me. What though he call the former works simply,
the latter good works? are not the former those works which the law moral
and natural require? and are not they in their nature good works? But who
knows not, that by works, without any addition, works of grace, after
justification, are signified? let the Apostle Iam. 2. 14. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22.
24. 25. 26.
James speak, who entreating of such works, and naming them almost in every
verse, does not once call them good works, but works simply.

If ye be circumcised, ye are bound to the whole law, and ye are abolished from
Christ. Here Paul disputes against such men as would be saved partly by
Christ, and partly by the works of the law: hence I reason thus. If a man will
be justified by works, he is bound to fulfill the whole law, according to the
rigor thereof: that is Paul's ground. I now assume: no man can fulfill the law
according to the rigor thereof: for the lives and works of most righteous men
are imperfect, and stained with sin: and therefore they are taught every day,
to say on this manner: forgive us our debts. Again, our knowledge is imperfect,
and therefore our faith, repentance, and sanctification is answerable. And
lastly the regenerate man is partly flesh, and partly spirit: and therefore his
best works are partly from the flesh, and in part only spiritual. Thus then
for any man to be bound to the rigor of the whole law, is as much as if he
were bound to his own damnation.

Erit mihi magnus Appollo: S. Paul only says in these words: That if you be
circumcised, ye are bound to keep the whole law of Moses. M. Perkins, That
if a man will be justified by works, he must fulfill the rigor of the S.
Paul knevv no other law, hut that of Moses to justification.
law: Which are as just as Germans lips, as they say: But M. Perkins says
that it is S. Paul's ground: but he is much deceived, for the Apostles ground
is this. That circumcision is as it were a profession of Iudaisme, and
therefore he that would be circumcided, did make himself subject unto the
whole law of the Jews. Of the possibilities of fulfilling the law, because
M. Perkins touches so often that string, shall be treated in a distinct
question, as soon as I have dispatched this.

Perkins understood his own mind in this, and other arguments, better than I
can do, and so could have affoorded better answers for his defense. Yet thus
much I may say, that the text of 1 the Apostle may be applied to the
proposition; because they that would be circumcised, Gal. 5. 3.
would be justified by the works of the law. Whereupon it follows, that he
that will be justified by works, is bound to keep the whole law. For so the
Apostle says of them that will be justified by circumcision.



Ans. That election is of grace without works, done of our own simple
forces, or without the works of Moses law: but not without provision of
good works issuing out of faith, and the help of Gods grace, as shall be
handled more largely in the question of merits.

Romans 9. 10, 11.
Apostle Paul, and Aug. Epist. 106.
Austins exposition of him, but also contrary to Lombard. lib. 1. did. 41.
Lombard, Thomas. 1. q 23. art. 5. and in 1 senten. did. 41. q. 1. art. 3. and
qq. disp. q 6. de praed. art. 2. and ad Romans 9.
Thomas, Bellarm. de gra. and lib. arb. lib. 2. c. 10. 11. and seqq.
Bellarmine, and generally the learned Papists: as it shall appear, if this
writer give occasion.

please God before his works can please him. But the person of a sinner cannot
please God, till he be perfectly justified: and therefore till he be
justified, he cannot do so much as one good work. And thus good works cannot
be any meritorious causes of justification, after which they are both for time,
and order of nature. In a word, whereas they make two distinct iustifications:
we acknowledge that there be degrees of sanctification, yet so as
justification is only one, standing in remission of sins and Gods
acceptance of us to life everlasting by Christ; and this justification has no
degrees but is perfect at the very first.

OF THE SECOND JUSTIFICATION.
A man must be fully justified, before he can do a good work: and therefore
good works cannot go before justification. True, not before the first
justification of a sinner. But good Sir, you He showed your distinction, he
made none.
having made in the beginning of this last Article a distinction between the
first and second justification: And having before discussed the first, and the
second now remaining, and expecting you, why did you not say one word of it,
the matter being ample and well worthy the handling?



This slander has bin often disproued. Page 76.
works be like unto defiled cloutes, and no better then deadly sins as you
hold else where, let any wise man judge what degrees of goodness can be
lodged in it.

inherent righteousness, and labor for, and (by the grace of God) attain to
the increase of it, in some measure, from day to day.

D. B. P. Lib. 2. con. souin. Epist. 81. Epist, 57. Hom. 15. in Ezech.
whereby they take fast hold on Christ's righteousness, which can never after, be
either lost or increased? Why then do you with your brother Jounuan,
maintain, that all men are equally righteous? If it so be, let him that
desires to see you well coursed, read S. Hierome, S. Amorose, S. Augustine, S.
Gregory.

Iouinian is rather one of your brood, who hold, that a man being justified, is
Hieron. contra Iouin.
wholly without sin, even in Gods judgment.

At least you must needs uphold that a man is as just and righteous at his
first conversion, as at his death, how godly a life soever he lead: against
which I will put down these reasons follovving.

Let him that is just be yet justified: or as Cap. 22. ^ccles. 18.
your text has it. He that is righteous, let him be more righteous.

Revel. 22. 11.
that place, signifies to proceed in doing justly; as Ribera in Apoc. 22. 11.
Ribera the Jesuit proves, by the opposition in the other part of the
sentence: Let him that hurts, hurt still, that is, go forward in your
hurting (says he) and so, let him that hurts no body, but gives every man
his due, go forward in so doing. Let him that does good (says Glossa interlin.
your gloss) yet Impensius inferat.
do good more abundantly. Let him that is righteous (says Cyprian de bono
patient. cap. 13. and testimon. ad Quiri. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Cyprian in two places) do yet more righteous things; and him that is holy,
more holy. The Aretas Apoc. 22. 11.
Greek Scholiast read it thus: Let him that is righteous, (...).
yet work righteousness. And so do the Testam. Graec. Plantin.
Greek Testaments printed by Plantin; and the Interlin. Bib.
Interlinear Bible too; so that there is not so much as the word, justified, in
some of your own Greek copies.

And that, fear not to be justified even until death: do convince, that there
are more iustifications then one, and that a man may increase in justification,
and righteousness until death.

Eccl. 18. 22.
That of Ecclesiasticus would have been spared, till you have proved that book
to be canonical, which you know we deny, and that, as we are sure, with the
consent of the ancient Church: at least you should not have alleged it with
so grosie an error in the translation. The Greek is (...).
differ not; The old Latin was in all likelihood, Ne veteris.
Be not forbidden, or hindered, as it may appear by Vatabl^ (...) pe. Ro^er.
Steph.
Vatablus edition of it, by Robert Stephens; An^uerp. a* pud ^iduam Stelsij
anno 1572.
that of Antwerpe, and that Biblia cum gloss 1506.
with the gloss: where Lyra, ne prohibearis.
Lyra expounds it, ne prohibearis. And^ad. Orthod. explic. lib. 6. page 446.
Andradius delivers it thus: Let there be nothing that may hinder thee from
praying always, or Prohibeat.
may let thee from being justified, even until death. Some ignorant writer
that copied out the book, finding ne veteris, be not let, and mistaking t, for
r, writ, ne Ne verea^^s.
vereris, fear not; barbarously, against true Grammar Latin. But the sense
also, not only the words, is misconceiued. For the meaning is, that we should
not put off honesty, or good conversation to our last end. Ne differas iustum
probare te. Vatablus.
Put not off till death, to prove thy self a righteous man, says Vatablus a
Papist, very skillful in the tongues, and sometimes Hebrew Reader in Paris,
where you have the very word, which Bellarm. d^ iusti^. lib. 4. cap. 19.
Bellarmine condemns in Calvin, ne differas. Which also Pagnin uses, a
notable Linguist and a Papist; Nec tuam prob^tatem differas.
Put not off thy honesty. Arias Montanus. ne expectes.
Arias Montanus has the sense, though not the word, weight not. Stapleton. de
iustif. proleg. 2. a^ lib. 5.
Stapleton applies it to the first justification; Bellarm. de just. vbi supra.
Prob. 4. 2. Cor. 9.
Bellarmine to the second; whose reasons I will answer otherwhere. It is
enough for the present, that a second justification cannot be proved out of
these two places.

that the path of a just man proceeds, as the light does until it be perfect
day; Which is by degrees more and more: And S. Paul teaches the same, where
he says to men that give alms plentifully. That God will maltiplie their
seed, and augment the increases of the fruits of their justice.

This Prou. 4. 18.
place proves not, that there is a second justification, but either that the
light of the righteous continues, or at the most, that it increases to the
end; which we denynot.

And this much less, where 2. Cor. 9. 10.
the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians to cheerfulness in liberality to the
poor, assuring them, that God will make them more able to bring forth such
fruits of righteousness, by multiplying their seed and their store. Ye shall
give them bread to eat (says Caietan. ad 2. Cor. 9 10.
Caietan) and Deuteronomy. 28. 11.
seed, wherewith to sow again, and just or honest gain; whereas the gain
that the wicked make, is unjust.

James does most effectually prove this increase of righteousness, and the
second justification, in these words. Abraham our Father was he not justified
by works, offering Isaac his son upon the Altar? That he speaks of the
second justification is evident: for Abraham was justified before Isaac was
borne, as it is most manifest by the Scripture it self: and by that heroical
act, of not sparing his only and entirely Cap. 2.
beloved Son, Not his justification. Genes. 15. Romans 4.
his justice was much augmented. And the Apostle himself seems to have
foreseen all our adversaries cauillation, and to have so long before prevented
them: First, that common shift of theirs (that this work was a sign, or the
fiuit only of his faith, and no companion of it, in the matter of
justification) is formally confuted: for the holy Ghost speaking distinctly of
both, his faith, and work, and joining them both in this act of justification,
attributes the better part of it, unto his work: thus; See thou that faith
did work with his works, and by the works the says was consummate and
made perfect? Which he does after fitly declare by a similitude, comparing
faith to the body, and good works to the soul: which give life and luster
to faith, otherwise faith is of little value and estimation with God.

Iam. 2. 21.
this place; yet perhaps it shall not be amiss to follow him in these several
points. That he speaks not of the same justification which Paul does, it is
plain: but not that he means your second justification, whereby the former
is made perfect to deserve everlasting life. When we say works are no companions
of faith in justification, we do not say, they are not present, but that they
do not justify: neither speak we of testifying our justification by works, as
the Apostle here does, but of that which you call the first justification; to
which questionless this fact of Abraham, in your own judgment, did not
appertain. But he joins faith and works together. How should they be
severed; when there is no holy action, performed in any part of our life, but
proceeds from faith, which Suapte natura. Caietan. ibi.
of it own nature, works by love? now faith is not said to be perfited by
works, as if it did justify a man by them, (for then had it not justified
Abraham, till this great work was wrought) but because the act is the proose
of the perfection of the virtue. Whereupon it follows in the text, Iam. 2. 23.
That by this work the Scripture was fulfilled, which had testified that
Abraham was justified by faith. For now it manifestly appeared, that the
testimony was true; Abraham making it clear to all the world, that he had true
faith indeed: that is (says Caieton) such a faith, as Non renuentem, sed
pa^atam opera^. Caietan. ibi.
would not refuse, but was re^die to bring forth good works. And (in his
opinion) this is that, which James says, that we are not justified by a barren
faith, but by a faith fruitful in good works.

Paul also teaches atlarge, among other speeches including this: 1. Cor. 13.
That if he should have all faith, and vvanted charity, he were nothing: And
comparing faith and charity together, defines expressly, that charity is the
greater virtue: Which charity is the fountain of all good works. And so by
this preferring these works of charity before faith, he does stop the other
starting hole of the Protestants, that Abraham forsooth was justified before
God, by only faith: but was declared just before men by his works: For if
God esteem more of charity, then of our faith, a man is more justified before
God by charity, then by faith.



Now I know that thou love me: and to convince all obstinate cauilling, Genesis
22.
is it not said that his faith did in this very fact cooperate with his works,
and that the work made his faith perfect? which conjunction of both of them
together, does demonstrate that he speaks o^ his justification We grant he
does.
before God; adding also, That he was therefore called the friend of God.
Which could not have been, if thereby he had been only declared just before
men: and thus does S. Augustine reconcile the two places of the Apostles, S.
Paul, and S. James, which seem contrary. S. Paul saying that a man is
justified by faith, without works and S. James, that a man is justified by
works, and not by faith only. That S. Paul speaks of works which go before
says, such as we of our own forces, without the help of grace are able to
do: and such he says not to deserve our first justification. But S. James
disp^teth of works, which sollovv faith, and issue out of our souls, now
garnished with grace, and such he holds us to be justified by, that is, made
more and more just: See the place. He says directhe, Lib. 83. quaest. q. 76.
Sermon. 16. de verb. Apos.
that we are justified, and that this iusuce does increase, whiles it does
proceed and profit.

Abraham by this glorious fact was justified even before God, that is, was
known to be justified, or to have true faith; as he Genesis 22. 12.
was known to fear God by it, not that God was ignorant before, either of his
faith, or fear, but because it pleased him, by this deed to take as it were
special notice of them both, as men do. That righteousness is increased by
holy actions, I showed before, and that therefore we are justified by them,
that is, more sanctified.

O ye of little faith. And then a little after, I have not found so great
faith in Israel: And O Lord increase our says: Math. 8. Luke 19.
and many such like, where many different degrees of faith are mentioned. How
then can the justification which depends upon that faith, not be correspondent
unto that diversity of faith, but all one? Again, M. Perkins delivers
plainly, That men at the first, are not so well assured Page 54.
of their salvation, as they are afterward; If then in the certainety of their
salvation, which is the prime effect of their justification, they put degrees,
they must perforce allow them in the justification it self.

Romans 4. 3. 5.
account faith to us for righteousness, and forgive our sins, not by halues,
but fully upon the least measure of true believing.

Objections of Papists.
Judge me according to my righteousness. Hence they reason thus; if David be
judged according to his righteousness, then may he be justified thereby; but
David desires to be judged according to his righteousness: and therefore he
was justified thereby. Answ. There be two kinds of righteousness, one of the
person, the other of the cause or action. The righteousness of a man's person,
is, whereby it is accepted into the favor of God into life eternal. The
righteousness of the action or cause is, when the action or cause is judged of
God to be good and just. Now David in this Psalm, speaks only of the
righteousness of the action, or innocence of his cause, in that he was
falsely charged to have sought the kingdom. In like manner it is said of
Phineas, Psalm. 166. 31. that his fact in killing Zimri and Cosbie, was imputed
to him for righteousness: not because it was a satisfaction to the law, the
rigor whereof could not be fulfilled in that one work, but because God
accepted of it as a just work, and as a token of his righteousness and zeal
for Gods glory.

Object. II. The Scripture says in sundry places, that men are blessed which
do good works. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed is the man that is upright in heart, and
walks in the law of the Lord. Ans. The man is blessed that endeavors to
keep Gods commandments. Yet is he not blessed simply, because he does so;
but because he is in Christ, by whom he does so: and his obedience to the law
of God is a sign thereof.

Object. III. When man confesses his sins and humbles himself by prayer
and fasting, Gods wrath is pacified and stayed: therefore prayer and fasting
are causes of justification before God. Answ. Indeed men that truly humble
themselves by prayer and fasting, do appease the wrath of God: yet not
properly by these actions, but by their faith expressed and testified in them,
whereby they apprehend that which appeaseth Gods wrath, even the merits of
Christ in whom the Father is well pleased: and for whose sake alone he is well
pleased with us.

Object. IV. Sundry persons in Scriptures are commended for perfection: as
Noe, and Abraham, Zachary, and Elizabeth: and Christ bids us all be
perfect: and where there is any perfection of works, there also works may
justify. Answ. There be two kinds of perfection: perfection in parts, and
perfection in degrees. Perfection in parts is, when being regenerate, and
having the seeds of all necessary virtues, we endeavor accordingly to obey
God, not in some few, but in all and every part of the law: as Josias turned
unto God according to all the law of Moses. Perfection in degree is, when a man
keeps every commandment of God, and that according to the very rigor thereof,
in ye highest degree. Now then whereas we are commanded to be perfected, and
have examples of the same perfection in Scripture: both commandments and
examples must be understood of perfection in parts, and not of perfection in
degrees, which cannot be attained unto in this life; though we for our parts,
must daily strive to come as near unto it, as possibly we can.

Object. V. 2. Cor. 4. 17. Our momentarie afflictions work unto us a greater
measure of glory: now if afflictions work our salvation, then works also do
the same. Answ. Afflictions work salvation, not as causes procuring it, but as
a means directing us thereto. And thus always must we esteem of works, in
the matter of our salvation, as of a certain way, or a mark therein,
directing us to glory, not causing and procuring it: as Bernard says, they
are via regni, non Lib. de great. (...) lib. arb.
causa regnandi: The way to the kingdom, not the cause of reigning there.

Object. VI. We are justified by the same thing whereby we are judged: but we
are judged by our good works: therefore justified also. Answ. The proposition
is false: for judgment is an act of God, declaring a man to be just that is
already just: and justification is an other act of God, whereby he makes him
to be just, that is by nature unjust. And therefore in equity the last
judgment is to proceed by works; because they are the fittest means to make
trial of every man's cause, and serve fitly to declare whom God has justified
in this life.

Object. VII. Wicked men are condemned for evil works: therefore righteous
men are justified by good works. Answ. The reason holds not: for there is
great difference between evil and good works. An evil work is perfectly
evil, and so deserves damnation: but there is no good work of any man that
is perfectly good: and therefore cannot justify.

Object. VIII. To believe in Christ is a work, and by it we are justified: and
if one work do justify, why may we not be justified by all the works of the
law. Answ. Faith must be considered two ways: first, as a work, quality, or
virtue: secondly, as an Instrument, or an hand reaching out it self to receive
Christ's merit. And we are justified by faith, not as it is a work, virtue, or
quality; but as it is an instrument to receive and apply that thing whereby
we are justified. And therefore it is a figurative speech to say, We are
justified by faith. Faith considered by it self makes no man righteous;
neither does the action of faith, which is to apprehend, justify: but the
object of faith, which is Christ's obedience apprehended.

These are the principal reasons commonly used: which as we see, are of no
moment. To conclude therefore, we hold, that works concur to justification,
and that we are justified thereby as by signs and effects, not as causes: for
both the beginning, middle, and accomplishment of our justification is only in
Christ: and hereupon John says, If any man (being already justified) sin
we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ, and he is the propitiation
for our sins. And to make our good works means or causes of our
justification, is to make every man a Savior to himself.

Perkins makes for us in this Article: do belong either to the question of
merits, or of the possibility of fulfilling D. B. P. Page 200. This is but a
de^^ce to s^^ft off the ans^vering of them.
the law, or to the perfection of our justice: and therefore I remitte them to
those places: and will handle the two latter points, before I come to that of
m^rits.

You are still the same man; shifting off that to which you have no answer
ready. If you say any thing to these objections afterward, I will refer the
reader to it by A. B. C.

WHETHER IT BE POSSIBLE FOR a man in grace, to fulfill Gods law.
Perkins argues, that it is impossible. First, for that Paul took it for his
ground, that the law could not be fulfilled. Admit it D. B. P. Page 95. Gal.
5. These objections he picketh out of other places here and there. Rom 8.
were so. I then would answer, that he meant, that a man helped only with the
knowledge of the law, cannot fulfill the law: but by the aid of Gods grace, he
might be able to do it. Which I gather out of S. Paul, where he says, That,
that which was impossible to the law, is made by the grace of Christ possible.

Your answer is insufficient. For the g Apostle speaks not of any strength
to be had by the knowledge of the law, (which no reasonable man ever looked for)
but denies ability to the Galathians, who would have joined faith and works
together to justification. That the Romans 8. 3
Apostle says is this; That the law, which promises everlasting life to them
that keep it, could not bestow it upon us, because we were unable to perform
the condition: but God has prepared that for us, in sending his Son to be a
sacrifice for sin, that we might obtain that, which by the righteousness of
the law was to be had, if we could have fulfilled it; which notwithstanding
they only attain to that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

The lives and works of most righteous men, are imperfect and stained with
sin; They are not justified by their works.
ergo quid? Of this, there shall be a several Article.

Therefore they cannot be justified by their works.

Our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore our faith, repentance, and
sanctification is answerable. I would to God all our works were answerable to
our knowledge, then would they be much more perfect then they are, but this
Argument is also impertinent, and does rather This is such a possibility as
never had event.
prove it possible to fulfill the law, because it is possible to know all the
law: Then if our works be answerable to our knowledge: we may also fulfill it.

Psalm. 119. 12. 18. 19. 33. 34.
David confesses himself so short of that knowledge. And yet a man may know
more than he can do. Our consequence is good, yours naught.

A man regenerate, is partly flesh, and partly spirit, and therefore Romans 8. 13.
his best works, are partly from the flesh. Not so, if we mortify the deeds
of the flesh by the spirit, as the Apostle exhorts. But these trifling
arguments belong rather unto the next question.

Romans 8. 13. Col. 3. 5.
Apostle exhorts, they should not be at all of the flesh. But since that in
this life is impossible, all our works savor of the flesh.

Perkins to some better, that the matter may be more thoroughly examined. Why
go ye about to put a yoke upon the Disciples Romans 8. 13.
necks, which neither we, nor our Fathers were able to bear? these words
were spoken of the law of Moses: therefore we were not able to fulfill it.

I answer first, that, that law could not be fulfilled by the only help of
the same law, without the further aid of Gods grace.

Secondly, that it was so burdensome and comberous, by reason of the multitude
of their Sacrifices, Sacraments, and Ceremonies, that it could hardly be kept
with the help of ordinary grace: and in that sense, it is said to be such a
yoke, as we were not able to bear. Because things very hard to be done, are
now and then, called impossible.

Perkins are trifles. Belike in your judgment, a little help would have
served: but it stands you upon to show, that we receive as much in this life,
as is sufficient for that purpose. Of all parts of the law, the sacrifices,
Sacraments, and Ceremonies had least need of grace to the keeping of them: and
therefore that is not the reason why it was a burden. But this is spoken also
of the Moral law; to Gal. 5. 3.
the keeping whereof circumcision binds. By such a distinction any slight
thing may to some man be impossible.

Josue, David, Josias, Zachary, Elizabeth, and many others, did fulfill all the
law, is recorded in holy Scripture: Wherefore it is most D. B. P. Ios. 11. 3.
Reg. 14. Act. 13. 4. Reg. 23. Luke 1.
manifest, that it might be kept.

In his answer to the 4. Objection.
Master Perkins has truly answered you) in respect of their sincere endeavor,
not in some, but in all known points of Gods commandments; yet faild they in
some now and then. That commendation of Ios. 11. 15.
Joshua, is only in that point of rooting out the Heathen; wherein he also
faulted not a little, Ios. 9. 14. 15.
by making peace with the Gibeonits, before he had asked counsel of God. How
2. Sam. 12. 9. and 13. 39. and 24. 10.
often and grievously David sinned, I had rather have the Scripture speak,
than my self out of it. 2. Chro. 35. 22.
Josiah is reproved for fighting against Pharao Necho, and chasticed for it
with loss both of victory and life. Luke 1. 20. Romans 7.
Zachary is convicted of sin, and stricken with dumnes, for not believing the
Angel: and yet in all probability he was as holy as his wife Elizabeth, both
truly, but not perfectly righteous.

To will is in me, but I find not how to perform: If Saint Paul could not
perform that which he would, how can others?

Ans. He speaks there of avoiding all evil motions, and temptations, which he
would willingly have done, but he could not: Marry he could well by the
assistance of Gods grace, subdue those prouocations to sin, and make them
occasions of virtue: and consequently, keep all the commandments, not
suffering those passions to lead him to the breach of any one of them.

Romans 7. 23.
that they overcame him sometimes, and led him captive.

Libr. 10. conf. cap. 7.
his consent from such wicked temptations, that S. Augustine thinks it may be
done of a mortified virtuous man, even when he is a sleep. And restifieth of
himself, that waking he performed it.

Math. 5. 28.
that consent to those sins was condemned in the 7. and 8. Commandments?
Besides, the Apostle might know by nature, that consent to lust was sin: but
the true meaning of the commandment Romans 7. 7.
he knew not, but by the law; so that withholding consent from these motions is
not enough to free us from sinning by them: and yet perhaps that would not
seem so easy, if we did not flatter our selves now and then. The quotation
out of Austin is false, and being of no great moment, I pass it over.

We do all offend in many things. And if we say we have no sin, we Iac.
3. 2. 1. Joan. 1.
deceive our selves. But if we could observe all the law, we should offend in
nothing, nor have any sin. ergo.

Ans. I grant that we offend in many things: not because it is not possible to
keep them, but for that we are frail, and easily led by the craft of the
Devil into many offenses which we might avoid, if we were so wary and
watchful as we ought to be: again, although we cannot keep our selves from
venial offenses, yet may we fulfill the law, which is not transgressed and
broken, unless we commit some mortal sins. For venial sins, either for
the smalnesse of the matter, or want of consideration, are not so opposite to
the law, as that they violate the reason, and purport of it, although they be
somewhat disagreeing with it. But of this matter more fully in some other
place.

Tully does an Orator, and Castiglio a Courtier. And what else is he, whom in
this answer you fancy? Such an one since the fall of Adam never was, not in
this world ever shall be. Do you not see your self what pitiful shifts these
be? Venial sins disagree with the law, but they do not violate the purport
and reason of it. Are they not against the pureness of Gods image, in which we
were created? are they not in a natural man damnable? Our obedience is to be
squared according to the commandment of God: neither have we any warrant from
him to excuse our selves by the conceited reason, and I know not what purport
of the law. For my part, though I acknowledge a great difference in degrees of
sins, yet I see little reason why it should not be as mortal a sin, to be
led away by carelesnes to the committing of those things which we might easily
avoid, as after a long and tedious fight, to be led captive by the violence of
some mighty temptation. For this striving argues a desire to please and serve
God: but that needless sinning shows either presumption, or want of ordinary
regard.





Which made S. Paul to say, I can do all things in him, that strengthens and
comfort me. Philip. 4.


Romans 7 19.
cannot do that good he would, shows plainly that ^hilip. 4. 13.
God does not enable him to all things: which in this place are to be
restrained according to the text: I can do all things, that is (says Lyra ad
Phil. 4. 13.
your gloss) I can use all fortunes and estates well. So do Theodoret. and
Oecumenius ad hunc locum.
Theodoret and Oecumenius take it. So do Lombard. Thomas Caietan. Psalm. 118.
other of your Interpreters restrain it; showing that he means not, he can
do all things; but that he could not do all those things, that is, be content
with any estate, were it not for the strength and comfort he has from Christ.

David, after thou O Lord hadest dilated my heart (and with thy grace let it at
liberty) I did run the wa^es of thy commandments: that is, I did readily,
and willingly perform them. Of the loving of God with all our heart, etc. shall
be treated in the question of the perfection of justice.

David ran indeed, and that an excellent race; but not without stumbling,
staying, and turning a little out of the way now and then: as 2. Sam. 24. 1. 2.
You ouervveened your strength as your answers show. Romans 8.
the last action in his health declares.

Paul is very plain for it, saying. That which was impossible to the law, in
that it is weakened by the flesh, God sending his Son in the similitude of
flesh, of sin, damned sin in the flesh, that the justification of the law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according
unto the spirit. See how formally he teaches, that Christ dying to redeem us
from sin, purchased us grace to fulfill the law, which before was impossible
unto our weak flesh.

Romans 8. 3.
the place before, that God by his Son has justified us, which the law could
not do: because we were unable to keep it. Now the end of this justification
is, that we should walk after the spirit, whereby we fulfill the law; though
not perfectly, yet performing the same duties the law requires, but not in the
same measure.

John was from that opinion, of thinking Gods Cap. 5. Matthew. 11.
commandments to be impossible, may appear by that Epistle: And his
commandments be not heavy. Which is taken out of our Saviors own words. My
yoke is sweet, and my burden is light. The reason of this is, that although to
our corrupt frailty, they be very heavy: Yet when the virtue of charity is
powered into our hearts by the holy Ghost, then lo, do we with delight fulfill
them. For as the Apostle witnesses. Charity is the fulness of the law. And,
He that does love his neighbor, has fulfilled Romans 13. Math. 22.
the law: Which Christ himself teaches, when he affirms, That the whole
law, and Prophets depend upon these two commandments, of loving God, and our
neighbor: Now both according unto our opinion and the Protestants, a man
regenerate and in the state of grace has in him the virtue of Charity: we
hold it to be the principal part of inherent justice: they say that their
justifying faith can never be separated from it: So that a righteous man, being
also endued with charity, is able thereby to fulfill the whole law.

1. Ioh. 5. 3.
S. John: for therefore are Gods Commandments said not to be heavy, because
our love to God, who has given us the assurance of his love to us in Jesus
Christ, makes us go willingly and cheerfully about them; for all those
encumbrances we find by the world, the flesh and the devil.

And in that respect we are said to fulfill the Romans 13. 13.
law by charity; because the obedience we perform (weak and slender though
it be) proceeds from the love of God, and of our neighbor; which is the very
sum of the law, Math. 22. 40.
upon which both the law and the Prophets depend. And all this proves not
perfect, but only true obedience; which all that are justified perform,
howsoever they fail much (in the particulars) of that measure the law exacteth.

Sermon in illud, Attend tibi. De not. and gra. cap. 69.
one ancient Father or two, S. Basil affirms, That it is impious and
ungodly, to say that the commandments of the spirit be impossible.

S. Augustine defines, That we must believe firmly, that God being just and
good, could not command things that be impossible for us to fulfill: The reason
may be, that it is the part of a tyrant, and no true lawmakers, to command his
subjects to do that under pain of death, which he knows them no way able to
perform: For those were not to be called laws, (which are to direct men, to
that which is just) but snares to catch the most diligent in, and to bind them
up to most assured perdition.

Austin we confess he did.

Basil speaks not of our ability to keep the Commandments, but only
shows, that the charge of looking to our selves belongs to the
contemplation of the mind, not to the eyes of the body: because if it did, it
were given in vain; no man being able to see the hinder parts of his body,
nor his face, nor his inwards. Therefore the holy Ghost, who does not command
things utterly impossible, will have this precept of looking to our selves to
be understood of the searching of our heart, not of the viewing of our body.

D. B. P. 2. Can. vlt. The Arausican Council you should say, or the Council
of Orange. Math. 19.
as an article of faith in these words. This also we believe according to the
Catholic faith, that all men baptized by grace there received, with the help
and cooperation of Christ, both can, and ought to keep and fulfill those
things, which belong to salvation. The principal whereof are after our
Saviors own determination to keep the commandments. If thou will enter into
life, keep the commandments.

He may do them without doubt, as I have often said, truly, and acceptably to
God; yet not so fully as he ought, because our corruption will not suffer us to
Si fideliter laborare voluerint.
labor faithfully without intermission or infirmity; which the Council
requires, and you advisedly leave out. Math. 19. 17.
That speech of our Savior, is not the voice of the Gospel (though that also
requires obedience, and allows a reward for it) but of the law; fit to be
uttered to him that came to our Savior full fraught with the conceit of his
own righteousness, not so much with a desire to learn of him (says Hieron.
apud Thomam in Catena. ad Math. 19.
Hierome) as to try his skill. And this our Savior spoke of the
justification, which is of the law without faith. As it appears by Beda,
Lyra, Glossa Ordinaria, Rem^gius ibi.
Beda, Lyra, the ordinary gloss, and Remigius.

THAT GOOD WORKS BE NOT stained with sin.
Job. Of whom it is written, that notwithstanding all the Devils power and
craft in tempting of him, He continued still a single hearted, and an upright
man, departing from evil, Cap. 2.
and preserving his innocence. If he continued an innocent, he sinned not:
Again, if in all these instigations to impatience, he remained patient: these
his works were perfect. For S. James says, Esteem it my brethren, Cap. 1.
all joy, when you shall fall into diverse temptations: knovving that the
probation of your faith, works patience: And let patience have a perfect
work, that you may be perfect and entire, failing in nothing.

Perkins; yet let us follow him step by step.

By Jobs innocence continued, nothing else is meant but that he had not (as
Satan had affirmed he would) uttered any blasphemy against God. But by this it
cannot be proved, that there was no taint of sin in his patience. As for his
sincerity and vprightnes, they are virtues that always accompany true
Christians, and without which all is hypocrisy.

That perfection, or perfect work, is the proouing that his faith is perfect,
because it overcomes, as your Glossa Ordin. and Lyra ad lac. 1.
gloss expounds it; and he is counted a perfect man, but not simply without
any spot in this patience.

David thus by the inspiration of the holy Ghost speaks of himself: Thou
have (O Lord) proved my heart, thou have visited me in Psalm. 16.
the night, thou have tried me in fire, and there was no iniquity found in me.
It must needs then be granted, that some of his works at least were free from
all sins and iniquity. And that the most of them were such, if you hear the
holy Ghost testifying it, I hope you will believe it: read then, where it is
of record, That David did that, which was right in the sight of our Lord (and
not only in the sight of men) and turned from nothing 3. Reg. 15.
that he commanded him, all the days of his life, except only the matter of
Vrias the Hethite.

David, in that place, does not clear himself of all sin, but only
protests his innocence, in respect of any hurt intended by him against Saul,
and the rest of his persecutors. David means not (says Lyra ad Psalm. 17.
Lyra) to say, that he is free from all sin, but that he had committed no evil
against Saul, for which he should persecute him.

It was one thing for David's works to be righteous in Gods sight, an other
thing for them to be perfect. The former we grant, the later you can no way
prove. That commendation the 1 Reg. 15. 5.
holy Ghost gives to his works, must needs be spoken in comparison (as Lyra ibi.
Lyra affirms) because it is certain, he 2. Sam. 10. 29.
wronged Mephthosheth, and 2. Sam. 24. (...). 2.
numbered the people; but these sins were not comparable to that against Vr^ah,
especially for the dishonouring of God by it, in the account of the heathen;
This deed (says 2. Sam. ^2. (...).
Nathan) has caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.

That some men do build upon the only foundation 1. Cor. 3.
Christ Jesus, gold, silver, and precious stones: that is, being choice members
of Christ's Catholic Church, do many perfect good works, such as being tr^^d
in the furnace of Gods judgment, will suffer no loss or detriment, as he
there says expressly: Wherefore they must needs be pure, and free from all
dross of sin, otherwise having been so proved in fire, it would have been
found out.

if 1. Cor. 3, 1^.
any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay,
or stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest. But put case he had said
so; he speaks of doctrine, built upon See 12. Art. par. 1. art. 4. 1.
the true foundation, as the whole allegory proves: especially verse. 10. As a
skillful master builder, I have laid the foundation, Verse. 10.
and an other builds upon it; now in good works, one man lays not the
foundation, and another builds upon it, but every man begins and ends his
own work himself. Farther, verse. 9. The Ministers are said to be Gods
laborers. Verse. 9.
the people (not every man's work) Gods husbandry and Gods building: because
he builds them up by their labor. This place is applied by you Papists to
prove Purgatory, even by Bellarm. d^ Purgat.
Bellarmine himself; but with what success, let any man judge, that either
reads our answers to him, or considers the text.

Make your bodies a Romans 12. 1. Pet. 2. Philip. 4.
quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God: the same offering spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God: And S. Paul calls alms bestovved on him in
prison, an acceptable sacrifice of svveet savor, and pleasing God. But nothing
infected with sin (all which he hates deadly) can please God and be
acceptable in his fight: God of his mercy through Christ does pardon sin, or
as the Protestants speak, not impure it to the person: but to say that a
sinful work is of svveet savor before him, and a grateful sacrifice to him,
were blasphemy: wherefore we must needs confess, that such works which so
well pleased him, were not defiled with any kind of sin.

No works infected with sin please God. Many works of righteous men please
God. Therefore many works of righteous men are not infected with sin.


I grant your assumption; though the proof of it, Romans 12. 1. 2
by the first testimony, is insufficient: for it does not follow that we can do
this or that, because we are exhorted to the doing of it.

Your proposition I deny; no sin can please God, nor any action, as it is
sinful; but God both can, and does pardon the faultines of his childrens
works, and accept the work it self in Christ, yea and reward it too with
increase of glory.

That they may see your good works: to be rich in good works: We are created
in Christ Math. 5. 1. Tim. 6. Ephesians. 2.
Jesus to good works: but they could not truly be called good works, if
they were infected with sin. For according to the judgment of all learned
Divines, it can be no good work, that fails either in substance, or
circumstance, that has any one fault in it: For, Bonum ex integra causa, malum
ex quolibet defectu. Wherefore we must either say, that the holy Ghost calls
evil good, which were blasphemy, or else acknovvledge, that there be many
good works free from all infection of sin.

No works infected with sin can be truly called good. Many works are called
good in Scripture. Therefore many works are not infected with sin.


Here is the same fault again. Your assumption is true, but your proof
naught. For the places you allege, prove no more, but that the works which we
should do, are good; not that they are good as we do them.

Your proposition is false, as the other was. For the works enjoined by God are
very good, but they have some allay, and abasement by our doing of them; which
argues not, that they are not truly, but that they are not perfectly good.

I will set down one passage of S. Augustine wherein this very controversy
is distinctly declared, and determined: thus he begins: Lib. 3. cont. duas
epist. Pelag. cap. 7.
The justice (through which the just man lives by faith) because it is given
to man by the spirit of grace is true justice: the which although it be
vvorthilie called in some men perfect, according to the capacity of this life,
yet it is but small in comparison of that greater, which man made equal to
Angels shall receive. Which (heavenly justice) he, that had not as yet, said
himself to be perfect, in regard of that justice that was in him; and also
imperfect, if it be compared to that which he vvanted. But certainly this
lesser justice, or righteousness, breeds, and brings forth merits, and that
greater, is the revvard thereof. Wherefore he that pursues not this, shall
not obtain that: Hitherto S. Augustine. Note first, that he defines the
justice which we have in this life, to be true justice, which is pure from all
injustice and iniquity: Then, that it is also perfect, not failing in any
duty, which we be bound to perform. Lastly, that it brings forth good
works, such as merit life everlasting. True it is also, that this justice
although perfect in it self, so far as man's capacity in this life does
permit: yet being compared unto the state of justice which is in heaven, it may
be called imperfect, not that this is not sufficient to defend us from all
formal transgression of Gods law: but because it keeps not us sometimes from
venial sin: and has not such a high degree of perfection as that has.



First, give me leave to observe by the way, that the life Aug. cont^^ 2.
Epist. Pelag. lib. 3. c. 7.
Austin hear speaks of, is not justification, but holiness of conversation.
Then, to your first note, the righteousness, we have in this life, is true
righteousness, in regard of the author thereof the spirit of God, who cannot
deceive, nor be deceived.

It is also called perfect, in some men, not (as you say, without Austins
authority) because it fails not in any duty, which we are bound to
perform, but in comparison of the imperfection of it in other men, and the
vncapablenes that by our corruption, is in every one of us.

By merits he means good works; as your self also expound them, and as the
manner of speech, that the ancient Church used, requires: the reason whereof
is, not because they deserve everlasting life (Augustine has no such word) but
because they shall have a reward; though not upon desert, but favor.

It cannot be called imperfect, because it does not keep us from sinning; If
it be true, that it is sufficient to keep us from all formal transgression of
Gods law: else we must say, that Adams righteousness was imperfect; yea, it may
well be held; That the Angels now, and we hereafter in heaven, shall be kept
from sinning, not by any strength of inherent righteousness, but by the special
grace of God, continually upholding us. That it may be proper to God, that
possibly he cannot sin, by reason of goodness resting in him (that I may so
speak) which cannot be less then infinite. And sure it is to me somewhat
strange, that this perfection of righteousness, should be able to keep us free
from deadly sins (as you call them) and not much more easily preserve us from
venial.

Augustine has the like discourse, where he says directly, that it
appertains to the lesser justice of this life, not to sin. So that we De
spirit. and lit. vlt. cap.
have out of this oracle of Antiquity: that many works of a just man are
without sin.

Aug. de spirit. and litera cap. vlt.
Austin rather makes against you. For if it belong to this less righteousness
not to sin, and (for all that measure of it, we have) we are not kept from
sinning; it may seem that this righteousness is not perfect. So have you
nothing out of this register of Antiquity, to prove, that any works of a just
man are without sin.

No mortal sin is to be done under pain of damnation: for the wages of
sin is death: but all Romans 6. A plain paralogisme, the Assumption and
conclusion being faulty.
good works are stained with mortal sin. ergo, no good work is to be
done under pain of damnation.

See 12 Art. par. (...). art. 2
No mortal sin is to be done, under pain of damnation: But all good works
are mortal sins. Therefore no good works are to be dono, under pain of
damnation.


Now the syllogism is true, but the assumption evidently false. You chose
craftily, rather no make a false syllogism, which you thought every one could
not spy, then a false assumption, manifest to the eyes of the simplest: If you
should alter the proposition, that would be as apparently false, as the
assumption is: Nothing stained with mortal sin is to be done under pain of
damnation.



He that is bound to perform the duties of the first and second table, is
bound to commit many mortal sins. But every man is bound to perform all
such duties: Therefore every man is bound to commit many mortal sins.


The proposition is thus proved, according to your collection. If the
performance of such duties be nearly linked with mortal sin, then he that
is bound to perform such duties, is bound to commit many mortal sins. But
the performance of such duties (as the Protestants say) is nearly linckt with
mortal sin. Therefore he that is bound to perform such duties is bound to
commit many mortal sins.


I deny the consequence of your proposition. This only follows upon the
antecedent, that he, which is bound to perform such duties, is bound to
perform that, which is nearly linckt with some mortal sin: And this we
grant to be true; we are bound to the performance of those duties, in the doing
whereof, by our corruption, there will be some sin annexed, which in it own
nature is deadly.

Enter not O Lord, into judgment with thy servant, because no living creature
shall be justified in thy sight. If none Psalm. 141.
can be justified before God, it seems that none of their works are just in
his sight.

Ans. There are two common expositions of this place, among the What if there
be a third that makes for it.
ancient Fathers: both true, but far from the Protestants purpose.

The commonnesse of an exposition is a presumption, but not a proof of the
truth thereof: for all these two, there may be a third of more certainty.

Augustines, S. Hieromes, S. Gregory's in his Commentaries upon that place: who
say, that no creature ordinarily lives De perfect. iustitiae. Epist. ad
C^esiph.
without many venial sins, for the which in justice they may be punished
sharply, either in this life, or else afterward in Purgatory. Wherefore the
best men do very prouidently pray unto God, not to deal with them according
unto their deserts: for if he should so do, they cannot be justified and
cleared from many venial faults. And therefore they must all crave pardon for
these faults, or else endure Gods judgments for them, before they can attain
unto the reward of their good deeds.

Aug. de perfect. iustitiae.
Austin has not a word, in that place, of any venial sin, but delivers
the latter exposition, of comparison with Gods righteousness. Judge me not
(says Austin) according to thee, who art without sin, and that, which shall
be in the world to come. That, which he says shall not be justified, he
referres to that perfection of righteousness which is not in this life.

Neither says Hieron. epist. ad Ctesip.
Jerome any such thing; but speaks absolutely of all sin, as the other
places alleged by him to the same purpose, manifestly show. Gal. 3. 22.
God has shut up all under sin. Romans 3. 233.
All have sinned; 1. Reg. 8. 46.
If they sin against thee; for there is no man that sins not, etc.

Neither does Gregor. ad Psalm. 141.
Gregory make that interpretation, unless we shall say, that there are no
sins in the heart but venial. Many (says he) though Delinquunt in opere.
they sin not in deed, yet slip now and then by vain and perverse thoughts.
After he concludes thus: Therefore he shall not be justified in Gods sight that
Cord delinquit.
sins in heart, upon which God looks. Where he uses not the word l
slipping, but sinning, as before of the deed. Therefore this first exposition
has not so much as any one authority, truly alleged, to countenance it self
withal.

Lib. ad C^^sium cap. 10. Lib. 9. moral cap. 1.
the Psalms: as S. Hilary, S. Hierome, S. Arnobius, S (...), and others: Which
is also S. Augustine, S. Gregory. All these say, that man's justice, in
comparison of the justice of God, will seem to be no iusti^e at all: and so
take these words, No creature, neither man nor Angel, shall be justified in
thy sight: that is, if his justice appear before thine, and be compared to it.
for as the stars be bright in themselves, and s^ne also goodly in a clear
^ight: yet in the presence of the glitt^ sun beams, they appear not at all:
even so man's justice, although considered by it self, it be great and perfect
in his kind, yet set in the sight and presence of Gods justice, it vanishes
away, and is not to be seen. This exposition is taken out of Job, where he
says: I kno^ (...) it is Job. 9. We take them in neither of these senses.
even so, that no man compared to God, shall be justified. Take the words of
the Psalm in whether sense you list (that either we have many ve^^all faults,
for which we cannot be justified in Gods sight, or else that in the sight of
Gods most bright justice, ours will not appear at all) and it cannot be
thereof justly concluded, that every work of the righteous man is stained with
sin. And consequently, the place is not to purpose.

Hilar. ad Psa. 141.
Hilarie says for it, who indeed applies it to a comparison with Gods
justice, but not only in degree of righteousness. For he recites there diverse
passions, of anger, grief, lust, ignorance, etc. which are the cause why we
cannot be justified.

Era^s in Censur.
Erasmus has brought good reasons to prove that Commentary on the Psalms to
be none of Hieromes. I will add one, which (I think) may put the matter out
of question, that Hierome refuteth that interpretation, which this Papist would
confirm by that place. They ( Hieron. ^plstola ad Ctesiph. contra Pelagian.
says Hierome) delude this testimony (none living shall be justified in thy
sight) under a show of godliness, by a new kind of reasoning. For they say
that none is perfect in comparison of God; as if the scripture had said thus.
Here is your exposition denied to be the meaning of this scripture. What is
then the meaning? When he says (in thy sight) he will have this understood (
Hieron. vbi supra.
says Hierome) that even those, which to men seem holy, Scientiae and
notitiae Dei*
in Gods knowledge and approbation are not holy: for man looks upon the face,
but God looks into the heart. Now if no man be righteous, when he looks into
and considers the heart, whom the secrets of the heart do not deceive, it is
manifestly showed, that the heretics do not extol men on high, but derogate
from the power of God. Hierome then is so far from bringing that
interpretation for his own, that he reiects and refutes it: and, that which is
worth the observing, even in Hieron. Epistola ad Cresiph.
that place which this Papist alleged for his former exposition. It is no
marvel if these men can prove any thing by the Fathers.

Arnobius indeed does so interpret it. But if we rest upon authority, his
bare exposition is not to ouerweigh Hieroms reason. Besides, he is far from
thinking a man righteous in such perfection, as you dream of; as it is plain
by his former words. Who dares say to God (says Arnobius ad Psalm. 141.
Arnobius) hear me in thy truth, and in thy righteousness? for it is true and
just, that he which has sinned, should be Acerrime.
most sharply punished. Upon the beginning of the second verse he has these
words: It is thy righteousness, that being Lord, thou should Contemnas.
think skorne to enter into judgment with thy servant.

Euthym. ad Psalm. 141.
Euthymius denies that a man can be justified, if he be examined according to
Gods Summam Iustitiam.
perfect justice. But he adds further: Or if we consider the benefits of God,
or his commandments. So that the righteous break even the Commandments of
God, and are unrighteous.

It is a needless matter to heap up authorities, for the proof of that
whereof there is no question. Who doubts that both men and Angels, in
comparison of Gods infinite perfection, are imperfectly righteous? And this is
all Aug. contra Priscil. and Origin.
Austin says. But how can this prove, that the Psalm is to be understood of
man's righteousness compared with Gods? This is to deceive your reader with bare
names of men, not to persuade him by the consent of the ancient. Neither do
you remember that Aug. ad Psalm. 141.
Austin, where purposely he expounds that Psalm, gives no such interpretation
of it; but makes (in his sight) to be, as it is indeed, in his judgment. Every
living man (says Austin) may perhaps justify himself Co^am se, non co^am te.
before himself, but not before thee. And afterward: Quantumlibet ^ec^us.
How upright soever I seem to my self, thou bring a rule out of thy
treasury, thou laiest me to it, and I am found Prauus.
evil. So that Austin understands this place wholly as we do.

Greg. Moral. lib 9. cap. 1.
Gregory is as truly alleged as Austin, and as himself was before. For he
does not so much as allude to the Psalm: but only say (according to that text
of Job. 9. (...).
Job, which he there expounds) that man, compared to God, cannot be counted
righteous.

That place of Job has the doctrine, which you would wring out of the Psalm:
but where is the proof, that because it is there, therefore also it is here?
But let me also show, that this which you rest upon, cannot be the meaning of
Psalm. 142. 3
the Psalm. Which I take to be plain; because if we understand it so, it is
no reason to move God not to enter into judgment. For what though no man be
so righteous as God? If he be so rigeteous, as God requires such a creature
should be, it can never hurt him, though God enter into judgment with him a
thousand times. So the sentence should be vain, there being no occasion of it.
Now the conclusion we make out of these and such like places, is, that no man
should fancy to himself a possibility of keeping Gods Commandments, when
the holiest men that ever were, dare not stand before Gods judgment seat, to
give account of those things they have done since they were justified, and (as
the Papists say) received this grace.

All A lewd metaphor. Esaias. 64. It was the fault of your bad horsemanship.
our righteousness is as a menstruous or defiled cloth. The which I have
already rid to death in the beginning of the question of justification,
whereit was alleged: The answer is briefly, that the Prophet praying for the
sins of the people, speaks in the person of the sinful. Such as the common
sort of them were, who had more sins then good works, and so their
righteousness was like unto a spotted and stained cloth. Now this disproueth
not, but that their good works although but few, yet were free for all sportes
of iniquity: it only proves, that with their few good, they had a great number
of evil, which defiled their righteousness, and made it like a stained cloth.



Omnes iustitiae nostrae. (...)
All our righteousnesses, or rather, to make English of it, all our good deeds.

3 There is not a man, who does not sin: And, blessed is the man, whose
sins be not imputed to him, And such like. I answer that the best men sin
venially, and are happy when those their sins be pardoned: but all this is
clean besides this question, where it is only enquired, whether the good
works that the just do, be free from sin, and not whether they at other
times do sin, at the least venially. This is all, which M. Perkins here and
there obiecteth against this matter.

(...). Reg. 8. 46.
Salomons in his prayer, at the dedication of the Temple, praying for the
people, in regard of such sins as should provoke God to deliver them into
their enemies hands: The other Psalm 32. 2.
David's, after those great sins of murder and adultery. Of that idle
distinction of venial sin it is needless to say any thing, till it be
better proved.



S. Cyprian says: That the be^eiged mind of man, can hardly resist all
assaults of the enemy: for when covetousness is overthrown, up starts lechery
and so forth.

Ans. All this is true, that the life of man is a perpetual warfare: yet man
assisted with the grace of God, may perform it most valiantly, and never take
any mortal wound of the enemies; although through his ^vvne ^tie he may be
sometimes foiled.

S. H. (...) affirms: That then we are just when we confess our selves to
be sinners. (...). 1. cap. Pelag.


Ans. That all just men confess themselves to sin venially: but neither of
these places come near the point in question, that not one good deed of the
just man, is without some spot or stain of sin.

S. Augustine has these words: Most perfect charity, which cannot be
increased, is to be sound in no man in this life: and as long as it may be
Epist. 29.
increased, that which is less then it ought to be is faulty, of which fault
it proceeds, that there is no man who does good, and does not sin. All
this we grant to be true: that no man has so perfect charity in this life,
but that sometimes he does less then he ought to do: and consequently does
notso well, but that now and then he sins at the least veniall^, and that
therefore the said holy Doctor had just cause to say. V^oe be to the laudable
life of a man, if it be examined without mercy. All Lib. 9. confess. cap. ^3.
which notwithstanding just men may out of that charity, which they have in
this life do many good works, which are pure from all sin as has been
proved. They allege yet another plase out of S. Augustine. That belongs
unto the perfection of a just man, to know in truth his Lib. 3. con. dua^
Epist. Pelag. cap. 7.
imperfection, and in humility to confess it. True: that is as he teaches
else where. First, that the perfection of this life is imperfection, being
compared with the perfection of the life to come. Again, that the most perfect
in this life, has many imperfections, both of wit and will, and thereby many
light faults.

Now come we unto S. Gregory our blessed Apostle, out of whose Never called
to any Apostleship by Christ. Lib. 9. moral. cap. 1.
svveete words ill understood, they seem to have sucked this their poison. He
says. The holy man Job, because he did see all the merit of our virtue to be
vice, if it be straightly examined of the inward judge does rightly add, if
I will contend with him, J cannot answer him one for a thousand.

I answer that by our virtue in that place is to be understood, that virtue
which we have of our own strength, without the aid of Gods grace which
we acknovvledge to be commonly infected with some vice: that S. Gregory so
took it, appears by the words, both going before and follovving: before he
vvriteth thus. A man not compared to God, received justice: but compared unto
him, he leeseth it. For whosoever compares himself unto the author of all
good, leeseth that good which he had received: for be that does attribute the
good unto himself, does fight against God, with his evvne gifts: And after
thus. ^o contend with God, is not to give to God the glory of his virtue, but
to take it to himself. And so all the merit of this our virtue, which comes
not of God, but is att^^buted unto our self, as proceeding only from our
selves, is the very vice of pride and cannot be prejudicial unto true good
works, all which we acknovvled^e to proceed principally from the grace of
God, dwelling in us. He says (...) there with S. Augustine that in this life
we cannot attain unto (...) purity, such as shall be in heaven: read the
beg^ing of his first and second book o^ Morals, and there you shall find him
commending Job to the skies, as a good and holy man, by his temptations not
soyled, but much ^anced in virtue.

Austins and Gregory's testimonies, are but shifts.

it is,

WHETHER FAITH MAY BE without Charity.
I Proo^e that it may so be: first out of these words of our Savior, Many
shall say unto me in that day, Lord Lord, have we not prop^^cied in thy name,
have we not cast out Devils, have we not done many miracles, to whom J will
confess, that I never knevve you, depart from me, all Math. 7.
ye that work iniquity. That these men believed in Christ, and persuaded
themselves assuredly to be of the elect appears, by their confident The rich
man in hell called Abraham father.
calling of him, Lord, Lord, and the rest that follovveth: Yet Christ Declares
manifestly that they vvanted charity, in saying that they were workers of
iniquity.

Luke 16. 24.
rich man in hell calls upon Abraham by the name of father; shall I conclude
as you do?

He found there a man not attired in his wedding garment: and therefore
commanded him to be cast Math. 22.
into utter darkness. This man had faith, or else he had not been admitted unto
that table which signifies the Sacraments: yet wanted charity, which to be
the wedding garment, beside: the evidence of the text is also proved, where in
express terms, The garments of Christ's Spouse is declared to be the
righteousness and good works of the Saints. Apoc. 19.
And that with great reason: for as S. Paul teaches. Faith shall not remain
after this life: With what instrument then (trow you) will the 1. Cor. 13.
Protestants lay hold on Christ's righteousness?

Hierome upon the same place does witness, saying: That it is the fulfilling
of our Lords commandments. And S. Gregor^e does in express words define it.
What Hom. 38. in Euang. Can. 22. in Math. Tract. 20. in Math.
(says he) must we understand by the wedding garment, but charity? So do
S. Hilarie, and Origin: and S. Chrysostom upon that place.

Parables are no further any proofs, than the meaning of them is certainly
known: but all your expositions of this, are at least uncertain. The table
signifies the Sacraments. What? Baptism too, and your other five? or how
many, and what Sacraments? Besides, your consequence is very feeble. Was no man
ever admitted to the Sacraments, that made show of faith, when indeed he had
none? Your Glossa Ordin. ad Mat. 22
ordinary gloss expounds it of being in the Church: Chrysostom. and Gregor.
apud Thomam in ^atena ad Mat. 22.
Chrysostom of the Scriptures; which sit at the table of the Scriptures:
Gregory of the Church; He comes into the marriage (says Gregory) but without
a wedding garment; that has faith in the Church, but not charity. I might in
like sort examine the rest of the parable, and find great diversities of
opinions, as in such cases there must needs be. But to the point. First, I say,
many hypocrites are in the Church, that have not so much as a persuasion of the
truth of the Scripture, and so absolutely want their marriage garment. Secondly,
I add, that this man, and many other, might have a general belief, and yet
not rest upon God for justification by Christ; without which faith, there is no
place for any man in heaven. Thirdly, let it be granted that charity is the
marriage garment; what get you by it, unless you can prove, that the faith
this man had, was a true justifying faith? which you can never possibly do.
The general meaning of the parable seems to be no more but this, that many
men thrust into the Church, who, when the day of trial comes, will be found to
have no interest to the kingdom of heaven: which our Saviors conclusion
shows, Math. 23. 14.
Many are called, but few are chosen. I deny not, that sentence shall be given
according to works, but that they, which want works, have faith. This is the
point in question, and this can never be proved by this parable.

Math. 25.
part of the Kingdom of God, and therefore had faith, which is the gate and
entrance into the service of God. Yea in the house of God, they aspired unto
more then ordinary perfection. Having professed Virginity, Popish perfection.
yet either carried away with vain glory, as S. Gregory takes it. Or not
giving themselves to the works of mercy, spiritual, and corporal, as S.
Chrysostom expoundes it: briefly not continuing in their former Or charity.
charity (for faith once had, cannot after the Protestants doctrine be lost)
were shut out of the Kingdom of heaven, albeit they presumed strongly on the
assurance of their salvation, as is apparent: By their confident demanding to
be let in, for they said, Lord, Lord, open unto us.

Math. 25. 1. (...)
These Virgins were part of Gods kingdom in profession, but not in election,
and therefore never had justifying faith. The perfection you fancy, might well
be attained to without true faith, especially the profession of such
perfection, which is all that they had for ought that can be proved by the text.

If you understood the Protestants doctrine, as well as you would seem to do,
you would know that we hold it as impossible to lose Charity, as to lose
Faith; affirming that he which has not both to the end, never had either.
Their confident demanding to be let in, shows rather their desire, than their
hope: and yet how many hope without true faith in Christ? Is it not generally
the case of all you Papists?

Many of the princes believed in Christ, but did not confess him, for Ioh. 12.
they loved more the glory of men then the glory of God. What can be more
evident, then that these men had faith: when the holy Ghost says expressly that
they believed in Christ which is the only act of faith? And yet were
destitute of charity, which prefers the glory and service of God, before
all things in this world.

Ioh. 12. 42. 43
rest upon him as the Messiah, and yet not to justification: for who knows not
that the Jews, and especially the princes or chief men amongst them, look^
for the Messiah, as a temporal deliverer, not as a spiritual Savior? Beside,
they might have a true justifying faith, and love too, and yet be led away, in
this point, by vain glory, or fear, as Ioh. 3. 2. and 19. 39.
Nicodemus was, who came to Christ by night; and Math. 26. 70. 71.
Peter, who denied his Savior by swearing and cursing, and yet lost not either
his faith or charity by it, though he sinned grievously against both faith and
charity, in that fearful denial.

James. (What shall it profit my brethren if any man say that he has faith,
but has not works: what, shall his faith be able to A. W. Cap. 2. This is
your gloss, without truth.
save?) Supposes very playnelie, that a man may have faith without good
works, that is, without charity, but that it shall avail him nothing.

You suppose that which will never be proved, that the Apostle takes works for
charity. Do you think that they, against whom the Apostle writes, would
grant that they were without the love of God? The Gnostics were never so
absurd. But the question was, whether a man that professed Jesus Christ to be
the Savior of the world, were not by this saved, how lewdly soever he demeaned
himself?

Calvin says that the Apostle speaks of a shadow of faith, which is a bare
knowledge of the articles of our creed, but not of a justifying faith. Without
doubt he was very well acquainted with it.
Without doubt he was little acquainted with that kind of faith, by which
Protestants be justified: but he directly speaks of such a faith, as Abraham
was justified by: saying. That that faith did work with his works, and was
made perfect by the works. Was this but a shadow of faith?

Calvin says truly, that the Apostle speaks of a dead faith, which (we say)
can justify no man; and of faith in profession, not in truth. The former is
plain; Iam. 2. 17.
Faith if it have no works, is dead in it self. Verse (...). (...)
Faith without works, is dead. The latter appears thus: Ve^s. 14.
Though a man sa^ he have faith. Verse. 18.
Show me thy faith by thy works. You answer, he was little acquainted with
our kind of faith. When you can prove he told you so, I will believe you.
But you add further: That he speaks directly of such a faith as Abraham was
justified by. True: for of such a faith these men did make profession.
Therefore the Apostle shows, that this faith of Abraham was a living faith,
that wrought by charity, and was acknowledged by God himself to be such, in
regard of the works issuing from it; such as theirs is not, if it have no
works, which are the evidences of a true faith, as Verse. 26.
breathing is a certain proof of life.

James compares them together: Now there are many points wherein these
faiths do differ, but this one is principal. That Christians out of a goodly
and devout affection, do willingly submit their understanding unto the
rules of faith, believing things above humane reason, yea such as seem
sometimes contrary to it. But the devil against his will, believes all that
God has revealed: Because by his natural capacity he knovves that God can
teach, nor testify any untruth.

For the Devils (says he) believe also; yea more then believe (say I) have one
of your preparatory works, even fear of damnation.

words of the same second Chapter. Ever as the body without the spirit is
dead, so also faith without works is dead. Hence thus I argue: albeit the
body be dead without the soul: yet is it a true natural body in it self,
even so faith is perfect in the kind of faith although without charity it
avail not to life everlasting.

Caietan. ad ^ac. 2. 26.
Caietan, that the Apostle speaks not of the soul, but of (...).
breath; so that the comparison stands thus. As the* body, that breathes not,
is dead: so faith, that brings not forth good works, is dead.

D. B. P. Faith is in the will. Gods goodness is the object of Faith.
other in the understanding: they have distinct obiectes, faith respecting the
truth of God, and charity the goodness of God.

Your reason is without truth. They have diverse seats in the soul, and
distinct objects; therefore the one may be without the other. First, I deny the
Antecedent, in respect of the former part thereof. For faith that iustifies is
not in the understanding, but in the will: secondly I deny your consequence
altogether; because it proves no more, but only that there is no natural
necessity of their being together, in regard of each other. Our doctrine is,
that they are always joined, because the spirit, that gives a man faith to
justification, does also give him true inherent righteousness, together with
that faith in Christ.

Perkins witnesses. Page 85.
But gives it self forth in all duties of the first and second table.

Faith does not (say you) necessarily suppose charity, as charity does faith;
neither does charity naturally flow out of faith. What then? therefore is not
every man sanctified, that is justified, I deny the consequence: he Ioh. 1. 12.
Romans 8. 9. 10. Gal. 4. 6.
that believes in Christ, has the spirit of Christ, and where he is, there is
sanctification.

That with you add of the impossiblity of our salvation, if I rightly
understand it (which I can hardly do, it is so confused) is not to the purpose,
yet we may conclude, out of the former part of the discourse, as before, Faith
receives in, charity does not; therefore they are not always together. The
consequence is naught, as if virtues of diverse effects could not be given by
the spirit, at one time, and always keep together in the soul justified, and
sanctified.

Romans 12.
they may assure themselves, that by that faith, they can never come to
salvation.



It was needles to prove that we deny not. Lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 17. Con.
Crescen. lib. 1. cap. 29.
testimony of Antiquity: That most incorrupti^ S. Augustine says flatly,
That faith may well be without charity, but it cannot profile us without
charity. And, That one God is worshipped sometimes out of the Church, but
that unskillfully, yet is it he. Also that one faith is had without charity,
and that also out of the Church, neither therefore is not faith: For there is
one God, one Faith, one Baptism, and one i^^aculate Catholic Church: in which
God is not served only, but in which only, he is truly served: neither in which
alone, faith is kept ^n which only, faith is kept with charity. So that faith,
and that only true faith, of which the Apostle speaks, One God, one faith,
may be, and is an many without charity.

Aug. de Tri nit. lib. 15. c. 17.
the former place alleged, Augustine has no such word; and if he had, the
answer is easy, that he speaks not of that faith, whereby we trust in God for
justification, but of that which is only an acknowledgement of the truth of
Scripture.

In Aug. contra Crescen. lib. 1. cap. 29.
the later thus he writes. As one God is worshipped ignorantly, even out of the
Church, neither therefore is not he; so one faith is had without charity, even
out of the Church, neither therefore is not it. For there is one God, one
faith, one Baptism, one incorrupt Catholic Church, not in which alone God is
worshipped, but in which alone one God is Pie.
rightly worshipped; nor in which alone one faith is held, but in which alone
one faith with charity is held; nor in which alone one Baptism is had, but in
which alone one Baptism is Salubriter.
healthfully had. In which discourse any man may see, that Austin speaks of
such a faith, as believes the truth of Scripture. To which purpose, a little
before he showed, that the Devils also had the same faith, or at least,
believed the same things of Christ, that we do in the Church. And this faith,
which is indeed the same, the Apostle speaks of, may be, and is often, without
charity. And yet by your leave, a man may reasonably doubt, whether this
assent to the Scripture, be wrought by the spirit of God, in every one that
professes religion, according to the truth of his persuasion; and be not
rather in many an opinion received from me^, as for the most part, amongst you
Papists; who rest upon the authority of men, under the name of the Church, in
this very point.





THAT FAITH MAY BE WITHOUT good Works.
He that has not care of his own, has denied his faith: therefore (...).
Tim. (...)*
says includes that good work, of providing for our own:

Ans. That faith there seems to signify, not that faith whereby we believe
all things revealed, or the Protestants the certainty of their salvation: but
for fidelity, and faithful performance, of that which we have promised in
Bapti^me, which is to keep all Gods commandments one of the which, is to
provide for our children, and for them that we have charge of: so that he who
has no such care over his own charge, has denied his faith: that is,
violated his promise in Baptism. There is also another ordinary answer
supposing faith to be taken there for the Christian belief, to wit, that one
may deny his faith two ways: either in flat denying any article of faith, or
by doing something that is contrary to the doctrine of our faith. Now he that
has no care of his own, does not deny any article of his faith, but
commits a fact contrary to the doctrine of his faith: so that not faith, but
the doctrine of faith, or our promise in Baptism, includes good works.

punc;
never read in any Protestant to this purpose, if you have, you should have
quoted the places. But howsoever, (I think) neither we, nor you, will be bound
to maintain all the arguments, that have been brought, in all questions, to
prove the doctrines we severally hold: If it had bin your purpose, to deal
thoroughly in this point, you might have found out better reasons then these,
though not better for your turn. If you ask where? I will show you, God
willing, in another treatise. For the answering of these arguments, is nothing
to Master Perkins reformed Catholic, nor the reason of any moment: but as it
may well be suspected, of your own devising: that you might make babies to
dally with all.

There are among you that believe not; for he know who believed, Ioh. 6.
and who was to betray him: Opposing treason to faith, as if he had said:
faith contained in it self fidelity. This Argument is far fetched, and The
more unwise you to trouble your reader with it. What could the doctrine of the
Sacrament hinder Judas gain?
little worth. For albeit faith has not fidelity and love always necessarily
joined with it, yet falling from faith, may well draw after it, hatred and
treason: yea ordinarily wickedness goes before falling from faith, and is the
cause of it: which was Judas case, whom our Savior there taxed, for he blinded
with coue^ousnesse, did not believe Christ's Doctrine of the blessed Sacrament,
and by incredulity opened the Devil a high way to his heart, to negotiate
treason in it.

Judas from growing rich, yt the fault of his not believing it, should lie upon
his covetousness? Secondly I wonder how it can be proved, that Judas did not
believe it? If you ground your conceit upon that of Ioh. 6. 64.
John, as it is likly you do, first prove that our Savior spoke there of the
Sacrament. Thirdly, it is not plain by any place of Scripture, that Judas
unbelief in that doctrine, opened the way to the Devil; nay rather the text
lays the blame upon his Ioh. 12. 6. 7.
covetousness, Math. 26. 15.
and malice, stirred up by our Saviors defect of Mary against him, when she
had bestowed such costly ointments upon him, in Bethania.

Who says be knovves God, and does not keep 1. Ioh. 2. See 12. Art. par. 2.
art. 5.
his commandments is a liar.

Ans. He is then a liar in grain who professing the only true knowledge of
God, yet blusheth not to say, that it is impossible to keep his commandments:
but to the objection, knowing God in that place, is taken for loving of God, as
I know ye not: that is, I love you not. Our Math. 7. and 25. Psalm. 1. Ioh. 14.
Lord knows the way of the just: that is approues it, loves it, so he that
knows God, keeps his commandments, as Christ himself testifies. Jf any
love me, he will keep my word. And he that loves me not, will not keep my
words.

Lastly, they say with S. Paul. That the just man lives by faith. But if faith
give life, then it cannot be without charity.

Ans. That faith in a just man is not without hope and charity, by all The
question is of works; your conclusion of charity. Not justifying faith.
which conjoined he lives, and not by faith alone. But faith is in a sinful
and unjust man, without charity: who holding fast his former belief, does in
transgressing Gods commandments, break the bands of charity. And so it
remains most certain, that faith may be and too too often is without the
sacred society of charity.

These objections were not worth the making; neither will I wast time and paper
in examining your answers to them.

The fifth point. Of Merits.
merit, understand any thing, or any work, whereby Gods favor and life
everlasting is procured: and that for the dignity and excellency of the work
or thing done: or, a good work done, binding him that receives it to repaie
the like.

With a m^ ter of truth.
or of malice do slander this our Doctrine, in saying untruly, that we trust
not in Christ's merits, nor need not Gods mercy for our salvation, but will
purchase it by our own works.

Ex rigor^ iustitiae.
in the rigor of justice, they deserve everlasting life as wages, what need
they either Christ's blood, or Gods mercy to make them meritorious? The Romans 3.
2^, 26. Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb. 10. 1. 4. 11. 12.
use of Christ's blood, is to wash away sin. Where there is no sin, what
should Christ's blood do? Romans 4. 4. Sess. 6. cap. vl^.
Now to him that works, the wages is not counted of favor, but of debt.

Life everlasting is to be proposed to them that work well, and hope well to
the end: both as grace, of mercy promised to the Sons of God through Christ
Jesus, and as a reward by the promise of the same God to be faithfully rendered
unto their works and merits, So that we hold eternal life to be both a
grace; as well in respect of Gods gree promise through Christ, as also for that
the first grace (out of which they issue) was freely bestowed upon us. And that
also it is a reward in justice, due partly by the promise of God, and in part
of the dignity of good works. Unto the worker, if he persevere and hold on
unto the end of his life, or by truerepentance lise to the same estate again.

the most part) the former errors of her Antichristian Church, you also (to
mend the matter) according to the policy of the crafty Council, pick out a
sentence and propound it, as the whole doctrine of the Council concerning
merits. The same afterward you expound; but so as that neithe text, nor the
gloss are sufficient to make your whole doctrine known to us. For whereas you
claim heaven of God, as wages due to the deserts of your works, here is no
mention but only of reward; yet somewhat is slipped from you, whereby the Councels
dealing may well grow into suspicion. For whereas that says no more but, that
it is a reward, by the promise of God to be faithfully rendered to their works
and merits: you tell us, that it is a reward in justice, due partly by the
promise of God, and in part, for the dignity of good works. Where I would
feign know of you, how you part this debt? what part is due upon promise, what
upon desert? For it may well be, though the reward be due upon promise, now God
has promised that it was simply due, for the dignity of the work, whether
God had promised it or no: And then it was a small favor of God, to make us a
promise of that, to which we had full interest by desert, before this promise,
so that he could not in justice, but pay us our wages, for our work, though he
had not promised it. And indeed this is the very maine point of your doctrine
of merits, howsoever you blaunch it with the name of grace. I prove it first by
the Council it self, then by Andradius the expounder of the Councels meaning.
Council. Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 16.
Seeing that Christ Jesus (says the Council,) Iugiter virtutem influat.
does continually infuse virtues into them that are justified, as the head into
the members; which virtue always goes before, accompanies and follows their
good works, and without which, they could in no sort be acceptable to God, and
meritorious: we must believe, that there is nothing else wanting to them that
are justified, why they should not be thought Diuinae leg^ plene satisfecisse.
full^e to have satisfied the law of God, (as far as the estate of this life
requires) by those works, In Deo sacta.
that are done in God; and to have truly deserved at their time, everlasting
life, provided that they depart in the estate of grace.

Andradius, who was present at the Council, and one that debated matters with
other Doctors, though he had no voice in determining, because he was not a
Bishop: yet he could not choose but perfectly understand the points that were
agreed upon: otherwise (we may be sure) he should never have been suffered to
undertake the defense of the Council, as he has been, if not chosen to it.
He then thus opens the matter: Andrad. Orthod. exp^. lib. 6. page 517 518.
That everlasting felicity is no less due to the works of the righteous,
than everlasting torments are to their sins that obey not the Gospel, nor
know God; that heavenly felicity, which the Scripture calls the rewards and
wages of the righteous, is not so much freely and liberally bestowed upon them
by God, as it is due to their works. Which he proves thus: When Paul (says
Andrad* vbi supra.
Andradius) would show, that Abraham was justified by faith, and not by works;
he does it especially by this reason: Romans 4. 5.
To him that works, the wages is not counted of favor, but of debt:
therefore if Abraham's righteousness were the wages of his works, it ought to be
called debt rather than grace. For the Mercedis ratio cum nomine gra^^ae ex
aduerso pugnat.
nature of wages is directly contrary to the name of grace. Upon this reason he
concludes: That everlasting felicity must not be counted according to grace,
but according to debt. And a little after: Andrad. page 519.
Therefore if any wages be due to the worthy actions of the righteous, there
is in them Vera and integra ratio.
the true and whole nature of merit. This then is the doctrine of the Church of
Rome concerning merits; That the good works of them that have the first
justification, do truly and wholly deserve everlasting felicity of God, as
wages due to them by debt, not by grace. Let no man be deceived, because (to
color the matter) they make mention of virtue coming continually from Christ,
as from the vine into the branches: for this is nothing else but the increase
of grace, whereby Christians are enabled to do good works, and added no more
worthiness to the action, than should be in it if this grace were received from
Christ all at one instant, as (for the substance of it) it is at the time of
our justification.

Sons of God, by his grace powered into their souls in baptism, whereby they
are made heirs of the Kingdom of heaven, but all that arrive to the years of
discretion, must by the good use of the same grace either meritlife, or for
want of such fruit of it, fall into the miserable state of death.



Our consent.


The second, that Christ our Mediator and Redeemer, is the root and fountain
of all merit.

The dissent and difference.
The Popish Church places merits within man, making two sorts thereof: the
merit of the person, and the merit of the work. The merit of the person, is a
dignity in the person, whereby it is worthy of life everlasting. And this (as
they say) is to be found in Infants dying after baptism, who though they want
good works, yet are they not void of this kind of merit, for which they
receive the kingdom of heaven. The merit of the work, is a dignity or
excellency in the work, whereby it is made fit and enabled to deserve life
everlasting for the doer. And works (as they teach) are meritorious two ways:
first, by covenant, because God has made a promise of reward unto them:
secondly, by their own dignity; for Christ has merited that our works might
merit. And this is the substance of their doctrine. From it we dissent in these
points.

I. We renounce all personal merits, that is, all merits within the person of
any mere man. II. And we renounce all merit of works, that is, all merit of
any work done by any mere man whatsoever. And the true merit whereby we
look to attain the favor of God, and life everlasting, is to be found in
the person of Christ alone: who is the storehouse of all our merits: whose
prerogative it is, to be the person alone in whom God is well pleased. Gods
favor is of infinite dignity, and no creature is able to do a work which may
counteruaile the favor of God, save Christ alone: who by reason of the
dignity of his person, being not a mere man but God-man, or Man-God, he can
do such works as are of endless dignity every way answerable to the favor
of God: and therefore sufficient to merit the same for us. And though a merit
or meritorious work agree only to the person of Christ, yet is it made ours
by imputation. For as his righteousness is made ours, so are his merits
depending thereon: but his righteousness is made ours by imputation, as I have
showed. Hence arises an other point, namely that as Christ's righteousness is
made ours really by imputation to make us righteous: so we by the merit of his
righteousness imputed to us, do merit and deserve life everlasting. And this
is our doctrine. In a word, the Papists maintain the merits of their own
works: but we renounce them all, and rest only on the merit of Christ.

Perkins would be thought to agree in two points. First, That merits are
necessary to salvation. 2. That Christ is the root and fountain of all merit.

Perkins, in the point of our consent with you, meant not merits, as you take
them, and as himself before had defined them, but only as good works, which
the ancient writers oftentimes call merits: not because they truly and wholly
have the nature of merits, as Andrad. vbi supra.
Andradius speaks of them, but for that they are not performed without labor
on our part, and shall have reward on Gods part in heaven.



Perkins.



To which I answer that we most willingly confess our blessed Saviors merits
to be infinite, and of such divine efficacy that he has not only merited at
his Fathers hands, both pardon for all faults, and grace to do all good
works: but also that his true servants works, should be meritorious of life
everlasting.



It is not really in us.
imagination, composed of contrarieties: For if it be really in us, why do they
call it imputed? and if it be ours only by Gods imputation, then is it not in
us really.

Perkins does not say, it is really in us, but really imputed to us; not, as
you trifle, by a supposed imputation, but in deed and truth, we being the
members of Christ our head by faith in him.

Iac. 2. Eccles. 45. Act. 13. Ioh. 16. Romans 1. Iudicio charitatis, non sidei.
is to give the lie unto many plain texts of holy Scriptures. Abraham was
called the friend of God: therefore God was well pleased in him. Moses was
his beloved. David was a man according unto his own heart. God loved Christ's
Disciples, because they loved him. Briefly all the Christians at Rome, were
truly called of S. Paul, the beloved of God. And therefore although God be best
pleased in our Savior, and for his sake is pleased in all others, yet is he
not only pleased in him, but in all his faithful servants.



By a real imp^, not a supposed.
but by imputation: for God as a most upright judge will in the end repay
every man, according to his vvorth: wherefore not finding any ^eall worthiness
in Protestants, but only in conceit: his revvard shall be given them
ansvverablie, in conceit only: which is evidently gathered out of S.
Augustine, where he says. That the revvard ca^ go before Lib. 1 de mo^^.
Eccles cap. 25.
the merit, not be given to a man before be be vvorthie of it: for (says he)
v^^at were more iniust then that, and what is more just then God? Where he
concludes that we must not be so hardly as once to demand, much Iesse so
impudent as to assure ourselves of that crown, before we have deserved it.
Seeing then that the Protestants by this their proctour renounce all such merit
and desert, they must needs also renounce their part of heaven, and not presume
so much as once to demand it according unto S. Augustines sentence: until
they have first renounced their erroneous opinions.

See 12. Art. part. 2. art. 7.
according to which we certainly look for our reward of God; not for the
worthiness of those works, but for his gracious acceptance of them and us in
Jesus Christ.

So that we demand not our reward before our work, which Austin (after the
phrase of the ancient) calls merits; but deny our work to be of such a
value, as man's pride would make it. Now to requite your kindness, I beseech you
by the mercies of God, and the love of Jesus Christ, that you do not lay
claim to everlasting life, as the wages of servants, least it be denied you,
as an inheritance belonging to sons.



Our reasons.
The first shall be taken from the properties and conditions that must be in a
work meritorious, and they are four. I. A man must do it of himself, and by
himself: for if it be done by an other, the merit does not properly belong to
the doer. II. A man must do it of his own free will and pleasure, not of due
debt: for when we do that which we are bound to do, we do no more but our
duty. III. The work must be done to the profit of an other, who thereupon
must be bound to repay the like. IV. The reward and the work must be in
proportion equal, for if the reward be more then the work, it is not a
reward of desert, but a gift of good will. Hence follows a notable conclusion:
That Christ's manhood considered apart from his Godhead, cannot merit at Gods
hand: though it be more excellent every way then all men and Angels. For being
thus considered, it does nothing of it self, but by grace received from the
godhead: though it also be without measure. Secondly Christ's manhood is a
creature, and in that regard bound to do whatsoever it does. Thirdly, Christ
as man cannot give any thing to God, but that which he received from God:
therefore cannot the manhood properly by it self merit, but only as it is
personally united unto the godhead of the Son. And if this be so, then much
less can any mere man, or any angel merit: yea it is a madness to think,
that either our actions or persons should be capable of any merit whereby we
might attain to life eternal.

Perkins, will nevertheless prove, and that by sundry reasons, that their
doctrine is the truth it self, and ours falsehood.

First, by a sorry short syllogism containing more then one whole It is said
afterward to be nakedly proposed.
page. It is taken out of the properties of a meritorious work: Which must be
(says he) four. First, That the work be done of our selves, without the
help of another. Secondly, That it be not otherwise due debte. Thirdly, That
it be done to the benefit of another. Fourthly, That the work and revvard be
equal in proportion. These proprieties he sets down pithagorically without
any proof. But infers thereon, as though he had proved them inuincibly,
that Christ's manhood separated from the Godhead cannot merit: because
whatsoever he does, he does it by grace received, and should be otherwise
due. He might in like manner as truly say, that Christ's manhood united to the
Godhead could not merit neither: for he received his Godhead from his Father,
and whatsoever he does is therefore his Fathers by due debte. And so the good
man, if he were let alone, would disappoint us wholy of all merits, as well
the imputed of Christ's, as of all ours done by virtue of his grace.

Every work that merits everlasting life, must be done of and by the worker
himself, not of debt, to the profit of God, with proportion to the reward. No
work of man can be so done. Therefore no work of man can merit everlasting
life.


Is not this a perilous long syllogism (trow you) to take up more than a whole
page? If this great scholar, that so often blames Master Perkins ignorance,
would (for I will not doubt but he could) have distinguished the syllogism from
the explication of the proposition, he would not have been so much offended
with it. Sure there was small cause he should be, if he say truly afterward,
that Master Perkins reason was nakedly proposed; or try whether himself can
make it any shorter; or compare it with his own tedious answer, containing
three whole pages in quarto in a smaller letter. But what if there be another
syllogism also implied in this reason? as there is this. If the manhood of
Christ, properly by it self, could not merit, then can no man merit: But the
manhood of Christ, properly by it self, could not merit. Therefore no man can.


The consequence of the proposition is proved: because the manhood of Christ
is more excellent every way, than all both men and Angels.

The assumption is made manifest; because every work of Christ's manhood,
considered apart from the Godhead, would be defective in three points
concerning merit.

To the two former you answer, that whereas Master Perkins says, Christ's
manhood could not merit, because he did nothing of himself, but by grace
received, and that that he did was due; that he might as truly say, that his
manhood could not merit united to the Godhead. Your reason is; for that he
received his Godhead from his Father, and whatsoever he does, is therefore his
Fathers by due debt. But your reason is false: for See 12. Art. par. 1. art. 4.
(...)
Christ had his Sonship (as I may speak) of his Father (for the property of
the Godhead is to be of it self) yet there is not any thing due from the Son
to the Father, more than from the Father to the Son, if they be of equal
nature and dignity. So that this latter point disproues the former, because it
inferres a superiority of the Father over the Son, and so an inequality:
which at no hand may be granted.

Of the talents given by a King to his servants; the which they employing
Matthew. 25.
well, and multiplying, were therefore esteemed vvorthie of far greater, and
vvithall to be made partakers of their Lords joys.

M. Perkins then was not a little ouerseene, to put for the first propriety
of merit, that it must be done by a man, and of a man himself.

of himself, and by himself. You answer, that one may merit by the good use
of a thing received by free gift. But not if the use of it also be of him, of
whom he should merit. The Son that receives the farm, receives not withal
continually from his Father the power to use the farm in that sort, and much
less the will and the use it self. But a man that has received grace from
God, has continually from him Phil. 2. 13.
both to will and to do, and therefore cannot properly merit of him.

The parable has not one word of any merit; only it is said, that the King
commended his servants for employing their talents well, and gave them
authority over much, because they had been faithful in a little; and further,
received them into his joy. But that he dealt thus with them upon due debt, or
that they did truly merit, is your gloss, besides the text.

That a man must do it of his own free will and pleasure, and not of due
debt: carries in show an opposition. But indeed there is no contradiction in
it: for a man may, and every honest man does, of his own free will and
pleasure, pay his due debt: but let us pardon the Show it first to be a fault.
disorder of words: his meaning being nothing else, but that the payment of
that which is otherwise due debt, cannot be any meritorious work.



Augustine does answer in these words. O great goodness of God, to whom
when we did owe service by condition of our estate, as Sermon. 3. de verb.
Apost.
bond men do to their Lord, yet has he promised again and again, the reward
of friends.

Austin answers nothing against us, or for you. It is free for God to promise a
reward, as we gladly acknowledge he does, even to those works that are due.
But an action of duty cannot be made to put on the true and whole nature of
merit, which is the question.

Bread and a vvhippe (says a Philosopher) serve for a slave: Now suppose the
Master to be sovereign governor of a state: then if it please him to make his
manfree, and vvithall a member of his common weal, the same man by performing
many good offices to the state, may justly deserve of his Prince as great
revvard and promotion, as any other of his subjects: and yet may his Lord and
old Master say truly to him, all this that thou have done, or could do, is
but due debt us to me, considering that thou vvast my bondman. So fares it
with us in respect of God: all that we can do, is due debt unto him, because
he has made us, and endovved us, with all that we either be, or have: yet it
has pleased him, as a most kind Lord, to set us at liberty through Christ, and
to make us Citizens of the Saints, and as capable of his heavenly riches, as
the Angels, if we will do our endeavor to deserve them: and whereas he might
have exacted all that ever we could do, without any kind of recompense: yet
he of his inestimable goodness tovvard us, does neither bind us to do all we
can do, and yet for doing that little which he commands, has by promise
bound himself to repay us a large recompense.

The comparison you show us is fained by you, not intended by Austin: and, if
it be granted you, makes nothing to the purpose. No more indeed does the
conclusion of your whole discourse; for it says no more than we yield, that
God will recompense those services, which are debt, on our part, and that
exceeding bountifully; but not upon their desert.

When Luke 17.
you have done all these things that are commanded you, say that you are
unprofitable servants: we have done that we ought to do. True. By our native
condition we were bound to perform, not only all these things, that be now
commanded, but whatsoever else it should have pleased God to command: and this
we must always confess, to preserve true humility in us: yet God has
bettered our estate through Christ, and so ^ighly advanced us, that we not
only be Citizens or Saints, but his sons and heirs, and thereby in case to
deserve of him a heavenly crown.

they are unprofitable servants, because they do that which they were once
bound to do, but now are not: as if a man that was once bound to pay double
custom, because he was a stranger, should count himself unprofitable to the
King, though being absolutely freed, he pay the same custom still, because
once forsooth he was by duty to pay so much. I would feign know what duty we
were bound to do in our natural estate, from which we are freed in our
spiritual: for (to my seeming) our bond is doubled; both in equity, because
we have received so undeserved kindness, and in Gods intent, who has given us
his grace that we might do him better service.

Ambrose exposition upon the place. D. B. P.


That Ambrose gives no such exposition, his own words shall testify:
Therefore (says Ambros. ad Luc. 17.
Ambrose) as thou do not only not say to thy servant, sit down, but
requirest further service of him: so neither does God content himself with one
work or labor of thine; because while we live we must always work. Therefore
acknowledge thy self to be a servant, Plurimis obsequijs defoenerarum.
bound to very many services; Non te praeferas.
do not extol thy self, because thou art called the son of God; his favor
is to be acknowledged, but thy nature not to be unknown; neither brag if
thou have served well, which thou were bound to do. These are his words; out
of which no man can wring any such interpretation. We owe service though we be
sons: for it is plain Ambrose speaks of our service after we are regenerate.
First, because he says, we must work always. Secondly, because he mentions,
having served well, which befalles no man in his natural estate before grace.

Chrysostom pondering these words let us say, takes it for a wholesome
counsel for us to say, that we be unprofitable servants, least pride It is as
true as wholesome. Matthew. 25. 21.
destroy our good works: and then God will say, that we be good and faithful
servants, as it is recorded.

Again, we may truly say, when we have done all things commanded, that we are
unprofitable servants, as venerable Bede our most learned countriman
interprets: Because of all that we do, no cammoditie rises unto God our
Lord in himself: who is such an infinite ocean of all In Luc. 17. Psalm. 15.
goodnesses, that he wants nothing: Whereupon David says, That thou art my
God, because thou stand in need of no good that I can do.

Chrysostom. ad Luc. 17.
Chrysostom in his homily upon that chapter says no such thing. But
wheresoever he says it (if he say it at all) it cannot prove that we are not
bound to do good service in the state of grace; nor that we can merit at Gods
hands; nor that you interpret S. Luke aright: wherefore then is it alleged?
Theophyl. ad Luc. 17.
Theophylact, who follows Chrysostom every where, expounds it of our service
after grace; and concludes upon it, that we may not for the doing of any work,
necessarily require reward or honor. For it shall be of the Lords bounty if
he bestow any thing upon us for it: and woe be to us if we do not our duty.
And Cyril apud Thomam in caten. ad Luc. 17.
Cyrill is wholly of the same opinion, who also denies that which before you
affirmed; that subjects can deserve any thing of their Sovereign: Consider
(says he) that they which rule amongst us, do not thank any of their
subjects, if they do any of those things that are enjoined them; but
oftentimes by their bounty stirring their subjects affections, they breed in
them a greater desire to serve; so God requires service of us by right: Now,
because he is merciful and good, he promises honors to them that labor; and
the greatness of his bounty ouerpasseth the pains of his subjects. Your Glossa
Interlin. ad Luc. 17.
gloss says, that we are servants, because we are bought with a price;
unprofitable, because God has no need of our good works, or because our
present sufferings are not worthy of the glory that shall be reueiled in us.
Which reasons of our unprofitableness, Beda apud Thomam.
Thomas also brings out of Bid: so do your Glossa ordin* and Lyra.
ordinary gloss, and Lyra expound it, making us servants even after
regeneration; as August. in Psalm. 124.
Austin truly says, that Christ did not make us free men of servants, but of
evil servants good servants.

Perkins meritorious work. Which is, That it be done to the profit of another:
and say that albeit God in himself receive no profit, by our works: yet does
he in the administration of his holy common weal the Church, wherein good And
bad men's too. 2. Tim. 2. Matthew. 5. Ioh. 15. v. 8.
men's services do much pleasure him. And in this sense is it said of Saint
Paul, That by cleansing our selves from wicked works, we shall become
vessels sanctified, and profitable unto our Lord. Again, God is glorified by
our good works, That seeing your good works, they may glorify your Father
which is in heaven. Finally, God does rejoice at the recovery of his lost
children.

Ezra 6. 3. and 7. 11. Dan. 3. 29. 30* and 6. 26.
bad men's services may be said to profit God, if every thing that benefits his
Church must be held to be of profit to him. But we neither can profit nor
pleasure him, nor glorify him truly and properly, but only in his
acceptance. And so whatsoever reward shall be given for these services, it
proceeds from Gods gracious bounty, not from our desert.

Luke 15.
him outwardly both honor, joy, and commodity: that may suffice to make their
work meritorious.

The assumption that should be added, I denied, and refuted in the former part
of my answer.

Perkins fourth property is, That the work and revvard, be equal in
proportion.

viz. that the good works of a man justified, do Vere prome^eri.
truly or of right deserve increase of grace, everlasting life, and
Consecutionem.
the fruition of it (if he depart in grace) and also increase of glory: and
further, Council. Trident. sess. 6 can. 32.
you accurse all them to hell that say otherwise.

Ethic. Geometrical: and the equality of that is taken by a reasonable
correspondence of the one unto the other: as when a good office is given to a
Citizen of desert, it may be, that the honor and commodity of the office is
far greater, then was the merit of the man: yet he being as well able to
discharge it as another, and having better deserved it, is holden in true
justice worthy of it.

Vera and integra ration^ meriti.
the true and whole nature of merit) unless it be fully answerable in value to
the reward. Therefore to speak properly, and truly, the citizen you name does
not simply deserve the office, but (as your self confess) in comparison of
other his fellow subjects. So that though there were more in him than in other,
why the Prince should bestow that place upon him; yet it is rather a gift than
a debt, else should the King offend against justice, if he did not give it him.

Paul, unto a Garland in a game: where he ^a^th, That we all run, but one
carries away the prize. And He that 1. Cor. 9. 2. Tim. 2.
strives for the masterie, is not crowned, unless he strive lavvfully. It is
also resembled unto places of honor. I will place thee over much. And Matthew
25. Ioh. 14. Matthew. 13. 1. Ioh. 3.
I go to provide you places.

For the seed of God tarrieth in him. But a little ^eede cast into good
ground, and well manured, brings forth abundance of corn. Briefly, then
such equality as there is between the well deserving subject, and the office,
between him that strives lawfully, and the crown, between the seed, and the
corn, is between the reward of heaven, and the me^^t of a true servant of God.
If it be nakedly proposed, there was small cause to blame the length of i^.


And thus much of M. Perkins first Argument, more indeed to expl^cate the
nature and condition of merit, then that his reason nakedly proposed, did
require it.

What shall I need to answer to your similitude of games, since your self
deny, that it is truly and properly desert? But to make the matter more
plain, let us a little consider it in this sort; where there is an agreement
(as in these games) though there be not properly any merit: yet there may be
somewhat that shall come near to the nature of merit. That there is no merit
you yield, in granting, that the reward is more in value than the act of him
that wins. Notwithstanding, if the prize (be it what it will) be propounded
to them, that shall not only pass other men in the race, but also run home
to the goal, in such a space of time, with such, or such a carriage of the
body, without any kind of stay or treading a hairs breadth out of a path
appointed, with other like circumstances: I grant that he which observes all
these conditions exactly, may be said, in some good sense, to have deserved
the hire that he labored for, though it were far greater than such a race
could truly and properly merit. But if this man should fail, in many, or any
of these circumstances, though he came nearer the performance of the whole than
any other man did, might he in justice claim the prize, as due to him upon
desert? This is our case in the point of merit. There is no man but he fails
very much, and often, in his best works, some less, some more; but every one
more or less. So that no man had any cause to accuse God of injustice, though
he should deny all men the reward, due to the keepers of his Commandments.

Reason II. Exodus 20. 8. And show mercy upon thousands in them that love me,
and keep my commandments. Hence I reason thus: where reward is given upon
mercy, there is no merit; but reward is given of mercy to them that fulfill
the law: therefore no merit. What can we any way deserve, when our full
recompense must be of mercy?





Adam: if he had stood to this day, he could not by his continual and perfect
obedience, have procured a further increase of favor at Gods hand, but should
only have continued that happy estate in which he was first created.

Adam by his continual and perfect obedience, could not have procured a
further increase of Gods favor, is both besides the purpose, and most false:
for as well he, as every good man sithence, by good use of Gods gifts, might
day by day, increase them: And that no man think that in Paradise it should
have been otherwise. S. Augustine says expressly, That in the felicity of
Paradise, righteousness preserved, should have ascended into better. And Adam
finally, and In Inchir. Cap. 25.
all his posterity (if he had not fallen) should have been from Paradise
translated alive into the kingdom of heaven: this by the way.

Adams continual and perfect obedience could not deserve increase of favor;
then our interrupted and imperfect obedience cannot. But his could not,
therefore ours cannot.

Your answer is little to the purpose. For Master Perkins speaks not of Adams
increasing his own righteousness, but of procuring, or rather deserving a more
happy estate: whereof the testimony alleged out of Austin says nothing. And
surely, unless men will needs be wiser in this point than the Scripture can
make them, it is not possible for them to know any such thing touching Adam.
For the Ge^. 2. 17
Scripture only sets down a penalty that should ensue upon the breach of the
commandment that was given him, and neither makes mention, nor gives
signification of any reward at all; much less upon desert.

Reason III. Scripture directly condemns merit of works. Romans 6. 23. The
wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The proportion of the argument required that S. Paul should
have said: The reward of good works is eternal life, if life everlasting could
be deserved, which cannot: because it is a free gift.

That eternal life, is the grace or gift of God.

Perkins recites the former part of that text, to show what the proportion of
the argument required: namely, that the wages of good works is everlasting
life, as the wages of sin is death. And thus, without question, would the
Apostle have spoken, to make his exhortation to holiness of life more
effectual, if everlasting life could be deserved.

Augustine, in diverse places of his most learned works. I will note one or two
of them.

First, thus here arises no small doubt, which by Gods help I will De gra.
and lib. arb. c. 8.
now discuss. For if eternal life be rendered unto good works, as the holy
Scripture does most clearly teach (note) how then can it be called grace: when
grace is given freely, and not repaid for works: and so pursuing the points of
the difficulty at large, in the end resolves: that eternal life is most truly
rendered unto good works, as the due reward of them: but because those good
works could not have been done, unless God had before freely through Christ,
bestowed his grace upon us, therefore the same eternal life, is also truly
called grace: because the first root of it, was Gods free gift.

The very same answer does he give, where he has these words. Eternal Epist.
106.
life is called grace, not because it is not rendered unto merits: but for that
those merits to which it is rendered, were given.

Austin, Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. ca. 8.
in the places alleged by you, neither expounds that text, nor speaks of any
proportion, betwixt the desert of death by sin, and life by good works. But,
because I am not ignorant, Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. ca. 9. De correp. and
great. cap. 13.
that it is his opinion, that everlasting life is due to good works, if you
will give me leave, I will salve the matter by fetching this due from the
promise of God, not from the dignity of the work, which I think to have been
his meaning; because he speaks so often, and so much, of the imperfection of
our works. If, to countenance your own error, you will needs have Austin
thought to have erred (which is not impossible) at the least show some good
reason why Romans 6. 23.
the holy Apostle should forbear to say, Everlasting life is the wages of
good works, when it would so fitly have served his turn for exhortation, and
when the nature of the sentence required it. Chrysostom and Theoph ad Romans 6. 23.
Chrysostom and Theophylact deny all recompense and reward of labors past,
and refer all to grace. He does not say, that the wages of righteousness is
everlasting life (says Ca^^tan. ad Romans 6.
Caietan) but the gift of God is everlasting life; that we may understand, that
we attain to everlasting life for our end: not by our merits, but of his free
gift: wherefore also he adds, In Christ Jesus our Lord; Behold the merit,
behold the righteousness; the reward whereof is everlasting life, but to us it
is a gift, by Ratione ipsius Christi.
reason or in regard of Christ Jesus himself.

Perkins proportion most directly, affirming, that S. Paul might have said
truly, eternal life is the pay or wages of good works: but to hold us in
humility pa^tly, and partly to put a difference between our salvation, and
damnation, chose rather to say, that the gift of God, was life eternal:
because of our damnation, we are the whole and only cause, but not of our
salvation, but principally the grace of God, the only fountain of merit, and
all good works.



The difference, you speak of, was put before in handling the doctrine of
justification. Neither could any Christian be so foolishly proud, as to think
he could of himself do good works; how then could he look for everlasting life
simply by his own strength?

We are saved not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us. And Ephesians. 2. 8. 10. By grace you are saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works which
God has prepared that we should walk in them. If any works be crowned, it is
certain that the sufferings of Martyrs shall be rewarded: now of them Paul
says, Romans 8. 18. The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory to
come. Where then is the value and dignity of other works? To this purpose
Ambrose says, The just man though he be tormented in the brazen bull is still
just, because he justifies God, and says he suffers less then his sins
deserve.

We are saved Ad Ephesians. 2. Ad Tit. 3. But you never proved (...), and have
been a^s^^ered. Romans 8.
freely, not of our selves, or by the works of righteousness, which we have
done. I have often answered that the Apostle speaks of works done by our own
forces, without the help of Gods grace: and therefore they cannot serve
against works done, in, and by grace.

Now to that text which he hudleth up together with the rest, although is
deserved a better place, being one of their principal pillars in this
controucrise: It is The suffering of this life, are not worthy of the glory
to come. The strength of this objection, lies in a false translation of these
words, Axia pros ten doxan, equal to that glory, or in the misconstruction of
them: For we grant (as it has bin already declared) that our afflictions and
sufferings be not of equal in length, or greatness, with the glory of
heaven: for our afflictions be but for the short space of this life, and they
cannot be so great, as will be the pleasure in heaven, notwithstanding, we
teach, that this shorter, and lesser labor employed by a righteous man, in the
service of God, does merit the other greater, and of longer continuance: and
that by the said Apostles plain words, for (says he.) That tribulation which
in this present life, is but for a moment 2. Cor. 4.
and light, does work above measure exceedingly an everlasting weight of
glory in us. The reason is, that just men's works islue out of the fountain
of grace, which gives a heavenly value unto his works. Again, it makes him
a quick member of Christ, and so receiving influence from his head, his
works are raised to an higher estimate: it consecrateth him also a temple of
the holy Ghost, and so makes him partaker of the heavenly nature as S. Peter
speaks. Which adds a worth of heaven to his works. 2. Pet 1. Divine nature.


Arias Moncanus.
your own men expound it, and Theophyl. ad Romans 8.
Theophylact in his Commentary says not only that they are not Dignae, pares.
equal, but also that they are not worthy. Indeed the Apostles purpose is to
compare the sufferings of this life with the glory of the life to come, and to
show how wonderfully that exceeds these. But yet we may also from thence
conclude, that because of this inequality, there can be no proper and true
merit by these. f 1. Cor. 4.
As for that you allege, of their working an everlasting weight of glory in
us, it is to be understood, that this is by Gods bounty, not the worthiness
of the person, or matter. Which must needs be apparent to every man, that
considers what infirmities accompany the sufferings of the best of Gods
children. By being a member of Christ, he does not receive ability to merit,
but privilege, to be partaker of his head our Savior Christ's glory; neither
by being the temple of God are we made able to deserve; nor by 2. Pet. 1.
being partaker of the divine nature; which is nothing else, but to have the
spirit of God dwelling in us, by the graces of righteousness and holiness;
which is the image of God, according to which we were at the first created.
For these graces, being not perfect in us, bring forth imperfect fruits,
which can never merit truly and properly.

D. B. P. Where says be so? According to our works, but not for the value of
them.
unto of infinite dignity, as Master Perkins fableth; but has his certain
bounds and measure, according unto each man's merittes, otherwise it would
make a man equal to God in glory: for there can be no greater then infinite;
as all learned men do confesle.

You should have showed, where Master Perkins says, that the glory of any
creature can be infinite; as well as you reprove him for saying so, and that
with such skorne as you do. Master Perkins knew, as well as you can teach him,
that no finite nature is capable of any infinitnes; but yet he truly denies
full proportion, betwixt our present sufferings and our glory to come: which
your self confess to be true.

Reason IV. Whosoever will merit, must fulfill the wholelaw: but none can keep
the whole law: For if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, 1. Ioh. 1.
7. And he that sins against one commandment is guilty of the whole law. And
what can he merit, that is guilty of the breach of the whole law?

Why do you not show what those properties be. Popish learned you mean.
Luc. 15.
circumstances does bring forth merit, as by all the properties of merit may be
proved at large: and by his own definition of merit set down in the
beginning. Now if a man afterward fall into deadly sin, he leeseth his former
merit: but recovering grace, he rises to his former merit, as the learned
gather out of that saying of our Savior, in the person of the good Father. Do
on him (that is on his prodigal son returning home) his former garment. His
second proposition is also false as J^ had been if your strongth had been as
good as your stomach. Epist. 29. ad Hieron.
has bin proved at large in a several question. To that of S. James, although
it belong not to this matter, I answer that he who offends in one, is made
guilty of all: that is, he shall be as surely condomned, as if he had broken
all; See S. Augustine.

Iam. 2. 10.
no man can be guilty of the whole law, as every one is that fails in any one
commandment, and yet deserve everlasting life. The reason of your denial is
not sufficient, for no one work done with never so due circumstances, can
bring forth any merit of everlasting life, whereof Master Perkins speaks in
his definition. Indeed this reason is nothing, but a bare denial of Master
Perkins proof. That you add of a man's losing, and recovering his merit, is
liker a dream, then a point of divinity, as it may well appear by the poor
proof you bring of it, viz. a speech out of an allegory, and that also falsely
translated, his former garment, for that best (...).
or principal garment. Your vulgar Editio Latina vulgar.
latin calls it the first garment: Pagnin. Vestem primam, praecipuam.
Pagnin that principal, your Glossa Interlin.
interlinear gloss expounds it to signify the garment of the holy ghost: and
the Glossa ordin.
ordinary gloss gives a reason why it is called the first, because it is the
garment of innocence, in which the first man was created, which interpretation
is taken out of De qq. Euangel.
Austin. But to the matter, What reason is there that merit should not be
recompensed according to justice? If a man have once deserved everlasting life,
why should he not have it? Or if that merit be once lost, how can it be
restored again, but only by Gods acceptance? and then how can it be truly and
properly merit?

You must not only say, but show too, that the place of S. James belongs not to
this matter, else it is an easy matter to answer any authority of scripture.
Let us grant your own interpretation, that he which breaks one commandment,
shall be certainly condemned, how then can he deserve everlasting life without
keeping all the commandments? And what a strange and unsavory doctrine is it,
that he which has merited everlasting life may be damned? But the meaning of
the Apostle is that the several commandments are as it were several
conditions of a covenant betwixt God and man, whereof if any one be broken, the
whole bond is forfeited, how exactly soever all the rest have bin performed,
what merit then can there be of life, where the party is liable to damnation?

Reason V. We are taught to pray on this manner, Give us this day our daily
bread. Wherein we acknowledge every morsel of bread to be the mere gift of
God without desert: and therefore must we much more acknowledge life eternal
to be every way the gift of God. It must needs therefore be a satanicall
insolency for any man to imagine, that he can by his works merit eternal
life, who cannot merit bread.

Perkins takes great delight to argue out of the Lords prayer: Master Perkins
knevv how to make better use of it, then to patter it over as you do. He
understood it better then you do his argument. What needs that, if we
deserve it?
but he handles the matter so handsomely, that a man may think him to be so
profoundly learned, that he does not yet understand the Pater noster: for who
takes our daily food to be so merely the gift of God, that we must not either
make it ours with our penny, or travail? we must not look to be fed from
heaven by miracle, by the mere gift of God: but according unto S. Paul's rule,
either labor for our living in some approved sort, or not cate. Yet because
our travails are in vain, unless God bless them, we pray to God daily to
give us our nuriture, either by sending or preserving the fruits of the earth,
or by prospering our labors with good success: or if they be men who live of
alms, by stir ring up the charitable to relieve them So we pray, and much more
earnestly that God will give us eternal life: Yet by such means as it has
pleased God to ordain; one of which and the principal is by the exercise of
good works, which God has appointed us to walk in, to deserve it. And it
cannot but savor of a Satanicall spirit, to call it a Satanicall insolency
(as M. Perkins does) to think that eternal life can be If we will believe
your word.
merited: when Saint Augustine and the best spirit of men, since Christ's time
so thought and taught in most express terms.

Perkins Arguments, then to disprove or understand them: his reason lies thus:
He that cannot merit bread, cannot merit everlasting life. But no man can merit
bread. Therefore no man can merit everlasting life.
The proposition stands upon the comparison of inequality, from the less to
the greater, for it is a less matter to deserve bread, then to merit
everlasting life. The assumption is proved by that clause of the Lords prayer,
wherein we beg our daily bread, which we might claim of due debt, if we could
deserve it.

In stead of answering some part of the syllogism, you tell us, that we must
not look to be fed from heaven by miracle without our own travel or cost,
which is as much to purpose as if you should say, we must eat our bread when
we have it, if we will be fed.

It is but a mockery to pray to God for it if we know we have deserved it,
unless perhaps we think him so unjust, that it is well if we can get our own
of him by any means whatsoever. We deny not that we are to use the means both
for the one and the other, but that we can deserve either by using the means.

Reason VI. Consent of the ancient Church. De interpellatione David. 4. vel ps
72. Yet is he one of your Saints.
Bernard, Those which we call our merits, are the way to the kingdom, and not
the cause of reigning.

Bernard, who lived 1000. years after Christ: He (in I know not what place,
the quotation is so doubtful) says. Those things which we call merits, are
the way to the Kingdom, but not the cause of reigning.

Bernard says merits are the way, not the cause, if he had meant as you would
have him he should and would have said, that they were not the whole cause, but
the party or joint cause, but he denies them altogether the nature of causes by
giving them another place to be the way to heaven.

D. B. P. Sermon. 68. in Cantic.
through Christ, and the grace of God freely bestowed on us, out of which our
merits proceed. Which is Bernards own doctrine.

What is Bernard ser. 68. in Cantic.
Bernards own doctrine? your whole answer, or only the later part of it? let
the reader judge. These are Bernards words, As it is enough to merit, not to
presume of merit, so to want merits is enough to condemnation. If he speak of
merits properly taken what presumption is it for a man to demand his right? But
because our good works, which he (as other ancient writers) calls merits, are
imperfit, therefore our greatest merit is, to know we merit not: for the later
part of his sentence, we grant, that it is enough to damnation, for a man to
be without good works. It follows in Bernard: No infants regenerate want
merits, but have Christ's, whereof notwithstanding they make themselves
unworthy, if they had opportunity to add their own, and neglected it, which
is the danger of riper years. Infants (says Bernard) have Christ's merits,
but, if they come to years, they must also have some of their own. What?
merits to deserve heaven? then were Christ's insufficient; but they must have
good works, without which they make themselves unworthy of any benefit by
Christ. Is not this wholly our doctrine? let us hear his conclusion. Have a
care (says Bernard) to have merits, having them, know they were given thee,
hope for the fruit of them by the mercy of God, and thou have avoided all
danger, of poverty, unthankfulness, and presumption. We must have good works,
else we are poor; we must know they are not of our selves, else we are
unthankful; we must look for reward of mercy, not of debt, else we are
presumptuous. So that Bernard requires good works, not as the cause, but as
the way, betwixt Gods promise, and performance of giving everlasting life to
them that are justified and sanctified.

August. Manual. cap. 22. All my hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is
my merit --:my merit is the passion of the Lord. I shall not be void of
merits, so long as Gods mercies are not wanting.

Augustine. All my hope is in the death of my Manual. c. 22.
Lord: his death is my merit. True in a good sense: that is, by the virtue of
his death, and passion, my sins are pardoned, and grace is bestowed on me to
do good works, and so to merit.

Austin; which indeed overthrows your answer, That Christ has procured
pardon and grace for you to merit by: but Austin says, that the death and
passion of the Lord are his merit: that is (by your interpretation) his merit
of grace, not of glory. For that he must merit, by well using the grace which
Christ has deserved for him; to cut off this, Austin adds: Aug. Manual. cap.
22.
I shall not be void of merits, so long as Gods mercies are not wanting. Have
those works the true and whole nature of merit, which receive their worth from
Gods mercy? If you will answer, that by Gods mercy he means not his
accepting of the work, but his supplying us with grace to work: I reply,
that he may, for all that mercy, want merits: because it depends upon his own
free will, when God has done his uttermost, whether he will work or no. But
that which follows in Austin, shows, that all is in Gods mercy: If (says
he) the mercies of the Lord be many, I am much in merit: the mightier he is to
save, the more am I secure. So that Austin takes all from himself, and gives
it to God.

Eternal rest is reserved for them, which have striuen lawfully in this life:
not for the merits of their doings, but upon the grace of the most bountiful
God, in which they trusted.

That God punishes men under their deserts, but rewards them above their
merits.

Eternal rest (says Basil) Manetillos.
is reserved for them who in this life have striuen lawfully; not as Debitum
operibus reddi^^m.
a debt paid them for their work, but given them upon the most bountiful
grace of God, in whom they have hoped. He is desirous to pick quarrels that
finds fault with such translations. What one word has Master Perkins left
out, or misinterpreted, that might be any thing to your advantage? But the
testimony was too plain to admit any cavil, else the translation had been
good enough.

But your proof is, at least, as bad as your accusation. To prove the words
are untruly translated, you tell us, that Basil makes eternal life the prize
of the combat: what is this to the purpose? where is the fault of the
translation? But let us take your interpretation of his meaning. If the reward
be not given according to debt, but in a fuller measure, and yet no greater
thing given than everlasting life; doubtless our works deserve not truly and
wholly the reward of everlasting life, that God bestows on them of bounty.

He crowns thee, because he crowns his own gifts, not thy merits.

Augustine was to wise, to let any such foolish sentence pass his pen: What
congruity is in this. He crowns thee, because he crowns his own gifts,
not thy merits. It had been better said: He crowns thee not, etc.

Austin has no such speech upon that Psalm; and then perhaps he might with
more reason have denied that he has it at all. The truth is the Printer
misplaced the cipher, and of Psalm 102. made 120. But Master Perkins truly
alleged Austins words and sentence, which this bold censurer calls foolish,
and confidently affirms, that Austin would not let any such foolish sentence
pass his pen. Let himself judge, whether Austin say so or no. We (says
Aug. in Psalm. 102.
Austin) that are overcome in our selves, have overcome in him; therefore he
crowns thee, because Quia dona sua coronat.
he crowns his own gifts, not thy merits. The sense is, that if God should
look to our actions of striving against sin, as they are weakly performed by
us, he would never crown them; but considering that we strive by his grace,
he vouchsafes them a reward, though on our part altogether undeserved.

Augustine. When God crovvneth thee, he crovvneth his gifts, not thy merits.
Which is true, being taken in that sense, which he himself declares. To such
a man so De great. and hb. arb. cap. 6.
thinking (that is, that he has merits of himself, without the grace of God,)
it may be most truly said: God does crown his own gifts, not thy merits. If
thy merits be of thy self, and not from him: but if we acknowledge our merits
to proceed from grace working with us, then may we as truly say, that
eternal life is the crown and revvard of merits.

Austin has the same sentence, for the substance of it, in Aug in Psalm. 98.
and epistola 105. and de gra. and lib. arb. ca. 6.
many other places, and namely in that you allege, though not altogether as
you allege it. For, after those words, If thy merits be of thy self, it
follows in De great. and lib. arb. cap. 6.
Austin, for these, if they be such, are naught; those that are naught, God
crowns not; but, if they be good, they be the gifts of God. The rest, and the
greater half of the sentence is none of Austins, but yours; yet closely
conveyed by you, as if it were his no less than the former.

Lord thou will quicken me in thy justice, not in mine: not because I have
deserved it, but because thou have compassion.

Psalm. 142.
me shows plainly: now we confess that a sinner is called to repentance and
revived, not for any desert of his own, but of Gods mere mercy.

It is not to this purpose, but speaks of the first justification of a sinner.
For David, who is held to be the penner of it, was truly justified, before the
writing of that Psalm: yea the whole course of the Psalm it self manifestly
proves, that it was the prayer of one greatly in Gods favor, and strongly
persuaded of his succor. But what need I seek any proofs? Have you
forgotten, that a few lines before you confessed as much, when as you would have
shifted off that place, in the second verse of this Psalm, by answering, that
the Prophet prayed only for venial and light sins? How then is the case so
suddenly altered? Forsooth, because he says, Thou shall quicken me. For so
indeed he says, and not, Quicken me, as you write. But this quickening, is not
giving him grace to justification, but comforting, and relieuing him in the
troubles he speaks of; and (as Lyra ad Psalm. 142.
Lyra truly expounds it) delivering him from the danger of death, which hung
over his head, by reason of his son Absoloms unnatural rebellion.

Objections of Papists.
Object. I. In sundry places of Scripture, promise of reward is made to them
that believe and do good works: therefore our works do merit: for a reward
and merit be relatiues. Answ. Reward is twofold: of debt, and of mercy. Life
everlasting is not a reward of debt but of mercy, given of the good will of
God, without anything done of man.

Perkins has alleged against merittes: Let us see what can be said for them,
following as near as I can M. Perkins order.

First, in sundry places of Scripture, promise of reward is made unto good
works. If thou do well, shall thou not receive? To him that does Genes. 4.
Prouer. 11. Eccles. 18 Matthew. 5.
well there is a faithful revvard. Fear not to be justified unto death,
because the revvard of God remains for ever; and. When you are reviled and
persecuted for my sake, rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven. And a
hundred such like: therefore such works do merit heaven, for a reward
supposes that there was a desert of it.

M. Perkins answers first, that the reward is of mere mercy without
Without any thing deserved by doing.
any thing done by men. But this is most apparently false: for the Scripture
expresses the very works whereof it is a reward: Again, a reward in English
supposes a former pleasure, which is rewarded, otherwise it were to be called
a gift, and not a reward: and much more the Latin, and Greek word, Misthos,
Merces, which rather signify a man's hire and wages, then a gift or reward.

Perkins says not, that reward is promised to works, but to them that believe
and do good works: where, if there be any desert, it is wholly in the person,
if not only. Yea all the places, you needlessly allege, mention reward to the
doer, not to the deed.

To the former part of the place out of Ecclesiastic. 18.
Ecclesiasticus, I answered before; I add now concerning the latter, which
belongs to this argument, viz. Because the reward of God remains for ever;
that it is not in the Greek copy, Caraffa. Pagnin.
Greek copy, nor in Caraffas Latin, nor in Pagnines. Vatablus
Vatablus has it indeed, but within two hooks, as a sentence suspected. The
edition of Complutum and A^^as Montanus wholly omit it. Complute^s. A^^as
Montanus.


There is nothing done by man that can deserve such a reward, though there be
something done, for which the doer is rewarded.

A reward supposes some action which is rewarded, but not always upon desert.
It may well be called a reward, because it is given in respect of the work,
howsoever not for the worth of it. The Greek (...), merces.
(...), and the Latin merces, signify a reward for somewhat done, either upon
covenant, or otherwise, but prove not any merit in the work.



Perkins skippes to a second shift: that forsooth eternal life is an
inheritance, but not a reward.

Reply. We know well that it is an inheritance, because it is only due unto the
adopted Sons of God: but that hinders not it to be a reward, for that it is
our heavenly fathers pleasure, that all his Sons coming It is due, because
they are Sons.
to the years of discretion, shall by their good carriage either deserve it,
or else for their bad behavior be disinherited.

that the son should be bound to purchase that by his labor, to which by a
natural right he has full interest. This is our case: for though we are not
sons by nature, but Gal. 4. 5. Romans 8. 17.
by adoption, yet being sons and heirs, yea joint heirs with Christ, the
natural son, of whose body we are members, the very nature of our
sonneship, or being sons, conueies unto us a sufficient and certain title to
the inheritance. It is indeed the pleasure of God our Father, that we should
labor to express our thankfulness, by all holy obedience to him, that has
adopted us for his children, and that we, after this labor, should receive the
inheritance; not deserve that by our labor, to which we have already a far
better claim, by being sons.



Perkins having so good reason to distrust his two former answers, It is not
distrust in (...) ^ormer answer, but desire to give satisfaction.
flies to a third: and grants that eternal life is a reward, yet not of our
works, but of Christ's merits imputed unto us: This is that Castle wherein he
holds himself safe from all Canon shot, but he is foully abused, for this
answer is the most extrauagant of all the rest, as being furthest off from the
true sense of the Scripture: examine any one of the places, and a babe may
discover the incongruity of it. Namely Christ says that great is their reward,
who are reviled and persecuted for his sake. Assigning the reward unto their
constant bearing and enduring of tribulation for Gods sake; and not to his own
merits imputed, and if you desire a formal sentence, fitting this purpose take
this. Every man shall receive 1. Cor. 3.
his reward, according unto his own proper labor: And not according to
Christ's merits imputed unto him. So a doer of the work shall be blessed
Jacob. 1.
in his deed. And not in the imputation of another deed.

Perkins did not, nor needed mistrust either of his former answers; but because
he knew that diverse men were moved with diverse reasons, he added this third, to
see, if by Gods blessing this might give satisfaction, where the other were not
fully understood. It is not Master Perkins meaning to say, that in these our
works there is desert by Christ's merit imputed, but that, if the children of
God must needs be thought to receive everlasting life, as of merit, the merit
is Judge (indifferent Reade^) what there ^s in this reason either obscure or
hard, that the Pa^^st in his ans^e should vv^
properly Christ's imputed to them.

Object. II. Christ by his death merited that our works should merit life
everlasting. Answ. That is false: all we find in Scripture is, that Christ by
his merit procured pardon of sin, imputation of righteousness, and life
everlasting: and it is no where said in the word of God, that Christ did merit,
that our works should merit: it is a dotage of their own devising. He died
not for our good works to make them able to satisfy Gods anger: but for our
sins, that they might be pardoned. Thus much says the Scripture, and no
more. And in that Christ did sufficiently merit life eternal for us, by his
own death: it is a sufficient proof that he never intended to give us power
of meriting the same: unless we suppose that at some time he gives more then
is needful. Again, Christ in the office of mediation as he is a King,
Priest, and Prophet, admits no deputy or fellow. For he is a most perfect
Mediator, doing all things by himself, without the help of any. And the
Ministers that dispense the word are not his deputies, but reasonable and
voluntary instruments, which he uses. But if men by works can merit increase
of grace and happiness for themselves, then has Christ partners in the work
of redemption: men doing that by him, which he does of himself, in procuring
their salvation. Nay, if this might stand, that Christ did merit, that our
works should merit, then Christ should merit that our stained righteousness
being for this cause not capable of merit, should nevertheless merit. I call
it stained; because we are partly flesh, and partly spirit: and therefore in our
selves deserving the curse of the law, though we be regenerate. Again, for
one good work we do, we have many evil, the offense whereof defaceth the
merit of our best deeds, and makes them too light in the balance of the law.

Perkins, I will confirm the first with such texts of holy writ, as specify
plainly your good A poor shift.
works to be the cause of eternal life.



Come unto me ye blessed of my Father, possess a Kingdom prepared for Matthew.
25.
you: And why so? For when I was hungry, ye gave me meat. And so forth:
the like is in the same Chapter of the servants, who employed well their
talents: for their Lord said unto them. Because you have been faithful in fevv
things, I will place you over many. And many such like; Not because your
faithfulness has fully deserved it.
where good works done by the parties themselves are expressly said to be the
very cause, why God rewards them with the kingdom of heaven: Thorefore he
must needs be holden for a very vvrangler, that does seek to pervert such
evident speeches, and would make the simple believe, that the cause there
formally specified, is not to be taken for the cause, but does only signify an
order of things.

August. in Psalm. 49.
Austins exposition. We are judged according to our works: so that if any man
should wonder, why these are received into heaven, those cast into hell, rather
than those into heaven, these into hell; our Savior tells them, that he does
not err in the difference he makes, which must be according to works: These
have done well, and therefore are they that must be saved: Those evil, and
therefore are the men that must be condemned. So that his judgment is right,
because it is according to works, though works be not the meritorious cause
of life truly and wholly.

Augustine: Where he thus briefly handles this text. Come ye blessed of my
Father, receive: What shall In Psalm. 49.
we receive? A Kingdom. For what cause? Because I was hungry, and you gave
me meat, etc. Of the real imputation of Christ's merits, there was no tidings
in those days: And that judicious Doctor, found that good works was the
cause of receiving the kingdom of heaven.

Sixtus Senens. biblioth. sanct. lib. 6. annot 152.
Sixtus Senensis a learned Papist, and not press their words to the uttermost.
It follows in Austin immediately, what is so Tam vile.
little worth, what so earthly, as to break bread to the hungry? Tanti valet
regnum coelorum.
That is the price of the kingdom of heaven. Now will any man be so absurd, as
to imagine that Austin thought, that the giving of a piece of bread to a poor
body was in deed the price of heaven, by which it might be truly and wholly
bought? If it be of no greater value, it was scarce worth the purchasing with
the blood of the Son of God. The reverend Father rhetorically amplifies the
point, to enforce his exhortation to works of charity, which is also our
Saviors reason in that parable. Now that the reward we receive is not truly
and wholly deserved by the works there mentioned, it may appear, because
Chrysostom. and Theophyl. ad illum locum Matthew. 25.
Chrysostom and Theophylact stand so precisely upon the manner of speech. He
says not Take it (say they) but possess it as an inheritance, whereas you say
it is both an inheritance, and a reward. Besides Opus imperfect. in Matthew.
homil 54. apud Chrysostom.
another says, That God did not make the kingdom of heaven of no greater
value then man's righteousness could deserve: and after, not according to the
narrownes of man's righteousness. And lastly, God (says he) appointed not the
reward of the saints, according to the reward of men, but according to his
own bounty.

Perkins redoubleth that common slander of This is drawn out of Master
Perkins second reason, which you durst not propound.
theirs: that we take away a part of Christ's mediation. For says he, if
Christ's merits were sufficient, what need ours? It has been often told them,
but they vvil never learn to understand it: I vvil yet once again repeat it.
We hold our Saviors merits to be of infinite value, and to have deserved of
God all the graces and blessings, which has or shall be bestovved upon all
men, from the beginning of the world unto the end of it: yet his divine will
and order, is that all men of diseretion, having freely received grace from
him, do merit that crown of glory, which is prepared for them, not to
supply the want of his merits, which are inestimable, but being members of his
mystical body, he would have us also like unto himself in this point of
meriting: and further desirous to train us up in all good works, he best
knevv, that there could be no And so of redeeming our selves by meriting.
better spur to prick our dull nature forvvard, then to ordain and propose
such heavenly rewards unto all them, that would diligently endeavor to
deserve them.

Perkins truly charge you to make your selves partners with Christ in the
work of your salvation, for he that is by his own works a deseruer of
everlasting life, is (in some part at least) a savior of himself, so that
howsoever you magnify in words the infinitnes of Christ's satisfaction and
merits, yet in truth you make it either not sufficient, or not effectual to
the saving of them, who must by their works truly and wholly merit everlasting
life, and receive it, not as joint heirs with Christ by the right of sons,
but as hirelings for wages due to their works. If you would grant us an
assured interest to heaven by virtue of our being sons, and claim no more of
God, but increase of glory upon his promise, according to our works, without
pleading desert, you and we should agree in this point; neither should we be
driven either to over value our own righteousness, by thinking it deserves
heaven, or to despair altogether of salvation, because we cannot do such works
as do truly and fully merit heaven.

That God would have us like unto his Son in true obedience, and patient
suffering, we find in the Phil. 2. 5. 8. (...) Romans 8. 29.
scriptures, and believe; that we should also be like him in meriting, when you
prove by the same authority, we will believe. In the mean while give us
leave rather to rest upon Christ only and his merits, the sufficiency whereof
we certainly know, then to trust to our own deserts, which (when they are at
the best) seem to us worthy of damnation rather then reward, which
notwithstanding we assuredly look for upon Gods promise, and acceptance, not
upon our desert or perfection, which comes always short of that which is
enjoined us.

But it is Gods purpose to train us up in good works, it is so out of
question, Ephesians. 2. 10.
for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which
God has ordained, that we should walk in them. And is there no sufficient
means (think you) to prick us forward to do good works, unless we may
persuade ourselves, we shall merit heaven by them? See the difference betwixt
children and servants. And yet forsooth you would bear the world in hand that
you do all of pure love to God, whereas indeed you would do nothing at all, but
that your pride is satisfied for the present by the persuasion of the good use
of your free will, and your hope fed with opinion of everlasting life to be
paid you hereafter, as the deserved hire of your worthy works: we on the other
side Romans 8. 17.
being led with the affection of children, Romans 12. 1.
pricked on with the feeling of Gods incomprehensible mercy: 1. Cor. 15. 58
encouraged by his gracious promises of accepting our poor endeavors to do him
service; Romans 5. 3.
ravished with the expectation of such a reward as is assured us, though without
desert; Psalm. 16. 2. Matthew. 25. 37.
ashamed in our selves every day of our unkindness and unthankfulness in doing no
more; Psalm 130. 3. and 143. 2. Dan. 9. 7. 8. 20.
yea condemned in our own hearts for doing our best works so vnperfitly; yet
by the blessing of God, and assistance of his spirit, press forwards to the
reward that is prepared for us, through the way of good works which our father
has set us in. I have bin carried on in this course farther then I purposed.
Let every man that has a true desire to glorify God more than himself judge
betwixt us and you, out of the sincerity of his heart, whether our doctrine or
yours be more to Gods glory.

merits, to undermine, and blovv out all the virtue of them.



It is a greater gift to vouchsafe us everlasting life without our desert, then
to make us able to deserve it; and more for Gods glory that we should have it,
of his free gift, then of our deserving by his gift, since the ability only to
use the gift well is from him, but the using of it from our own free will, as
before.

Perkins, what should we talk of our merittes, who for one good work we
do, commit many bad, which deface our merits, if we had any.

We must not plead merit, because we deserve damnation.
out all former justice and merit: but by repentance, both are recovered
again: but must we not speak of any good, because we may hap to do evil?
that is a fair persuasion, and well worthy a wise man.

Of this jest, whereby merit is made to rise and fall, I spoke a little before,
and showed how unjust and impossible it was. You may speak of, and do what
good you will, but not plead desert, because you have so many sins to
condemn you.

Object. III. Our works merit by bargain or covenant, because God has
promised to reward them. Ans. The word of God sets down two covenants: on
Legal, the other Evangelical. In the legal covenant life everlasting is
promised to works, for that is the condition of the law; Do these things, and
thou shall live. But on this manner can no man merit life everlasting, because
none is able to do all that the law requires; whether we respect the manner,
or the measure of obedience. In the Evangelical covenant, the promises that
are made, are not made to any work of virtue in man, but to the worker: not
for any merit of his own person or work, but for the person and merit of
Christ. For example, it is a promise of the Gospel, Be faithful unto death,
and I will give thee the crown of life. Reuelat. 2. 10. Here the promise is
not made to the virtue of fidelity, but to the faithful person; whose
fidelity is but a token that he is in Christ: for the merit of whose obedience
God promises the crown of life.

Matthew. 20.
of an householder agrees with his workmen, for a penny a day: that is, to give
them life everlasting for travailing in his service during their life time, as
all ancient interpretours expound it.

Chrysostom. Gregor. Hieron. Hilar. Glossa ordin. apud Thom. in Caten. ad Matthew.
20.
Chrysostom, Gregory, Jerome, Hillary, and the author of your ordinary
gloss. Therefore Lyra ad Matthew. 20.
Lyra doubts not to say plainly, that the literal sense is, that in the
beginning of the Church the Jews that were converted murmured, because the
Gentiles obtained like favor to them, which he proves out of the Act. 11. 2.
Acts. And indeed that seems to have bin the end of the parable, to show the
Matthew. 19. 30 and 20. 1. 16.
reiection of the Jews, who were the first, and the receiving of the Gentiles,
who were the last. To which purpose Hieron. ad Matthew. 20.
Jerome says, that the Jews which were the head shall be turned to the tail,
and the Gentiles who were the tail shall be changed to the head. And for the
penny, he seems to expound that of grace, rather then glory. A penny (says
he) has the figure of the king, thou have therefore received the reward I
promised, that is, my image and likeness, which was also Cyprian. Epist. 66. ad
Magnum.. 10 Heb. 6. 2. These. 1. Lib. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 2.
Cyprians opinion, as it appears in his epistle to Magnus.

Paul infers, that God should be unjust, if he should forget their works,
who suffered persecution for him: And says, If it be just with God, to render
tribulation to them that persecute you, and to such as are persecuted, rest
with us: Upon the same ground S. Hierome says, Great truly were the injustice
of God, if he did only punish ^^^ll works, and would not as well receive good
works. To all th^se, and much more such like, M. Perkins answers, that
covenant for works was in the old Testament, but in the new, the covenant is
made with the workman, not with the work.

Reply. All that I cited in this Argument, is out of the new Testament, You
mean the book, not the couerant. Matthew. 19. Both these are of the old
covenant.
where express covenant is made for working, and works, as you have heard.
And as it was said in the old law, Do these things and thou shall live: so is
it said in the new, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments:
and life eternal, is the hire, and wages, for laboring in Gods vineyard, and
not of the imputed justice, or merits of Christ:

Upon what does Heb 6. 10. 12
S. Paul infer that? not upon that parable; and much less upon the
expositions of it, which then were not hatched: but upon the promises of God,
made to them which through faith and patience attain to the inheritance of
those promises. And this is that justice the 2. These. 1. 6.
Apostle speaks of, having no ground, but Gods gracious promise to accept and
reward our works, though their worth deserve no such recompense. Which
Chrysostom. ad Matthew. 20.
Chrysostom signifies in his Commentary upon the other place, where he says,
The reward shall be greater than the work; not only in continuance, whereof
also he speaks, but in the measure too. He ioynes them (says Chrysostom) in
respect of their crowns, with those who have done far greater things than
they. So that everlasting life is not truly and properly deserved by works, but
is given by promise to them that do work. If you will urge the point of
justice, I answer, the Apostle speaks according to the common speech of men,
who count it a matter of injustice, not to do well to them that do well; and
ill to them that do ill. And in this general respect God indeed deals
justly, punishing them that have behaved themselves lewdly and wickedly, and
rewarding them that have lived righteously and virtuously: So that herein
stands his justice, in giving every man according to his own works; without the
following of which course, there cannot be (ordinarily) any justice. And
therefore Hieron. cont. Iouin. lib. 2. c. 2
Jerome truly says, that God does both punish evil works, and receive or
accept of good works: but not as if there were an equality of merit in either
sort of works, to the punishment or reward he gives; only, as he says there,
because he would have none that are fallen despair of Gods mercy, he thus
amplifies his regard of them; as though it were an unjust thing for God, as
Chrysostom speaks, to contemn and forget them that have exercised themselves
in works of charity.

You have brought no place of any express covenant, but that which being
allegorical, and (as I said before) not expounded in the Scripture, can hardly
afford any certain proof: and none at all of the matter, for which you bring
it. Whereas if the point were so clear, as you would make it, being of so
great importance, doubtless it would have more direct confirmation in
Scripture, than by allegories and exhortations. But it seems you do not
rightly understand Master Perkins distinction; who denies not that a reward is
promised for working, and works, even in the new covenant, but makes this
difference, that by the covenant of the law the wages is due to him that
works, upon the value of his work; but by the covenant of the Gospel the
reward is given, not for the worth of the deed, but because the work is
accepted for the workmans sake, who by faith is the son of God.

Neither of those speeches are any part of the new covenant, though they be
recorded in the new Testament. And the Matthew. 19. 17
latter was our Saviors own speech, to beat down the pride of him that would
be justified by the law: but of this before. The parable is often urged, but
nothing proved out of it. He that will have everlasting life, as hire of his
travail, proclaims himself to be a hireling, not a son.

I come quickly, and will give to every man according to his works: mark, he
says not to the work, or for the work, but to the worker according to his
works. And thus the bond of all other promises of the Gospel, in which God
willingly binds himself to reward our works, do not directly concern us,
but have respect to the person, and obedience of Christ, for whose sake alone
God binds himself as debtor unto us, and gives the recompense or reward,
according to the measure of our faith testified by our works. And therefore it
cannot be truly gathered, that works do merit by any promise or covenant,
passed on Gods part to man.

Perkins sets up: Mark says he, that it is said, God will render unto every
man according to his works: not to the work, or for the work. O sharp and
over fine wit? does he render according to the works, and does he not render
for the works? if the rate of the works be the measure of the revvard, that
for fewer or lesser works, there is a lesser revvard, and for many and
vvorthier, a greater: surely, in my simple understanding, he that gives
according unto the works, gives for the works.

according to the work, or for the work. As in general he rewards them that
do well, because they do well; and he punishes them that do ill, because
they do ill; and so gives to both according, or for their works.



not vvorth the confuting, it is so flat contrary to the text: which
ascribes distinctly that revvard unto the workman for his works, and not
for Christ's obedience imputed unto him.

Perkins answers, has any such direct ascribing of the reward to the workman
for his works. But it is the latter (I think) you speak of, which you have
labored to confute: what is there in that, but that Christ will give to every
man according to his work? That is, as Revel. 22. 11
the verse next before shows, to punish the unjust and filthy, and to reward
the righteous and holy.

Object. IV. Good works are perfect and without fault, for they are the works
of the holy Ghost, who cannot sin: therefore they merit. Ans. If works did
proceed only and immediately from the holy Ghost, there could not be any
fault in them: but our works come from the holy Ghost, in and by the will and
understanding of man: and by this means they are tainted with sin: as water
in the fountain is both clear and sweet, yet the streams thereof passing
through the filthy channel, are defiled thereby. Again, they reason thus:
That which we are bound to do has no fault in it: but we are bound to do
good works: therefore they are perfect. Answ. The proposition must be
expounded: that which we are bound to do, in it self, according to the
intention of the commander, has no fault: or, that which we are bound to do
according as we are bound to do it, has no fault, yet in regard of the
intention of the doer, or in regard of our manner of doing, it may be faulty.

Perkins fourth objection for us, is proposed unskillfully, yet could D. B. P.
What miserable shufling is this? Which confutation has already been
ansvvered. Was there none therefore,
he not answer it, but by relying upon that which is most untrue, that
forsooth no one action of the best man is without fault: with has bin
already confuted, and might be by instances of Abraham's oblation of his Son,
S. John Baptists preaching, and reprehending of Herod. Stephens martyrdom,
with infinite such like, in which M. Perkins, nor any else will be able to
show in particular, what fault there was.

Will this shifting never be left? What want of skill find you in propounding
the objection? If you could have told, we should have been sure to hear of it.
Well, let reasonable men judge. There lackes only the proposition, which any
man may supply; and the assumption, wherein the doubt lies, is proved by a
further reason.

Gal. 5. 17. Romans 7. 24.
the flesh in them lusting against the spirit, natural corruption not wholly
abolished, to taint their works; and Hieron. epist. ad Ctesiph. cont. Pelag.
Matthew. 6. Luke 12.
that God can see an error, or want, where men think the thing cannot be
bettered.

Again, our Savior says: That if the eye be simple, the whole body is
lightsome, not having any part of darkness in it: and very reason teaches us,
that a man's action, for substance and all due circumstances, may be perfect.

Matthew. 6. 22. Luke 11. 34.
place of the eyes simplenes. If by the eye you understand the heart, and
think to prove that men's actions are good, because the heart is good, either
your consequence of the proposition is naught, if by heart you mean intent,
(for a good intent makes not by and by a good work) or else your assumption
will be false, imagining such a measure of pureness in the heart as is not in
this life to be found. Your Glossa ordin. ad Matthew. 6.
Gloss upon the place referres it to the intention, but argues not from thence
any perfection. If thou do good works with as pure intention as thou are able,
they are the works of light, though it seem not so to the world. And Glossa
Interlin. ibid.
another Gloss says, that by the intent works are discerned, whether they be
works of light, or of darkness, not as you say, whether they be perfect, or
imperfect. A third I yea ibid.
Gloss restraines it more, saying, it is a metaphorical speech, as if he
should have said, as thy bodily eye directs thy bodily actions, so the eye of
the mind by a right intention directs humane actions In quantum inest ratio
boni moralis.
as far as concerns the nature of moral goodness. If the intent of the mind
be right, the whole heap of thy actions shall be good and belie, so that the
work be lawful, In genere.
for the kind of it. I will add no more, let all men judge what truth there is
like to be in that doctrine, that can find no better warrant of scripture.

D. B. P. He does not say so in his answer.
action, with all his due circumstances.

Whose shift is this? sure not Master Perkins in this answer. But why is it a
shift? because you say that reason teaches us that a man's actions, for
substance, and all due circumstances, may be perfect. I dare not take it for
true upon your word, in moral actions, according to the light of nature: and
if it were true in them, I should not be resolved, that therefore it were also
true in them, according to the law of God.



Perkins for want of skill in propounding the last argument. for you to mend
the matter, first bring us out a false syllogism, and then conclude that,
which we deny not. your syllogism is false, because the assumption is not
taken out of the proposition, as it should be, but is a new matter, as it were
a fourth term brought in. for your assumption should be, But a greater reward
is due: in steed whereof you say, a greater is provided. Now to be provided,
and to be due, is not all one, because many things are provided for mere
gifts, whch are no way due. your conclusion must be, Therefore a reward is due
to them which do good works. who says otherwise? but this due is of promise,
not of desert.

Augustine grounded upon Gods word, proves in sundry places: Sermon. 46. de
verbis Dom. 1. Cor. 15. Sermon. 95. Lib. de virg. cap. 44.
nam^ly, upon that, For star dissereth from star in glory, so shall be the
resurrection from the dead; specifying that virginity shall shine after one
sort, chastity in vvedlocke after another, and holy vviddovvhood yet after
another: all (says he) shall be there, but they shine diversely: And of the
same work affirms, That martyrdom, shall be higher revvarded, then any
other work. The like does he upon those words, One ground shall yield thirty
fold, another threescore fold, another an hundred fold: Comparing chastity in
vvedlocke to the thirty, in vviddovves to the sixty, and in virgins to the
hundred. But most directly in his sixty seven treatise upon S. John's Gospel
upon this verse: Jn my Fathers house are many mansions: where he says, that
albeit some be holier, iuster, and more valiant then others, yet there shall be
fit rooms for them all, where every one is to receive his place according
unto his merit. That penny spoken Matthew. 20.
of (by which says he is signified eternal life) shall be given to every man
equally: because every one shall live for ever, and not one longer then
another: but many mansions do signify the different dignities of merits in the
same everlasting life.

Gregory in most express terms, does teach the same doctrine, Lib. 4. mo^.
cap. 42.
saying: Because in this life there is a difference of works amongst us,
there shall be in the other life without all doubt a distinction of dignities:
that as one here exceeds another in merit, so there one surpasses another i^
revvard. Finally, S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, condemn it De haeres. haer.
82. Lib. 2. cont. Iouin.
as an heresy, to hold that there is not diversity of merits in this life,
and rewards in the next: Whereon follovveth most manifestly, that there be
merits and rewards.

All this labor of heaping up needless testimonies might well have been
spared, especially since they prove not that which you should have assumed,
That greater reward is due; but that which you did assume, That greater reward
is provided. Wherefore letting pass the three former, which are nothing to the
purpose; to the Aug. ^n Ioh. tract. 67.
last I answer: that by merits, good works are meant, as by meriting, working,
not that which is truly and properly desert. Beside, it is expressly set down
in that testimony out of Gregory, wherein that which is termed work in the
former part of the sentence, in the latter is called merit. The same answer I
make to the other two testimonies of Austin and Jerome: granting a diversity
of reward, according to the diverse dignity and number of good works.

Obict. V. Christ says Revel. 3. 4. that the faithful in the Church of Sardis
shall walk with him in white: for they are worthy: therefore believers merit.
Answ. Every believer is worthy to walk with Christ; yet not worthy in
himself, but in Christ, to whom he is united, and made bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh. And by reason of this conjunction it is, that men are said
to be worthy, because they are enriched with Christ's merits and righteousness.

They shall walk with me in whites, because they D. B. P. Apoc. 3. Sap. 3. 2.
These. 1. Luke 20. 35.
be worthy. God proved them, and found them worthy of himself. That you may
be esteemed vvorthie of the kingdom of God: Now if men be worthy of eternal
life, it must needs be granted that they have deserved it.

I deny the consequence of the proposition. First, because infants (at the
least in your doctrine) are worthy of everlasting life; and yet it were hard
to say, they have deserved it. Secondly, in that we are the sons of God, we
have a certain worthiness of our inheritance: yet have we not truly and wholly
deserved everlasting life. Thirdly, there is also a worthiness in Gods
acceptance, whereof the Apostle speaks, 2. These. 1. 5.
That you may be esteemed worthy: and our Savior, Luke 20. 35.
They that shall be esteemed worthy. Fourthly, they that are justified, shall
have a special worthiness in themselves, when they come to receive their
inheritance, because they shall be truly and fully sanctified.

Perkins answers: that they were indeed worthy, but not for their own
merits, but for Christ's imputed unto them. This is his only refuge, Not in
words.
yet has he not, nor cannot show any one text in Scripture that speaks so.

Perkins rightly understanding the question, that it is of such a worthiness,
as truly and fully deserves everlasting life for wages, denies that they of
Sardis were in that sort worthy of heaven, by any other thing, than by being
members of Christ's mystical body, and so partakers of his worthiness, in
their measure. Which Master Perkins proves, though he name not the place, by
showing, that Ephesians. 5. 30.
we are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, receiving 1. Cor. 15. 22.
as our resurrection, so everlasting life, by, and with him our head.

Apoc. 3.
that this worthiness rose of good works, as Christ says: I know thy
works, and find them not full: yet there be some amongst yo^, who ^aue not
defiled their garments (but have their works full) they shall walk with me
in whites, because they be worthy.

Revel. 3. 4.
holy Ghost gives this commendation, rather for refraining from those sins,
whereof the Sardians generally were guilty, than for any principal works of
obedience. Now whereas you add, but have their works full, it is without
authority from the text, though it be in the second verse. Yea the change of
the phrase in this verse, may cause us to think, that by that want in the
former verse, some actual transgressions are signified, by which their
garments were defiled, as the holy Ghost here speaks. So that this
worthiness was by Christ's acceptance, and in comparison of the rest of the
Sardians.

By susteining persecutions, they were made worthy of that Kingdom. 2. These.
1.
And in the words following, the Apostle signifies, that it is as just for God
to requite good works with the joys of heaven, as he does punish wicked, with
the pains of hell.

2. These. 1. 5. Verse. 6.
Thessalonians, who were esteemed worthy for their works. Yet not precisely
for the value of them, being such as they were bound to do, and could not
without sin leave undone. The justice of God, which you urge out of the
Apostle, proves nothing but this, that in justice the persecutors are to be
punished, and the persecuted relieved. But it does not prove an equality of
desert on each side; because to suffer for Christ, if occasion be, is a duty;
and many imperfections overtake the best in suffering, and overthrow all true
merit.

Object. VI. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Everlasting life is termed a crown, and a crown of
righteousness to be given of a just judge: therefore man for his part by his
works deserves the same. Answ. Everlasting life is called a crown only in
resemblance. For as he which runs a race, must continue and run to the
end, and then be crowned: even so must we continue to walk in good works
unto the end, and then receive eternal life.

Perkins delivers thus: Eternal life is termed a crown, and a crown of
righteousness to be given by a just judge: 2. Tim. 4.
therefore in this life it must be justly deserved, otherwise it were not well
called a crown of justice, nor could be said to be rendered by a just judge.



Perkins answers, that it is called a crown by resemblance, because it is
given in the end of the life, as the cro^ne is given in the end of the race.

Perkins denies the consequence of the Enthymem, viz. that therefore
everlasting life must be deserved, because it is called a crown. He adds the
reason of his denial; That it is called a crown, not because it is deserved,
but because it is given as a reward, after we are come to the end of our race;
as the 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8
Apostle shows plainly, I have fought a good fight, and have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: he says not, therefore I have deserved the crown.

D. B. P. A gross comparison. We grant the likeness, but deny the equality.
former deserts, it might then as well be called a halter by resemblance,
because that also is given in the end of life: and in their opinion, more
properly: because all their works are defiled like a menstruous cloth: and a
halter is the end of such wicked works. But as a halter is due to a thief, so
is a crown of glory the just reward of the righteous man.

That I may omit your lewd dallying, in saying that everlasting life might, in
that respect, as well be called a halter; consider whether your answer be not
absurd. For that which is given upon continuance of walking in good works, as
Master Perkins says the crown is, cannot in any reason be as well termed a
halter, as a crown: though there be not in the works, the true and whole
nature of merit, to deserve the crown. Everlasting life (says Glossa Ordin.
ad 2. Tim. 4. 8 and Lombardus ibi.
your gloss) is as it were the reward of faith, and God seems to pay it,
Quasi ^^^ces. Videtu^ deus tanquam debitum reddere. gloss.
as it were debt.



He never denied it. Js every thing deserved that is due by promise? Math. 20.
Math. 25.
due debt unto the righteous: but as having ouer-shot himself, he adds, not
for any desert of theirs, but only for the promise sake. But as you have heard
before, out of S. Matthew, that promise was made for vvorking the time of our
life in his vine yard, and so there was some desert on their part, and the
servants were rewarded, because they employed their talents well.

Perkins ouershot himself. That which you repeat out of Saint Matthew, was
answered before.

Paul reckons up his good services, for which the just judge would render him
a crown of justice: and therefore the justice is not only in respect of Gods
promise.

Paul reckons up his good services: and good reason; for the reward is not due
to any by promise, but to them that do good works. For else what should be
rewarded? But why should it be called a crown of justice? Because it is given
to the just (says Thomas ad 2. Tim. 4. 7.
Thomas) Secundunc opera iusta.
according to their just works. And in that respect God is called a just Judge,
in giving this crown: because he gives good for good. Yea that very justice,
whereby good is given for good, is not without mercy, says the Glossa. Ordin.
bona pro bonis.
gloss, and Lombardus ibi.
Lombard.

Perkins on his bare word, let S. Augustine be arbitrator between us: who most
deeply considers of every word in this sentence: Let us hear (says he) the
Apostle speaking, when he approached near unto his passion, J have (quoth he)
fought a good fight, J have accomplished Lib. 50. hom. Hom. 4.
my course, J have kept the faith: concerning the rest, ^there is laid up for
me a crown of justice, which our Lord will render unto me in that day, a just
judge: And not only to me, but to them also that love his coming: He says
that our Lord a just judge will render unto him a Crown: he therefore does
owe it, and as a just judge will pay it. For the work being regarded, the
revvard cannot be denied. I have fought a good fight, is a work: I have
accomplished my course, is a work: J have kept the faith, is a work. There
is laid up for me a crown of justice, this is the reward. So that you see most
clearly by this most learned Fathers judgment, that the reward is due for the
work sake, and not only for the promise of God.

Austin is brought as a proof, that a man has nothing of himself, which he
has not received. Whereas if your doctrine of merit and free will were true, a
man, having grace from God, whereby he is enabled to work, might of his own
free will so use this grace, that everlasting life should be due to him, as
wages for his work. But if these good works proceed from grace, not only in
respect of our ability to do them, but of the particular actions; what true
merit can there be in them? Immediately after the words you allege, it
follows Aug. lib. 50. Hom. Homil. 14.
in Austin: In the reward thou do nothing, in the work nothing alone. The
crown is from him, the work from thy self; yet not without his help. Which
help we must understand to be more than an ability to work; or else, as I
said, our free will shall have the chief commendation in all our good works.
But to the testimony; we grant that the reward is due to the work, which is
your conclusion out of Austin; but we deny that it is due upon desert of the
work. For neither does the work, if it were perfectly done, truly and
properly deserve the reward, because it is a matter of duty, and but one work,
whereas many thousands are due to make up true merit by works; and being
imperfect, as all our best works are, it is so far from deserving
everlasting life, that it rather might increase our sins, if God should
strictly in justice examine it.

J will sing unto thee O Lord, Psalm. 100.
mercy and judgment. Where he concludes, that God in judgment will ont of his
justice crown those good works, which he of mercy had given grace to do.

Austin, That God cannot but reward our works, because of his promise, and
because they are such, for the substance of them, as he has enjoined. And so
(as I have said often) in general justice, they that do well must have well.
But we add hereunto, first, that these works did not by their due worth wring
this promise from God, as if he had been unjust, unless he had made it. Which
must have been, if they be truly and wholly such merits, that everlasting life
is necessarily due to them as wages. Secondly, the promise being made, we say
further, that none of our works are so exactly performed, according to the rule
of Gods justice, but that he might justly deny us the reward promised.
Thirdly, we affirm, that it is not everlasting life, or the kingdom of heaven
properly taken, which God has promised and owes to our works, but only the
measure of glory in heaven. The kingdom is due to us, as an inheritance, by
the right of sons; the diverse measure of glory is met out to every one
according to his works, and for his works; yet not upon their desert, but
upon Gods gracious promise, and merciful acceptance, pardoning our sins, and
rewarding us above our deserts.

Augustine does so confidently teach this doctrine of merits, (which M. Perkins
blushed not to term the invention of Satan.) I will fold up this question
with some testimonies of the most ancient and best Authors.

Ignatius the Apostles auditour says. Give me leave to become the Epist. ad
Roman.
food of beasts, that I may by that means merit and win God.

For answer to the testimonies of the ancient writers, we must remember, that
to merit does signify in them to work, and to obtain, and that very
commonly: and in like sort, merits are ordinarily taken for good works. Beside,
their testimonies for the most part entreat of reward, not of wages; and we
deny not, that God will reward every least good work of his children. Now to
the several allegations; we may easily observe, in this Ignatius ad Roman.
Ignatius, that oueruehement desire of martyrdom, that carried away very many,
as it appears by Gregory Greg. Nazian. monod. in obitum Ba^ilij.
Nazianzen, who commends Basils father, because he had no such zeal without
knowledge, and condemns (though not by name) this counterfaite Ignatius, who
is so hot upon martyrdom, that he says, he will provoke the wild beasts to
tear him in pieces, if they (as sometimes it fell out, questionles by Dan. 6.
22. Hebr. 11. 33.
Gods great providence) should refrain to fasten on him. Now if this man
should somewhat ouerprize his deserts, I think it were no great wonder: but I
had rather excuse him, if you will let me, and say, he means by meriting
nothing but enjoying God, which he was to obtain after this life, and
therefore so much longed for his dissolution. As for the other word win, it
is your addition, to make the allegation the more likely. If you will not allow
of this excuse, I say plainly, this man's testimony is nothing worth, because
he was of little judgment in divinity, as it is evident by his whole epistle,
and especially by this absurd sentence. Whosoever (says he) does not fast
every Lords day or Sabbath, except Easter day only, is a murderer of Christ:
but he may serve your turn for number, though not for weight. D. B. P. Apolog.
2. ante med. Worthy of Gods will and counsel is no English nor sense.


Iustine a glorious Martyr of the next age has these words, speaking in the
name of all Christians. We think that men who by works have shevved
themselves worthy of the will, and counsel of God, shall by their merits
live and reign with him, free from all corruption, and perturbation.

Justin. Apo. log. ad Anton.
Justin neither speaks, nor thinks in that place of the question in hand, but
writing to a heathen Emperor, tells him that Christians hold this doctrine,
That they which show themselves (...).
conformable, or fitted to Gods will by their works, (...), dignatum iri.
shall be vouchsafed his company, and reign with him free from corruption and
passion. If you will have the word translated thought worthy, it is all one,
though the latin be otherwise, and the meaning of the other word, as the case
in the greek shows, and the translation, both being the Dative, howsoever you
mistook the latin, which is not the Ablative case, as you translate it.

Ireneus says. We esteem that crown to be precious, which i^ D. B. P.
Lib. (...). con. hae^^^. cap. ^2.
gotten by combat and suffering for Gods sake.

Irenaeus te^s us, that the Apostle Paul exhorts to strive, or fight, that we
may think the crown precious, for indeed (as he says (...). lib. 4. cap. 27.
there) we make most account of those things which we hardliest come by, so
that the more pains we take in striving, the more precious shall we think
the crown to be: this is Irenaeus true meaning, as any man may see that will
look on the place. But what is this to prove, that our works deserve
everlasting life for wages? as for the suffering for Gods sake, it is of your
devising, and adding, not of Irenaeus writing.

All we that walk the way of the Gospel, as Merchants Ora. in initium prou.
Lib. de Spirit. Sancto c. 24.
do, buy and get the possession of heavenly things, by the works of the
commandments. A man is saved by works of justice.

We acknowledge a comparison of likeness betwixt Merchants and Christians, but
we deny an equality of value in the commodities we are to utter: which we do
the rather, because in those parables, to which Basil. Orat. in initium Proverb.
Basil in this place alludes, Mat. 13. 44. 45.
Though the field and the pearl are said to be bought, yet no man imagins
that the price paid for them is of equal worth to the purchase: neither does
it follow, that if (as Basil says) a man be saved by Per iusti^am operum.
the righteousness of works, then his works are of full value to the salvation
he obtaines by them.

If the day of our return shall find us unloaded, svvi^t, Sermon. de el^^ mo^.
in fine.
and running in the race of works, our Lord will not fail to reward our
merits. He will give for works, to those that win in peace, a white
crown, and for martyrdom in persecution, he will redouble unto them a purple
crown.

Cyprian ser. de ^l^^mos. in fine.
Cyprian, but that God, if we persevere to the end in well doing, will reward
our works according to the diversity of them, with less or more glory? we say
as much. But the question is, whether our works fully deserve everlasting life
or no.

The kingdom of heaven, is the hier and revvard of them that live well and
perfectly. D. B. P. Can. 5. in Mat.


Hilar. in Mat. Can. 5.
Hilary expounding that exhortation of our Savior, Math. 6. 33.
seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, counsels men to
seek it Vitae nostrae stipendijs.
with the labor of their life, and this (says he) is the reward (for there is
but one word merces) of them, that live well and perfitly: he says not, that
any man's work is perfect enough truly and wholly to deserve it.

Is it not evident that there remains after this life, either revvard for
merits, or punishment? D. B. P. Lib. 1. de offic. cap. 15.


Ambros. de Offic. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Ambrose speaks not of the value of good works, but labors to take away that
offense that commonly troubles men, when they see that evil men fare better
then good in this world: he answers, that in the world to come the case shall
be altered, the one shall be rewarded, and the other punished for their works,
which he calls merits.

Now after Baptism it appertains to our travails, according unto the
diversity of virtue to prepare for us different rewards.

Ieromes testimony, as you do the quoting of it, for it makes nothing for you,
nor against us, that we are to prepare different rewards for our selves,
according to the diversity of virtue, what if he had said merit? do we not
grant it? But where is deserving everlasting life in Ieromes words?

Provide that thou have merits, for the want of them is a pernitions poverty.
D. B. P. Sermon. 68. in Cant.


Penury of works (says Bernard. ser. 68. in Cantic.
Bernard) is dangerous poverty, who denies it? it follows, but presumption of
spirit is deceitful riches. who presumes if he do not, that thinks himself
absolutely worthy of heaven, as wages?

Revvard is debt unto good works, if they be done, but grace which was not
debte, goes before that they may be done. These testimonies of the Can. 18.
most ancient, and best learned Christians may suffice, to batter the brazen
forehead of them that affirm the Doctrine of merits, to be a Satanicall
invention, and to settle all them, that have care of their salvation, in As
pride is Satanicall.
the most pure doctrine of the Catholic Church.

The Council. Arausic. can. 18.
Council of Orange says nothing that was not said before in the testimonies
of the Fathers, neither needs any other answer. The doubt is not, whether
reward be due to good works, but by what right it is due, whereof the Council
says nothing expressly.

The doctrine of merits, as it was held and taught by the ancient Christians,
before the discovery of your Romish Antichrist, we acknowledge and embrace,
howsoever perhaps some particular men may have gone a little too far in their
amplifications. But the doctrine that is maintained by your Church, and
Council of Trent, we disclaim, and detest, as the principal means next to
direct Pelagianisme, to puff up the pride of man's heart, and to take away true
thankfulness and trust in God, that is to overthrow the Gospel, the end whereof
is believing in Christ to justification and salvation. For if, as by your
doctrine it must needs be, man do at the first, by the good use of his
freewill, receive grace, and by the same freewill, though in both cases
enlightened and inspired, merit his salvation truly and wholly as the day
laboring man does his wages, what glory can God have, or what thanks does
Christ deserve for any particular man's salvation? he provided the means, you
will say that Peter (for example) might be saved, if he would. So did he that
Judas might be. He offered the means to Peter, and to Judas too. How chance
Peter received this grace and Judas did not? you answer, because Peter would,
and Judas would not. But how came it to pass that Peter would and Judas would
not? Here is the first difference, was it because God of his love to Peter
wrought in his heart by his spirit, so that it could not come to pass but he
should believe, and left Judas to himself, who so left would never believe? so
we teach according to the truth of the Gospel. But you persuade your people
that it was Peter that made the difference betwixt himself and Judas, not God,
who left the matter to the free will of both alike, that either, or neither of
them might be saved, as pleased them.

But what? is Peter by this believing in Christ, an heir of heaven? no, only
he is now in such an estate, as that he may if he will earne everlasting life,
as the hire and wages of his works. I appeal now to any Christian soul that
has but the least desire to advance Gods glory above his own, to give
sentence of this matter out of the truth of his heart: what does God by the
doctrine of popery, but only provide that men may come to heaven if they will?
And how? forsooth upon our Savior Christ's deserts, he is content to give men
grace, whereby they may be able to merit their own salvation. But he will give
this grace to no man, who shall not first upon good motions inspired, prepare
himself, of his own free will, by faith, fear, hope, love, repentance, to
the receiving of it: having received it, he must now by good works, to which he
is enabled, deserve everlasting life so fully, as that God should be unjust, if
he should not give it him, for the worthiness of the work he has done. For
whereas he made a promise of a reward, it was no more then he was bound to do
in true justice, our works, without his promise, deserving the reward truly and
wholly. This is the doctrine of your Church touching faith, and works, which
Master Perkins justly calls a satanicall invention, because it overthrows the
glory of Gods mercy, to establish the pride of man's free will. Now whereas we
teach, that our works do not by their worth deserve everlasting life, what hurt
is it (if it were false, but only that it were false) to make men think
themselves wholly bound to God, for their justification and glorification? for
we urge necessity of works, and assurance of reward, as well as you, though
not to merit everlasting glory by them. If any man be so thankeles, or so
proud, that he will not work, unless he may merit by working, he never felt
himself to be a son, and shall receive the wages of servants, the just hire
of his sins, damnation.

The sixth point. Of Satisfaction. Our consent.
Conclus. I. First, we acknowledge and hold Civil or Politic satisfaction;
that is, a recompense for injuries, and damages offered any way to our
neighbors. This Zacheus practiced, when at his conversion he restored
fourfold things gotten by forged cauillation. Again, by civil satisfaction
I understand, the imposition of fines, mulcts, and penalties upon offenders,
and the inflicting of death upon malefactors. For all these are satisfactions
to the law, and societies of men when they are wronged. All these we maintain
as necessary: for, neither Church, nor commonwealth can well be without them;
considering they are notable means to uphold civil peace: and otherwhiles
they are fruits of true faith, as the satisfaction of Zacheus was.

D. B. P. Luke 10. Are you so p^^^y to their a^counts?
testants, for where the Sacrament of Confession is wanting, there men use very
seldom to recompense so much as onefold, for their extorsion, bribes, usury,
and other crafty ouer-reaching of their neighbors.

Whatsoever our practice be (and yet if it did not exceed yours, we had good
cause to be ashamed of it) the question is now of our doctrine; which Master
Perkins has truly delivered. As for the help you would have imagined to come
from Auricular confession, to the exercise of satisfaction; who is so ignorant
of your courses in appointing penance, that he knows not how little you
inioyne this satisfaction, and how easily it may be bought out, if it be
enjoined, with some contribution to some of your Abbeyes, Frieries, Churches,
Chapels, and such like?



Then there may be satisf^ction not voluntary.


to purge us from that temporal pain, which for sins past and pardoned, we
are to endure, either in this life, or in Purgatory, if we die before we have
fully satisfied here.

By visitation, that is by punishment, to purge men from pain that should be
endured? May a man satisfy against his will, or without his knowledge? for
both these fall out in Gods visitations, that a man is visited against his
will, wholly, if he could help it; and that he does not so much as once
think upon satisfying for his sins by it: yea sometimes, if he should, he
should think amiss: for all visitations of God are not Ion. 9. 1. 2. Job. 1.
and 2.
chastisements for sin, but special trials and means of Gods glory.

Conclus. II. We acknowledge Canonical or Ecclesiastical satisfaction: and
that is, when any having given offense to the Church of God, or any part
thereof, do make an open public testimony of their repentance. Mirian for
murmuring against Moses, was stricken with leprosy, and afterward by his
prayer she was cleansed, and yet for all that she must go seven days out of
the tent and congregation, that she might make a kind of satisfaction to the
people for her trespass. And in the old testament, sackcloth and ashes were
signs of their satisfaction.

Conclus. III. We hold that no man can be saved, unless he make a perfect
satisfaction to the justice of God for all his sins; because God is infinite
in justice, and therefore will either exact an everlasting punishment, or
satisfaction for the same.

The dissent and difference.
The points of our difference and dissent are these. The Church of Rome
teaches and believes, that Christ by his death has made a satisfaction for
all the sins of men, and for the eternal punishment of them all: yet so, as
they themselves must satisfy the justice of God for the temporal punishment
of their offenses, either on earth or in purgatory. We teach and believe,
that Christ by his death and passion has made a perfect and all-sufficient
satisfaction to the justice of God for all the sins of men, and for the whole
punishment thereof both eternal and temporal. Thus we differ, and herein we
for our parts must for ever stand at difference with them: so as if there were
no more points of variance but this one, it should be sufficient to keep us
always from uniting our religions, and cause us to obey the voice of Christ,
Come out of her my people. For as in the former points, so in this also, the
papists err, not in circumstance, but in the very foundation and life of
religion.

Perkins in his third conclusion, decrees very solemnly, That no man can be
saved, unless bs make a perfect satisfaction, unto the justice of God, for all
his sins. Yet in the explication of the difference betvveene Not by himself
having made satisfaction by and in Christ.
us, defines as peremptonly, that no man is to satisfy, for any one of all
his sins, or for any temporal pain due to them: Which be flat
contradictorie propositions, and therefore the one of them must needs be false.
But such odd broken rubbish does he commonly cast into the ground work of
his questions, and thereupon raises the tottering building of his new
doctrine: and lets not, like a blind man, to make an outcrie, that in this
matter the Papists err in the very foundation and life of religion.

man must satisfy, and every man does satisfy, by and in Christ, are not
contradictorie propositions, as a man with half an eye may see.

The very foundation and life of religion, is the acknowledging of full
redemption by the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. But how can that be acknowledged,
where satisfaction remains to be made by (perhaps) many thousand years
punishment?

Our reasons.
Biel Super lib. 3. did. 19. concl. 3
in plain words confessed: Although (says he) the passion of Christ be the
principal merit, for which grace is conferred: the opening of the kingdom and
glory: yet is it never the alone and total meritorious cause: it is manifest,
because always with the merit of Christ, there concurreth some work, as the
merit of congruitie or condignity of him that receives grace or glory, if he
be of years and have the use of reason: or of some other for him, if he want
reason. For that which admitts a supply by another, is imperfect in it self.
Therefore humane satisfactions cannot stand.



virtue: so that, though he has paid part of his principal debt, he has
made no satisfaction at all.



M. Perkins says, his D. B. P. M^ has resi^ted this page 121 Prove there is
such a will.
faith does to them, and to fulfill his will and ordinance.

First, the speech is beyond any ordinary man's understanding; to make
satisfaction, is to apply another man's satisfaction to us. Secondly, to make
satisfaction, is to deserve, that because of our satisfaction for the temporal
punishment due to our sins, Christ's satisfaction for the eternal may be
auailable to us. Thirdly, if man's satisfaction be not to supply the want of
Christ's satisfaction, either there is no temporal punishment belonging to
sin, or Christ has made satisfaction for that, as well as for the eternal;
and then God cannot require any satisfaction of us, because he is already
satisfied both for the eternal and temporal punishment. Fourthly, if we do
nothing by our satisfaction, but apply Christ's satisfaction to us, which is
only for the eternal punishment, the temporal remains wholly without
satisfaction made for it.

Every man do bear his own burden. Gal. 6.


Perkins syllogism, nor defending any point of your own answer; but only
affirming that, which before was said, that God exacts a temporal
satisfaction; and affoording us some reason to confute your opinion by, in this
sort.

If Christ's satisfaction was sufficient more easily to take away the temporal
punishment than the eternal, how will you prove it did not? It stands you
upon to show us good evidence out of the record of Scripture, that God agreed
with Christ, not to take the full desert of his sufferings and satisfaction,
but to leave man still indebted to him, though in truth the debt were paid. If
no such agreement can be showed, for my part I see not how God in justice can
ask the same debt twice, being once fully satisfied.

That which you add is wholly our doctrine, viz. that God, by smart and grief,
would fear us from sinning, and make us conformable to his Son our Savior.
But you teach, that he punishes us, and so takes satisfaction for sins past,
as if he were to be revenged on us, at least by temporal punishment, for our
sins committed.

You repeat your conclusion, but with no dependence upon your former matter,
or proof from that which follows: where Gal. 6. 5.
the Apostle tells the Galathians, that they may not be always finding fault
with other men, and so grow into a conceit of their own goodness, but look to
themselves; because every man must give an account to God for his own sins,
and not for another man's. If you will needs abuse the Apostle, and apply his
words to that he thought not on; why do you not, by the same reason, lay the
eternal punishment upon us too? for that was our burden, as well as the
temporal.

that man might satisfy, then Christ does make every believer to be a Christ,
a Jesus, a Redeemer, and a priest in the same order with his own self. But to
make sinful man his own redeemer, though it be but from temporal punishments,
is a doctrine of devils. For the holy Ghost teaches that the priesthood of
Heb. 7. 24.
Christ is incommunicable, and cannot pass from him to another. Now to make
satisfaction for sin or any part of the punishment thereof, is a duty, or a
part of Christ his priesthood, and therefore to make satisfaction is a work
that cannot pass from his person to the person of any man.

Perkins,) we must then be new Christ's, and redeemers, and Priests of the same
order with himself: Nothing so, but having grace from him, we may in virtue
thereof satisfy, not for the crime it self, or everlasting punishment, which is
lincked with it: because that would require an infinite virtue: But for the
temporal pain of it, one endued with grace may satisfy, for the measure of
stripes must not exceed the rate of the fault, the punishment then resting
unsatisfied being limited, a creature may pay it.

Perkins words. For you saw well enough, that if you should do so, your poor
blinded Papists would venture to read them (which now they dare not do) and
so your weakness in answering might be discovered. Master Perkins has refuted
your answer of applying Christ's satisfaction, before it was hatched: you pass
it by as not seen, and propound his answer to another objection by halues,
leaving the objection out altogether. I will make the matter as plain as I can
with shortness. You Papists say, that Christ's satisfaction merited, that man's
works should satisfy for temporal punishment: Master Perkins denies it upon
this reason: If Christ did satisfy that man might satisfy, he made every
believer a Christ, a Jesus, a Redeemer, a Priest, in the same order with
himself: But he did not make men Christ's and Iesuses, Redeemers and Priests,
in the same order with himself. Therefore he did not satisfy, that man might
satisfy.


The assumption he proves; Hebr. 7. 24.
because Christ's Priesthood cannot be communicated to any other; the
consequence of the proposition depends upon this, that satisfaction is a part
of Christ's Priesthood: you deny the consequence; but neither show any reason
of your denial, nor answer his proof: only you tell us, that a man is able
to bear the temporal punishment, though not the eternal; as though we
denied temporal, because a man cannot bear it.





Secondly, what a fond distinction is that, betwixt the sin, and the pleasure
in the sin? Is not that pleasure in the sin, a sin too, if it be
voluntary? and if it be not voluntary, but only be a consequent upon the
sin, having no ground in the will any way, how is it punishable?

It is finished, that is, I have fully satisfied for all the sins of mankind,
both in respect of the fault and punishment. As for Christ's burial and
resurrection which follows his death, they served not to satisfy but to
confirm and ratify the same.

Perkins) said. On the Cross it is finished: Wherefore all satisfaction was
at Christ's death ended: as well temporal as eternal.

Ans. That those words have a far different sense: To vvitte, that Christ
had then ended his course, and fulfilled all prophecies, and endured all such
torments, as pleased God to impose upon him for the redemption of mankind: of
satisfaction temporal there is no mention, neither can any thing be drawn
thence against it.

we are redeemed from them by Christ, or he has not made perfect redemption.
But questionless his redemption is perfect, and these are punishments due to
sin. Therefore he has freed us from these also.

Paul says, 2. Cor. 5. 21. He that knew no sin was made sin for us, that
is, the punishment of sin for us: but if the Church of Rome say true, that
Christ does daily satisfy, then Paul spoke too short, and should have said
further, that Christ was made sin for us, and in us too: and that God was not
only in Christ but also in us reconciling the world to himself. But Paul
never knew this learning: and therefore let them turn themselves which way they
will, by putting a supplement to Christ's satisfaction, they do indeed
annihilate the same.

Christ was made sin for us: That 2. Cor. 5.
is, the punishment of sin, as M. Perkins gloseth it: but the learned say, an
host or sacrifice for sin. But we ^raun^ that he suffered the punishment For
our sin, and say consequently: that all sin is pardoned freely for his sake,
and the pain of hell also, which is punishment of sin: but not other
temporal pains, such as it has pleased the justice and You beg, not prove
this.
vvisdome of God, to reserve unto every si^ner, to bear in his own person.
And after this sort, and no other was God in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself.



Paul understood well. that Christ suff^rings did not take Collos. 1.
away ours, may be gathered by these his words. I rejoice in suffering for
you, and do accomplish those things, that want of the passions of Christ, in
my flesh for his body, which is the Church.

But of this point more, when we come unto the Arguments for the Ca^holike
part.

that his satisfaction leaves us no place for ours: we suffer, but not to
satisfy: neither does Saint Paul say any such thing.

Reason II. In sundry places of Scripture, especially in the Epistles of Paul,
we are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved Freely: which word Freely,
does import that we are justified and saved without any thing done on our part
or by our selves in the matter of our salvation: and if this be so, then can
we do nothing at all that may satisfy the justice of God for the least
punishment of our sins. If we satisfy in our own persons we are not saved
freely: and if we be saved freely, we make no satisfaction at all.

Perkins second reason. In sundry places (says he) of Scripture, we are said
to be redeemed, justified, and saved freely: but this word freely imports
that we are saved without doing any thing our selves in that matter of
salvation.

Ans. Not so good Sir, for even in your own Doctrine, it is necessary that ye
believe, and bring forth the fruits of repentance, and that now and then, ye
make some short prayers, and receive the communion, and do many other odd
things in that matter of salvation: Wherefore the word freely does not exclude
all our working, and suffering in that All to merit or satisfy by
matter.

Master Perkins means not to exclude all doing, on our part, but all doing to
merit, or satisfaction. As it appears by the proposition of his syllogism in
the end: If we satisfy in our person, we are not saved freely: If we be saved
freely, we make no satisfaction at all. Now although all doing be not against
free salvation, yet all doing to merit and satisfy is directly against it.

Reason III. We pray daily, forgive us our sins: now to plead pardon, and to
satisfy for our sins be contrary: and for all things, for which we can
make satisfaction, we need not crave a pardon: but we are taught in the
foresaid petition wholly and only to use the plea or pardon for our sins, and
therefore we acknowledge that we cannot make any satisfaction at all.



If we can satisfy for sin, we need not crave pardon for it: But we need
crave pardon for it. Therefore we cannot satisfy for it.


Your answer cannot well be applied to any part of this syllogism, but in
effect it seems to be as much, as if you should deny the assumption: not
simply, but with this distinction, that we need crave pardon for the eternal
punishment, but not for the temporal. Then the meaning of that petition in the
Lords Prayer is, forgive us the eternal punishment due to our sins: which is
to ask forgiveness by halues. Lyra ad Math 6.
Lyra says, We pray that our sins may be Totaliter.
wholly forgiven, both in respect of the fault, and of the punishment. And that
he means temporal punishment too, it appears by his reason; because so
long as that remains, we cannot enter into blessedness. Witness the poor souls
that ^^ie so many years in your Purgatory.

Augustine: saying. That for the daily, short, and light offenses, without In
Enchirid cap. 71.
which this life is not led, the daily prayer of the faithful does satisfy.

as a satisfaction for our venial sins. Can any reasonable man imagine, that
our Savior did not teach us to pray for the full pardon of all punishment due
to sin, and yet never gave notice of any such distinction? But of this more
afterward.

Austin speaks of the different course that is to be held in repenting of our
sins, that according as they are greater or less, so we should be the more
or less careful of obtaining pardon. Which for ordinary sins, may be had
by ordinary praying; not as if this made a sufficient amends to God, which
satisfaction imports, but because he looks not for so much sorrow and care for
these sins, as for those; by which, if we commit them, we shall highly
dishonor him, and therefore need to grieve more, that we may the more
carefully avoid them. If you will draw Austin to the worst, we may not follow
him, against the truth of the Scripture.

Perkins adds, that we are taught in that prayer, wholly and only, to use the
plea of Pardon. For in the same petition, we are taught also to pardon others,
even as we will look to be pardoned.

Luke 11. 4.
Luke expounds it) for even we are so kind, as to forgive them that offend
us. How then should God not show his kindness, when he is entreated?

Perkins purpose. For who would say, that within the compass of the Pater
noster, all things necessary to salvation be contained.

Pater noster. What of that? It will serve our turn, that the Lords Prayer
prescribes sufficient means for the obtaining of pardon, and yet meddles not
with satisfaction. But what speak you of things necessary to salvation? The
satisfaction in question is of no such nature. For you tell us, that all fear
of eternal punishment is taken away by Christ, and a man may come to heaven,
though he never dream of any temporal satisfaction; the worst is but the
enduring of the painted fire of Purgatory for a certain time.

D. B. P. An easy cause to satisfy.
and so by often praying for pardon, we may well satisfy for much temporal
punishment.

Praying for pardon is a poor satisfaction, else might a felon, or a traitor
easily satisfy for his fault, and the punishment, especially for the
imprisonment and fine you speak of. But we shall examine this better, when we
come to answer your proof of it.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. Tertul. de Baptism.
Guiltiness being taken away, the punishment is also taken away.

Perkins fourth Argument is taken out of certain odd fragments D. B. P. You
are glad i^ patch up your arguments with such fragments. Tertul. de Baptis.
Page 28.
of ancient writers.

Guiltines being taken away, the punishment is also taken away. True: he that
is guilty of nothing, cannot justly be punished: for guiltines is a binding up
to punishment (as M. Perkins defines) then if the band to punishment be
cancelled, the party is freed: but all this is nothing to the purpose, for
guiltines of temporal punishment does remain after the sin and guilt of
eternal be released.

If by these odd fragments you mean the treatises of the authors whence the
testimonies are fetched, you are glad to patch up your profes out of these odd
fragments. If you mean the sentences alleged, what bring you of this kind but
odd fragments? And what else can be brought, unless a man should absurdly
write out the whole treatise?

Tertullians purpose, who speaks of washing by baptism, in which both guilt
and punishment are wholly taken away. Death (says Tertul is. cap. 5.
Tertullian) is destroyed by washing away of sins, but death is the whole
punishment of sin, Genesis 2. 17.
The day thou eatest thou shall dye, therefore freedom from death, is freedom
from the whole punishment.

Sermon. 37. de verbis Apost.
August. Christ by taking upon him the punishment and not the fault, has done
away both fault and the punishment.

Augustine himself declares. God of compassion does In Enchir. cap. 70.
blot out our sins committed, if convenient satisfaction be not on our parts
neglected.

Austin speaks of, as you would easily have seen, if you had looked upon the
place, and not answered by guess rather then by skill, is our mortality, which
is no part of the eternal punishment. He (says Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 37.
Austin in his sermon 37. de verbis Domini, not de verbis Apostoli, where there
are in all but 34.) had two good things, righteousness, and immortality; we two
naughty things, sin, and mortality. Sin (as he shows afterward) was our
fault, mortality our punishment. This Christ took upon him, that he did not,
and by taking the one freed us from both, namely so, that mortality is no
longer a punishment, and we by him shall be come immortal. As for the
satisfaction he requires, it is not to procure release of any punishment
belonging to us, but to show our repentance, which God will take knowledge of
by outward actions, so that when he sees them he may seal up our forgiveness by
assurance of it.

when we are gone out of this world, there will remain no compunction or
satisfaction. Some new Editions have foisted in the word [aliqua] and so have
turned the sense on this manner: There will remain no compunction or some
satisfaction. But this is flat against Augustines meaning, who says a little
before, that when the way is ended there is no compounding of our cause with
any.

When we are gone out of this Tom. 10. Hom. 5. The* thought not so, that
^^^sted in (...)*
world, there will remain no compunction or satisfaction: It is easy to
answer without the help of any new edition. For it will be too late then to
repent, and so there is no place left to compunction, that is, contrition of
heart: neither consequently to confession, or satisfaction: as if he had said,
before we go out of this world, there is place for both compunction, and
satisfaction, and so that place is rather for us.

Austin, is nothing else but true repentance, or newnes of life, that we love
God, our neighbors, and our enemies, as it follows immediately upon the words
set down, That we may (says Aug. lib. hom. 50. homil. 5.
Austin) do all these things, that is, have compunction, and make satisfaction
by the help of God, let us love, not our friends only but our enemies also,
that that may be fulfilled in us which is written, The whole law is fulfilled
in one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: now this is a
necessary duty, and cannot be properly any satisfaction. But for such
satisfaction as we make by repentance there is place in this world. And
howsoever a man himself cannot make satisfaction in his own person but by
suffering after this life, yet by your doctrine he may by other men, and have
full pardon and release, procured him at the Popes hands, or otherwise by
masses and alms paid for, and bestowed after his departure. And therefore in
your learning Austin shows either his ignorance, or his craft, in telling us,
that we cannot satisfy hereafter, which is not true, but of satisfying in our
own persons.

Say not to me, I have sinned: how shall I be freed from so many sins? Thou
can not: but thy God can. Yea, and he will so blot out thy sins that there
shall remain no print of them: which thing befalls not the body, for when it
is healed there remains a skarre: but God as soon as he exempts thee from
punishment, Luc. 22. Petri negat.
he gives thee justice.

Perkins doctrine of the infection of original sin: but nothing touching
satisfaction: for we hold that the soul of a sinner when he comes to be
justified, is washed whiter then snow: so that there is no stain or print left
in it, of the filth of sin. It is also freed from all eternal punishment,
but not from some temporal.

Chrysostom. Prooem, in Esaiam.
Chrysostom speaks not of original sin, but of daily actual
transgressions (as his whole discourse shows) which God by pardoning of them
so takes away, as that neither guilt nor shame of them remains in his sight,
yea he makes supply of the contrary virtues. To Master Perkins purpose they are
thus to be applied, that Chrysostom requires nothing of him that is to be
pardoned for his full release, but repentance only, which thing he repeates
oftentimes in that proeme before Esaias, without any the least inkling of
temporal satisfaction, which is almost as needful as the other if your
doctrine be true: for it is in our shallow estimation as fearful almost to
fry (I know not how many thousand years) in Purgatory, as to be for ever in
hell. Euerlastingnes we cannot comprehend, many thousand years are as much as
we can reach to, therefore since Chrysostom in that one preface so many times
promises so full pardon, and requires nothing but repentance, it is more then
likely he knew not your satisfaction.

I read of Peter's tears, but I read not of his satisfaction.

Ambrose says, I read of Peter's tears, but I read not of his satisfaction:
Luke 22.
The color of the craft, lies in the ambiguity of this word Satisfaction,
which is not always taken for the penance done to satisfy for the former
fault. But is sometime used for the defense, and excuse of the fact: So
speaks S. Paul, Bono animo prome satisfaciam, with good courage I will
answer in defense of myself, or give you satisfaction: in Act. 24. 10.
like manner Ready always to satisfy every one that asks you a reason of
that hope which is in you: In this sense does S. Ambrose use the word as 1.
Pet. 3.
is most plainly to be seen to them that read the place: and confer it with
the very like of his, I find not (says he) what Peter said, but I find that
he wept: I read his tears, but I read not his satisfaction: but that which
Lib. 10. in Luc.
cannot be defended, may be vvashed away. So that nothing is more manifest,
then that satisfaction in this, and the like places, is taken for defense and
excuse of his fault, which Peter used not, but sought by tears and bitter
weeping, to satisfy in part for it, for this bevvayling of our sins, is one
special kind of satisfaction as Saint Ambrose testifies, saying: That he
who does penance, must with tears vvash away his Lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 5.
sins.

Ambrose: for if your interpretation of it be never so true, it is such as
might escape a dilligent reader, and not be seen, yea perhaps if it had not bin
so pressed by our me^, you would have read Ambrose over a good many times before
you had dreampt of that sense. Bellarm. de purgat. lib. cap. 13.
Bellarmine (from whom you had this as the rest of your answers for the most
part) lays no such matter to Peter Martyrs charge, out of whom he brings this
objection; you see not more then he did, but write with more spleen. If Master
Perkins had read, and, at the writing of this sentence remembered Bellarmines
answer, either he would not have alleged it, or else have given some special
reason for his allegation. But this (me thinks) may be observed out of this
testimony, that Ambros. Ser. 46.
Ambrose accounted confessing, and craving of pardon to be the satisfaction God
looks for, which is always performed by a sinner, before he can have any true
hope that his sins are forgiven. This therefore going before the pardon of
the eternal punishment, what other satisfaction shall need for the temporal?
Now that Ambrose in that place understands by satisfaction both confessing his
fault to Christ whom he had offended, and entreating for pardon, it appears
by these speeches, and such like, Ambros. ad Luc. 22. lib. 10 cap. Petrus.
Therefore Peter brake out into tears, entreating nothing by voice. Tears
wash sins, which it is a shame to confess. Tears are as it were silent
prayers. I find why Peter hold his peace, least the craving of pardon so soon
might more offend. Tears are part of repentance, when they come from the true
grief of the heart, but not any part of satisfaction for temporal pain,
which we should else endure, as that very sentence of Ambrose proves. He
(says Ambrose) that repents, must not only wash away his sins with tears,
but also cover and hide his former sins with better deeds, that sin be not
laid to his charge. Now where sin is not imputed, there can no punishment be
due; and where such repentance is not, there sin is imputed even to eternal
damnation. So that the tears Ambrose speaks of are parts of outward
repentance, for pardon of sin, not satisfaction for temporal judgments
remaining after pardon.

let us adore Christ that he may say unto us, De bono mor.
fear not thy sins of this world, nor the waves of bodily sufferings: I have
remission of sins.

Ambrose, de bono mortis, Let us adore Christ, that ^e may say unto us, fear
not thy sins, nor the waves of vvorldly sufferings, I have remission of
^^n^es: is rather for us then against us: for if by adoring and serving of God,
we may be put out of fear of our sins, and the punishment of them: then does
it follow, that prayers, and such like service of Christ, does acquit us of
sin, and satisfy for the pain due to them.

Whosoever (says Ambros. de bono mortis cap. 12.
Ambrose, in our Savior Christ's person) Ioh. 6. 35.
comes to me, (that is, believes in me) shall never see death. By this adoring
we are freed from all sins, and all punishment due to them, whereas, if your
doctrine of satisfaction should be received, for all our coming to Christ by
faith and true repentance, we might and ought stand in fear of grievous
punishment for many years in Purgatory. Neither does it follow, that if by
serving God we may be put out of fear of our sins, then such service does
satisfy, for by true repentance we may be put out of fear of eternal
damnation, and yet no man will say that therefore true repentance does satisfy
for eternal pain.

Hierome says in Psalm. 31. The sin that is covered is not seen, the sin
that is not seen is not imputed: that which is not imputed, is not punished.



Hieronym. in Psalm. 31.
not imputed, how can it be punished? for punishment is laid upon a man in
respect of sin, which he is charged with; neither can any thing be justly
punished with any kind of pain eternal, or temporal, but only sin. Your
second answer is wholly for us: for if sin be then said to be covered, when
the fault and the punishment are forgiven, doubtless he that is justified, is
freed from both: witness Romans 4. 6. 7. 8
Paul, and Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 5.
David, who avouch that justification couers sin, and suffers it not to be
imputed.

Ambrose take that word covered, saying: The Prophet calls both them
blessed, as well him, whose iniquities is forgiven in Baptism, as him, whose
sins are covered with good works: For he that does penance, must not only
vvash away his sins with tears, but also with better works cover his
former sins, that they be not imputed unto him.

Lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 5.
S. Ambrose take the word covered in that sense (as indeed he and all men else
do that speak of covering sin) justification takes away the fault, and
punishment of all sin) so that he which is justified needs make no farther
satisfaction.

Chrysostom on Matthew. hom. 44. Among all men, some endure punishment in this
life and the life to come: others in this life alone: others alone in the life
to come: others neither in this life nor in the life to come. There alone, as
Dives, who was not Lord so much as of one drop of water: Here alone, the
incestuous man among the Corinthians. Neither here nor there, as the Apostles
and Prophets, as also Job and therest of this kind: for they endured no
sufferings for punishment, but that they might be known to be conquerours in
the fight.

Chrysostom, belike he had forgotten this, when he cited the other, or else
this was reserved to strike it deed.

Such excellent holy personages sufferings as are mentioned in the Scriptures,
were not for their sins: for they committed but ordinary light offenses, for
which their ordinary devotions satisfied abundantly: the great persecutions
which they endured were first to manifest the virtue and power of God, that
made such frail creatures so invincible, then to daunt the adversaries of his
truth, and vvithall, to animate and encourage his followers. Finally, that
they like conquerours triumphing over all the torments of this life, might
enter into possession of a greater revvard in the kingdom of heaven. All this
is good doctrine, but nothing against satisfaction, that their surpassing
suffering, were not for their own sins: and thus much in answer unto M.
Perkins Arguments against satisfaction.

Perkins escape without reproof, if you had looked this place in Chrysostom. in
Math. homil. 42. and 44.
Chrysostom, and found it to have bin misquoted, though it was most like to
have bin the Printers fault. In stead of answering to this testimony, you fall
a discoursing of the end of the persecutions of holy men, whereas many of them
were not persecuted at all: and Chrysostom speaks generally of sufferings, not
of persecutions. But this must be observed in your discourse, that howsoever
you mince the matter of their ordinatie light offenses, yet they themselves had
another opinion of their sins. If thou Lord (says Psalm. 130. 3.
one of them) strictly mark what is done amiss, who shall stand? In Psalm.
143. 2.
another place one cries to God not to enter into judgment with his servant,
because in his sight no man living shall be justified. Yea Daniel, that Dan.
10. 19.
beloved man, Dan. 9. 7. 8. 11. 20.
confesses his own, and his peoples sins to God, as matters that deserve no
small punishment; yea there is almost no man's story set down any thing at
large in the scripture that has not some special sin observed and recorded,
which notwithstanding, if their sufferings were not punishments, to satisfy,
how do you teach, that all sins must be satisfied for by us in part?

Objections of Papists.
Object. I. Leuit. 4. Moses according to Gods commandment prescribed several
sacrifices for several persons: and they were means of satisfaction for the
temporal punishments of their daily sins. Answ. Those sacrifices were only
signs and types of Christ's satisfaction to be offered to his father in his
alone sacrifice upon the cross: and whosoever offered any sacrifice in the
old testament, did thus and no otherwise esteem of it, but as a type and
figure of better things. Secondly, the said sacrifices were satisfactions to
the Church, whereby men did testify their repentance for their offenses, and
likewise their desire to be reconciled to God and men. And such kind of
satisfactions, we acknowledge.

Lib. 3. instit. cap. 4. number. 29.


And albeit he like an evil master of the camp, range our Arguments out of
order, placing that in the sore-front of our side, which Calvin presses out
against us, yet will I admit of it, rather then break his order.

Perkins it was all one which was first, which last, if you think him beholden
to you for your kindness, he has fully paid you, in bearing with your reciting
of this, and diverse other his reasons.

Moses according to Gods commandment prescribed several sacrifices, Leuit. 4.
5, 6.
for the sins of several persons, and ordained, that they should be of greater
and lesser prices, according unto the diversity of the sins. Whence we argue
thus: These men's faults upon their true repentance, joined with faith and hope
in Christ to come were pardoned: Therefore their charges in buying of
sacrifices to be offered for them, their pains, and prayers in assisting
during the time of the sacrifice, being painful works done to appease Gods
justice, were works of satisfaction.

Perkins does, I answer to your Enthymem, by denying the consequence. Their
sins (say you) were pardoned upon their faith and repentance, therefore their
sacrifices, and other painful works, were works of satisfaction. It follows
not, for these very works were part of their repentance, which without them,
when they could be done, was insufficient, and they were as requisite for the
pardon of the eternal punishment (I speak as you Papists do) as of the
temporal.

Perkins answers, many things as men do commonly when How many Not above
two.
they cannot well tell what to say directly to the purpose: First, that those
sacrifices, were types of Christ's suffering on the Cross: what is this to
the purpose?

Perkins answer? But poor two, and those more to the purpose, than you would.
The objection was, That those sacrifices which Moses prescribed several
persons, were satisfactions for sin. This Master Perkins denies directly,
saying, that Hebr. 10. 1.
they were appointed to be types of Christ's satisfaction; which is most
certain. Do you ask what this is to the purpose? To show, that there was
another end of these sacrifices, than you imagine. But you will say, this does
not disprooue their being for satisfaction. Remember your self. Master Perkins
answers, and you reply: who must prove, he or you? He has given you a reason
of his denial, which is as much as in extremity can be looked for of an
answerer. Further reply shall have further answer.





And upon that sacrifice, the sin shall be Leuit. 4. 20. The sin as your
self confessed was forgiven before.
forgiven them: So that sacrifices were to satisfy God, who thereupon
forgave the sin, and all pain due to it.

for eternal. And I am sure you will not say, they were to satisfy in that
respect, though upon that sacrifice the sin should be forgiven, that is, upon
their faith and repentance; of which those sacrifices were enjoined to be
proofs and parts.

Object. 11. Men, whose sins are all pardoned, have afterward sundry crosses
and afflictions laid upon them, unto the end of their days: therefore in all
likelihoode they make satisfaction to God for temporal punishments. As for
example, the Israelites for murmuring against the Lord in the wilderness were
barred all from the land of promise; and the like befell Moses and Aron for
not glorifying God, as they should have done at the waters of strife. Answ. Man
must be considered in a twofold estate, as he is under the law, and as he is
under grace. In the first estate, all afflictions are curses or legal
punishments, be they little or great: but to them that are in the second estate
and believe in Christ, though the same afflictions remain, yet do they change
their habit or condition, and are the actions of a Father serving to be
trials, corrections, preuentings, admonitions. 1. Cor. 11. 32. When we are
judged we are nurtured of the Lord: and, Heb. 12. 7. If we endure chastisment,
God offers himself unto you as children. And Chrysostom says, 1. Cor. hom.
28. When we are corrected of the Lord, it is more for our admonition then
damnation: more for a medicine then for a punishment: more for a correction
then for a penalty. And whereas God denied the believing Israelites, with
Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot be proved that it
was a punishment or penalty of the law upon them. The Scripture says no more
but that it was an admonition to all men in all ages following, to take heed
of offenses, as Paul writes, All these things came unto them for ensamples,
and were written for our admonition, 1. Corinthians. 10. 11.

We deny that any man has been punished to satisfy for his sin.
the same sin: which is most properly that which we call satisfaction.
They deny that any man has been punished temporally for any sin, which was
once pardoned.



Moses intercession pardoned: yet all the elder sort Numb. 14.
of them, who had seen the miracles wrought in Egypt for their deliverance,
were by the sentence of God deprived of the ^^ght of the Land of promise, and
punished with death in the wilderness, for the very same their murmuration.

Moses request? If it were not, your example is not to the purpose: for our
question is of them only, who have that forgiven. If it were, then all the
people had true faith in the Messiah; which is a very bold assertion, without
all likelihood of truth. But, no doubt, some of them were indeed true
believers. They were, and of them it remains to be proved, that their
shutting out of Canaan, was to appease the remains of Gods wrath against their
murmuring. There is no such thing in the text, but Number 14. 22, Ioa 9 1. 2, Number.
14. 23.
that God did it to make all the earth see his glory. Add hereunto, that this
punishment was not occasioned by this sin only, but by former murmurings,
and those many (perhaps) not at all pardoned, by any such special entreatie of
Moses.

Moses himself and Aaron, for not glorifying Gad at the waters of
contradiction: both of them had their sin pardoned, yet were they both
afterward for the same de Numb. 20. Deuteronomy. 32.
barred from the entrance into the holy Land.

Moses and Aaron; that is, I deny the antecedent. Number. 20. 11.
Moses and Aaron were not punished, that God might be satisfied for the
temporal punishment belonging to their sin, but that they and the people
might learn, to put their trust in Gods promises made to them, and to weight
on him with patience. The end of their punishment was not Gods satisfaction,
but their reformation, and the peoples.

Perkins answers, first, that man must be considered in a tvvofold estate,
as he is under the law, and as he is under grace: In the former estate, all
afflictions were curses of the law: in the latter, they are turned unto them
that believe in Christ, from curses into trials, corrections, For satisfaction
was made by Christ.
preuentions, admonitions, instructions, and into what you will else, saving
satisfaction. Now to the purpose: Whereas God (says he) denied the believing
Israelits, with Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot be
proved that it was a punishment, or penalty of the law laid upon them: the
Scripture has no more but that it was an admonition unto all ages follovving,
to take heed of like offenses, as Paul vvriteth: All th^se things came unto
them for examples, and were written for our admonition. 1. Cor. 10.


Reply. He that will not be ashamed of this audacious assertion, needs not to
care what he says: Has the Scripture no more of their fact, then that it was
an admonition to others? Turn to the original places, where the whole matter
in particular is related: First their murmuration, then Moses intercession for
them, and the obtaining of their pardon, and lastly, after all the rest, Gods
sentence of deprivation of them from entering into the land of promise, for that
their murmuration: Again, Numb. 14. Numb. 20. verse. 24. Deuteronomy. 32. 51.
Aaron shall not enter into the land, because he has been disobedient to my
voice: and of Moses. Because he has trespassed against me at the waters of
strife. So that nothing is more clear even by the testimony of the holy Ghost,
then that their days were shortened, and their hope of entrance into the land
of promise cut off, in punishment of those offenses, which were before forgiven
them. And these things being recorded as S. Paul testifies, for our admonition
and instruction: we are to learn thereby, that God so dea^eth daily with all
those sinners that he calls to repentance.

Perkins denies not that this punishment was laid upon them for those sins,
but that the Scripture affoords any proof to show, that it was a penalty of
the law, as a Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
part of the Curse, which appertains to sinners by the law, Gal. 3. 13.
for which Christ has fully satisfied. The punishments, in themselves, were
penalties of the law: but they are notsuch to them, who, by Romans 3. 25. 26.
true faith in Christ, have all their sins fully satisfied for by him.

Object. III. David was punished after his repentance for his adultery, for
the child died, and he was plagued in his own kind, in the incest of Absolon:
and when he had numbered the people he was yet punished in the death of his
people, after his own repentance. Answ. I answer as before that the hand of
God was upon David after his repentance: but yet the judgments which befell
him were not curses unto him properly, but corrections for his sins, and
trial of his faith, and means to prevent further sin, and to renew both his
faith and repentance: as also they served to admonish others in like case; for
David was a public person and his sins were offensive, both within the
Church of God and without.

What dotage is it for you to take one thing for another?
he can beguile) may not perceive it: If the hand of God were upon David
correcting him for his sin, and that after his repentance: did not David then
suffer temporal punishment for his sins before forgiven: Which is most
properly to satisfy for them.

David was punished, but not to satisfy Gods wrath, remaining after the
eternal punishment was taken away, by the sactifice of the Messiah, made
effectual to David by his faith. The reason of his punishment (as 2. Sam. 12.
14.
the Scripture expressly says) was the stopping of the Heathens mouths, who
were likely to blaspheme God, because of David's sin; as if God either would not
have seen, or had not cared what manner of man by his special providence he
had preferred to the kingdom of Israel.

Master Perkins truly and constantly denies the same thing still, viz. that
David's punishment was for satisfaction to God, by bearing part of the curse due
to sinners by the law; which only is to satisfy. The reason of this denial
(that I may answer once again for all) is, that Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.

He never dreamed of satisfaction in all this repentance. Psalm. 50.
ashes his food, and in this most pitiful plight, he made most humble
supplication unto God, to wash him more and more from his iniquity: he never
dreamed that this his satisfaction, should be any derogation unto the
satisfaction of his Lord and Savior: but in the Psalm says. That such an
humble and contrite heart, is a sweet sacrifice unto God.

David had not so little feeling either of his Saviors love, or his own
sin, as to think that the one had satisfied by halues, or the other by such
outward carriage could be satisfied for. His praying and humbling of himself
was to another end; 2. Sam. 12. 16.
partly to entreat for the child's life, whom he loved most dearly; and partly
Psalm. 51. 8. See 12. Art. part. 2. art. 1. (...).
to obtain the recovery of that joy and comfort, which he had formerly taken
in the sense of Gods love to him; to which he was not to be restored but upon
earnest repentance at Gods good pleasure.

Augustine upon this verse of the Psalm. Thou have loved truth, teaches Psalm.
50.
most plainly: saying. Thou have not left their sins whom thou did pardon,
unpunished: for thou before did so show mercy, that thou might also
preserve truth: thou do pardon him, that confesses his fault, thou do
pardon him, but so as he do punish himself: and by that means both mercy and
truth are preserved.

Aug. ad Psa. 50.
punishment of a man's self, which Austin speaks of, is not to make
satisfaction, but to show repentance; as it may well be gathered, because it is
joined to forgiveness; which can have no place where the debt is paid. If I make
satisfaction, God forgiues me not: If God forgive me, what do I satisfy for?
Therefore the grief and humiliation of a sinner, is not to satisfy God, that
he need not be forgiven, but to repent that he may be forgiven. So far is
David from pleading satisfaction by punishing himself, that he intreates for
pardon, upon confession of his fault. Because (says Glossa. Ordin. ad Psalm.
50. 6. e Castiodo^o.
the Gloss, out of Cassiodorus) he had told the truth by confessing, which God
desires more than sacrifice: therefore he intreates for help.

Object. IV. The Prophets of God, when the people are threatened with the
plague, famine, sword, captivity, etc. exhort them to repent and to humble
themselves in sackcloth and ashes: and thereby they turned away the wrath of
God that was then coming forth against them. Therefore by temporal
humiliation, men may escape the temporal punishments of the Lord. Answ.
Famine, sword, banishment, the plague, and other judgments sent on Gods
people, were not properly punishments of sin, but only the corrections of a
father, whereby he humbled them that they might repent.

Jonas preaching, doing penance in sackcloth and ashes, turned away the
sentence of God against them.

M. Perkins answers, that famine, the plague, and such like scourge^ of God,
were not punishments of sins, but corrections of a Father.

Reply. This is most flat against a thousand express texts of the Scripture:
which declare that for the transgressions of Gods commandments, he has sent
those punishments upon the people of Israel. And what is the correction of a
Father, but the punishing of a shrewde son for some fault committed, yet in a
mild sort? Or does the Schoolmaster (which is Caluins example) whip the
Scholar, or strike him with the f^^ula, but to punish him for some fault? So
that great Rabbis seem not to understand, what they say themselves, when they
admit those scourges of God to be the corrections of a Father, but not the
punishment for a fault. As though Fathers used to correct those sons, who
never offended them: Or Masters to beat such Scholars as commit no faults.





Perkins, these punishments be tending to correction, not serving for
satisfaction: what senseless ryming is this? By due correction of the fault,
the party is satisfied in justice: and when he that has offended, does abide
such punishment as the grieuousnes of his offense did require, there is both
due correction of the offendour, and due satisfaction unto the party offended.

Epistrophe, when the like sound is repeated in the clauses of sentences? It is
very like Master Perkins did not regard the figure, but hit upon it, as it
were, by chance. Howsoever, it is not a ryme; because the vowels in the
syllables, which have the accent, are diverse. Well, for the matter you answer,
That a punishment may be both for satisfaction and correction. What then?
Therefore these are so. I deny the consequence; because (if I may repeat the
same answer, as often as you bring the same objection) satisfaction is, in this
case, made already by Christ for as many as truly believe in him.





Perkins, but you sustain.



Bellarm. de poenit. lib. 2. cap. 12.
their eternal punishment was unsatisfied for; and we speak of that
satisfaction which is made for the temporal, after the eternal is discharged.
From this, and such like examples, we may conclude, that God sometimes for
bears to lay outward judgments upon sinners, 1. Reg. 21. 29
when, and because they humble themselves: but that these men made satisfaction
to God, either by applying Christ's satisfaction to themselves, or by redeeming
the temporal punishment, remaining after the pardon of the eternal, or by
making God amends for their former sins, neither can it be proved, nor (I
think) you, upon better advice, will affirm.

Object. V. Dan. 4. 24. Daniel gives this counsel to Nabuchadnezar, redeem
thy sins by justice, and thine iniquities by alms deeds. Behold (say they)
alms deeds are made means to satisfy for man's iniquities.



Nebuchadnezzar is no more to purpose, than that of the Ninevites. For the
satisfaction we dispute of, cannot be performed by any, but him that has his
sins forgiven, in respect of the eternal punishment, by the satisfaction of
Christ: such as this King, at the least at this time, of the Prophets counsel
was not.

Answ. The word which they translate to redeem, [as the most learned in ye
Chaldie tongue with one consent auouch] does properly signify to break off,
as if the Prophet should say: O King, thou art a mighty Monarch, and to
enlarge thy kingdom thou have used much injustice and cruelty, therefore now
repent of thine iniquity, and break off these thy sins, testify thy
repentance by doing justice, and give alms to the poor whom thou have
oppressed. Therefore here is nothing spoken of satisfaction for sin, but
only of testification of repentance by the fruits thereof.



be true; and did but shift it off, that you might not seem to Dan 4. 24.
(...) Not of (...) But (...)
be overcome. The word indeed is hebrew, signifying to rub, and so to break
off by rubbing. It is properly spoken of cattle, which being yoked, rub
against a tree, or wall, or some other hard thing, till they have fretted their
yoke in sunder, and so freed themselves. Hence is that speech of Genesis 27. 40.
(...)
Isaac to Esau: Thou shall rub his yoke off thy neck. And from hence it is,
that the word signifies to redeem, or deliver; yet not by making satisfaction,
but by breaking the bonds in sunder. Servants have ruled over us, says the
Prophet, and Lament. 5. 8. (...)
there is no man that rids us out of their hands. So Aaron bids the people to
take or break off their eare-rings, viz. by opening the ring, by which they
were fastened. Agreeably hereunto Exodus 32. 2. 3. (...)
the Prophet in this place advises the King to break off his sins, which
held him captive, and so to free himself from them. And this is the first sense
of the word; as it appears also in the Hebrew Concordance and Dictionaries.
Concor. l. Haebraic. Pagnin. Auenar.
Beside, the only way for him to escape the judgment threatened, which was
temporal, was to give over those sins, for which it was denounced: in which
sense he might be said to redeem his sins, in respect of the punishment to
come; that is, to avoid and free himself from the evil, which else would
fall upon him.



Dan. 4. 22. 24.
the Prophet spoke in expounding the vision; here he deals with him about the
other, willing him to practice the contrary virtues, that he might so escape
the destruction that was threatened: for the Prophet knew, that it was possible,
even for wicked men, to avoid punishment denounced, upon the forsaking of
their outward sins, whereby they had provoked the Lord to use those
threatenings.

And that by almesdeeds we are cleansed from our sins, our Savior Daniell 4.
Luc. 11.
himself does teach, saying. Give alms, and behold all things are clean unto
you.

Luke 11. 41.
S. Luke, where our Savior reproouing the hypocrisy of the Pharisees in
washing so carefully before meats, as if they thought themselves otherwise
clean, when they respected not what wrong they did, and what extortion they
used, exhorts them rather to purge their hearts of their covetousness, and to
give to the poor, and then all these outward things, meat, drink, and such
like should be clean, and ^it for them, without such superstitious washing.

Object. VI. Matthew. 3. 2. Do penance: and bring forth fruits worthy of
penance, which (say they) are works of satisfaction enjoined by the Priest.

Bring forth the worthy fruits of penance. That is, do such D. B. P. Math. 3.
Luc. 3.
works, as become them who are penitent.

John, seeing the Pharisees come to his baptism, exhorts them not only to
make show of repentance, but to bring forth fruits, (...).
be seeming or worthy of them that repent. The same is otherwise thus expressed,
Act. ^6. 20.
To repent and turn to God, and to do works worthy repentance; to Ephesians. 4.
1.
walk worthy of their calling. But for the interpretation we agree in sense.

Chrysostom expounds) are: He that has stolen away Hom. 10. in Math.
another man's goods let him now give of his own: he that has committed
fornication, let him abstain from the lavvfull company of his own wife, and
so forth. Recompensing the works of sin, with the contrary works of virtue:
The same exposition gives Saint Gregory, and to omit all others, Hom. 10. in
Euang. In Psalm 4.
venerable Bede interprets them thus Mortify your sins by doing the
worthy fruits of penance, to wit, by afflicting your selves so much for every
offense, as worthy penance does require, which will be a sacrifice of
justice, that is, a most just sacrifice.

not only the change of the gross outward sins, which we doubt not was their
meaning also, as it is manifest by Chrysostom in Chrysostom. ad Math hom. 10
that place you bring, who describes the repentance that he speaks of to be
not only a leaving of our former sins, but a fulfilling of good works, which
he proves by that place of the Psalm, Psalm 37.
Eschew evil and do good: and Chrysostom. ad Math. hom. 11.
expounding those words, bring forth fruits etc. It is not enough says John to
fly from naughtines, unless we betake our selves to the practice of well
doing. You see what he says (quoth Theophylact) that we must not only avoid
evil, but also bring forth the fruit of virtue. To which he adds for proof
that place of the Psalm. Yea we refuse not that of Beda ad Psalm. 4. and ad
Math. 3. and ad Luc. 3.
Bid, for it is indeed a sacrifice fit for us in justice to offer, that our
repentance be answerable in proportion to our sins. But what is all this to
prove, that there remains tempo all pain to be endured, whereby Gods wrath
may be satisfied? especially when as Chrysostom says plainly, that John
persuading the people to repentance, did it not that they might be punished,
but that being made humble by repenting, and condemning themselves, because of
their sins, they might come to the gift of pardon.

Answ. This text is absurd: for the word (...), signifies thus much, change
your minds from sin to God, and testify it by good works, that is, by
doing the duties of the moral law: which must be done, not because they are
means to satisfy Gods justice for man's fine, but because they are fruits of
that faith and repentance which lies in the heart.

Reply. His answer is most absurd, for we argue out of these words (Worthy
fruits of penance.) And he answers to the word going before, repent: which we
use not against them and for his gloss or testifying our repentance, is
sufficiently confuted, by the Fathers before alleged.

John's charge to do penance. The authors alleged do not confute that
interpretation, by bringing another, which is not (...) ^ty to it, at the least
we deny your consequence upon their words.

And S. John expressly makes them the means to esca^ wrath D. (...). (...).
of God: saying, that the (...) was set to the ^ose of the ^rie, and un less
by worthy fruits of penan^ they (...) God, they (...) ^e (...) up, and cast
into hell fire: and (...) h^ confute the ^aying ^d on Christ's satisfaction by
faith: saying (...) w^^l not help you to say th^^ ye are the Sons of
Abraham, w^o was ^her of all true beleeueis: as much as if he had said, trust
not to your faith hand off ye generation of vipers. For notwithstanding ye be
the Sons of the faithful, unless ye amend your lives, and for the evil
works, which ye have deno^ tofore, make recompense, and satisfy the justice of
God with good, y^^ shall be cast into hell fire.

John speak of any satisfaction for the temporal punishment after the pardon
of the eternal, but threatens them with everlasting damnation, except they
bring forth the fruits of repentance, as well as make a profession of it, by
being baptized, so that if satisfaction be required in those words, d^^btles it
is that satisfaction which may free them from hell fire: but that (you
confess) is not to be performed by every man, for himself, but by Christ, for
all that trust in him.

To whom seems he to confute the very matter of all his preaching? not to Beda
vbi supra.
Bid, who in the place alleged by you tells us, that John exhorts the Pharisees
to humility, who were so proud because they were Abraham's children, that they
would not confess themselves to be sinners: nor to Lyea, at Matt. 3.
Lyra, who writes thus, Because the Pharisees and Lawyers refused Abraham's faith
of Christ, therefore they lost the name of Abraham's sons. And certainly it
had bin against reason for John to have dissuaded the Saduces and Pharisees from
trusting in Christ, as well because it was his especial commission to persuade
men by all means to believe in Christ, as also for that there was not the
least cause of suspicion, that they would be Math. 11, 28, Joan. 6. 35
too forward to trust in him, who had so strong a persuasion of their own
righteousness, that they could find no want of his help.

Object. VII. 2. Cor. 7. 10. Paul sets down sundry fruits of repentance:
whereof the last is revenge, whereby repentant persons punish themselves,
thereby to satisfy Gods justice for the temporal punishment of their sins.
Answ. A repentant sinner must take revenge of himself, and that is only to
use all means which serve to subdue the corruption of his nature, to bridle
carnal affections and to mortify sin: and these kind of actions are
restrainments properly, and not punishments: and are directed against the
sin, and not against the person.

Perkins. Paul sets down sundry fruits of repentance, whereof one is
revenge, whereby repentant persons punish 2. Co. 7. 10.
themselves to satisfy Gods justice, for the temporal punishment of their
sins.

M. Perkins answers. A repentant sinner must take vengeance of himself, and
that is, to use all means to subdue the corruption of nature, and to bridle
carnal affections, which kind of actions are restrainements properly, but no
punishments, directed against the sin, but not against the person.

Reply. I never saw any writer so contradict himself, and so dull, that he
does not understand his own words. If this subduing of our corrupt It this he
whom you so commended in the beginning?
nature, be restrainments only from sin hereafter, and not also punishments
of sin past, how then does the repentant sinner take vengeance of himself,
which you affirm that he must do? Revenge as every simple body knows, is
the requital of evil past: We grant that all satisfaction is directed against
sin, and not against the person, but for the great good of the man, albeit
that for a season it may afflict, both his body and mind too, as S. Paul's
former Epistle did the Corinthians.

The revenge that a sinner must take of himself is (says Master Perkins) to
use all good means which serve to subdue his corruption: but this is not
properly a punishment of the person, against whom it is not directed, but
against the sin, wherein now lies the contradiction? for sooth because
revenge is a requital of evil past, therefore the sinner in his revenge,
punishes himself for his sin. But Master Perkins has already answered,
that the revenge the Apostle speaks of, is of an other kind, being directed to
the reformation of the party, not to the punishing of him. It is called
revenge, because the Corinthians used the same means for the reforming of
themselves, that men commonly do when they revenge. If this word revenge would
not bear this interpretation (which you have not proved nor can prove) yet
were not Master Perkins guiltic of contradiction, or not understanding his own
words, but only of mistaking the sense of the word.

The text speaks not of appeasing Gods wrath.
person, as the Apostle declares. For besides this revenge taken on himself
to appease Gods wrath, it breeds (as it is in the text following) in our
corrupt nature, that loves not such chasusement, A fear to return to sin,
least it be again punished. For where there is no fear of pains, and much
pleasure, thither our corruption will run headlong. It stirs up also in
us, Indignation against sin, and all the wicked instruments of it, A defense
and clearing of our selves, with the honester fort, And an emulation, and
desire to she as farie from sin as other our equals, and consequently, A love
of virtue and honest life, which freeth us from that sorrow and all other
troublesome passions, all which are plainly gathered out of the same text of
Saint Paul.

this revenge was a requit all of evil past, will it follow thereupon that
therefore they did it to satisfy God for the temporal punishment which
otherwise they were to have endured: I trow not, your Glossa Interlin. ad 2.
Cor. 7. 11.
gloss reserres it to their care to punish sin, not to satisfy by
punishing, that they might show they mislikt and hated sin, because (says
the Gloss) you punish even your selves when you sin, since you punish (says
another Lyra ad 2. Cor. 7.
Gloss) your own sins, and especially (since you punish) Aliena potissimum.
other men's. But if it were for satisfaction, a man would punish his own
especially, that he might avoid a greater judgment. Your ordinary Gloss
applies that revenge to the sin of the incestuous person. You have showed
(says the Glossa Ordin. ad 2. Cor. 7. 11.
Gloss) by punishing him that committed the incest, that Incontaminatos.
you were undefiled: so does Caretan. ad 2. Cor 7.
Caietan also expound it, This (says he) was the last effect against the
incestuous person, for they used revenging justice in excommunicating him: so
Chrysostom. Theophylact. Hieronymab.
Chrysostom, You punished them that had sinned against the laws of God, so
Theophylact, so Jerome.

fasting, and alms deeds. For the first it is mere foolishness to think,
that man by prayer can satisfy for his sins.

Call upon me in the day of tribulation, and J will deliver Psalm. 49.
thee. Prayer cannot be made without says in Gods power, and hope in his
goodness, and therefore must needs be pleasing in Gods sight: by prayer we humble
our selves before God, and acknowledge his omnipotency, and our infirmity. By
prayer we lament with bitter tears our own ingratitude, folly and wickedness,
and bewail the grieuousnes of our sins: such prayer made King David (as his
Psalms do testify) water his couch with tears, making them his food day and
night: and by them he satisfied for his former offenses. So did a far greater
sinner then he, King Manasses: who falling into tribulation, prayed unto This
of satisfying is quite beside the text. a. Paral. 33. Of prayer, fasting, and
almsgiuing. See 12. Art. par. 2. art. 2. C.
the Lord his God, and did great penance before the God of his Fathers, and
prayed, and entreated earnestly, and God heard his prayer, and brought him
back again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom.

God pardons sinners that call upon him for mercy and deliverance, therefore
their prayers appease his justice. There is no show of truth in this
consequence. What though true prayer please God? does it therefore satisfy his
justice? Whom does it not please, that he which has offended, should crave
pardon? yet is not this a satisfaction to justice. David and Manasses lamented
their sins, and called upon God for mercy, but what scripture says, they
satisfied for their sins by so doing? It were an easy matter to satisfy
justice, if entreating pardon would make satisfaction.



Such as your Aue-maries Hudled up.
but the short fleight one of the Protestants from the lips outward: The like
we say of a debtor, whose creditor being a needy man, will not be paid without
money, but God who needs none of our goodness, highly esteems of a humble and
contri^e heart, grieved much for having sinned in the sight of God, and humbly
suing unto him for pardon. To such a one he said. Did I not forgive thee all
thy debt, because thou besough est me. Math. 18.


by a set speech, as long as one of your Auemaryes, he deserves that he asks.
If he deserve it, it is small charity to give it, and injustice not to gide
it. What if the creditor be not a needy man, and would be content to be paid
his debt by a days labor, which, upon the man's entreaty he releaseth also,
does the detter satisfy by entreating? God forgiues upon entreaty, therefore
entreating makes satisfaction. These loose consequences fall asunder of
themselves without touching.



It is one thing to say fasting pleases God, another to say it satisfies for
sin. Math. 6.
Niniuits fast, put on sack cloth, and lie on the ground (all which bodily
afflictions are reduced to fasting) rather then eat, and drink, and presume
of Gods mercy, if the one had bin as acceptable to God as the other? Why is S.
John Baptist commended for his rough garments and thin diet, if cherishing
the flesh please God as well, as punishing of it? Christ says expressly. That
if we fast in secret, his heavenly Father will repay us openly: Will he
reward eating, and drinking so liberally? but of falling we shall have a whole
Chapter hereafter. Therefore Briefly I here conclude, that this Doctrine
tends to the establishment of the Kingdom of Atheists and Epicures, whose
sweet speech is. Let us eat, and let us drink, for after death there is no
pleasure. True: for such Belly-gods and th^^ followers.

Perkins says, that fasting (of it self) conferres no more to the obtaining
of heaven, then eating does. You leave out the principal point in reporting
his opinion, and then you ask, why the Niniuits fasted, if eating be as
acceptable to God (you must add, of it self) as fasting? because though of it
self it pleased not God, yet as part of repentance it does when it shows
humiliation and sorrow. But they might have fasted long enough, without being
humbled, and have bin never awhit the nearer for it. But let it be granted,
that fasting did please God (of it self) as prayer does, will you thereupon
conclude that therefore it satisfies Gods justice? Prove the consequence; John
Baptist is described to have lived upon such meat as the place where he abode
did ordinarily afford, but it is not said that he used a thin diet, much less
is he commended for it, as if the thing (of it self) had pleased God. It was
fit for him, by the extraordinary direction of Gods spirit, to follow such an
austere course of life, not to satisfy for any punishment, but Luke 7. 31. 32.
33.
to make the Israelites the more carefully attend so extraordinary a man's
preaching. The Math. 6. 18.
reward that God will give to them that in private repent of their sins with
fasting, is not because fasting (of it self) pleases him, but for that such
fasting is part of their repentance.

by repeating the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments, so
foolish are they in this kind.

Carolo D. B. P. That is for you trauailers.
Bussone, that thus ruffleth in grave matters with his simple Similes.

If the similies were as simple as your answers to them, a man should lose both
his time and his labor to read either of them, show their unfitness for the
purpose, if you can.

And already ansvvered. Sermon. de opere and eleenios.
all things clean unto us, has bin already proved out of holy scriptures, I
will join thereunto this one testimony of that worthy Maityr Saint Cyprian.
Our frailty could not tell what to do, vulesse the goodness of God, by
teaching us the works of justice and mercy, had shevved us a certain way of
preserving our salvation, which is, that with Almesdeeds we might vvash clean
away the filth of sins, which we had contracted after Baptism. The holy
Ghost speaks in the Scripture, and says. Sins are purged by almesdeeds and
says.

Cyprian intending to exhort all men to alms deeds, is somewhat too far
carried with his earnestnes to persuade, especially since he ascribes to it the
purging of sin, whereas it can reach no farther at the uttermost by your
doctrine, then to satisfy for the temporal punishment. His proof Prou. 15.
27.
out of scripture is not there to be found, for though your vulgar translation
have it, yet it is not in the original, nor in your Interlin. bibl. Arias
Mont. Chald. paraphr. Vatablus.
interlinear Bible, nor in Montanus, nor in the Chaldee Paraphrase, nor in
Vatablus. The Greek seems to have had it added out of the Tobi. 4. 11.
Apocryphal.

Perkins Simile. We deny that a man is bound to give all the alms that he can:
We are bound to give that which we may well spare, when there is great want:
But alms (which is a part of satisfaction) is not given out of our
superfluity, but spared from our necessary uses. And is many times bestowed,
when there is no such great need, upon building Schools, Colleges, Hospitals,
and Chapels, And this may Whom may it serve? No reasonable man.
serve to answer M. Perkins Similes against these three works of
satisfaction: If any man desire to know why we make special reckoning of
these three works, it is principally for two causes: First, we being to
satisfy, must perform it with such things, as be our own, which be of three
sorts, either they belong to our soul, or to our body, or to our external
goods; the goods of our mind, we offer to God by prayer, by fasting, and other
bodily discipline, we exhibit unto him, A living host, holy and pleasing God.
By Almesdeeds we make him an agreeable present Romans 12. 1.
of our goods. Secondly, all sin as S. John teaches, may be reduced 1.
Epist. 2.
to three principal heads. The concupiscence of the flesh: that is heacherie,
which is cooled by fasting and such like afflicting of the body; Concupiscence
of the eyes, Covetousness, which is purged and chased away by almesdeeds: And
pride of life, which is suppressed by humble prayer, and often meditation of
our own miseries.

When we give alms, as we ought (says Master Perkins) we do but our duty.
You answer, that we are not bound to give all the alms we can. Is this to
gainsay him? We are bound to spare, even from our necessary use, when the
necessity of our brethren requires it. He that has no more meat than to fill
his own belly, is bound to give his brother part of it, if he see him ready
to starve. As for other giving, when we cannot spare that we give, and there
is no necessity, it is so far from being a satisfaction for old sins, that
it is a committing of new. But whence comes this distinction? It is not either
in Cyprian, or in Toby, or that place thrust into the book of Toby. And out of
question it was not Daniels meaning, that King Nebuchadnezzar should give to
the poor, so that he should come into want himself by giving; Neither (I
think) can you prove it was our Saviors meaning, when he exhorted the
Pharisees to alms deeds. But do you not perceive that you mar all by this
doctrine? Who will give any thing at his death to your Monasteries, if he may
not by giving make some satisfaction? And what satisfaction* can then be made,
when a man gives all of superfluity, as having need of nothing? There must be
some help thought on for this matter, or all will be naught. That which
follows, presumes there must be satisfaction made, and shows why you think
those the fittest means for to satisfy by. But where the foundation is
overthrown, what shall we need to thrust at the building. Only I will add
here in the end of this discourse, a few, of many means, for the procuring of
pardon by satisfaction. Pope John the 22. granted seven hundred years of
pardon to every one, that should kiss three times the measure of our Ladies
foot (as Pardon. 700. years.
you call her) and should say devoutly three Auemaries to her blessed honor
and worship. The measure is to be had in Spain, printed together with the
grant of pardon, I have caused it to be printed and inserted in this place.

Monstra te esse Matrem: sumat per te preces.



Qui (...) nobis N^ tus tulit (...) se tuus.

Show thy self to be a Mother: let him by thy mediation receive our prayers.

Who f^ our sak^ vouchs^ to be the Son.



El Papa Iuan 22. Concedio a quien besare esta medida tres vezos, y rezare tres
Aue Marias deuotamente, a su bendito honor y reuerencia, gana setecientos an^os
de perdon. Y es libre de muchos peligros. Teniendo la Bula de la santa Cruzada.
Impressa con licencia. Dirigida a la devotion del Cauallero de Gracia. Pope
John the 22. granted to every one, that shall kiss this measure three times,
and shall say three Aue-Maries deuoutelie to her honor and worship, to have
seven hundred years of pardon; and to be free from many dangers; always
provided that he have the Bull of the holy Cruzada. Printed by authority,
directed to the devotion of the Knight of Grace.



Sixtus the 4. granted to all them that devoutly say a short Horae Virginis
Mariae ad vsum Sarisburiensis Ecclesiae. Fol. 42. a. Years 11000. Fol. 38. b.
prayer (beginning Aue Maria matter Dei) before the image of our Lady, the
sum of eleven hundred years of pardon.

He that shall devoutly say that prayer (Obsecro te Domina) etc. before our
Lady of Pity, she will show him her blessed visage, and warn him the day and
hour of his death, and in his last end the Angels of God shall yield his soul
to heaven, and he shall obtain five hundred years, and so many Lents of
pardon, Years 500. Lents. 500.
granted by five Popes. Enough for failing.

Sixtus the Pope to every one (being in the state of grace, which Fol. 45. a.
must be observed) that shall say (in the morning, after three tellings of the
Aue-bell) three times the whole salutation of our Lady, granted for every time
so doing, of the spiritual treasure of holy Church three hundred days of
pardon. Toties quoties. Days 300. toties quoties. Fol. 50. b. Deliver 15.
souls of Purgatory, Convert 15. finners. Confirm 15. righteous. Fol. 54 a.
Years 32755.


These be fist^^ene Oos, which S. Briget was wont to say, etc. who so say these
a whele year, shall deliver fifteen souls out of Purg^ of his next kindred,
and convert other fifteen sinners to goodlife, and other fifteen righteous
men of his kind, shall persevere in good life.

To all them, that before this Image of Pity, devoutly say five Pater nosters,
and five Aues, and a Credo, pitiously beholding these arms of Christ's passion,
are granted thirty two thousand, seven hundred, fifty five years of pardon.

Sixtus the 4. made the fourth and fifth prayers, and has Caused his pardon to
be bulled. Fol. 58. a. Days 3000. for deadly sins. Years 10000.
done bulled his foresaid pardon.

John the 22. has granted to all, that devoutly say this prayer, after the
elevation of our Lord Jesus Christ, three thousand days of pardon for deadly
sins.

Boniface the 6. granted ten thousand years of pardon, upon the saying of
another prayer, between the elevation, and the three Agnus Deis.

Sixtus the 4. has granted to all them that be in the state of Fol. 60. a.
Clean remission of all their sias perpetually enduring.
grace, saying this prayer following, immediately after the elevation of the
body of our Lord, clean remission of all their sins perpetually enduring.

And John the 3. has granted to all them that devoutly say the same prayer
before the Image of our Lord crucified, as many days of pardon, as there were
wounds in the body of our Lord, in of the time of his bitter passion; the
which were 5465. Days 5465. The number vvounds that were in our Lords body in
the time of his Passion. Fol. 66. a. Years 1000000. Fol. 72. a.


Who that devoutly say these prayers, shall obtain ten hundred thousand
years of pardon for deadly sins: granted by John the 22.

Who that devoutly with a contrite heart daily say this Orison; if he be that
day in the state of eternal damnation, then this eternal pain shall be
changed him into temporal pain of Purgatory; then, if he have deserved the
pain of Purgatory, it shall be forgotten and forgiven, thorough the infinite
mercy of God.

But, that I may not tire the reader, and make him cast his gorge at such
abominations, which are Popish satisfactions for sins, I will give you a view
of the number of years for which pardon is granted in this one book, viz.
Yet Purgatory is to last no longer then the world.
1076832.

Perkins began with Tertullian, omitting his ancients. Let us first hear what
he says of it in his book of penance. How How many of his ancients can you
allege
foolish is it (says he) not to fulfill our penance, and yet to expect pardon
of our sins, this is not to tender the price, and yet to put out a hand for
the revvard: for God has decreed to set the pardon at this price: he proposes
impunity to be redeemed with this recompense of penance.

Perkins had omitted some ancienter than Tertullian, which else you could have
alleged. But who is so little acquainted with your courses, that he knows not
we have here the best you can bring?

Tertullian, as the ancient writers generally, speaks of repentance, without
which it is unreasonable and vain to look for pardon. Now, whereas they
mention, and urge oftentimes the outward works, it was, because without them,
neither the Church could be satisfied, and men would easily deceive themselves
with an opinion of repentance; or at the most with some slight thinking upon,
and grieuing for their sins. This appears in Tertull de poenit. cap. 6.
that very place immediately after: Therefore if they that sell, first try the
coin which they are to receive, that it be not clipped, nor washed, nor
countenfeit, we may well think that God will first make trial of the
repentance, especially since he is to grant us so great a reward of eternal
life. But let us defer the truth of repentance a while. By which words it is
plain, that Tertullian speaks of testifying our repentance to be true, by
those outward signs of it, which do ordinarily accompany it where it is true.

Origin, thus discourses. But worse for errors. Hom. 3. in lib. Indic.
See our good Lord tempering mercy with severity, and vveighing the measure of
the punishment in a just and merciful balance: he delivers not up a sinner
for ever. But look how long time thou know thy self to have offended, so
long do thou humble thy self to God, and satisfy him in the confession of
penance.

Tertullian, is made good by this place of Origin: that repentance is the
satisfaction they required. Look not (says Origin. hom. 3. ad Iudic.
Origin) immediately upon the former words, That Chusarsacon should humble thee,
and necessity drive thee (spite of thy teeth) to repentance: but prevent thou
this tormentors hands: because if thou amend and correct thy self, God is
pitiful and merciful, who will temper revenge toward him that has prevented
it by repentance. So that it is not satisfaction, but amendment that God looks
for.

Cyprian, is vvonderfull vehement against them, that would not have severe
penance done, by such as fell in persecution, saying. That such indiscreet men,
labor tooth and nail, that satisfaction be not done to God, highly offended
against the^. And says further, That he who withdraws our brethren from
these works of satisfaction, does miserably deceive them, causing them that
might do true penance, and satisfy God their merciful Father, with their
prayer and works, to perish daily. And to be more and more seduced to their
further damnation.

Cyprian. Epist. 10.. 1.
Cyprian is falsely alleged. The words are these: Our brotherhood is deceived
by certain amongst you, who while they desired to be plausible, without regard
of restoring Salutis.
health, do more hurt them that are fallen. There is no word of satisfaction
to God. The case was this, certain Christians had fallen from the profession
of religion in time of persecution, who were restored to the enjoying of the
word and Sacraments, before they had sufficiently repented, and testified their
repentance to the congregation. By this presumption and rashness in receiving
these men; the honor of the Martyrs, shame of the Confessors, and the peace of
all the people (as Cyprian says) were disturbed. He therefore writ this
epistle, against that bad practice of admitting them that had denied Christ, to
the Sacrament^, before either the Church were satisfied, or these men had
repented toward God, as was meet. Whereby it came to pass, that whereas by
being held out, they might have been brought to true repentance, by this hasty
receiving of them they made light of their grievous sins, and remained in
state of damnation. Which is the very thing, that Cyprian affirms, in the
other testimony, which follows in the same epistle, presently Cyprian. Fp.
10.. 2.
after the amplifying of the sin, by certain places of Scripture.

Look to thy self, that according to the proportion of thy fault, thou may
hence also borrow some help of recovering thy health. Is it D. B. P. Lib. 1.
Epist. Lib. 3. Ep. 14. Orat. in illa verba attend Libi. Idem Am. ^d virg. lap.
cap. 8
a great and grievous offense? it has then need of much confession, bitter
tears, a sharp combat of watching, and incessant and continued fasting: if
the offense were light and more tollerabte, yet let the penance be equal unto
it.

Basil. in illa verba attend tibi.
Basil says no more than we grant; That our repentance must be proportionable
to our sin. If you gather from thence that we must satisfy God thereby, I
deny your consequence. The end is, that we may become more careful of
sinning, and more truly humbled, to increase our thankfulness to God, for
pardoning us.

It is as great an evil to pardon without some punishment, as to punish
without all pity. For as that does loose the Orat. in sanct. lum. Idem de
paup. amor.
bridle to all licentiousnes, so this does strain it too much.

By compassion on the poor and faith, sins are purged, therefore let us be
cleansed by this compassion, let us scour out the spots and filth of our
souls with this egregious herb, that makes it white, some as vvoole, others
as snow, according to the proportion of every man's compassion and alms.

Nazianzen. ^ratione 39. in sancta lumina.
Nazianzens end of requiring punishment (as himself makes it plain) is the
restraining of us from sinning: but this proves not, that we can, or must
satisfy for the temporal punishment of our sins to God. For this effect may
easily be wrought in us, though we be not pu^t up with a conceit of our
ability to satisfy. What is it that should encourage us, but hope of
immunitie? But neither do we promise, nor can any man look for freedom in
this case. For though God look not for any further satisfaction than our
Savior Christ has made him, yet he will chastise our sins sharply, for
example to other men, and our own amendment.

His other Nazianzen. de pauper. amore.
speech is an earnest exhortation to compassion and mercy, and (as Sixtus
Senensis has taught us) may not be pressed to the uttermost. There is no doubt,
but God likes of mercy and pity on the poor very highly, and rewards it with
increase of grace even in this life, by which we may be said to find favor
with God for the avoiding of diverse chastisements, not because of their worth,
but for that the Lord by them graciously takes knowledge that we have a desire
and care to please him.

We have many helps whereby we may redeem our De Helia and ieiun.
sins, ^ast thou money? Redeem thy sin, not that our Lord is to be bought
and so^^, but thou thy self art sold by thy sins, redeem thy self with
thy works, redeem thee with thy money.

Ambros. de Elia and ieiunio, cap. 20.
Ambrose having taught before, that being redeemed by the blood of Christ, we
are not to have to do with the works of the devil, and that if we do sin, he
that once has pardoned us will not remember the wrongs we have done him,
proceeds to exhort us to the redeeming or satisfying for our sins, by all
outward means of true repentance, and namely by using well the goods that God
has bestowed on us: he that will press this by the word, may urge
satisfaction for sin by it, not only for punishment. Redeem thy sin.
Beside, you told us before that satisfaction is not made, but by that, which is
spared from our necessary uses. Ambrose here speaks of abundance. Make (says
he) of the instrument of co^etousnes, a help of mercy. And he brings that out
of the Prou. 13. 8. D. B. P. Epist. 82.
Proverbs, though misaplied, A man's riches are his redemption.

How could we be saved, unless we washed away our sins by fasting.

Ambros. Epist. 82.
The other testimony also speaks of washing away, not satisfying for the
punishment due to it in Purgatory. He that will read the place, and see the
weak proofs that are brought for it, will not greatly rely upon the
authority of the writer in that case, yet I had rather expound this and such
like passages, of repentance so testified and assured to our selves and God,
then of satisfaction.

Hierom makes Paula a blessed Matron say, My face is to be dissigured, which
against the commandment of God I painted: my body is to be afflicted, that
has taken so great pleasure: my often laughter, is to be recompensed with
continual weeping: my silks and soft clothing, it to be Ad Eustoch. de
obitu Paulae.
changed into rough hair.

Hieron. ad Eustoch. de obitu Paulae.
Jerome, and this beside, that Paula had now resolved, as it follows in that
place, to give her self to please Christ, and not the world, which she could
not well do if she continued in the vanities thereof.

Eustochium, about the preserving of her virginity, and see what penance
himself did, being a most virtuous young man.

Jerome himself did, it was not to satisfy Gods wrath for his sins, but to
subdue his own corrupt affections, which makes me the rather so expound the
former of Paula. I subdued (says he Hieron. ad Eustoch. de virginit.
in that place) the rebelling flesh, by fasting diverse weeks. And afterward,
if they suffer this, (that is as the place shows, if they be so tempted) who,
their body being consumed, are assaulted by thoughts only, what temptations is
a virgin subject to, who lives in the abundance of delights? Yea, Ieromes whole
epistle to her, persuades to the avoiding of courtly temptations, by the
forsaking of the place of danger, not to satisfaction by penance.

He that is truly penitent, looks to nothing else, then that he leaves not
unpunished the sin which he committed: For by that Epist. 54.
means, not sparing our selves, he whose high and just judgment no
contemtuous person can escape, does spare us.

Aug. Epist. 54. ad Macedon.
epistle to Macedonius, is the anowing of the priests praying for them, who
having sinned, promise ecclesiastical penance. The clause you allege out of
it makes nothing against us, who confess, that our looking into our own
faults, and condemning our selves for them, and (if you will) afflicting our
minds and bodies to, became we have offended, is many times an occasion that
God withholds his hand from shiking. For his end being our reformation, by the
sight of our sin, and his judgment due unto it, in the nature of the thing,
when this effect is already wrought in us, to what purpose should God draw his
sword to chastise? D. R (...). Lib. (...) hom. Ho^. 50. cap. 1^.


he shows how that a penitent sinner does come to the Priest, and receive of
him the measure of his satisfaction.

The very beginning of the Aug lib. hom. 5. homil. 50. cap. xi.
homily shows, that it is true repentance Austin there intreates of, because
he proves the necessity and profit of that which he there requires, by those
places of scripture which urge humiliation, and amplifies the parable of the
Publican, who was justified in his humility, rather then the Pharisie, though
he fasted twice a week, and gave tithes of all that he possessed. The end of
coming to the priest, Austin makes this, that he may judge whether the sin
require any public satisfaction to be made to the Church, or no, that if his
sin (says Austin) be not only to his great hurt, but also to the offense of
other, and it seem expedient to the priest, for the benefit of the Church, he
may not refuse to do penance before many, or even before the whole multitude,
and not by shamefastnes add pride to the deadly sore.

That it is not Cap. 15.
sufficient to amend our manners, and to depart from the evil which we have
committed, unless we do also satisfy God, for those things which we had done.

Aug hom. 50 cap. 15.
Austin against our position? do we say it is enough to leave sin, though we
sorrow not for it? nay do we not teach, that no man can leave that sin, for
which he is not truly and heartily grieved, unless perchance he change one
sin into another? The satisfaction that God requires is that which Austin
there describes out of the Psalm. 51. 17.
Psalm, The sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, an humble and contrite
heart God will not despise. This is all that the Prophet whom he alleges
requires in that place. Austin adds alms, which we willingly acknowledge as a
sacrifice greatly pleasing God, and fit to testify true repentance, that
having found mercy at Gods hands, we may also show mercy to other.

That sins are not only to be confessed, but to be blotted out with the
austerity of penance. D. B. P. Li. 6. in 1. Reg.


Gregor. lib. 6. cap. 15. in 1. Reg. In Psalm. 1.
Gregory more then I have often acknowledged? that we may not think it
sufficient to confess we have sinned, but must also bewail our sins
committed.

I will close up these testimonies, with this sentence of our learned
countryman venerable Bede: Delight (says he) or desire to sin, when we do
satisfaction is lightly purged by almesdeeds, and such like: but consent is not
rubbed out, without great penance: now custom of sinning is not taken away,
but by a just and heavy satisfaction.

Beads proof of these three points, least the weakness of his reasons might
lighten the weight of his authority. Delight in sin (says Beda in Psalm. 1.
Bid) is likened to Iairus daughter, who was raised to life by the touching of
her hand, (he forgot that Christ bad her rise) so is that purged by alms, and
such like light satisfaction. Consent is signified by the young man that was
carrying out to be buried, and is not wiped out but by heavy penance. Will you
hear his proof, for our Lord does not reach out his hand to him, but says to
him as it were Pulsu and grauitate.
with a certain moving of him, and gravity, young man I say unto thee arise.
By Lazarus, having lien four days in the grave, and stinking, both the
simple act, and the custom of sinning is signified, which is not taken away
and pardoned, but by a right and heavy satisfaction, which is understood by
the lowdnes of our Lords voice, and his groaning in spirit at the raising of
him. As weak as this groundworke is to bear so weighty a building, we will
not offer to push at it, if you will give us leave to make that reasonable
interpretation, which I have proved to be intended by diverse of Beads
ancients, that he means only to teach us, that as sins differ in
heinousnes, so must our ret entance in weight and measure: if this like you
not, whatsoever damage this work of Beade shall have, the fault shall be yours
wholly, and not ours at all.





The seventh point. Of Traditions.


Our consent.
Conclus. I. We hold that the very word of God, has been delivered by
tradition. For first God revealed his will to Adam by word of mouth: and
renewed the same unto the Patriarchs, not by writing, but by speech, by
dreams, and other inspirations: and thus the word of God went from man to man
for the space of two thousand and four hundred years, unto the time of Moses
who was the first penman of holy scripture, For as touching the prophecy of
Enoch, we commonly hold it was not penned by Enoch, but by some Jew under his
name. And for the space of this time, men worshipped God and held the articles
of their faith by tradition, not from men but immediately from God himself.
And the history of the new testament (as some say) for eighty years, as some
others think, for the space of twenty years and more, went from hand to hand
by tradition, till penned by the Apostles, or being penned by others was
approved by them.

Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and such like, to teach their children and servants the
true worship of God, and true faith in him; otherwise, how should the word of
God pass by Tradition from Adam to Moses, as M. Perkins affirms: If no child
learned any such thing of his Father, but was taught immediately from God, but
M. Perkins seems to regard l^^tle such petty contradictions.

Perkins says no such thing, as you charge him with, but speaks only of the
Patriarks, by whose ministry the rest were taught, as he shows Idolatry of
the later times.
otherwhere, making it an argument to persuade householders to the like duty.

Conclus. II. We hold that the Prophets, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles,
spoke and did many things good and true, which were not written in the
Scriptures: but either came to us, or to our ancetours only by tradition. As
2. Tim. 3. 20. it is said, that Iannes and Iambres were the Magitians that
withstood Moses: now in the books of the old testament we shall not find
them once named, and therefore it is like, that the Apostle had their names by
tradition, or by some writings then extant among the Jews. So Hebr. 12. 21.
the author of the Epistle records of Moses, that when he saw a terrible sight
in Mount Sinai, he said, I tremble and am afraid: which words are not to be
found in all the books of the old testament. In the Epistle of Jude mention is
made, that the Devil strove with Michael the Archangell about the body of
Moses: which point (as also the former) considering it is not to be found in
holy writ, it seems the Apostle had it by tradition from the Jews. That the
Prophet Esai was killed with a fullers clubbe, is received for truth, but yet
not recorded in Scripture: and so likewise that the Virgin Mary lived and died
a virgin. And in Ecclesiastical writers many worthy sayings of the Apostles
and other holy men are recorded, and received of us for truth, which
nevertheless are not set down in the books of the old or new Testament. And
many things we hold for truth not written in the word, if they be not
against the word.

His 2. Conclus. We hold that the Prophets, our Savior Christ and his Apostles
spoke, and did many things good and true, which were not written in the
Scriptures, but came to us by Tradition: but these were not necessary to be
believed: For one example he puts; that the blessed Virgin Marie lived and died
a Virgin: but it is necessary to salvation to believe this, for Heluidius is
esteemed by S. Augustine an Heretic, for denying it. De haeres. ad Quod. lib.
14.


Perkins says nothing of the necessity of believing. That point of the virgin
Mary's perpetual virginity, we hold to be true, but we dare not lay a burden
upon any man's conscience where the scripture is silent. S. Austins judgment
though he were a singular light of the Church, is not of weight enough to
determine, without all warrant of scripture, what is heresy, and what is not;
especially since In praefat. de haeres: b.
himself confesses that it cannot at all, or very hardly be declared Regulari
definitione.
by a lawful definition what makes a man an heretic. Besides, Austin thus
delivers the matter concerning the Heluidians heresy. The Heluidians (says
he) so gain said the virginity of Mary, that they confidentlie affirm, she
had other children after Christ by her husband Joseph. So that it may well be
Austin counted them heretics especially for auouching that peremptorily which
they could no way make good by scripture.

Conclus. III. We hold that the Church of God has power to prescribe
ordinances, rules, or traditions, touching time, and place of Gods worship, and
touching order and comelines to be used in the same: and in this regard, Paul
1. Cor. 11. 2. commends the Church of Corinth for keeping his traditions, and
Act. 15. the Counceil at lerusalem decreed that the Churches of the Gentiles
should abstain from blood, and from things strangled. This decree is termed a
tradition, and it was in force among them so long as the offense of the Jews
remained. And this kind of traditions whether made by general Councels or
particular Synods, we have care to maintain and observe: these caueats being
remembered: first that they prescribe nothing childish or absurd to be done.



acknowledge this caveat most needful. No stage play is so full of fooleries
as your Masse-game.











Col. 2.
was ye Gentiles worshipping of Angels, supposing they had worshipped none but
God: such is your worshipping of Angels, and he saints and she saints now
adays; such is your fear of displeasing God, if you eat flesh on saints
eauens, or in Lent, and such like.



And yet afterward you bring this very decree to prove that the Apostle Paul
alleged Tradition, end rested not on (...) Scripture.
That is of more importance, that he terms the decree registered, in the 15.
of the Acts of the Apostles, a Tradition: whereas before he defined Traditions
to be all doctrine delivered, besides the written word. Now the Acts of the
Apostles is a parcel of the written word, as all the world knovves: That then
which is of record there, cannot be termed a Tradition.

Though the Acts of the Apostles be a part of the written word: yet was not the
book written when that decree was first observed; neither does Master Perkins
give it the name of himself, but says, it is termed a tradition.

The difference.


Divine, because they were delivered by our blessed Savior, who is God:
Thesecond, Apostolical, as delivered by the holy Apostles: The third,
Ecclesiastical, instituted and delivered by the Governors of the Curch, after
the Apostles days. And of these three kinds of Traditions, we make the same
account, as of the writings of the same Authors: to wit, we esteem no less of
our Saviors Traditions, than of thefoure Gospels, or any thing immediately
dictated from the holy Ghost. Likewise as O eloquence! So do we to all known
to be the Apostles.
much honor and credit do we give unto the Apostles doctrine unwritten, as
written. For incke and paper brought no new holiness, nor gave any force and
virtue unto either Gods or the Apostles words; but they were of the same value
and credit uttered by word of mouth, as if they had been written. Here the
question is principally of divine Traditions, ^ou confess afterward that the
Gospel comprehends the principal points of faith.
which we hold to be necessary to salvation, to resolve and determine many
matters of greater difficulty. For we deny not but that some such principal
points of our Faith, (which the simple are bound to believe under pain of
damnation) may be gathered out of the holy Scriptures: as for example, that God
is the Creator of the world, Christ the Redeemer of the world, the Holy Ghost
the Sanctifier: and other such like Articles of the Creed.

some such principal points, and may be gathered out of the holy Scripture:
whereas not only those two you name; but, if not all, yet many more are
manifestly therein declared.

Our reasons.
Thou shall not add to the words that I command thee, nor take anything
therefrom: therefore the written word is sufficient for all doctrines
pertaining to salvation. If it be said that this commandment is spoken as
well of the unwritten as of the written word, I answer: that Moses speaks of
the written word only: for these very words are a certain preface which he
set before a long commentary made of the written law, for this end to make
the people more attentive, and obedient.



Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
this place of unwritten traditions, is to Marc. 7. 5. 13.
strengthen the Jews error, and to void our Saviors reproof. And if there
were any such, though the particulars were not to be recorded; yet it is
strange, that Moses should not once make mention of them in general. Thomas 3.
q. 60. art. 8. ad primum.
Thomas expounds it of adding to the words of the Scripture. And if it be
lawful for all these prohibitions to add other doctrines, why does Chrysostom.
ad Mat. hom. 52.
Chrysostom reprove the Jewish Priests, for having added many things to the
law, though Moses with threatening charged them they should not? For it is
certain, they never added to nor any way corrupted the text. But Chrysostom
accuses them of adding, because they delivered doctrines that were not written
in the Scripture: as Math. 15. 9.
our Savior also says of them. Cardinal Caietan. ad Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Caietan wills us to gather from this place, that the law of God is perfect.

Moses Law, that therefore nothing must be added unto the same Law, is
extreme dotage.

Perkins proves, that Moses spoke of the written law, because he sets it as a
preface before his Commentary upon the same law. You answer nothing to that,
but cry out upon extreme dotage, for inferrring, that because it is a preface
to Moses law, therefore nothing must be added to it. Who inferres any such
matter, but your self? You need not make work: you have your hands full.



We neither need, nor will defend either of them. But we deny your
consequence; if no man might add any thing A. W
to the law of God delivered by Moses, then the Prophets offended in writing so
many volumes. The reason is, that the Prophets writ not as men, but as 2. Pet.
the instruments of Gods spirit, inditing and penning by them. God did not tie
his own hands by that commandment, that he might not from time to time
instruct his people, as it should seem good to his infinite wisdom. To
speak yet more plainly; the Prophets and Apostles writings, are nothing else
but expositions of that, the sum whereof is delivered in the five books of
Moses; wherein the whole doctrine of the Law and the Gospel is contained.

Testimony II. Isai. 8. 20. To the law and to the testimony. If they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Here the
Prophet teaches what must be done in cases of difficulty. Men must not run
to the wizard or southsaier, but to the law and testimony, and here he
commends the written word as sufficient to resolve all doubts and scruples in
conscience whatsoever.

Perkins what is to be done in cases of difficulty. Men must not run to the
Wizards and Soothsayers, but to the Law and to the Testament, commending the
written word, as sufficient to resolve all doubts.

By the Law and testimony in that place; the five books of Moses are to be
understood. If that written Word be sufficient to resolve all doubts
whatsoever: What need we then the Prophets? what need we the Evangelists
and the Epistles of the Apostles? What Wizard would have reasoned in such sort?

Moses be sufficient for the resolving of al doubts; what need any writings of
the Prophets, Evangelists or Apostles? Is not the Civil and Canon law (in your
judgment) sufficient to resolve all doubts, in cases concerning them? is there
therefore no need of any exposition thereof? The rest of the Scripture is a
Commentary upon those five books. Besides, is nothing required in the
scripture but resolving of doubts? The history of the Church is worth the
knowing, for our instruction, comfort, exhortation, imitation, and such like.

Wizards and Soothsayers, to see what is written in the Law of Moses
concerning that point of consulting. Wizards, which is there plainly
forbidden in diverse places. Now out of one particular case, whereof there is
express mention in the written word, to conclude that all doubts and
scruples whatsoever are thereby to be decided, is a most unskillful part,
arguing as great want of light in him, as was in those blind Israelites.



These things were written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and
in believing might have everlasting life. Here is set down the full end of the
Gospel, and of the whole written word: which is to bring men to faith and
consequently to salvation: and therefore the whole scripture alone is
sufficient to this end without traditions.

Ioh. 20. 31.
These things were written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ:
and in believing, might have life everlasting. Here is set down the full end
of the Gospel, that is, to bring men to faith, and consequently to salvation:
to which, the whole Scripture alone is sufficient without Traditions.

Ans Here are more faults than lines. First the text is craftily mangled:
Things being put in steed of Miracle^. For S. John says, Many other Miracles
Christ did, etc, but these were written, etc.

Things-comprehends both doings and sayings; and to both does one of your
Glosses refer this narration, even on the former verse, where the word
miracle is set down; He shows (says I yea ad Ioa 20. 34.
Lyra) the insufficiency of the Scripture, in respect of Christ's excellency
In opere and doctrina.
in work and doctrine.

John says not that for faith we shall be saved, but believing we should
have salvation in his name, which he clipped off.

Perkins more, than Glossa Ordin. ibi.
your gloss does acknowledge? That faith may be anowed, by which life may be
had. And Lyra. ibi.
another gloss expounds that believing, of faith formed by charity; which you
grant iustifies. It helps us nothing at all to leave out those words in his
name, and therefore there was no clipping in it.

John ascribes the means of our salvation, not to that whereby we apply
unto our selves Christ's righteousness, but by which we believe Jesus to be
Christ the Messiah of the Jews, and the Son of God, which M. Perkins also
concealed.

we have life in his name, that is, by resting upon his power to save us. The
concealing of those words does more hurt, than help us.

Paul teaches, Gal. 8. 1. If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any
thing beside that which we have preached, let him be accursed, And to this
effect he blames them that taught but a diverse doctrine to that which he had
taught, 1. Tim. 1. 3.

John says, that these miracles recorded in his Gospel, were written, that
we might believe Jesus to be the Son of God; and believing, have salvation in
his name, etc. Therefore the written word contains all doctrine necessary to
salvation.

Ans. S. John speaks not a word of doctrine, but of miracles: and therefore to
conclude sufficiency of Doctrine out of him, is not to care what one says.
But M. Perkins foreseeing this, says, it cannot be understood of miracles
only; for miracles without the doctrine of Christ, can bring no man to life
everlasting: True, and therefore that text speaking only of miracles, proves
nothing for the sufficiency of the written Word. Christ's miracles were
sufficient, to prove him to be the Son of God, and their Messiah: But that
proves not S. John's Gospel, to contain all Doctrine needful to salvation:
For many other points of faith must be believed also.

Perkins proves, that the Evangelist speaks not only of miracles, because he
speaks of such a faith as will bring a man to everlasting life; which the
faith that comes by miracles only will not do. You offer not to answer his
reason, which stands still in force against you, but deny the conclusion, that
he speaks not only of miracles. This reason we have confirmed, as also the
interpretation by that place of Austin; John the Evangelist (says Tractat. 49.
in Joan.
^ustin) witnesses, that our Lord Christ both said and did many things that
are not written. But those things were chosen out to be written, which seemed
sufficient for the salvation of the believers. And whereas you would restrain
the text only to the proof of Christ's being the Messiah, Lyra ibi.
Lyra may teach you, that in this Epilogo.
conclusion the profit also of the doctrine is declared. And Hugo ibi.
Hugo Cardinalis says, that in these words specially the intent of the book,
but generally the end of all the Scripture is declared. Now the end of the
Scripture is our salvation.

To the same purpose writes Cyrill. in Ioa. lib. 12. cap. 68.
Cyrill: All things that our Lord did, are not written, but those that the
writers thought to be sufficient for manners and doctrine, that we glistering
with true faith, good works and virtue, might come to the kingdom of heaven.

John's Revelations.

him afterward. But the objection shows it self to be vain, by my former
answer to the like, about the five books of Moses.

John's Gospel were all-sufficient, yet should not Traditions be excluded; for
Christ says in it in plain terms, Ioh. 16.
that he had much more to say unto his Apostles, but they as then being not
able to bear it; he reserueth that to be delivered unto them afterward; of
which high mysteries S. John records not much in his Gospel after Christ's
resurrection; and so many of them must needs be delivered by Tradition
unwritten.

Ioh. 16. 12.
our Savior had (at that time) some new matter to deliver, which they had not
heard of, what get you by it? It will not follow thereupon, either that all
things necessary to salvation are not contained in the scriptures, or that
your traditions are the things that our Savior meant, for (as Tract. 96. i^
Joan.
Austin truly affirms) since Christ has not signified any where in scripture
what they were, it is rashness for any man to presume to say, they were such, or
such things. No man (says your Glossa Interlin. ibi.
Gloss) may determine what they were. Secondly, there is no show of
consequence in your reasoning, Christ had many things to say not long before
his death: Therefore though the Gospel be all sufficient, yet there are many
things not written which were needful to be believed. Because they were
afterward to be spoken, therefore were they not written at all by the Apostles
and Evangelists? sure Christ forbad not the writing of them in those words.
Thirdly, this is the place which heretics abuse to the countenancing of their
traditions, as you do of yours. All foolish heretics (says Aug. Tract. 97. in
Joan.
Austin) that will have themselves counted Christians, endeavor to color their
bold fantastical inventions with that sentence of the Gospel, I have yet many
things to say to you. Lastly I answer, that those many things of which Christ
speaks, were the same that before he had taught them, which they partly
understood not, and partly remembered not. I prove it thus: Our Savior said
before, that he John. 15. 15.
had taught them all things which he had heard of his father, and promised to
send them the holy ghost, John. 14. 26.
that should teach them, and cause them to remember whatsoever he had said to
them, whereof we have a worthy example in Joan. 2. 22.
that speech of Christ concerning building the temple again. This (says the
Gospel) the disciples then understood not, but after his resurrection they
came to the true understanding of it. We say not, that our Savior delivered to
them every point of doctrine distinctly, but that he furnished them with so
much knowledge, as that they might easily by that light gather and write
whatsoever was needful to be believed; to the penning whereof they had the
special direction of the spirit both for matter and manner. Iansen. ad Joan. 16.
Iansenius Bishop of Gaunt is wholly of the same opinion, affirming that those
many things were not diverse from those which he had taught them before, but a
more plain exposition of them: and to that purpose he alleages very fitly that
place of the 1. Cor. 3. 1.
Apostle, I could not speak to you, as unto spiritual men, but as it were
unto carnal men, to little ones in Christ. Didymus apud Tho. in caten. ad Ioa.
16.
Didymus about the year 580. expounded the place thus, This he says, that his
auditors Omnia verborum consecuti.
had not yet conceived all things which he had told them, that afterward they
were to suffer for his name sake. And afterward, as yet also (says Didymus)
being under the type of the law, and shadows, they could not discern of the
truth, the shadow whereof the law carried.

John, M. Perkins patcheth up with another of S. Paul If we or any Angel
from heaven preach unto you any thing besides that Gal. 1. 8.
which we have preached, let him be accursed: And to this effect he blames
them that taught but a diverse doctrine, to that which he had taught, 1. Tim.
1. 3.


Ans. Now we must look unto the Gentleman's fingers: There were three
corruptions in the text of S. John: here is one, but it is a foul one. Instead
of preaching unto them another Gospel, he puts (preach unto them any other
thing:) when there is great difference between another You give more to the
Gospel in this place, then before to all the Scripture.
Gospel, and any other thing. The Gospel comprehends the principal points
of faith, and the whole work of Gods building in us: which S. Paul like a wise
Architect 1. Cor. 3. 12.
had laid in the Galathians; others his fellow workmen, might build upon it,
gold, silver, and precious stones, with great merit to themselves and thanks
from S. Paul: Marry if any should dig up that blessed and only foundation,
and would lay a new one, him S. Paul holds for accursed. So that, that
falsification of the text is intolerable; and yet when all is done, nothing can
be wringed out of it, to prove the written word to comprehend all doctrine
needful to salvation: for S. Paul speaks there only of his Gospel, that is,
of his preaching unto the Galathians, and not one word of any written Gospel:
No more does he in that place to Timothy: And so it is nothing to purpose.

if we, or an angel from heaven shall preach unto you, (...).
beside that which we have preached, let him be accursed. Your vulgar, Latin
all one with it in a manner, Praeterquam quod.
praeterquam quod, for (...).
praeter id quod, as it is in the next verse, where the greek is all one: your
Interlin. Bib. praeter quod.
interlinear praeter quod, in both verses. You will have the Apostle mean
another gospel, and so will Master Perkins: for by another thing he
understands such another thing, as shall be necessary to salvation, and yet
diverse from that, which the Apostle had delivered. And what is that else, but
another Gospel?

You tell us the gospel comprehends the principal points of faith, whereas
before in this point you give no more to the whole scripture but that some
principal points may be gathered out of it: this would have made a
contradiction in Master Perkins. But is there any thing necessary to
salvation, that is not a principal point of faith? Is not that a principal
point, without which a man cannot be saved? But if (as you add) the gospel
comprehend also the whole work of Gods building in us, either I conceive not
what you mean by those words, or else he that teaches any other course of
Gods building in us then the gospel prescribes, preaches another gospel:
which doctrine will go near to overthrow the greatest part of your will
worship. You proceed and say, that the Apostle speaks of such a doctrine as
digs up the foundation. What is the foundation? If it be not dug up, as long
as Christ is held to be the Messiah, and that without him there is no
salvation, as you commonly expound the gospel of faith in Christ, questionles
the Apostle speaks not of overthrowing the foundation, because the Galathians,
against whom he writes, did not think that any salvation could be had without
Christ, but Gal. 5. 1. 2. 3.
that the law moral and ceremonial was to be joined with Christ to
justification. If the foundation may be razed, though those points be not
denied; and if to join the law with Christ, be to lay another foundation, and
to preach another gospel, how can your popish synagogue be a true member of
Christ's Church, in which the foundation is shaken, in coupling the law with
Christ, and another Gospel preached, by teaching such points of doctrine for
matter necessary to salvation, as the Apostles never delivered? Master Perkins
therefore understanding by any thing, only things, that make another Gospel,
as the question in hand, and 1. Tim. 1. 3.
the other place alleged show A diverse doctrine, may neither be charged with,
nor suspected of false dealing. Bellarm. de verbo Dei non script. lib. 4. cap.
10.
Bellarmine a Cardinal, and a man of as great judgment as you, affirms, that
the Apostle in that place speaks both of the written and unwritten word, not
as you would have it, only of the gospel preached. And Aug. contr. lit. Petil.
lib. 3. cap. 6.
Austin applies the text to the scripture of the law and of the gospel; other
then that which you have received in the legal and Evangelical scriptures,
that is, in the old and new Testament. Basil. Moral. sum. 72. cap. 1.
Basil also says the like of the same matter, that the hearers must examine
those things that are delivered by their teachers, and receive those that are
(...).
agreeable to the Scripture, and reject those (...). Praeterquam quod.
that are diverse, which he proves by that place to the Galathians. And whereas
Bellarmine would have their testimonies, understood of things contrary only,
the very words refute him. But it is apparent, that all that Paul preached is
in the scriptures; for out of them does he still confirm his doctrine. They of
Act. 17. 10. 11
Berea found that, which he taught them, to agree with the scriptures, and
Act. 26. 12.
himself avouches before Festus, that he preached nothing but that which
Moses and the Prophets had taught. And so both these places are to purpose.

Testimony IV. 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration
of God and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
every good work. In these words be contained two arguments, to prove the
sufficiency of the Scripture without unwritten verities. The first: that which
is profitable to these four uses: namely, to teach all necessary truth, to
confute all errors, to correct faults in manners, and to instruct in
righteousness, that is, to inform all men in all good duties, that is
sufficient to salvation. But scripture serves for all these uses: and
therefore it is sufficient: and unwritten traditions are superfluous.

Perkins) two arguments to prove the sufficiency of Scripture: The first; that
which is profitable to these four uses, to teach (all necessary truth is not
in the text) to confute Neither does M. Perkins put it in. An interpretation is
not addition to the text.
errors, to correct faults in manners, to instruct (all men in all duty, is M.
Perkins his addition to the text) that is sufficient to salvation: But the
Scriptures serve for all these uses, etc.

Ans. This text of holy Scripture, is so far from yielding our adversaries
two Arguments, that it affoordeth not so much as any probable color of half
one good argument. In searching out the true sense of holy Scriptures; we must
observe diligently the nature and proper signification of the words; as M.
Perkins also notes out of S. Augustine, in his sixth objection of this
question; which, if the Protestants did here perform, they would make no such
account of this text: for S. Paul says only, that all Scripture is profitable,
not sufficient^, to teach, to prove, etc. How are they then carried away with
their own partial affections, that cannot discern between profitable and
sufficient? Good Timber is profitable to the building of an house, but it is
not sufficient, without stones, mortar, and a Carpenter. Seed serves well, yea,
is also necessary to bring forth corn: but will it suffice of itself, without
manuring of the ground, and seasonable weather? And to fit our purpose more
properly; good laws are very profitable: yea, most expedient for the good
government of the commonwealth: But are they sufficient without good
customs, good governors, and judges, to see the same law and customs rightly
understood and duly executed? Even so the holy Scriptures (S. Paul affirms)
are very profitable; as containing very good and necessary matter, both to
teach, reprove, and correct: but he says not they are sufficient, or that they
do contain all doctrine needful for these four ends: And therefore, to argue
out of S. Paul, that they are sufficient for all those purposes; when he says
only, that they are profitable to them, is plainly not to know, or not to care
what a man ^h: And to press such an impertinent cauil, so often and so
vehemently as the Protestants do, is nothing else but to bewray, (unto the
indifferent reader) either their extreme ignorance, or most audacious
impudency, that think they can face out any matter, be it never so impertinent.

Perkins shows how he gathers his argument out of the text, without adding to
it at all, but interpreting it. Now whereas he says all necessary truth, how
much less affirms Lyra ad 2. Tim. 3.
Lyra, when he adds, to Veritatem.
teach the truth? for if by that word he should mean no more but some truth,
it were but a bare exposition, but that he understands by it all truth, I
gather out of his other exposition that follows, for which also you blame
Master Perkins, to instruct all men in all duty. The word is in all
righteousness, that is, to Glossa Interlin. ibi.
make him righteous with legal righteousness (says Lyra) which is all Omnis
virtus.
or every virtue.

That the profitablenes of the Scripture to those purposes argues a
sufficiency, it is the judgment of the best Interpreters: There is no sickness
of the soul (says De dupl. martyr. cap. 43
Cyprian) for which the Scripture of God affoords not a present remedy. He
proves it by the place of Timothy. Hieron. ad 2. Tim. 3.
Jerome says, The Scripture was given to teach us, that doing all things by
the advice thereof, we might do just things justly. Chrysostom. ibi.
Chrysostom is yet more plain: If we be to learn, or to be ignorant of any
thing, there we shall learn it: if to convince falsehood, thence we shall
fetch it: if we be to correct or chastise for exhortation, if any comfort be
wanting, which must be had, out of the Scripture we shall learn it. And upon
those words, That the man of God may be perfect: Therefore without the Scripture
he cannot be made perfect. In steed of me (says Paul) thou have the
Scriptures: if thou desire to learn any thing, thence thou shall, or there
thou may have it. The Scripture (says Theophylact. ibi.
Theophylact) is profitable to us, teaching us, if any thing be to be learned.
For there is nothing that cannot be answered by the holy Scripture. If vain
and false things be to be reproved, thence also it may be done: if any thing
be to be corrected, if any man be to be instructed, that is to be taught to
righteousness, that is, that he he may do that which is righteous, this also is
ready for thee in the Scripture. And afterward he makes the Apostle speak thus
to Timothy: If thou will be perfect and holy, etc. let the Scriptures be thy
Counselors in steed of me. And upon these words, Perfect to every good work.
Not simply (says Theophylact) Particeps bonorum operum.
partly fitted to good works, but perfect: not so that he shall be fitted to
this and not to that, but to every good work. That he may be perfect to every
good work, says Lombard. ad 2. Tim. 3.
Peter Lombard, expounding the word instructus, which is in your vulgar
translation. Thomas ibi.
Thomas goes further, to every good work: Not only to those works which are
for necessity of salvation, but to those also that are of supererogation. And
a little before: If the effect of holy Scripture be fourefold, to teach the
truth, to convince falsehood, for speculation; to draw from evil, and bring to
good, for practice; the last effect of it is, that it brings men to perfection.
Non enim qualitercunque bonum facit, sed perficit.
For it does not make a man good in part, but perfectly. It is proper to the
holy Scripture (says Caietan. ibi.
Caietan) to teach the igrant, and that he may be perfect in all things, that
belong to the perfecting of a man of God. And afterward: See whether the profit
of the holy Scripture teads, to the perfection of the man of God: that is, of
him who gives himself wh^ly to God; to such a perfection I say, that he may be
perfect to the practis^ of every good work. I have been some what the larger
in this, because this Papist charge us so hard, not to know, or not to ^e
what we say. And yet what say we, that has not been said before by the
ancient writers, and many Papi^s themselves? Now for the further confirmation
of this exposition (though against a Papist there needs no further) we may
observe out of Chrysostom, and Theophylact, that the Apostle Paul, being, as
he 2. Tim. 4. 6.
says afterward, shortly to be offered up, commends the Scriptures to Timothy
for instructers in his steed, to which he may have recourse, as often as any
truth is to be taught, any error to be confuted, any fault to be reproved, or
any good duty to be enjoined. Further, we understand by the Apostle himself,
that 2. Tim. 3. 15.
the Scriptures are able to make him wise to salvation. And thence we conclude,
that they contain all things necessary to salvation. And if any thing else
were requisite, it is strange that the Apostle should not commend the especial
meditation thereof unto him, since without it he could not be perfect.



Perkins his second argument, out of the same place: that the holy Scriptures
be profitable to make the man of God absolute, but not sufficient.

Perkins syllogism, but roue at the imagined exposition of the place.

Perkins does falsely English these words (...) into the whole Scriptures: when
it signifies all Scripture, that is, every book of Scripture: and is there
put to verify, that the old Testament only serves to instruct to salvation:
For, in the words next before, S. Paul shows, how that Timothy from his
infancy, had been trained up in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures: which,
says he, can instruct thee to salvation: And annexeth, as the confirmation
thereof the Text cited: All Scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach,
etc. Now, in Timothies infancy, no part of the new Testament was written, and
therefore, all Scripture which is here put, to prove that Scripture which
Timothy in his Infancy knew; cannot but by unreasonable wresting, signify
more than all the books of the old Testament.

(...).
Col. 2. 9. In him dwells the whole fulness of the Godhead: (...).
Act. 20. 27. The whole counsel of God. Luke 21. 32. All the people. Ephesians.
4. 16. The whole body. Romans 4. 16. The whole seed. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. All the
good pleasure. Matthew. 3. 5. All Judea, and all the region thereabout. That it
must be so taken, in this place Dionys. Carthus. ad 2. Tim. 3.
Dionysius the Carthusian witnesses; All, that is Tota Scriptura.
the whole Canonical scripture. The Scriptures (says Glossa Ordin. ibi.
your ordinary Gloss.) And in that sense did the Interpreters expound it. If
we take it, as you do, every Psalm, every verse, yea every word, as being
from God by inspiration, must have all these properties. For whereas you would
restrain it to every book of scripture, the words will not bear it,

If the old Testament only without the new had this sufficiency, can it be
insufficient now the new is added? which indeed is rather an explication, than
an addition to the former. It is more than can be proved, that no part of the
new Testament was written in Timothies childhood, he being at this time but a
young man, and this being one of the last Epistles, if not the very last, that
ever the Apostle wrote a little before his martyrdom.

Paul affirms onley to be profitable. And this is all they can say out of
the Scripture, to prove that the written Word contains all doctrine needful
to salvation.



Let us see your Achilles.
this their ov^ne position.

Nothing is necessary to be believed, but that which is written in holy
Scripture. But in no place of Scripture is it written, that the written word
contains all doctrine needful to salvation, as has been proved.

Therefore, it is not necessary to salvation to believe the written word, to
contain all doctrine needful to salvation.

the assumption of your syllogism, as it lies; that place of Timothy, if
there were no more, proves the matter sufficiently. But if by written in the
Scripture, you mean set down in plain words, I deny also the proposition.
For many things are contained in the Scripture, that are not expressly
delivered; and that your great champion Bellarm. de verbo Dei scripto. lib. 4.
cap. (...).
Bellarmine knew well enough, when he propounded your opinion so craftily by
that word express, expressly.

Perkins brings out of antiquity, in favor of his cause.



Turtul. De resurrect. carnis.
says, Take from heretics opinions which they maintain with the heathen,
that they may defend their questions by Scripture alone, and they cannot stand.



Tertull. de relurrect. carnis, cap. 3.
here appealed to, as the only competent Judge in matters of controversy
about religion. For otherwise if Heretics would fly to revelations, and
thereby defend their errors, they might be said not to do against this rule of
Tertullian. Yea, if traditions were of force to prove, they might easily
answer Tertullian in this case, that it skilled not though they could not
maintain their opinions by Scripture, as long as traditions perhaps might make
for them. But Tertullian condemns their errors, because they cannot be auowed
by the Scripture, making that the only trial.

We need no curiosity after Christ Jesus, nor inquisition after the Gospel.
When we believe it, we desire to believe nothing beside: for this we first
believe that there is nothing more which we may believe.



Tertull. de praeser. aduers. haeret. cap. 8.
the Gospel, the doctrine of salvation by Christ is understood, which is no
less plainly and fully delivered in the other writings of the new Testament,
than in those four books, which we call by that particular name. But that
traditions should be commended under the title of the Gospel, it is neither
true, nor likely. You must show some place of this author, or of some other
about his time, to give credit to your interpretation. But it is apparent you
answered at adventure, not knowing where it is to be found in Tertullian.

Tertullians judgment of Traditions, let him read his book of prescriptions
against Heretics, where he auerreth, that Traditions serve better than the
Scriptures themselves, to confute all Heresies: Heretics always, either not
allowing all the books of Scripture, or else perverting the sense and meaning
of the Scriptures.

Tertull. de praeser. aduers. haeret.
Tertullians adversaries then were, and you Papists in part now are, must of
necessity have recourse to the judgment of the Church. For what other means
can be used against them, that deny the sufficiency of the Scripture?
Therefore Tertullian and Irenaeus too, who had to deal with the same kind of
men, labors to beat them with their own weapons, and yet bring not in any
new doctrine beside the Scripture, but maintain the doctrine of the Scripture
against them, that condemn the Scripture, by the testimonies of learned men,
(...)

custom of the Church, but he says nothing of giving like authority to the
traditions, and written word. Beside, here is no speech of doctrine, but only
of observing certain outward ceremonies not necessary to salvation.

Augustine book 2. cap. 9. de doct. Christ. In those things which are plainly
set down in Scripture, are found all those points which contain faith and
manners of living well.

As if there were not one and the same belief for the saving of learned, and
unlearned.
pain of damnation, that is, the Articles of our Belief, are contained in the
Scriptures, but not the resolution of harder matters, much less of all
difficulties, which the more learned must expressly believe, if they will be
saved, which distinction S. Augustine else-vvhere does signify. De peccatorum
meritis cap. vlt.


Austen allow any such distinction, but refutes it rather Aug. de doctri.
Christ. cap. 9.
in that very place: for he says, that all that fear God do seek the will
of God in the Canonical scripture; but the words alleged are most plain, All
those points that contain faith and manners of living well, that is hope, and
charity. Now what is necessary for any man to salvation, that is not
comprised in one of these?

Lib. 5. contr. Donat. cap. 23.
The Apostles truly have commanded nothing hereof (in their vvritings) but
that custom which was laid against S. Cyprian, is to be believed to have
flowed from an Apostolical Tradition, as there be many things which the
universal church holds, and therefore are to be believed.

Austen makes no mention of any such difference betwixt the learned and
unlearned to salvation, but teaches directly contrary to your doctrine in
both points. For the hard matters you speak of, thus says Aug. de peccat.
merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 36.
Austin, when we dispute of dark matters, where Scripturarum certis claris.
documentis.
the certain and clear instructions of the holy Scriptures do not help us, a
man's presumption must restrain it self, and not incline to either side. This
is Austens judgment, he leads us not in these cases to traditions as you do.
Now for the other point, he adds presently after that, if the knowledge of
hard questions could not be wanted, without loss of salvation, there would be
some clear authority of Scripture to instruct us in them, so far was Austen
from seeking to any traditions, as necessary to salvation.

This testimony is falsely alleged by you in the later part of it, which is
thus in Aug. contr. Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 23.
Austin, and therefore are to be believed to have bin enjoined by the Apostles.
You put the matter indefinitly are to be believed, that so they may be thought
necessary to salvation, of which there is not a word in this place of Austen.

De genes. ad lit. lib. 10. c. 23.
And in his Epist. 174. of the word (...), that is not in the holy Scripture,
and yet nevertheless is defended to be used in the assertion of faith. As also
(says he) we never read in those books that the Father is unbegotten, and
yet we hold that he is so to be called. * And S. Augustine holds that the holy
Ghost is to be adored, though it be not written in the word.

Austin says, that it is not to be despised, nor by any means to be thought
superfluous, and that it were not at all to be believed, unless it were an
Apostolical tradition, where he speaks not of any doctrine necessary to
salvation, but of the Churches practice, and that indeed in a case grounded on
the Scripture.

We speak of doctrine, not of words, as Aug. de Genes. ad lit. lib. 10. cap.
23.
Austin does in those places. The matter which is signified by those words,
that Aug. contra Maximin. lib. 3 cap. 3.
Christ is of the same substance with his father, that the father was not
begotten, may be proved by the Scripture, and must needs be held: the words are
neither in the Scripture, nor bring any danger of salvation, though they be
denied, if the points of doctrine signified by them be believed; yet were it a
great presumption and folly for any man to refuse such words, as have bin
fitly applied by the former Churches. The other point of adoring the holy
ghost, has a strong foundation on those places of Scripture which prove him
to be God, as many do. But what is all this to the purpose for the stablishing
of any doctrine necessary to salvation by tradition?

Haeresi 4.
out of which and many more such like, we gather most manifestly that S.
Augustine thought many matters of faith, not to be contained in the written
word, but to be taken out of the Churches treasury of Traditions.

Austin is the Basilidians, who held no such opinion of the virgin Mary. Indeed
there were other heretics, the Aug. de haeres. haeres. 6. non. 4
6. in number, who denied her virginity after our Saviors birth, falsely, as
we verily persuade our selves; but this is no matter necessary to salvation,
though it be an heresy to hold that as a matter of faith, which has no
warrant from the Scripture, but rather the contrary.

Vincentius Lyrinen. says, the Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and fully
sufficient to it self for all things.

What need we make recourse unto the authority of the Why did you not look?
Ecclesiastical understanding, if the Canon of the Scripture be perfect? He
affirms not that they be fully sufficient to determine all controversies in
religion, but throughout all his book he proves the clean contrary, that no
heresy can be certainly confuted and suppressed by only Scriptures, without we
take with it the sense and interpretation of the Catholic Church.

Vincentius cap. 2.
Vincentius says, that the Canon of the Scripture is Satis, superque sufficit.
sufficient, and more then sufficient for all things: and in another place, the
Canon of the scripture suffices it self for all things. The Vincentius Lyrin.
cap. 41.
former place is those very words which you allege falsely, where Vincentius
thus speaks. Here perhaps some man will demand, what the authority of the
Ecclesiastical understanding of the Scripture needs, seeing the Canon of the
Scripture is perfect, and more then sufficient to it self for all things? His
answer is, that the interpretation of the Church is requisite, because diverse
men expound the Scripture diversely: but what is this against the sufficiency
of the Scripture, or for the authority of traditions, concerning matters not
contained in the Scriptures?

Beside these testimonies, other reasons there be that serve to prove this
point. I. The practice of Christ and his Apostles, who for the confirmation of
the doctrine which they taught, used always the testimony of Scripture,
neither can it be proved, that they ever confirmed any doctrine by tradition.
Act. 26. 22. I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great,
saying none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should
come. And by this we are given to understand, that we must always have
recourse to the written word, as being sufficient to instruct us in matters
of salvation.

(But I say unto you) And very seldom confirms it with any testimony out of
the Law. The Evangelists do often note how Christ fulfilled the old prophecies;
but never, or very seldom seek to confirm his doctrine by test moneys; their
own they do sometimes; but to say they never wrote any thing out of Tradition,
proceeds of most gross ignorance. Where had S. Matthew the adoring of the
Sages? S. John Baptists preaching? briefly, that was done before his own
conversion, but by Tradition? S. Mark wrote the most part of his Gospel out of
Tradition, received from S. Peter, as witnesses Eusebius, Lib. 2. hist. cap.
14.
S. Luke testifies of himself, that he wrote his whole Gospel, Cap. 1.
as he had received it by Tradition, from them who were eye-vvitnesses. What
desperate carelessness was it then to affirm that the Apostles never used
Tradition, to confirm any doctrine? when some of them built, not only parcels,
but their whole Gospels upon Traditions?

Math. 4. 8.
he repeld Satan; by that Math. 12. 3.
he confuted the Pharisees, and defended his disciples eating the ears of corn
on the Sabbath; by that he Math. 13. 14. 35.
taxes the Jews blindness, and maintains his own speaking in parables. By
the same Math. 15. 4.
he overthrows the Jews traditions, and rebukes their hypocrisy, he Math. 19.
refutes their errors about divorces, but what should I run over the
particulars? the Gospels are full of such examples.

Master Perkins has never a word of the Evangelist, who did but write the
history of our Saviors doings and sayings, and yet even they (as your self
confess) prove, that he is the Messiah by the Scriptures of the old
Testament, applying them to the things he did and suffered.

You devise matters to confute. Master Perkins speaks of confirming doctrine
by traditions, and you answer, that they wrote something out of tradition,
that is, they set down somewhat in writing which themselves had heard of
other, and not read in the old Testament. And then you ask, where Math. 2. 1.
2.
S. Matthew had the adoring of the Sages? even there where Moses had the
creation of the world, and the whole story of Genesis. From a better ground
then tradition, viz. from the Spirit of God, the author and enditer of the
Scripture, from whom also the other Evangelists had the matter and penning of
their Gospel, though two of them Mark and Luke first came to the knowledge of
those things by the preaching of the Apostles, which had all one authority
with the word written.

This is apparent of Mark by Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Eusebius himself, who says, that the Romans entreated him to set down in
writing those things which the Apostle Peter had taught them by word of mouth,
and which he also had heard him deliver. The like is to be said of S. Luke, who
was a companion of the Apostle Paul, and wrote (as the other did) that which he
heard of him, and other of the Apostles. But howsoever the things delivered by
them came first to their knowledge, it wants not much of blasphemy, to make
traditions the foundation of the Gospels written by them. For either the holy
Ghost did not inspire them with the matter and manner of their penning, or
else, if it be as you would have it, the holy ghost built upon tradition, which
is but an uncertain kind of knowledge depending upon men's memories, which may
often fail them, especially in carrying away speeches of discourse, and
disputation.

of the ancient Fathers as well as the writings of the Apostles, because
Apostolical traditions are not elsewhere to be found but in their books. And
we may not believe their sayings as the word of God, because they often cry
being subject to error: and for this cause their authority, when they speak
of traditions, may be suspected: and we may not always believe them upon their
word.



Ans. That does not follovv for three causes: First, Apostolical Traditions,
are as well kept in the mind of the learned, as in the ancient Fathers
vvritings: and therefore have more credit then the Fathers vvritings.





Perkins reason? unless you will say that we are as well to believe the
writings of the fathers, where more then one writ the same thing, as we are one
of the Apostles or Evangelists alone, which (I persuade my self) you will not
affirm.



it so, because they were taught by our Lord: yet Paul's case is proper to
himself, and altogether extraordinary.

The third particular is somewhat more to purpose; because 1. Cor. 11. 16.
S. Paul having proved by many reasons, that women might not come into the
congregations bareheaded, adds in the conclusion, that it was enough to stop
any contentions man's mouth, that the Apostles, and the Churches of God allowed
of no such custom. But first, this hatescripture Papist must be put in mind,
that whereas he calls these wranglers scripturists, as if they had alleged
scripture for their defense, there is no such thing in the text, nor any one
objection so much as signified by the Apostle. Secondly, this custom of the
Church is not alleged because (as he seems to presume, by his conclusion
afterward) he wanted other reason to prove the point. For as Chrysostom and
others have observed, he has in the former part of the chapter, proved it to
be against nature, and against scripture too. Thirdly, he reasons not about any
matter of doctrine, but about the outward carriage of men and women in the
assembly of Gods service. Lastly, it does no way follow, that because the
custom of the Church must ouer-way private men's fancies in things indifferent,
therefore the Scripture contains not all things necessary to salvation, but
must be supplied therein by traditions. Neither does the Apostles example
warrant his conclusion. The Apostle having proved that he exhorts to by reason
and Scripture, last of all alleages custom, against contentious men, in a
thing which they took to be indifferent: therefore we must allege
Scriptures, when they be plain for us, and when they are not plain,
tradition, even in matters of salvation. Who sees not that this follows not
upon that?

Objections for Traditions.
ordinances which he taught either them by word or letter. Hence they gather,
that beside the written word, there be unwritten traditions, that are indeed
necessary to be kept and obeyed. Answ. It is very likely, that this Epistle to
the Thessalonians was the first that ever Paul writ to any Church, though in
order it have not the first place; and therefore at the time when this Epistle
was penned, it might well fall out, that some things needful to salvation
were delivered by word of mouth, not being as yet written by any Apostle. Yet
the same things were afterward set down in writing, either in the second
Epistle or in the Epistles of Paul.

(...).
Ordinances; ever flying the word Tradition, where any thing is spoken in
commendation of them. But if any thing sound against them, then thrust they in
the word Tradition, although the Greek word bear it not. See for this their
corruption, and many other: a learned Treatise, named, The Discovery of false
translation, penned by M. Gregory Martin, a man most singulerly conversant in
the Greek and Hebrew tongues.

Gregory Martinus cauils were answered long since Fulke against Martins Discou.
cap. 2.
by Doctor Fulke, and the answer never yet replied to (that ever I heard of) by
any Papist. Your old translation has, in steed of traditions, 1. Cor. 11. 2.
precepts, and in the Gospel, every where, traditions; and yet the former
place is to the commendation of traditions, and all in the Gospel to their
dispraise. Vatablus.
Vatablus also uses his liberty in translating this word, sometimes 1. Cor.
11. 2, Col. 2. 8. Marc. 7. 8. 2. These. 2. 15. and 3. 6.
Instituta, sometimes Constitutio, sometimes Institutio; the difference in our
translation, as far as I can perceive, is this, that we call men's precepts,
traditions; the Apostles doctrines, ordinances.



Perkins compares not this epistle with the other to the same Church, but with
other that were written to other Churches, and generally with the books of the
new Testament; among which, if we may believe Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Eusebius.
hist. lib. 5. c. 8.
Irenaeus, it was the ancientest, except the former, and perhaps the Gospel of
S. Matthew: for it was written when Paul taught at Athens, some seventeen or
eighteen years after our Lords Ascension; whereas the Gospel of S. Matthew,
as Irenaeus says, was penned when Paul and Peter preached and founded the
Church at Rome, twenty years or more after the Ascension. Neither does Master
Perkins auow this for a truth, but sets it down as very likely.

Perkins that? the man has such confidence in his own word, that he goes not
once about to prove it. Good Sir, hold you not here; that nothing is needful
to be believed, which is not written in the word? show us then where it is
written in the word, that Saint Paul wrote in his later Epistles, that which he
taught by word of mouth before? or else by your own rule it is not needful to
believe it.

2. Tim. 3. 14.
Scripture is sufficient to make a man wise to salvation.

Paul committed all to writing, and left nothing by Tradition.

whether it can be proved by this text, or any other, that those matters are
not any where recorded in the holy Scriptures, and yet are points necessary to
salvation.

Chrysostom in his most learned and eloquent Comentaries upon this text,
concludes thus. Hereupon it is manifest that the Apostles delivered not all in
their Epistles, but many things also unwritten; and those things are as well to
be believed, as the written. Oecumenius and Theophylactus upon that place
teach the same.

Chrysostomes interpretation I
answer, first, that Chrysostom says not they were matters necessary to
salvation. Secondly, that Chrysostom. (...) Psalm. 95.
otherwhere he ties us to the Scriptures, if we will be believed in that we
deliver. Thirdly, that many things may be, and are in other parts of the
Scripture, which are not to be found in the Epistles. Fourthly, that it does
not follow, the Apostle Paul spoke something to the Thessalonians, which he
wrote not to them, therefore the Apostles spoke some things which they never
writ. For this place speaks only of S. Paul's doings, not of other Apostles.
Yet I make no question, but they also did in like sort, but it cannot be
certainly concluded from this place. Fifthly, I grant, that all that the
Apostles delivered, was to be received as true, and fit for the Church in those
times to which they were delivered. The doctrine of the Gospel is perpetual,
matters of circumstance, appointed by them for the use of the Churches
perpetually, are as well to be observed, as the doctrine, if there be any such:
yea traditions of this nature are equal to things written. But here lies the
matter, we say there are no such traditions. And indeed who can think that the
Apostles would write matters of small importance, which were also not to
continue perpetually, and leave great and weighty points of faith unwritten?
The like answer I make to Oecumen. and Theophylact. ad 2 Thessalonians.
Oecumenius, and Theophylact; whereof the one professedly sets down
Chrysostoms opinion; the other, according to his custom, writes him out in
this place word for word.

Basil * De sp^ cap. 27
speaks thus, I hold it Apostolical to persevere in Traditions not written:
for the Apostle ^^ith, I commend you that ye are mindful of my precepts: and,
do hold the Traditions, even as I delivered them unto you: and then alleges
this text: Hold the Traditions which you have received of me either by Word
or Epistle.

Basil, de spirit. sanct. c. 27.
Basil says not, that these traditions were matters necessary to salvation.
2. He defines not what these traditions were. 3. The consequence is naught. The
Apostle wills the Thessalonians to keep things delivered by mouth: therefore
the Church is always to keep some things not written. There was a necessity
to lay that charge upon them, for else they had needed to care for no more than
was set down in those Epistles. 4. The Papists themselves observe not all the
traditions there mentioned as Apostolical by Basil. 5. His judgment in this
case is not much to be accounted of, who pronounces, that without those
traditions, the Gospellis not available, and yt they are of equal force with
the Gospel to piety.

John Damascen accords with the former saying, Lib. 4. De fide cap. 17.
That the Apostles delivered many things without vvriting. S. Paul does
testify, when he writes, Therefore brethren stand and hold the Traditions
which have been taught you either by word of mouth or by Epistle. These holy
and judicious expositors of S. Paul, free from all partiality, gather out of
this text of his, that many things necessary to be believed, even until their
days remained unwritten, and were religiously observed by Tradition; which
throws fiat to the ground M. Perkins his false supposition (fenced with
neither reason nor authority) that S Paul put in vvriting afterward all that
he had first taught by word of mouth.

Damascen is neither greatly to be respected, nor says any thing, but that
which I have answered already and granted in part as nothing to the purpose.
He might well err in matter of Tradition, that Damascen. de Orthod. fide lib.
4. c. 18.
accounts the Apostles Canons, set out by Clement Bishop of Rome, to be
Canonical scripture: which opinion the Papists themselves reject.

Master Perkins would gladly have acknowledged any tradition, that could have
been proved to be Apostolical; namely so far as it was intended by the
Apostles. Whatsoever they taught, that he would hold to be the truth of God;
if they ordained any thing for those times, he would confess it to have been
most fit. Did they appoint any custom to be perpetual? M. Perkins would have
embraced it with both his arms, and, if occasion had been offered, have
maintained it with his life. But neither can you show any such tradition, nor
he is to prove the contrary. But you are to make good your proposition, that
the Apostles left some doctrines, necessary to be believed to salvation, by
word of mouth only, without any ground in Scripture for the particulars either
expressly, or by good and necessary consequence. Prove this, and the
controversy is at an end.

Moreover S. Paul immediately before his death in one of the last of his
Epistles, commands his dear Disciple Timothy, 2. Tim. 2.
To commend unto the faithful, that which he heard of him by many vvitnesses;
and not that only which he should find written in some of his Epistles, or in
the written Gospel.

I deny your consequence: Paul wills Timothy to commend to the faithful those
things which he had heard of him, therefore he delivered some things which are
not written in any part of the Scripture. I might add, and those necessary to
salvation, but the other has work enough for you.

Object. II. That Scripture is Scripture, is a point to be believed, but that
is a tradition unwritten; and therefore one tradition there is not written,
that we are to believe. Answ. That the books of the old and new Testament are
Scripture, it is to be gathered and believed not upon bare tradition, but from
the very books themselves, on this manner. Let a man that is endued with the
spirit of discerning, read the several books, withal let him consider the
professed author thereof, which is God himself, and the matter therein
contained, which is a most divine and absolute truth full of piety: the manner
and form of speech, which is full of majesty in the simplicity of words. The
end whereat they wholly aim, which is the honor and glory of God alone, etc.
and he shall be resolved that scripture is scripture, even by the Scripture it
self. Yea, and by this means he may discern any part of Scripture, from the
writings of men whatsoever. Thus then Scripture proves it self to be
Scripture: and yet we despise not the universal consent or tradition of the
Church in this case: which though it do not persuade the conscience, yet is it
a notable inducement to move us to reverence, and regard the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles. It will be said, where is it written that Scripture is
Scripture? I answer, not in any one particular place or book of scripture,
but in every line and page of the whole Bible to him that can read with the
spirit of discerning, and can discern the voice of the true Pastor, as the
sheep of Christ can do.



Perkins reason, but frame one of your own. To which I answer, that is called
in this question necessary to salvation, without the belief where of a man
cannot be saved; but the knowledge of the number of the books of Scripture,
and what they be, is not so necessary, but that without it a man may attain
to salvation. Yea who doubts that he may be saved which knows not that there
are any books of scripture at all, so that by the preaching of the word he
believes truly in Jesus Christ? And if those two points be absolutely
necessary, what shall we think of them that have doubted of some parts of
Scripture, as the Epistles to the Hebrews, and that of James? Damascen added
one to the number, your Papists many.

Perkins answers that the books of the Old and New Testament, be
Scripture, is not believed on bare Tradition, but by the books themselves on
this manner. Let the man who is endued with the spirit of discerning, read
the books and consider first the Author of them, who is God; then the matter
contained, which is divine; the manner of speech, which is full of majesty
in simple words: Lastly, the end aimed at, which is Gods honor, and by this
means he shall discern any part of Scripture from the vvritings of men
whatsoever.

Reply. A wise and deep observation I vvarrant you, and well vvorthie A
skornfull reproof and unworthy of a Doctors gravity 1. Cor. 12.
a grave Author: Let us examine it briefly; first he will have his man endued
with the spirit of discerning: Who shall endue him with the spirit? M.
Perkins seems to say, that every Sheep of Christ has his spirit. But S.
Paul De doctrine. Christ. cap. 8. 18. de ciuit. Dei 36. lib. 2. cont. ep.
Gaudent. 23.
teaches plainly the contrary; that some certain only have the judgment to
discern. And touching this matter of discerning which books are Canonical,
which are not: Not the learned in the Primitive Church would take upon him
to discern which they were, three hundred years after Christ, was left
undefined by the best learned, whether the Catholic Epistles of S. James and
Jude: the second of S. Peter. the second and third of S. John, and his
Apocalypse, were Canonical or no, as is confessed on all parts: has then every
Christian this spirit of discerning, when the best Christians wanted it? Who
more profound, more skillful to discern, than that subtle and sharp Doctor
S. Augustine, and yet the Protestants will not allow him the true spirit of
discerning which books be Canonical. For he, in diverse places of his works,
De praedest. Sanct. 14.
holds the books of the Machabees, to be Canonical Scriptures,; and
expressly proves the book of Wisdom so to be. * And yet our Protestants will
not admit them. See therefore how foolish and vain his first rule is: Come to
the second.

Master Perkins denies the assumption of the contract syllogism propounded by
himself, affirming that the scripture is to be believed to be scripture upon
bare tradition. If you will refute him, you must prove that assumption, till
that be done, his answer must stand for sufficient, howsoever that he adds
for the confirmation of it, be true or false.

But let us examine that he brings. First he says, a man must have the spirit
of discerning, to which you knowing not what to answer, tell us, that Master
Perkins seems to say, that every Sheep of Christ has his spirit. If he did
say so plainly, he says no more then our Savior himself does, and his
Apostle Paul. But he does not once glaunce at that point, in any part of his
answer, yet you refute that but slenderly, for the 1. Cor. 12. 2. 3.
Apostle speaks of an extraordinary gift bestowed upon some men, not denying
this general ability which all true Christians have in some measure; neither
does the Apostle speak of discerning doctrine, but spirits, that is (says
your Glossa Interlin. ad 1. Cor. 12.
gloss, and Lombard. ^b^. Thomas. Ca^an.
Lombard, Thomas, and Caietan) that he may discern that he hears, with what
spirit it is spoken, with a good spirit, or with a bad. By this gift the
children of God are enabled, or rather directed by the spirit of God to
acknowledge those books to be scripture, though they can not determine of
every particular among them.

Austins judgment we reverence in this, and other matters, though we cannot
always rest upon it. He calls the books Canonical, not properly, but because
they were used in the Church to be read as the Canonical were, but he makes
them not of equal authority with the other, because they were not then so
generally received, in which respect he made some doubt of those which were
indeed Canonical. Thus we expound Austin, that he may not be thought to
contradict other fathers in this point.





Romans 3.
And if there be (...) more certain means to assure them of this which is the
ground of all their Religion, then every particular man's discretion and
judgment, then out of doubt their whole Religion is most vnvvisely builded
upon mean men's inventions and discretion, who also for the most part do
neither understand the language in which they were first penned, nor the usual
phrases of Scriptures translated; that I say nothing of the figures, parables,
prophecies and controue^sies which seem to be; and many other difficulties,
and yet these men need not doubt having learned some halfe-dozen-lines of
Master Perkins, but that reading any book, they shall be able presently to
discern whether (...) be Canonical or no. A goodly mocketie.

See 1^. Art. par. 1. Art. (...)
holy ghosts directing the elect in this trial, and teaching and assuring them
so far, as shall serve for their necessary instruction and salvation.

Men were not so taught in the Primitive Church, but the most skillful and
wisest in discerning Canonical books, trusted not unto their own judgment,
but leaned alvvaies upon Apostolical Traditions. So did Serapion an ancient
holy writer (as Euse^^us reports) reject certain books set out in the
Apostles names, because they had not received from their Predec^sso^s any such.
The like does element of Alexandria, Cap. 11. Cap. 19.
and that famous Origin Lib. 35. ca. 6.
of the same book, who observe the E^clesiasticall Canon, as he had learned
and received by Tradition. So does he deliver his opinion of the four
Evangelists, and other books of Canonical Scripture, and not relying on his
own wit, which was excellent, or learning which was singular in all manner of
languages and matters: That S. Augustine was of the same mind, may be gathered
out of these words of his, * Contra Faustum. Of what book can there be any
assurance, if the letters, which the Church propagated by the Apostles, and by
such excellency declared throughout all Nations, does teach and hold to be the
Apostles, should be uncertain, whether they be the Apostles or no? So that he
makes the declaration of the Church descended of the Apostles, to be a sure
pillar to rest upon, for the certain knowledge of Canonical Scripture and
other spirits whatsoever, if they follow not that rule to be rejected; so far
is he off from encourageing every sheep of Christ's fold, to take that weighty
matter upon himself as M. Perkins does. And what can be more against the most
prudent providence of the divine wisdom than to permit every one to be a judge
of the books of Canonical Scripture. For if all those books, and no others
should pas^e ^u^rant for Ca^call, (which any Christian taking upon (...) lib.
(...). and (...). (...). (...). (...). Lib 1. cap. (...). 2^. (...). (...).
(...). 6. Lib. 32. cap (...).
him the spirit of discerning, would c^nsure to be such) then always with all
the Old Testament, because diverse esteemed it to proceed of some evil spirits,
as witnesse^h I^^neus and Ep^s: Yea, not only all the Old must be abrogated,
but all the New also, because it has many falsehoods mixed with the truth; as
some prefuming greatly of their spirit and skill in d^ning did teach: so
testifies (...). Augustine, (...). Fa^st. Some would have had but one of the
four Gospels, some five, some six, some seven; some rejected all S. Paul's
Epistles: Many, and those of the faithful did not admit for Canonical some of
the other Apostles Epistles not the Revelations. If then the divine foresight
of our Savior had not prevented this most foul inconueniencie by instituting
a more certain means of ^iscerning and declaring which books were penned by
inspiration of the holy Ghost, which not, then by leaving it unto every man's
discretion he might be thought to have had but slender care of our salvation,
which every true Christian heart does abhor to think: and therefore we must
needs admit of this most holy and provident Tradition of them from hand to
hand: as among the Protestants Brentius does in his Prolegomenis, and also
Kemnitius, handling the second kind of Traditions, in his examination of the
Council of Trent; albeit they reject all other Traditions, besides this one.

Perkins, or any Minister, teach the people now to rely on their own wit or
judgment, but to use the means prescribed, and by prayer and faith to call
and to rest upon the spirit of God for assurance in this case. The judgment of
the Church we are so far from discrediting, that we hold it for a very
special ground in this matter: condemning them as void of shame and reason,
that refuse those books upon their own judgment, which have bin from time to
time, even from the Apostles days counted Canonical. But it is utterly from
the question in hand to dispute this point, and beside diverse other Whitak. de
s^riptur.
Doctor Whitacker has handled this matter very sufficiently, though every man
cannot read his disputation, because it is latin; but for the matter in hand,
concerning traditions, it falls not into this question to be disputed what is
scripture, and what is not. For it is presupposed that the Scriptures are the
word of God, and thereupon this doubt arises, whether the word of God contain
all things necessary to salvation or no. If that be doubted of, it is idle and
absurd to enquire, whether there be, besides that, another word of God diverse
from it, though not contrary, which is not written, but only as men have now
and then set down some part of it in their writings: so then leaving this
point, let us come to those which follow.

Object. III. Some books of the canon of the Scripture are lost, as the book
of the wars of God. Number. 21. 14. The book of the just. Iosu. 10. 13. the
books of Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah. 1. King 14. 19. the
books of certain Prophets, Nathan, Gad, Iddo, Ahiah, and Semiah: and therefore
the matter of these books must come to us by tradition. Answ. Though it be
granted that some books of Canonical Scripture be lost; yet the Scripture
still remains sufficient, because the matter of those books (so farforth as
it was necessary to salvation) is contained in these books of Scripture that
are now extant.

You should have s^d the faults.
M. Perkins. The third is to be framed thus:

Either all the books of holy Scripture contain all needful doctrine to
salvation, or some certain of them without the rest; not some of them without
the rest, for then the other should be superfluous, which no man holds:
therefore all the books of holy Scripture put together, do contain all
necessary instruction. Now then the argument follows, but some of those
books of holy Scripture have been lo^t; therefore some points of necessary
doctrine contained in them, are not extant in the written Word, and
consequently to be learned by Tradition. M. Perkins answers: First supposing
some of the books to be lost, that all needful doctrine, which was in them,
is in some of the others preserved. But This Argument was not proposed to him.
why did he not solue the Argument proposed? were then those books
superfluous? Does the holy Ghost set men to pen needless discourses? which
this answer supposes.

some other. Secondly, if your consequence be good, it is also superfluous to
have the same psalm or story recorded in two places of the scripture,
especially the later. But to say so were to condemn the holy ghost of having
taken superfluous pains to no purpose, which were blasphemy. I prove it by
these particulars; for example Psalm. 18. 2. Sam. 22.
Psalm. 18. is in the book of Psalms, and in the second book of Samuel. The
history of Ezechiah 2 Reg 19. and 20. and Esai. 35. and 37. and 38.
is 2. Reg. 29. and so forward, and Isai 36. 37. 38. The like I might bring out
of the books of Kings and Chronicles. Thirdly, though the matter be all fully
and perfectly in certain books, yet every point is not so plain in one book
as in another, and therefore it is not superfluous to have all these books,
though all matter necessary to salvation be comprised in some few of them.
Fourthly, the purpose of the holy ghost in penning the scriptures, was, not
only to teach matters necessary to salvation, but to set forth the glory of
God in his providence, justice, mercy, wisdom, and such like, to afford us
examples of diverse kinds of virtues, to exhort us to faith, and good works, and
(in a word) to provide for Gods glory by us here, as well as for our
glorifying by him in heaven, to which there is no book, nor sentence of
scripture, but serves more or less, and therefore no book of it can be
thought supersluous, though the necessary matters belonging to salvation be
contained in certain of them very sufficiently.

Paul says, Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, etc. Romans
15. 4. where he takes it for granted, that the whole Canon of holy Scripture
was then extant. For if he had thought, that some books of Scripture had been
lost, he would have said; whatsoever was written and is now extant, was
written for our learning and comfort. For books that are lost serve neither
for learning nor comfort. Again, to hold that any books of Scripture should
be lost, calls into question Gods providence, and the fidelity of the Church,
who has the books of God in keeping, and is therefore called the pillar and
ground of truth. And touching the books before mentioned, I answer thus: The
book of the wars of God, Number. 21. 14. might be some short bill or narration
of things done among the Israelites, which in the days of Moses went from
hand to hand. For sometime a book in Scripture, signifies a roll or
Catalogue, as the first chapter of Matthew, which contains the genealogy of
our Savior Christ, is called the book of the generation of Jesus Christ.
Again, the book of the just, and the books of Chronicles, which are said to
be lost, were but as the Chronicles of England are with us: even politic
records of the acts and events of things, in the kingdom of Judah and Israel:
out of which the Prophets gathered things necessary to be known, and placed
them in holy Scripture. As for the books of Iddo, Ahiah, Semiah; Gad, and
Nathan, they are contained in the books of the Kings and Chronicles and in
the books of Samuel, which were not written by him alone, but by sundry
Prophets, 1. Chro. 29. 29. as also was the book of Judges. As for the books
of Solomon which are lost, they did not concern religion and matters of
salvation, but were concerning matters of Philosophy and such like things.

1. Paral. vit. 2. Pa^^^. 9.
as S. John Chrysostom proves: Romans 9. in Math and (...). 7. in (...) (...)
(...).
where he has these express words: That many of the Prophetical books are
lost, may be proved out of the history of Paral^pomeneon (which they translate
Chronicles.) Now as for M. Perkins gesses, that some of them are yet extant,
but otherwise called: some were but little rolls of paper; some profane and of
Philosophy, I hold them not worth the discussing, being not much pertinent,
and auowed on his word only, without either any reason or authority.

Chrysostom, and other learned men, I cannot persuade my self that any part
of the Canonical scripture is lost, when you have brought your proof out of
any place of the scripture, I will either answer, or yield to it. But it makes
nothing to your argument whether any be lost or no, for (as you see) I deny
your assumption and the proof of it, which overthrows your whole reason. The
Jews and the skilfullest Christians in the Rabbines and antiquities of the
Jews that I know, are of a diverse judgment from Chrysostom concerning this
point.

Object. IV. Moses in mount Sina, beside the written law, received from God a
more secret doctrine, which he never writ, but delivered by tradition or word
of mouth to the Prophets after him: and this the Jews have now set down in
their Cabala. Answ. This indeed is the opinion of some of the Jews, whom in
effect and substance sundry Papists follow: but we take it for no better then a
Jewish dotage. For if Moses had known any secret doctrine beside the written
law, he could never have given this commandment of the said law, Thou shall
not add any thing thereto.

Perkins his fourth objection of the Jewish Cabala, is a mere dream of his
own: our Argument is this; Moses who was the pen man of the old Law, committed
not all to vvriting, but delivered certain points needful to salvation by
Tradition, nor any Lavv-maker that ever was in any Country comprehended all in
letters, but established many things by customs, therefore not likely that our
Christian Law should be all written.

Moses committed all to writing, that was necessary to salvation; so do all
wise lawmakers: and if any thing be left unprovided for, that is of moment, it
is because the lawgiuer perceived it not, or knew not how to help it; which,
in Gods laws, and Moses the holy Ghosts Scribes writing, could be no
hindrances. For what is there that God sees not by his wisdom, or cannot
order as he list by his power?

Moses did not pen all, thus we prove. It was as necessary for women to be
delivered from Original sin as men. Circumcision the remedy for men, could
not possibly be applied to women, as every one vvhoknovveth what circumcision
is can tell; neither is there any other remedy provided in the written law,
to deliver women from that sin: Therefore some other remedy for them was
delivered by Tradition.

Moses appointing, but was long before him. The remedy for all sin is the
sacrifice of the Messiah; the means to apply it, faith: which Moses taught in
diverse places of those five books. If women without circumcision cannot be
freed from original sin, how were Adam and Eve freed, and all that died
before God enjoined it to Abraham?

Item, if the Child were likly to die, before the eight day, there was remedy
for them, as the most learned do hold, yet no where written in the Law:
Also, many Gentiles, during that state of the old Testament, were saved, as
Job, and many such like, according to the opinion of all the ancient Fathers:
yet in the Law, or any other part of the old Testament, it is not written,
what they had to believe, or how they should live; wherefore, many things
needful to salvation, were then delivered by Tradition.

To means and authors in the air, no thing need be, nor can be answered.



Although God in his providence permits much evil, it follows not, nor is at
al likely, that he would suffer his own holy word, indicted by his spirit, to
perish. Neither can it help the matter, that tradition might preserve the
truth, unless God should miraculously hold in men, from mingling their
inventions with his traditions. Experience makes the matter clear: few things,
or none yet remaining, that are indeed of antiquity, both for the substance
and use of them. But what answer you to Master Perkins other reason out of S.
Paul? That was too heavy for your shoulders.

Object. V. Heb. 5. 12. Gods word is of two sorts, milk, and strong meat. By
milk, we must understand the word of God written, wherein God speaks
plainly to the capacity of the rudest: but strong meat is unwritten
traditions, a doctrine not to be delivered unto all, but to those that grow to
perfection. Answ. We must know, that one and the same word of God is milk and
strong meat, in regard of the manner of handling and propounding of it. For
being delivered generally and plainly, to the capacity of the simplest, it is
milk; but being handled particularly and largely, and so fitted for men of
more understanding, it is strong meat. As for example: the doctrine of the
creation, of man's fall, and redemption by Christ, when it is taught ouerly and
plainly, it is milk: but when the depth of the same is thoroughly opened, it is
strong meat. And therefore it is a conceit of man's brain, to imagine that
some un written word is meant by strong meat.

Perkins his fifth reason for us of milk and strong meat, vvishing him a Mess
of Pappe for his childish proposing of it: I D. B. P. Your vvish is better,
then your answer would have bin.
will set down some authorities out of the written Word, in proof of
Traditions.

I make no question but Master Perkins had all the reasons he propounds for you
in any matter, in some of your own writers; as perhaps hereafter, upon better
search, at more leisure, I shall find and prove to all the world.

To the testimonies I answer in general, that no argument can be drawn from
any, or all of them, to prove that any doctrine necessary to salvation is to
be learned by tradition, and is not written in the Scripture. Let any man
conclude the point out of them, and we will yield, if we show not a reasonable
cause to the contrary. Secondly, I add fu^th^r, that if it were granted that
there were some such traditi^s ^^et (as Au^n Ioa. tract. 41.
Austin says of the first place) who can say these, or those be they? For the
most part of the traditions, that are now thrust upon the Church, by you
Papists, are (in comparison) but new, and very trifles, or mere superstitious.

That he had many Ioh. 16. 12. Act. 10.
things to say unto his Apostles, but they could not as then bear them. Our
Savior after his resurrection, appeared often unto his Disciples, speaking
with them of the kingdom of God, of which little is written in any of the
Evangelists.

I commend you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep 1. Cor.
11.
the Traditions, even as I have delivered them to you.

Ioh 16. 12.
first is answered already; the Act. 10.
second makes a bad consequence. Christ spoke often with his Disciples of the
kingdom of God, of which little is written in the Evangelists: therefore there
are some points necessary to salvation, not recorded in Scripture. His talk
with them might be for exhortation and consolation especially. Who can say,
whatsoever it were, that it is not written in the Epistles?

By traditions Ambros. ad 2 Thessalonians. (...).
Ambrose understands in the 2. Thessal. nothing but the Gospel; in that place
1. Cor. 11. 1.
to the Corinthians, the Apostle seems in all likelihood to speak of
ceremonies, or circumstances, in their carriage, about Gods service: which
neither is matter of salvation, nor to be always alike in all places, and at
al times. So does Ambros. ad 1. Cor. 11.
Ambrose understand him.

O Timothy keep the depositum, that is, that which I delivered thee to keep,
Hold fast by the holy Ghost, the good things committed unto thee to 1 Timothy 6.
2. Tim. 1.
(...), which was as S. Chrysostom and Thesphilact expound, the true doctrine
of Christ, the true sense of holy Scriptures, the right admini- (...)

words be not set down in Scripture, yet the matter is: if not expressly, which
is not needful, yet by necessary consequence: as it may evidently appear by
the Council and Fathers, wherein and by whom the contrary to those opinions
is condemned and confuted. The first point is implied necessarily in all those
places, by which our Savior is proved to be true God, that is, the same God
with his Father; which you shall find in Athanas. contr. Ana. and Council.
Nicen. 1.
Athanasius writings, and the first Council of Nice. The second, of the holy
Ghosts proceedings from the Son, as well as from the Father, is proved by
Thom. cont. gentil. lib. 4. cap. 24
Thomas out of the Scripture, and by other against the Greek Church. The
third, beside 1. Io^. 5. (...).
that place of John, is necessarily concluded (since there can be but one God)
out of the texts, that prove every one of them severally to be God; and by
Ma^h. (...). 19.
that of Matthew. The fourth is proved out of Scripture, by Council. Ep 1.
the first Council of Ephesus, against Nestorius; so that for these points we
need no traditions.

Object. VI. Sundry places of Scripture be doubtful: and every religion has
his several exposition of them, as the Papists have theirs, and the
Protestants theirs. Now then seeing there can be but one truth, when question
is of the interpretation of Scripture, recourse must be had to the tradition of
the Church, yt the true sense may be determined, and the question ended. Ans.
It is not so: but in doubtful places Scripture it self is sufficient to
declare his own meaning: first, by the analogy of faith, which is the sum
of religion gathered out of the clearest places of Scripture: secondly, by the
circumstances of the place, and the nature and signification of the words:
thirdly, by conference of place with place. By these and like helps contained
in Scripture, we may judge which is the truest meaning of any place. Scripture
it self is the text, and the best gloss. And the Scripture is falsely termed
the matter of strife, it being not so of it self, but by the abuse of man.

And thus much for our consent concerning Traditions, wherein we must not be
wavering but steadfast, because notwithstanding our renouncing of Popery, yet
Popish inclinations and dispositions be rife among us. Our common people
marvelously affect humane traditions; yea man's nature is inclined more to be
pleased with them, then with the word of God. The feast of the nativity of our
Savior Christ, is only a custom and tradition of the Church, and yet men are
commonly more careful to keep it then the Lords day, the keeping whereof
stands by the moral law. Positive laws are not sufficient to restrain us
from buying and selling on the Sabbath; yet within the twelve days no man
keeps market. Again, see the truth of this in our affection to the ministry
of the word: let the Preacher allege Peter and Paul the people count it but
common stuff, such as any man can bring: but let men come and allege
Ambrose, Austin, and the rest of the fathers; oh, he is the man, he is alone
for them. Again, let any man be in danger any way, and straight he sends
to the wise man or wizzard: Gods word is not sufficient to comfort and direct
him. All this argues that Popery denied with the mouth, abides still in the
heart: and therefore we must learn to reverence the written word, by
ascribing unto it all manner of perfection.

This (...) ^all out but in some places: many other are very ^in and easy.
be hard to be understood, others doubtful whether they must be taken
literally or figuratively: If then it be put to every Christian to take his
own exposition, every several sect, will coin interpretations in favor of
their own opinions: and so shall the word of God, ordained only to teach us
the truth, be abused and made an Instrument to confirm all errors. To avoid
which inconvenience, considerate men have recourse unto the Traditions and
ancient Records of the Primitive Church, Still you beg the question.
received from the Apostles, and delivered to the posterity, as the true
copies of Gods word; see the true Exposition and sense of it, and thereby
consute and reject all private and new glosses, which agree not with those
ancient and holy Commentaries: So that for the understanding of both difficult
and doubtful texts of Scripture, Traditions are most necessary.

M. Perkins his answer is, that there is no such need of them, but in
doubtful places, the Scripture it self is the best gloss: If these be
observed; first the analogy of faith, which is the sum of religion, gathered
out of the cleerest places. Secondly, the circumstance of the place, and the
nature and signification of the words. Thirdly, the conference of place with
place; and concludes, that the Scripture is falsely termed the matter of
strife, it being not so of it self, but by the abuse of man.

We must have recourse to traditions, for the expounding of doubtful places.
Therefore the Scripture contains not all doctrine necessary to salvation. I
deny the consequence: This rather proves the sufficiency of the Scripture,
as being sufficient in it self, if it be rightly understood. Secondly, I say
there is no such danger as you imagine: For though some may abuse it, to
confirm error: yet may their false interpretations be confuted, by diligent
examination of the text, without resting upon the authority of man's
interpretation: as it appears manifestly by the courses that the ancient
writers took, for the confuting of all heresies. And if without this it could
not have been done, what should have become of the truth, before the writings
of men were extant in any number? For it were ridiculous to imagine, that every
particular text was expounded by the Apostles, and so left by tradition to the
Church. Thirdly, who shall determine when the time, to count ancientnes by,
ended? especially since every man's writings were new when they were written,
and cannot grow in truth, as they do in age by continuance: we acknowledge
them for helps of interpretation, not for warrants.

Reply. To begin with his latter words, because I must stand upon the former:
Is the Scripture falsely termed matter of strife, because it is not so, of his
own nature? why then, is Christ truly called the stone of offense or no, to
them that believe not? Saint Peter says, Yes, No says 1. Pet. 2.
M. Perkins because that comes not of Christ, but of themselves. But good
Sir, Christ is truly termed a stone of offense, and the Scripture, matter of
strife, albeit there be no cause in them of those faults, but because it so
falls out by the malice of men.

The question is not wherefore it is so called, but whether it be so called or
no truly: That which truly is, may be so called truly: But the Scripture truly
is matter of great contention, every obstinate Heretic understanding them
according to his own fantasy, and therefore may truly be so termed, although
it be not the cause of contention in it self, but written to take away all
contention.

Perkins denies the scripture to be matter of strife, and that it may so be
slandered to the disgrace of it, as some Papists have most shamelesly spoken of
it, to draw people from the reading and loving of it. What blasphemies (almost)
have not your writers uttered against the holy word of God? Albert. Pigh. con^^
(...) d^ feels
Pighius calls them dumb judges, and in Pigh. Hierar. lib. 3. cap. 3.
another place commends the truth and pleasantnes of his speech that compared
the scriptures to a nose of wax. Did not Hosius contt. Bren. lib. 2.
Hosius say of David's Psalms, we write poems every body learned and unlearned?

Augustine, be good directions, whereby sober and sound wits may much profit in
study of divinity, if they neglect not other ordinary helps of good
instructors, and learned Commentaries: But to affirm that every Christian may
by these means be enabled to judge which is the true sense of any doubtful or
hard text is extreme rashness and mere folly. S. Augustine himself well
conversant in these rules, endued with a most happy wit, and yet much bettered
with excellent knowledge of all the liberal Sciences; yet he having most
diligently studied the holy Scriptures, for more then thirty years, with the
help also of the best Commentaries he could get, and counsel of the most
exquisit; yet be ingeniously confesses, That there were more places of
Scripture, that after all his study, he understood not, then which he did
understand, And shall every simple Epist. 119 cap. 21.
man furnished only with M. Perkins his three rules of not twice three lines be
able to dissolve any difficulty in them whatsoever? Why do the Lutherans (to
omit all former Heretics) understand them in one sort, the Caluinists after
another, The Anabaptists a third way, and so of other sects?

And in our own Country, how comes it to pass that the Protestants find
one thing in the holy Scriptures, the Puritans almost the clean contrary? Why
I say is there so great, bitter, and endless contention among brothers of the
same spirit, about the sense and meaning of Gods word: If every one might, by
the aid of those triuiall notes, readily disclose all difficulties, and
assuredly boult out the certain truth of them; It cannot be but most evident
to men of any judgment, that the Scripture it self can never end any
doubtful controversy, without there be admitted some certain Judge to
declare what is the true meaning of it. And it cannot but redound to the
dishonor of our blessed Savior to say, that he has left a matter of such
importance at random, and has not provided for his servants an assured mean
to attain to the true understanding of it. If in matters of Temporal justice
it should be permitted to every contentious smatterer in the Law, to expound
and conster the grounds of the Law and statutes, as it should seem fittest in
his wisdom, and not be bound to stand to the sentence and declaration of the
Judge, what iniquity should not be Law, or when should there be any end of any
hard matter; one Lawyer defending one part, an other the other: One counselor
assuring on his certain knowledge, one party to have the right, another, as
certainly auerring, not that, but the contrary to be Law, both alleging for
their warrant sometexts of Law: What end and pacification of the parties could
be devised, unless the decision of the controversy be committed unto the
definitive sentence of some, who should declare whether counselor had argued
justly and according to the true meaning of the Law? none at all, but bloody
debate and perpetual conflict, each pursuing to get or keep by force of
arms, that which his learned counsel avouched to be his own.

Austin by that means was likelier to have it then any of you, as he was
nearer the Apostles, from whom those traditions are said to have come. If you
rest upon the Commentaries of the Ancient, what means had they to further
them, in understanding the Scripture that we now want? is it not apparent, that
we have all they had, and their pains, and judgment beside?

You ask then, how chance diverse men understand them diversely? not because
they want the tradition you talk of. For who knows not that the Fathers
differ exceedingly one from another in their expositions? And do all the popish
interpretations agree? who, it should seem by you have recourse to that maine
help of Tradition. He that looks into your Commentaries, and books of
controversies, shall find very diverse, and sometimes contrary expositions.

Our Savior Christ has provided sufficiently for his Church, by delivering
in scripture the grounds of religion so plainly, some here, some there, that
any reasonable man may with small labor understand them, from which, they that
have knowledge of the tongues, and arts, especially of Logic and Rhetoric,
may come to understand the harder places, though perhaps not every one, yet (at
the least) so many, and such, as shall serve to instruct the people of God in
the knowledge of his will for the obtaining of everlasting life.





sure, and who therefore were appointed to be heard without exception. This
befalls not any men nowadayes, and therefore none can justly claim any such
credit.

The ancients that so wrote in this point of S. Paul's going to see Peter, have
wholly mistaken the Apostle, who denies that of himself which they affirm of
him. For he says, Gal. 1. 1.
First, that he was not an Apostle of men, nor by man. Secondly, that he went
up to Jerusalem, not Gal. 2. 6. 7.
to have confirmation of his doctrine from them who were no way superior to
him, but that the Gentiles might know he taught the same things that the other
Apostles did. If he had done it for his own assurance, he Act. 26. 19.
had not believed the vision, and discredited our Saviors extraordinary
teaching of him, and had taught for a time such things, as he was not sure to
be the truth of God. But if this should be his case, he had sinned grievously
in his former preaching, and he had wholly overthrown the authority of his
ministry, which in these two Chapters he labors especially to uphold,
auouching, that Gal. 2. 6. 7. 8. 9.
he neither learned any doctrine, nor received any allowance of his authority
from James, Cephas, and John, which were esteemed to be pillars; yea Gal. 2. 11.
he did openly reprove Peter, if not of error in doctrine, yet of misbehauiour
in his conversation.

As for the controversy of abrogating Moses law, it was a case determined by
scripture, and no man might refuse to obey any one of the Apostles charge
concerning that point. But that the Brethren might have the better
satisfaction, it pleased the holy ghost that the Apostles should in a Council
decide the question by Act. 15. 6. 23.
joint consent of themselves, and the brethren there assembled, which any one
of them might (of himself) have ended. But because diverse parts of the Church
were converted by diverse Apostles, and each Church made most account of their
own Apostle, the readiest and safest way was to conclude of the matter by
common consultation: so afterward in all lawful Councels the written word was
held sufficient for the consutation of the heresies that arose from time to
time: but for the better stopping of the heretics mouths, and satisfying of
all men, sometimes the consent of former Divines, Churches, and Councels was
added, in good discretion for men's sake, not for the matter which might be and
was abundantly proved, or discovered, as occasion served, by the scriptures.

Bellarmine, I will only record two noble examples of Tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Lib. 11. cap. (...).
this recourse unto Antiquity, for the true sense of Gods word, The first, out
of the Ecclesiastical History, whereof Saint Gregory Nazianzen and Saint
Basil, two principal lights of the Greek Church, this is recorded: They were
both noble men, brought up together at Athens: And afterward for thirteen
years space, laying aside all profane books, employed their study, wholy
in the holy Scriptures. The sense and true meaning whereof they sought, not
out of their own judgment and presumption, (as the Protestants Both are
untrue.
both do, and teach others to do) but out of their Predecessors writings and
authority: namely, of such as were known to have received the rule of
understanding from the Tradition of the Apostles: These be the very words.

Nazianzen and Basil sought the true sense of the Scripture, not out of their
own judgment but out of their predecessors writings and authority. What
then? Therefore the Scripture contains not all doctrine necessary to
salvation. This consequence has often been disprooued. Neither is the
Antecedent true, if it be generally taken. For their own writings show every
where, that they used the help of learning and discourse, to find out the
sense of scripture in many places, and set down that in their Commentaries,
which by study they came to understand. If any thing were doubtful, we presume
they did, See 12. Art. par. 1. Art. 2. E, and Art. 5. per ^^t.
as we are sure the Protestants now do, where they had not apparent reason to
the contrary, rest upon the authority of their predecessors, rather than upon
their own. This reverence we give to the Fathers writings, and read them
with as great dilig^, as they that make more bragges of their knowledge in
^he^. And if that rule (which the story) (...) and or you name (...) R^. hist
Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 9.
not, but it is Austin, speaks of (...) one of them, which we follw in
searching out the (...) of the Scripture, ^treate ^ou to make (...) to us, and
you shall find that we will take it (...) and use it diligently, if we cannot
show you certain reasons to the contrary. If the rule be, to take for truth
whatsoever the ancients have delivered; how many things, yea contrary
expositions, shall we hold for true? If you say, the rule is to believe the
ancientest; what shall we do where they say nothing? where their expositions
are contraried by those you name, and other about their time? But this can be
no rule of understanding any more of the Scripture, than that which they have
expounded, which is very little: and Origin, one of the ancientest and greatest
expositors, is generally condemned for an Heretic, by Epiphanius, Jerome,
Austin, and the best writers in Divinity. Yea Bellarm. de Purgat lib. 2. cap.
8. c Prato spirituali citat 27. Synod.
Bellarmine shows, that Origin was seen in hell with Arius, and Nestorius;
and affirms that Synod. quinta. cap. 11.
the fifth Synod cursed him amongst other Heretics. This rule, if it be a rule,
will serve in very few places of the Scripture.

Augustine, who not only exhorts and advises us to follow the decree of the
ancient Church, if we will not be deceived with the obscurity of doubtful
questions, but plainly affirms, That he would not believe the Gospel, if
the authority of the Church did not move him unto it. Lib. contra Crescon. c.
33. Cont. Epist. fund. cap. 5.
Which words, are not to be understood as Calvin would have them that S.
Augustine had not bin at first a Christian, if by the authority of the Church,
he had not bin thereunto persuaded: but that when he was a learned and
judicious Doctor, and did write against Heretics; even then he would not
believe these books of the Gospel to have bin penned by divine inspiration,
and no others, and this to be the true sense of them; unless the Catholic
Church (famous then for antiquity, generality, and consent) did tell him, which
and what they were: So far was he often from trusting to his own skill and
judgment in this matter, which notwithstanding was most excellent. This matter
is so large, that it requires a whole question: but being penned up within the
compass of one objection, I will not dwell any longer in it, but here fold up
this whole question of Traditions, in the authorities of the ancient Fathers;
out of whom, because I have in answering M. Perkins and elsewhere, as occasion
served, cited already many sentences; I will here be brief.

Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 1 cap. 33.
Austin wills us to consult with that Church, which the holy Scripture shows us
to be the Church, without any ambiguitie: the ancient Church he names not,
but, by the Church so commended, he understands the universal Church, as he
calls it: that is, he appeals, in the question about Baptism among the
Donatists, to the general practice of the Church, in the several
congregations: which no doubt is of great force to persuade any reasonable man
in any matter, that cannot be decided by the scripture. For in matters of
indifferency the Churches judgment is a kind of law: so that he, which in
such things would not be deceived, cannot do better than to follow it.

There is no word in Aug. contra Epist. funda. cap. 5.
that place of Austin, to allow your interpretation of that sentence: but
rather the whole course of the speech makes for Calvin. I will propound the
matter, let any indifferent man judge. Manes or Manicheus in his epistle of the
foundation, as he termed it, called himself the Apostle of Christ: Austin
answers, that he did not believe him to be so; and then demands of the
Manichean, what course he would take to prove it to him. Perhaps (says
Austin) you will read the Gospel to me, and assay to prove Manicheus person
to me out of it. But what if you should light upon one, that does not yet
believe the Gospel? I truly Non crederem.
had not believed the Gospel, if the authority of the Church Commo^^ret.
had not moved me: why should I not obey them (says Austin) when they will me,
not to believe Manicheus, whom I obeyed, when they willed me to believe the
Gospel? These are Austins words: to which I will add those that follow Cap.
14.
afterward, that, First we believe that, which as yet we cannot Intueri.
discern: that being made stronger in faith, we may attain to the
understanding of that we do believe, not men now, but God himself confirming,
and enlightening our mind within.

Ignatius the Apostles Scholar, does exhort all Christians, To stick D. B. P.
Eusebius. lib. 30, 36.
fast unto the Traditions of the Apostles, some of which he committed to
writing.

I showed before what little credit many of the writings we have of Ignatius
deserve. Eusebius authority is more worth, but he is Eusebius. hist. lib. 30.
36, for lib. 3. cap. 32.
neither quoted, nor alleged truly. The former I take to be the Printers
fault, the latter must needs be yours. Ignatius (says Eusebius) as he past
through Asia, under guard, in every City where he came, by preaching and
exhortation strengthened the parishes, that they should especially take heed of
heresies, then first newly sprung up; and should cleave fast to the Traditioni.
Tradition of the Apostles, which also, for more surety, he thought it
necessary for him to write. Now the heresies, which at that time troubled the
Church, were those of the Simonians, Menadcians, Ebionites, Nicolaitans,
Cerinthians, Saturninians, Basilidians; for the refuting whereof, the scripture
is alsufficient to a reasonable man.

Polycarpus, by the authority of the Apostles words, which he had received from
their own mouths; confirmed the (...) truth, and overthrew the Heretics.

Polycarpus might well refute them by authority of the Apostles words, which
himself had heard, if without the Scripture they would believe him, that he
heard them of the Apostles. But Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18.
Eusebius reports of him, in Irenaus words, that he recited all things, in that
refutation, agreeable to the holy Scriptures. It was much for the persuading of
the people, to whom (as Irenaeus says) he spoke those things, that he could
truly say, he had heard those things of the Apostles by word of mouth, which
they might find written in the Scriptures.

Ireneus, who imprinted in his heart Apostolical Traditions, received from
Policarp, says, If there should be a controversy about any mean Ibid. lib.
5. cap. 20.
question, ought we not to run unto the most ancient Churches, in the
which the Apostles had conuersed, and from them take that which is clear and
perspicuous to define the present question? For what if the Apostles had not
written any thing at all, must we not have follovved the order of Traditions,
which they delivered to them to whom they delivered the Churches?

Iren. Epist. ad Floren. and lib. 3. cap. 4.
Irenaeus, in his epistle to Florinus above mentioned, says that he imprinted
in his heart the whole carriage, and discourse of Polycarpus refuting the
Heretics; but of Apostolical traditions he speaks never a word more, than
that Polycarpus had heard those things of the Apostles, which he then
delivered, agreeable to the Scriptures. In any such mean question, as is not
resolved of in Scripture, it was fit to have recourse to those Churches, in
which the Apostles had lived: yea, if they had written nothing, we must have
repaired to the books of the old Testament, the known word of God, for all
matters of substance: in things indifferent, the judgment of such Churches is
of great authority.

Origin teaches, that the Church received from the Apostles by Tradition, D.
B. P. Romans 6.
to baptize Infants.

Origin calls the tradition of the Apostles, their practice of baptizing
infants, which has sufficient ground of scripture, though not in express
words; as your Church also holds, and as Origin. in Leuit. hom. 91 and in ^^c.
homil. 14.
Origin himself acknowledges, by showing the reason that moved the Apostles
to baptize them, as he conceiues; though indeed there is also other better
warrant for it.

Athanasius says: We have proved this sentence to have been delivered D. B.
P. Lib. de decret. Niceni conc.
from hand to hand by Fathers to Fathers: but ye, O new Jews, and sons of
Caiphas, what Ancestors can ye show of your opinion?

Athanasius adds this as a further proof for their confutation; that the
doctrine of Christ (...)
being one with his Father, had been held from time to time in the Church:
whereas they had no consent of antiquity for their opinion. Yet had he
himself proved the point, by many certain reasons out of the Scripture, and
brought this argument from the authority of men, for confutation of their
false assertion, that the former Divines were not of that judgment. This
Athanasius refuteth by the testimonies of Theognostus, Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, whom he calls (...).
eloquent, and one other Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and Origin whom he terms
(...). D. B. P. De Spu. Sanct. 27. Of Nazianzen in the treatise of Images.
painful.

S. Basil has these words: We have the doctrine that is kept and preached in
the Church; partly written, and part we have received by Tradition of the
Apostles in mystery, both which be of the same force to godliness, and no man
opposes against these, who has at the least, but mean experience of the
Laws of the Church. See Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 1. in Julian.

If you will give me leave, I will defend Basils speech by that, which may be
gathered out of him, viz. that he holds them things to be by tradition, which
are not expressed in the Scriptures. My ground for this exposition are these
words of his: Out of what Scripture have we (says Basil. de spirit. sanct. c.
27.
Basil) the very (...)

Augustine, some thousand two hundred years ago, records the very form of
arguing, which the Protestants use now-a-daies, in the person of Maximinus an
Arrian in his first book against him in the beginning. Jf thou shall (says
this Heretic) bring any thing out of the Scriptures which is common to all,
we must needs hear thee, but these words which are without the Scriptures
are in no sort to be received of us: when as the Lord himself has admonished
us, and said: in vain do they worship me, teaching commandments and
precepts of men. How S. Augustine And before ansvvered. Hom 62. Cantica.
opposed against them unwritten Traditions, has been before declared. The like
does S. Bernard asfirme of certain Heretics of his time, called Apostolici.

So that most truly it may be concluded, that even as we Catholics have
learned of the Apostles and ancient Fathers, our noble progenitors, to stand
fast and hold the Traditions which we have received by word of mouth, as well as
that which is written: Even so the Protestants have received as it were from
hand to hand, of their ignoble predecessors, old condemned Heretics, to reject
all traditions, and to she unto the only Scriptures.

Maximinus asked nothing but reason of Austin if he stood upon the matter, and
not upon the (...).
terms; neither does Austin find fault with this condition, nor could he in
reason, because (as I answered before) himself appeals to that kind of trial
in that very disputation. Neither must I (says Aug. contra. Maxim. lib. 3.
cap. 14.
Austin to Maximinus) allege the Council of Nice in prejudice of the matter,
nor you the Council of Ariminum, neither am I tied with the authority of this
Council, nor you with the authority of that; let matter strive with matter,
(...) with cause, reason with reason, by the authority of the scriptures which
are not proper to you or me, but common to us both. But will you hear him
speak more like Maximinus? Read me this (says Aug. de pastor. cap. 14.
Austin) out of a Prophet, read it out of a Psalm, recite it out of the Law,
recite it out of the Gospel, recite it out of an Apostle. Thence recite I the
Church, dispersed over the whole world, and our Lord saying, my sheep hear my
voice. And a little after, away with men's papers, let Sonent voces diuinae.
the voice of God sound. And August. in Psalm. 57.
in another place, away with our papers, let Gods books come forth: hear
Christ, hear the truth speaking. If these speeches be heretical, we confess
our selves to be Heretics, but so, that we have Austin on our side for an
Arch-Heretike.

Bernard ser. 66. not 62. in Cantica.
Bernard speaks of the Heretics called Apostolicks, not in his 62. but in his
66. sermon upon the Canticles, where he says never a word of their rejecting
Traditions. No more has Aug. haeres. 40.
Austin, nor Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 61.
Epiphanius, where they write of them. And if they did reject traditions, it
was because they would establish their own heretical books, viz. the Acts of
Thomas and Andrew, and the gospel of the Egyptians, which, to say the truth,
are to be counted traditions, because they have no warrant of the scripture,
nor are any part of the Canon.

It were easy for me to turn your own sentence against you, and (as all men
may see) with good reason, but it shall suffice me that I have refuted your
slanders and shows with sound proof of arguments and authority. I consider,
loosers must have leave to speak.

The eighth point. Of Vows. Our consent.
life everlasting: and man again for his part promises to believe in Christ,
and to obey God in all his commandments. All men ever made this vow unto God,
as the Jews in circumcision: which also they renewed so often as they received
the Passover: and in the new Testament all that are baptized do the like.
And in baptism this vow is called the stipulation of a good conscience whereby
we purpose to renounce our selves, to believe in Christ, and to bring forth
the fruits of true repentance: and it ought to be renewed so often as we are
partakers of the supper of the Lord. This vow is necessary and must be kept
as a part of the true worship of God; because it is a promise, wherein we vow
to perform all duties commanded of God either in the law or in the Gospel.
It may be demanded, considering we are bound to obedience, how we bind our
selves in baptism thereto. Answ. Though we be already bound partly by nature
and partly by the written word, yet may we renew the same bond in a vow, and
he that is bound may further bind himself, so it be for this end, to help
his dulnes for want of zeal, and to make himself more forward in duties of
love to men and the worship of God: to this end David swear to keep the law of
God. Psalm. 119. 116. though he were bound unto it by nature and by the written
law it self.

The special vow is that, which does not reach to the person of al believers,
but only concerns some special men upon some special occasions. And this
kind of vow is twofold. The first, is the vow of a ceremonial duty in the way
of service to God: and it was in practice in the Church of the Jews under the
old Testament: examples hereof are two especially, the first was the vow of
the Nazarites, whereto no kind of men were bound by Gods commandment, but
they bound themselves: God only prescribing the manner and order of keeping the
same with rites pertaining thereto, as abstinence from wine, the not cutting of
their hair, and such like. The second example is of the Jews, when of their
own accords, they vowed to give God house or land, sheep, or oxen, or any
like things for the maintenance of the legal worship: and of this also God
prescribes certain rules, Leuit. 27. Now these vows were part of the Jewish
pedagogie or ceremonial law, wherein God trained up the Jews in the old
testament: and being observed of them they were parts of Gods worship: but now
under the Gospel they are not: being all abolished with the ceremonial law,
to which Christ put an end at his death upon the cross. It is true Paul made
a vow, and since kept the same, in in the time of the new Testament. Act. 18.
yet not as a part of Gods worship: but as a thing indifferent for the time,
wherein he only condescended to the weakness of the Jews, that by this means
he might bring them the better unto Christ. And whereas Christ is called a
Nazarite, Matthew. 2. 23. we may not think he was of that very order, because he
did not abstain from wine: but he was so termed because he was the verity
and accomplishment of this order. For by it was signified that Gods Church was
a peculiar people severed or chosen out of the world: and that Christ in
respect of holiness was also separated from all sinners. And the words in Saint
Matthew, he shall be called a Nazarite, are borrowed from the book of Judges,
cap. 13. where they are properly spoken of Sampson, and in type or figure of
Christ. For as Sampson saved Israel by his death, so did Christ save his
Church. And as Sampson killed his enemies more by death then by life, so did
Christ. It is plain therefore that this kind of vow binds not us: for there
are no more ceremonies to be kept under the Gospel for parts of Gods
worship, but the outward rites of Baptism and the Lords Supper. Vows
concerning meats, and drinks, attire, touching, tasting, times, place, days,
were proper to the Jews.

The second kind of special vow is that whereby a man promises freely to
perform some outward and bodily exercise, for some good end: and this vow
also (if it be made accordingly) is lawful, and belongs both to the Church of
the old and new Testament. In the old we have the example of the Rekabites,
Ier. 35. who by the appointment of Ionadab their father abstained from strong
drink, and wine, from planting vineyardes and orchardes: whereby Ionadab
intended only to break them before hand, and to acquaint them with their
future condition and state, that they should be strangers in a foreign land;
that so they might prepare themselves to endure hardness in the time to come.
And now in the new testament we have warrant in like manner to vow: as if a
man by drinking of wine or strong drink, find himself prone to drunkenness,
he may vow with himself to drink no more wine nor strong drink for so long
time, as he feels the drinking thereof will stir up his infirmity, and
minister occasion of sinning. Of this kind also are the vows in which we
purpose and promise to God, to keep set times of fasting, to task our selves
in prayer and reading of holy Scriptures, and to give set alms for special
causes known to our selves, and to do sundry like duties. And that we be
not deceived in making such vows, certain rules must be remembered: I. that
the vow be agreeable to Gods will and word: for if it be otherwise, the making
as also the keeping thereof is sin. Vows must not be the bonds of
iniquity. II. It must so be made, that it may stand with Christian liberty.
For we may not make such things necessary in conscience, which God has made
free. Now Christian liberty allows unto us the free use of all things
indifferent, so it be out of the case of offense. Hence it follows that vows
must be made and keept or not keept, so farreforth as in conscience they may
stand or not stand with our liberty purchased by Christ. III. The vow must
be made with consent of superiors, if we be under government. Thus among the
Jews the vow of a daughter might not stand unless the consent of Parents
came thereunto. IV. It must be in the power and ability of the maker thereof,
to do or not to do. A vow made of a thing impossible, is no vow. V. It must
be agreeable to the calling of him that makes it: that is, both to his
general calling as he is a Christian, and to that particular calling wherein
he lives. If it be against either one or both, it is unlawful. VI. It must
be made with deliberation. (...)

no better things performed then God by his law has bound us to, else man
could devise better obedience, or more acceptable service to God then he
himself has appointed. If by better good, you mean be a greater measure of
obedience then is commonly performed, I doubt whether any man can do more then
the law of God has required of him, which is the rule of perfect obedience. If
you understand the means of stirring up our selves to the doing of our duty
to God, Master Perkins acknowledges that, and compriseth it in the later part,
though he do not express it. Secondly, you say, that it must proceed from our
own free choice and liberty. The promise doubtless must have our own will
for the ground of it, and so much the word imports, but the good must be a
duty commanded, or at the least allowed by warrant out of the word of God in
the scriptures, or out of the light of true reason, and the law of nature, or
out of Revelation before the scriptures.

Moses Law, but are not so in the Gospel, which we also deny, M. Perkins
proves his assertion thus. Vows belonged to the ceremonies of Moses Law, but
all those Ceremonies are abolished, by Christ's Passion.

Ans. That Vows in themselves were no part of the Ceremonies of Moses Law,
but true parts of the worship of God in all estates; as well in the state of
Nature and the Gospel, as in Moses Law: but this point M. Perkins handles
again in the first point of our difference, where it shell be discussed.
Thirdly he says, that special Vows may be made in the New Law, to
perform some bodily exercise for some good end, as to fast, to task our
selves to prayer, or study of holy Scripture, and such like: but many rules
must then be observed: that we Vovv an honest thing agreeable to Gods word:
this we allow.

Perkins does not say as you conceive, that all vows belonged to the ceremony
of Moses law, but that the vow of a ceremonial duty in the way of service to
God, apperteined thereto, whereof he brings two examples of the Nazarites, and
of the people generally at their choice.

having Vowed these things; is he not bound to perform them? Yes, or else he
breaks his Vovv, with which God is highly displeased. An unfaithful promise
displeases God. Then is it manifest, that all Vows Deuteronomy. 83. Eccles. 50.
do abridge us of our liberty, and make that unlawful for us, which before
our Vovv was lavvfull: which is so euiden^ of it self, that I marvel
where the man's wit and memory was, when he vvrote the contrary.



D. B. P. Do you then allow all, that is taken out of your Doctors? Quest. 88.
consent of our Superiors; and not only of things possible, but also of the
better sort, we allow, for they are taken out of our Doctors: See S. Thom.

Your cotation is somewhat with the shortest, naming nothing but the Tho. 2a,
(...), q. 88. art. 8.
question; so is also the determination of your DD. upon it; for, although they
grant in general, that we must have the consent of our superiors to vowing,
Art. 9.
yet they exempt us in this case from subjection, as soon as we are out of our
noneage, and that they draw us out of very quickly, that a maid of 12. or 14.
years old may vow herself a Nun, and so a youth at 18. or 20, or perhaps
sooner, may vow himself a Friar, without any consent of their parents, yea
directly contrary to their express will and commandment.

The dissent or difference.
no: considering the ceremonial law is now abolished: and we have only two
ceremonies by commandment to be observed, Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord. Again we are not so much bound to make or keep vows as the Jews
were: because they had a commandment so to do, and we have none at all.

Perkins) teaches, that in the New Testament, we are as much bound to make
Vows, as was the Church of the Jews, we say no; Considering that the
Ceremonial Law is now abolished, and we have only two Ceremonies by
commandment to be observed for parts of Gods worship: Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord.

Ans. What, is not your Holy Day service (which you call divine service) any
part of Gods worship in your own opinions? Can a public assembly instituted
to honor God by prayer and thanksgiving with external ceremony of time,
place, apparel, kneeling, standing and sitting, be no part of Gods worship?
In your irreligious Congregations, assembled together against Christ and his
Catholic Church, be it so. But admitting as you do, your service to be good;
it could not truly be denied to belong unto the worship of God.



O strange eloquence not to be understood!
intrinsecallie belonging and much furthering the true worship of almighty
God, which we prove in this sort. In a Vovv are two things, the one is the
good which is Vowed, called the material part: as for example, Fasting, etc.
The other, the promise it self made to God, which is the form; the material
parts do belong unto their several virtues: but this promise and performance
of it be substantial parts of Gods worship. For by promising of any good
thing unto God, The performance is no part of the Vow ^rither the matter nor
the form of it.
we acknovvledge and profess that God is the sovereign goodness it self,
and takes great pleasure in all good purposes and determinations: therefore,
to honor and worship him, we make that good promise. Again, In performing
that good service of God, we testify, that he is most maiesticall, reverend,
and dreadful. And consequently, that all promises made to him, are to be
accomplished most diligently, and without delay, wherein we honor and worship
him, as contrariwise they do much dishonor him who break with him, as if he
were of no better account then to be so deluded. This thing in it self is so
certain and clear, that he who denies it, must needs either be ignorant in
the nature of a Vovv, or not know wherein the true ^orship of God consists:
for according unto the holy Scripture itself, all good deeds done to the glory
of God, be acts of the true worship of God. And S. Anne did worship Luke 1.
Philip. (...). Iac. 5.
God, by fasting and prayer: And alms bestovved on Gods prisoners, is called a
sacrifice pleasing and acceptable unto God: And it is said, to be a pure
religion before God to visit Orphans and vviddovves: If then all other
virtuous duties done to the glory of God, be parts of his true worship; much
more Vows, which by special promise dedicate a good deed to Gods honor:
they then being of their own nature, special parts of his true vvorshippe of
God: it follovveth necessarily that at all times they were and may be used to
the true worship of God.

Perkins says. But indeed (as I conceive) he means, bound to it, as a
service of God. We grant that you say of a vow, and withal confess, that it
is a means of Gods service; but not properly a part, otherwise then all
obedience, whereby we glorify God; and all helps, by which we fit our selves
to obedience, are parts of his worship. But those actions only are held to be
properly the parts of his worship, which are performed immediately for service
to him, not used for the better performance of it.

Moses Law is evident, by that Vovv Genesis 28.
which Jacob made of setting up a stone, which should be called the house of
God, and the paying the tenthes of all his goods. Out of which Vow, we also
gather, that God holds for agreeable, any kind of good service offered unto
him out of our own devotion: albeit he has not commanded it, for no such
thing as Jacob there Vowed was commanded him, but he being well assured that
it would be well taken by God, which was offered of good will to his greater
honor, he Vowed it, and is in holy Scripture commended for it.

Paul seems to disallow voluntary worship, he Colos. 2. As most oral^ of your
c^r^m^ni^s are.
must be understood to speak either of erroneous, or of frivolous and foolish
things, promised to God, which do not properly serve to the setting forth of
his honor.

Genesis 28. 2^.
Jacobs action was directed immediately to Gods service, not intended, or used
as a help to further him in the worship of God. That which you gather out of
his example, is not warrantable by it, unless you restrain those words (good
service) otherwise, than you Papists commonly do. For it does not follow, that
because God accepted of t^ vow, therefore he will like whatsoever a man shall
promise him, so it be (as he imagines) to the greater honor of God. The former
of these two was (in likelihood) enjoined Adam by God, and so continued among
the true worshippers of God: the latter is grounded upon that principle, that
we must glorify God in our souls, bodies and goods, though the manner be left
free to every man's discretion, according to his ability and opportunity: but
no man may conclude hereupon, that God in his solemn worship allows of
whatsoever we out of our devotion invent, and appoint to serve him by. That
Col. 2. 18.
of Paul must needs be understood of such things; but such are all that are
devised by man to worship God by, without warrant from the word of God, either
generally or particularly, expressly, or by necessary consequence. For all such
serving of God, is worship, depending wholly upon the will of man, and so
will worship. The ceremonies of your Romish Church are generally foolish and
ridiculous, yea those in your Mass: your Doctrines, besides Scripture,
erroneous, as I showed in the last article.

the Egyptians shall know the Lord, and shall vow unto him and keep it. I
answer two ways: first, that the Prophet in this place expresses and
signifies the spiritual worship of the new Testament by ceremonial worship
then used: as he does also in the last chapter where he calls the ministers
of the new Testament Priests and Levites. Secondly, we grant, the Church of
the new Testament makes vows unto God, but they are of moral and evangelical
duties: which must not be left undone: and if vowing will indeed further them,
it is not to be neglected. And therefore so often as we come to the Lords
Table, we in heart renew the vow and promise of obedience. And though vows
be made of things and actions indifferent, yet are they not any parts of Gods
worship, which is the point to be proved.

Act. 1^. Esaias. 19. 18.
the evidence of S. P^, Vo^ and diverse other (...) (...) ^^e Prophet Esaias did
foretell, in th^se word^: (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) sacrifice and gifts,
and they shall Vo^ Vo^^s (...) our^. To which M. Perkins answers first, that
by such cere^ as th^n was in use, the Prophet does express the spiritual
(...) (...) the new Testament. This exposition is voluntary and nothing (...):
For what is more vild and absurd, than (^o declare that Christians shall make
(...) proper a^ so^^re.
no Vows) to say that they shall make Vows, as though one contrary were
fit or would serve to express the other. This exposition being very unmeet,
M. Perkins adioyneth a second, that in the new Testament, we have Vows of
Moral and Evangelical duties, but such are not any part of Gods worship: ^o
that first you shall have no Vows at all: Secondly, the vvind being changed,
you shall have them, but as no parts of Gods worship, as though Moral and
Evangelical duties undertaken and performed to Gods greater glory be not the
very synevves and substance of his service and worship.

Act. 18. 1^.
S. Paul's vow makes nothing for you, Master Perkins has showed. It is
marvel you would name the example, and not refute his answer. Belike the
truth of it was too evident. And yet it had been no hard matter perhaps, to
find as good a shift for that place, as you have for the other Esaias. 19 2^.
of Esaias. Master Perkins answered to it, that the Prophet signifies the
spiritual worship of the new Testament by the ceremonies of the old, then in
use: and he proves his interpretation by the Prophet himself; who Esaias. 66.
21.
afterward calls the Ministers of the new Testament, Priests, and Levites,
which were offices and names proper to the old. You slip over the reason, and
^ell us, that it is vile and absurd to say, that Christians shall make vows,
to declare, that they shall make none. But the Prophet means to de- (...)

from Senacherib. The general doctrine ensuing from it is this, that we are to
be thankful to God, when he has deliuerd us out of any extraordinary danger.

Your second reason is of less force, for first, by the Kings of the earth,
the Lyra ibid.
Kings bordering upon Jerusalem, and those parts, are signified, who should be
driven into a fear of God, that had so destroyed the Assyrians. Secondly, if
it be general, it follows not that therefore the vows he speaks of there
may be made of any sort of men, but that all men must perform the duty of
thankefulnes upon like occasions.

Augustine serve in his Commentary upon this Psalm 75. Because we have
handled those things (says he) pe^ture thou who vvast vvilling before, but
now vvilt not Vovv: but m^ke what the Psalm said unto thee: It says not,
Do not Vovv, but Vovv and pay it: vvilt thou not Vovv? Therefore would
thou have Vowed, but not have fulfilled it ^ay rather do both: Let the one be
of (...) own promise, the other shall be performed by the help of God: He
then took these words to belong unto his Auditors who were no jews.

In the same place, he does highly commend Christians for Vovving, some
Chastity, some Hospitality some Poverty.

(...). ibid.
Theodoret, auncienter then Austin, and not inferior to him, in expounding the
Scripture, applies it to bringing of gifts, as also the Psalm. 76. (...)
Psalm it self in the later part of the verse, and the 2. (...). 32. 2^
practice of the people at that very time warrant him. So also may Au ust. ad
Psalm. 75.
Austin himself, for all those words, be understood. For what do they import,
but an exhortation to thankefulnes, under the legal terms of vowing? If
Austin, or any man else will ground other doctrine upon it, he delivers his
own conceit, not the Prophets meaning. I think there is no man that reads
those Commentaries of Austins upon the Psalms, but finds, that he mistakes the
sense very commonly, which is to be imputed to his want of knowledge in the
tongues, especially in the Hebrew.

Perkins ^his Commentary upon this place: who says, that the Prophet speaks
of Vows, of Prayer and thanksgiving: For so (says M. Perkins:) does he
expound himself, My Vows are upon me, J will offer praises unto Psalm 56.
1^.
God: Well aimed I vvarrant you; The Psalm fifty sixth, written first, is the
Exposition of the Psalm seventy five, which was conceited and uttered after:
Again, in the Psalm seventy five David speaks to others: in the other he
speaks of himself. Thirdly, the Prophets words in Psalm fifty six,
confirm rather that which he taught before, that all considerate Vows are
praises and parts of Gods worship, or as the words do more literallie ^ound,
because his Vows, that is, his prayers and desires were by God accomplished,
therefore he would praise and thank him.

Hebr^i in^e^p. 70. (...).
Septuaginta, and Ambr. orate.
Ambrose witness, but Esai. 38. 9. 10
Hezekiahs practice confirms. To deny that thankefulnes is urged, is not to
understand the occasion of the Psalm, and the end of the exhortation, which
requires vows, be they what they may be, but only in that respect. Master
Perkins therefore needed not any further proof, then the text it self: but,
for the better auowing of his exposition, he brought Psalm. 56. 22
another place of the Psalms, where vows do signify praise or thanksgiving.
Now whereas he says, that David expounds himself, and you refute that by the
placing of the Psalms, your answer is not sufficient. For any man may see,
the Psalms were not set in order, as they were penned in time; and if that 75.
Psalm were a prophecy of Senacheribs overthrow, as I showed Theodoret. ad
Psalm. 75.
Theodoret thinks, it might well be written before Psalm 56. But Master
Perkins had no such meaning; only he expounds the word Vows, used in this
place by the certain sense of it in another, which course is agreeable to the
rules of interpreting the scripture.

But in the one you say David speaks of himself, in the other he speaks to
other. What then? is it not more then likely that he exhorts others to the
duty he practiced himself? If in his own person he mean by vows praise,
what else should be understood by exhorting other men to vow, especially upon
the like occasion, that is, as you say afterward, upon having their prayers and
desires accomplished?

Your collection, that David should prove, that all considerate vows are
praises, and part of Gods worship, has no likelihood of truth in it. For the
Prophet declares by that speech, that he had vowed to praise God, as the next
verse before shows in part, and the practice of David, and the rest of the
godly every where in scripture confirms. And this is a sacrifice of special
honor to God, as by the Psalm. 50. 23.
Psalm 50. appears, by which Lyra ad Esai. 19.
Lyra expounds that of Esai, whereof before. See Hieronym. and Theodor. ad
Psalm. 49 and 56. and 65.
Jerome on Psalm 49. and 56. and 65. and Theodoret on the same places.

Point of difference. They also hold that vows made even of things not
commanded, as meats, drinks, attire, etc. are parts of Gods worship, yea
that they tend to a state of perfection, in that the keeping of them brings men
to an higher estate then the keeping of the law can do. We flatly say, no:
holding that lawful vows be certain Adminicula cultus diuini.
stays and props of Gods worship, and not the worship itself. For Paul says
plainly, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is
profitable for much. Again, as Gods kingdom is, so must his worship be: and
Gods kingdom stands not in outward things, as in eating, drinking, and such
like actions: and therefore his worship stands not in outward things.

Perkins sets up a rotten prop or two, to uphold his ruinous 1. Tim. 4.
building, saying, S. Paul says plainly, Bodily exercise profits little,
^^t godliness profits much. Where are you good Sir? We treat here of Vows,
which are formally actions of the mind: what do you now about bodily
exercises? Vows are principal parts of that godliness, which is so
profitable. And if by bodily exercise, Fasting, and other corporal pain or
labor be understood, then we say, that such things of themselves would
profitlittle; but being directed to the chastising of the rebellious flesh, to
the end we may less offend, and better serve God, then they may much profit
us.

Perkins brings this place, is, because, as it should seem, some Papists
allege it, to prove the lawfulnes of vowing bodily exercises, to honor God by
them. You answer, that vows are actions of the mind. What of that? if the
performance of the vows be of small profit, doubtless the vowing of them is a
poor piece of service to God. Yet may there be good use of fasting, and such
like, to us, in that they may be made good means to further our service to
God, though of themselves they be no worship.

Perkins his second reason against such Vows. Gods kingdom stands not in
outvvard things, and therefore his worship stands not in outvvard things.

Ans. Gods kingdom in itself stands not in outvvard things, and as it is in
us also, it does consist chiefly in inward worship, by faith, hope, charity,
and religion, in whose kingdom Vovvs hold a honorable rank: but a great part
of this worship among us, depends of outvvard things; for be not the two only
parts of Gods worship among Protestants (as M. Perknis says in this question)
Baptism and our Lords Supper, both which partly consist in outwardly, both
speaking and doing. And is not faith (which is the root of all Christian
Religion) gotten by outvvard preaching and hearing? But it would vvearie a
vvilling man to trayle after all M. Perkins his impertinent errors.

Perkins denies not, that we are to perform outward worship to God, which
consists among us in prayer, praise, thanksgeuing, and such like duties, not
only, as you would have your followers falsely imagine of us, in administering,
and receiving the sacraments. You that would seem so unwilling to traile after
Master Perkins errors, are glad to make some of your own, and father them upon
him, least ofttimes you should have nothing to say. I have showed diverse
particulars of this kind in the course of my answer to your cauils against him.

Point of difference. They maintain such vows to be made, as are not
agreeable to the rules before named: and herein also we are to dissent from
them. The first and principal is, the vow of continency, whereby a man
promises to God to keep chastity always in single life, that is, out of the
estate of wedlock. This kind of vow is flat against the word of God: and
therefore unlawful. For Paul says, 1. Cor. 7. 9. If they cannot contain let
them marric. 1. Tim. 4. 1. It is a doctrine of devils to forbid to marry.
Heb. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled.

Paul, If they cannot contain, then let (...) Marry: True, if they have not
Vowed Chastity before, as the common 1. Cor. 7.
Christians of Corinth, (to whom S. Paul there speaks) had not. For such, ^f
they cannotliue otherwise chastely, it is better they marry then be burned that
is, defiled with incontinencie. But to them who had Vowed chastity before,
S. Paul vvriteth in another style, That if they but desire to marry, they
incur domnation, because they have made frustrate and broken their former
faith and promise made unto God of their 1. Tim. 5.
chastiue: So that this first text is a Furlong vvide at the least from the
mark.

Epiphanius
holds it to be a better course for them that have vowed, to marry, then to
continue in sin against God. And Aug de bono viduit. ca. 9. 10
Austin says, that the marriages of such men are not to be condemned, as if
they were no marriages at all, which opinion that they are no marriages he
there refutes. And indeed who can think in any reason that it is more
displeasing to God for a man to break the promise he has made, then by making
a show of keeping it, to live in uncleanness? It is but one fault to break a
vow, though it be never so lawful, but it is a double fault both to do against
the vow, by continuing subject to such lusts, and to refuse the remedy that is
afforded. In which respect Epiphan. vbi supra.
Epiphanius says, it is better to have one sin, then many sins. Therefore
Cyril. in Leuit. lib 3.
Cyrill gives council to marry even after the vow of single life, and to
confess our sin in so doing, if we cannot live chastely. Yea 22. q. 4. I^
malis.
the Common law bids a man not to do that which he has vowed unadvisedly. It
is no doubt a fault not to keep our vow, but to make such a vow as a man is
not sure he shall be able to keep, is a greater fault. If the case fall out to
be so, Hieron. ad (...). (...) act. (...) 34.
Jerome and q Austen hold it the less evil to marry.

It cannot be proved out of the text, that the Apostle speaks there of any
votaries, but only of such widows as having for a time employed themselves in
the service of the Church, at the last left both the Church and Christ, and
followed Satan by marrying with Infidels. But take it as you will, we have
already seen the judgment of the Auntients, who for all their high conceit
of virginity, allow marriage even after vows.

It is a doctrine of devils, to forbid to marie: 1. Tim. 4. What reverence
when you think it defiles your Priests? Ephesians. 5. They are soon of years
ripe enough in your account. Lib. 3. contra Faust. manich. cap. 6.
truth, if one should hold marriage in it self to be wicked, and therefore
condemn it in all sorts of persons, as Montanus, and the Manichees did. But we
have a more reverend opinion of marriage, than the Protestants themselves. For
we with the Apostle hold it to be a great Sacram^: they, that it is a morail
contract only. Notwithstanding, we maintain, that such persons, who being of
ripe years, have advisedly Vowed chastity, may not marry; not because
marriage is not honorable, but for that they have solemnly promised to God the
contrary which we also hold to be better, tha^ if he had married. And so to use
S. Augustines words, H. forbids to marry, who says it to be evil, but
not be who before this good thing, prefers a better. And a little after,
you see (says he) that there is great difference between persvvasion to
Virginity, by preserring the greater good before the less, and forbidding to
marry, by accusing lying together for issue. The first is, the doctrine of the
Apostles, which we teach, the latter only of devils.

1. Tim. 4. 1.
Apostle speaks of all forbidding marriage at the least as an unclean thing,
but so it is forbidden by you, because it defiles your priests, that they
cannot be fit to offer up there maker, yea that they cannot pray, as Harding
against the Apology in Juel. sol 210.
Harding says. You take marriage for such a Sacrament that it is too base for
your holy priesthood. We acknowledge it to be Genesis 1. 18. 19. etc.
the ordinance of God, of another manner of bond then a moral contract only.
We deny not that single life is in some respects to be preferred before
marraige, but that marriage is to be forbidden any sort of men, as if of it
self it made them less holy.

(is) is not in the text, nor cannot by the courle of the Apostles speech,
requiring a verb of the Imperative Mood, as both the sent nces before and
after do convince.

Hebr. 13. 4.
later part of the verse shows that it should be [is] marriage is honorable,
but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge: whereas if it had bin so
intended as you would have it, the other part must have bin, for God will
judge, by way of a reason, as your vulgar translation reads it without ground.
If we corrupt the text, by adding the verb is, what do Theodoret. Chrysostom.
Theophyl. Oecum. Heuten. ad Hebr. 1^.
Theodoret, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenins, and Heutenius the Papist that
translated him, Hesych. in Leuit. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
Hesychius, Fulgent. ad Galla. de statu. viduit. cap. 2.
Fulgentius, Damasc. Orthod fidei. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Damas^en, who so expound it. Primas. ad Hebr. 13.
Primasius gives the reason why the Apostle speaks so, because some at that
time condemned marriage as unclean.

(is) should be joined with the one more than with the other. And nothing but
passion does cause them to make the middle sentence an affirmative, when they
turn both the other into exhortations.

is honorable, be repeated; and the bed undefiled is honorable. In the sentence
following it cannot be understood, with any reason; and therefore the Vulgar
Latin, sint.
vulgar Latin puts in sint, and the Rhemis. English, Let be. (...).
Rhemists English, let be: which in the former verse neither of them does. You
so interpret it.

The second corruption is in these words (among all) when they should translate
(in all) and the adjective being put without a substantive, must in true
construction have this word (things) joined with it, and not (men) wherefore the
text being sincerely put into English, it would carry no color of their
error: For the Apostles saying is: Let marriage be honorable in all things, and
the bed undefiled: Here is no willing of any man to marry, but only a
commandment to them that be married to live honestly in marriage, to keep (as
he else where says) their vessels in sanctification, and not in dishonor, and
then shall their marriage be honorable in all things, that is, in all points
appertaining to Matrimony: So that now you see that M. Perkins is not able to
bring any one place out of Scripture to disprove the Vow of chastity.

Theophyl. ibid.
Theophyl. understand it. In all (says Theophylact) is not only in men of
riper age, and not in young men also, but in all men, or in all means and
times: not in affliction only, and in rest otherwise; not honorable and
precious in this part, in that part otherwise; but the whole throughout is
honorable. So that both your cauils at the translation are vain, and the
sense is wholly for us.

You know what is wont to be said of pro^ered service.
some one broken fragment of a sentence or other, would relieve you in this
your combat against the Vow of Chastity? I will help you to one, but I fear
me, you will scarce thank me for my pains: It is such a one, as is neither
holy nor father, but the ancient Christian Epicure Jouinian, who as S.
Augustine has recorded, and Saint Ierom did hold that Haeres. 82. ad Quodvult.
Lib. 1. cont. Ioui.
Virginity of professed persons, men and women was no better then the
continency of the married. So that many professed Virgins believing him did
marry, yet himself did not marry, as Friar Luther did; not be cause he
thought chastity should be rewarded in the life to come, with a greater crown
of glory; but because it was fit for the present necessity, to avoid the
troubles of marriage; see just the very opinion of M. Perkins and our
Protestants. But this heresy says S. Augustine in the same This was
ansvvered in the Epistle. Lib. 2. retract. 22.
place, was quickly suppressed and extinguished; it was not able to deceive
any one of the Priests: And in another place thus he speaks of Iouinian: Holy
Church most faithfully and valiantly resisted this monster: So that no
marvel, if that M. Perkins could find small relief in antiquity for this his
assertion, which the best of them esteemed no better than a monstrous
sacrilegious heresy.



tained then to vow; but first to vow, and then to look for strength from God
to fit us for the keeping of our vow, is against all Divinity and reason. And
therefore the persuasion to vow, upon presumption of ability to perform that
which is vowed, shows (at the least) zeal without knowledge; and can be no
matter of commendation to the ancient Church, if they simply allowed it.
Howsoever, they were far better than you, because they enjoined breach of
vow, rather than increase of sin.



Perkins Antecedent, by the testimony of the ancient writers. To which I
answer in general, that as we freely acknowledge their authority, where
there is nothing but men's authority to be waighed; so we account it lighter
than nothing, in all cases contrary to Scripture: such as we can prove this
to be.

Tertullian near the end, expounding these words: He that can take, let him
take, Choose (says h^) that which is good: if thou say thou can not, it is
Lib. de monog. Matthew. 19.
because thou vvilt not, for that thou might if thou would, he does
declare who has left both to thy choice.

Tertullia. de Monogam. cap. 14.
Tertullians testimony is not worth the answering. Not only because (as I
showed before out of Hilary) his heresy discredited all his writings, but
because this is the book wherein he chiefly maintains that his heresy, and
blasphemy too; accompting Montanus the holy Ghost, and Comforter, whom our
Savior promised to send. Upon his authority does Tertullian forbid second
marriages as unclean, and brings Math. 19. 22
this place, you allege, to that purpose. Such conscience make you of citing
authorities against the truth. But I answer Tertullian, that our Savior has
left it to no man's choice, but to his that has received the gift.

Origin upon the same place, He that will take this word that is set down
of chastity, let him pray for it, believing ^m that said, ask and it Matthew.
19.
shall be given you, and he shall receive it; which does plainly confute M.
Perkins. Who says, that although we ask never so much, we cannot obtain this
gift.

Tertullian Origin may well be joined, a man condemned of heresy, or rather of
many heresies, by Jerome, Austin, Epiphanius, Theophilus, and a whole Council.
Further, it is strange that he should be reported to have offered such violence
to his own body, if he thought the gift of continency so easy to be
obtained. More especially I say that Origin. in Matthew. 19. Tract. 7.
Origin mistakes the matter. For our Savior Christ bids not every man pray for
it that will have i^, but him to take it that can; implying that every one
cannot. The promise is of things needful, such is not continency; nor
convenient for all.

Origin agrees S. Jerome upon the same place, who says, It is given unto them
who have requested it; who have desired it, and trauayled that they might
receive it.

Hieronym. in Math. 19. lib. 3
Ieromes authority is in it self more worth; in this case not much; because
he goes directly against our Saviors words, who makes it a gift particular to
some, and not once mentions any means of coming by it, but bids them take it
that can. His reason is the same with Origens, and answered before: yet even
there he wills all men to consider their strength, whether they be able to go
thorough with it, or no.

Gregory Nazianzen which is of three kinds Orat. 31.
of Eunouchs.

Nazianzen. in Matthew. 19. orat. 36.
Nazianzen goes somewhat further, making it no more but a matter of a man's own
inclination. When thou hear (says he) to whom it is given, add, it is
given to them Valentibus.
that are able, and to them who are so carried by the inclination of their
mind. As if our Savior had said, Take it who will, not who can; as if nothing
wanted but resolution.

Chrysostom says, it is possible to all them who make choice of it: and
further adds, that our Savior Christ himself does prove it there after this
sort: Think with thy self if thou had bin by nature an Eunuch, or by the
malice of men made one, what would thou then have done, when thou
should both have been deprived of that pleasure, and yet not have had any
recompense for thy pain. Therefore thank God, because thou shall have a great
revvard, and a glittering Crown, if thou live so as they must do without
any revvard: yet (says he) thou may do it more easily, safely, and
pleasantly, both, because thou art fortifi^d with hope of recompense, and also
comforted with a virtuous conscience.

Chrysostom. in Matthew. 19. honul. 63.
Chrysostoms Rhetorike is better in this place than his Logic: Our Savior
exhorts them, that can, to take it; he says not, every man that will may.
Those are they which have made themselves chaste, who having the gift of
continency from God, use it accordingly, and forbe are marriage, that they may
with more cheerefulnes, and less encumbrance, serve God: yet is there no
shadow of any proof in this place, that every one may vow continency.

Augustine, who directly confuteth M. Perkins by many reasons and exampl^ Lib.
2. De ada^erinis coning. cap. 12. Et de bono vid^^^. ^ap. ^0.

He that exhorts thee to Vo^, will help thee to fulfill it. All which
heavenly Doctrine, because it is spiritually judged, (as the Apostle speaks)
the Carnal man cannot understand: And therefore M. Perkins being persuaded
that few can live chastely except they marry, avouches that this Vovv, does
bring forth innumerable abominations in the World: Not the hundredth part, so
many as the fleshly Heretics imagine, and out of flying and lying tales report
and bru^te abroad: Nay, I dare affirm, that Whence came that old proverb:
Priests and Doves make foul houses? See the Ploughmans tale in Chavv^er.
let the authentical Records of our Realm be well perused, and you shall find
more lewd filthy Lechery, to have been practiced by Ministers and their
Wives this last age, than was in a thousand year before, by all the Catholic
Priests and Religious persons of the Land.

There is not a word of this place, either Aug. de a^ulter. coniug. cap. 12.
in that twelfth Chapter, or in any part of that book: how then does Saint
Austin directly confute Master Perkins by many reasons and examples? The
question propounded by Pollentius, and there handled by Austin is, whether the
Apostle 1. Cor. 7. forbid her to marry, who is departed from her husband,
though not because of fornication.

In Aug. de bono viduit. c. 20
the other place Austin shows no more but this, that it is possible to
refrain from fornication and adultery: which it never came into our mind to
deny. But this is not enough to chastity and continency. If the ancient
Fathers hereto fore, and you now, count al them chaste, that defile not their
bodies with outward uncleanness of that kind, monstrous filthiness may be
chastity. But admit (which we grant may be, and like enough has been in many
carnal men, yea is perhaps at this day in some Turks and other Heathen) that
the outward act should be utterly for borne; yet may they, that so forbear,
burn in continual lust, and live in the breach of Gods Commandments. What
does this discourse of Austins then concern that which Master Perkins
affirms, when he is ready to grant as much as Austin says, and yet holds his
former conclusion, that chastity and continency are virtues of Gods special
gift, and not matters to be attained to by every one that will vow to continue
unmarried, in hope to prove able to keep his vow?

August. in Psalm. 137.
This third place is like the first, alleged by you, without any ground at
all. For there is no such speech in that Commentary, nor any occasion of it in
the Psalm. The likeliest place for it, in his exposition of the Psalms, is
upon the Psalm. 75.
75. Psalm, where he discourses of the vow of continency at large. But there
it is not; so that it is not to be taken for Austins, till you bring better
proof that it is his. If I would answer at adventure, I could say, that God
exhorts none to this vow, but them on whom he has bestowed the gift, and they
have his help to fulfill that they have vowed.

We envy not this your special judgment, nor respect your slanderous
challenge: only this I answer, that if all the Ministers and their wives, had
been as lewd, as your malice can imagine, they could not have come near the
thousand part of that filthiness, which your Bishops, Priests, Friars and Nuns
committed in this land, by record of popish histories. Yea let just trial be
made, and we will adventure our lives, that time for time, there have been,
since the renewing of the Gospel, more and more beastly unclean persons,
among your Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nuns, in
that one City of Rome, than among all the Ministers, and their wives, in this
whole realm of England.

both of Church and Commonwealth; and it brings forth a seed of God for the
enlarging of his kingdom. Yet single life in them that have the gift of
continency, is in some respects to be preferred. First, because it brings
liberty in persequution. Thus Paul says, 1. Cor. 7. 26. I suppose it to be
good for the present necessity for a man so to be. Secondly, because it frees
men from the common cares, molestations, and distractions that be in the
family, verse. 2. 28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh, but I spare you.
Thirdly, because single parties do commonly with more bodily ease and
liberty worship God: it being still presupposed, that they have the gift of
continency. verse. 34. The unmarried woman cares for the things of of the
Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit.

Again, though we mislike the vow, yet we hold and teach, that men or women
being assured that they have the gift of continency, may constantly resolve
and purpose with themselves to live and lead a single life. 1. Cor. 7. 38. He
that stands firm in his own heart that he has no need, but has power of
his own will, and has so decreed in his heart that he will keep his
virginity, he does well. And we embrace the saying of Theodoret on 1. Tim.
cap. 4. for he does not (says he) blame single life, or continency, but he
accuses them that by law enacted compel men to follow these. And men made
themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 19. 12. not by vow, but by
a purpose of heart, which is far less then a vow, and may be changed upon
occasion, where as a vow cannot, unless it do evidently appear to be
unlawful.

Thirdly, for such persons as are able to contain, to live single for the
ends before named, indeed we hold it to be no counsel of perfection; yet
do we not deny it to be a counsel of expedience, o^ outward ease:
according to that which Paul says, verse. 25. I give mine advise, -- and, 35. I
speak this for your commodity not to entangle you in a snare.

Lastly, we think that if any having the gift of continency, do make a vow
to live single, and yet afterward marry (the said gift remaining) they have
sinned. Yet not because they are married, but because their vow is broken. And
thus said Augustine of widows that married after their vow. lib. de bono
viduit, c. 9.

Perkins obiecteth against the Vovv of chastity: afterward, the man would
somewhat reason the matter by shevving how he condemns not chastity: yet
says, that Marriage is better than it, in two respects. If Iouinian was
reputed by the learned and holiest Fathers (a Christian Epicure and a
Monster) because he durst make marriage equal with Virginity: What shall
this A good shift, when you know not how to answer.
man be who says it is better? His reasons are so childish, that by the like
you may prove, dirt to be better then gold: wherefore I will not stand upon
them.

He nevertheless afterward concludes, that one may purpose constantly with
himself to lead a single life, but so as he may change upon occasion, and this
to be a counsel of expedience, but not of perfection.

Lastly, that if any having the gift of continency, do Vovv, and atfervvard
mar^ie (the gift remaining) they have sinned, which is flat against his own
second rule, which prohibits us to leese our liberty, and to make any thing
unlawful in conscience, which Christian Religion leaves at liberty.

Now to supply M. Perkins his default, who was accustomed to rehearse,
although many times untowardly, yet lightly alvvaies some reasons for the
Catholic party; which in this question he has wholy omitted.

Perkins writes, and what you answer, shall see a true image of popish
dealing, whereby you slubber over the matter, to which you know not what to
say. Is it a wrong to single life, or virginity, to hold that marriage in some
respect is better then it? I will go further then Master Perkins has done, and
not doubt to affirm, that it is simply better then virginity: my reason is,
that it belongs to the perfection of human nature, that there should be
continuance and multiplying of the kind by propagation: beside, God appointed
it as an especial blessing for Adam, when he was in Gods especial favor But
if that estate be worse then the single life, in which he lived before, God did
not bless, but punish him rather by that change: therefore marriage simply is
better. But that virginity might have his due, Master Perkins sets down
presently after, three respects, wherein it is to be preserred before marriage,
all which you do not once name.

Those Christian Fathers dealt unchristianly with Iouinian, who ascribed as
much to virginity as our Savior Christ, or his Apostles gave to it in any
place of Scripture, according to that conclusion of Theodoret. Decret. divine.
de virginit.
Theodoret, who ends his discourse of virginity with these words, Such things
we have received, being appointed and decreed by men endued with the knowledge
of heavenly things, which are such, as do not accuse marriage, but exhort us to
a life void of cares. This Iouinian acknowledged, and worthily denied all
difference of merit betwixt a married and single life, which no enemy of
Iouinian can disprove, no more can you Master Perkins reasons, though you
disgrace them all you can.

Who denies this?
having well tried their own aptness to Vovv virginity; if by good
inspirations, they be thereunto inwardly called. My first reason is this, that
which is more pleasant and grateful unto God, may very well be Vowed to
him, but Virginity is more acceptable to God then marriage. The first
proposition is manifest, and has no other exception against it, but that
which before is confuted, to wit, if we be able to perform it. The second
is denied by them, which we prove in express terms out of S. Paul. He that
joins his Virgin does well, but he that joins her not, does better: and
again of Widows: They shall be more 1. Cor. 7. Esai. 56.
happy by S. Paul's judgment, if they remain unmarried: This may be confirmed
our of Esaias, Where God promises the Eunuch that holds greatly of the thing
that pleases him, that he will give him in his household, and within his
wales a better heritage and name, than if they had bin called sons and
daughters. I will (says God) give them an everlasting name. And also, out of
the book of Wisdom, Blessed is the Eunuch which has Cap. 3.
wrought no unrighteousness, etc. For unto him shall be given the special
gift of faith, and the most acceptable portion in our Lords Temple: for
glorious is the fruit of God: Which is also plainly taught in the Revelations,
Where it is said, that no man could sing that song but 14400. and the cause
Reuelat. 14.
is set down, These be they which have not been defiled with women, for
they are Virgins. To these latter places, M. Perkins anivvereth page 24^. that
to the Eunuch is promised a greater revvard; but, not because of his chastity,
but because he keeps the Lords Sabbath and covenant. but this is said
unadvisedly; for to all others that keep Gods commanments; shall be given a
heavenly revvard: but why shall they have a better heritage, and more
acceptable portion than others, but because of their special prerogative of
chastity?

Theodoret. Decret. divine. de virginit. and ad 1. Cor. 7.
I have showed to be false. To your proof I answer, that the happiness the
Apostle speaks of is that which Theodoret. vbi supra.
Theodoret names, viz. being without care, and having more free liberty to
serve God, as he proves out of the Apostle himself, who shows by his whole
discourse, that he prefers that single life before the married, only in regard
of the present times, and opportunity of serving God generally. This 1. Cor.
7. 26. Verse. 28. Verse. 32. 33.
(says he) is good for the present necessity, verse. 26. such shall have
trouble in the flesh. I would have you without care. The unmarried cares for
the things of the Lord. That of Esai. 56. 4. 5.
Esaias proves nothing to the purpose, for the Prophet speaks not of them that
had made any vow of continency, but of such as were made Eunuchs by men
against their wills, to whom he makes promise, not for their continency, which
was no way voluntary, but for their keeping of his Sabbaths, and choosing the
thing that pleases him, and taking hold of his covenant. The Eunuch, and the
Gentile (says Lyra ad Esai. 56.
Lyra) coming to faith, shall obtain as much grace and glory (other things
alike (...)

Now these young Widows, if the Protestants doctrine were true, not having the
gift of continency, did very well to marry, and were in no sort bound to
keep their Vows, which was not in their power: But the Apostle does not
acquit them of their Vow, but teaches that they were bound to keep it; in
that he pronounces damnation to them if they marry.

1. Tim. 5. 12.
Apostle speaks of it in this place. The first faith, or vow of a Christian to
God, is that general promise of obedience in Baptism, or the undertaking of
the profession of Christianity, as it appears by Hieron. in prooem. in
epist. ad Tit.
Jerome speaking of Marcion and Basilides, two infamous heretics, they are not
worthy of credit (says Jerome) they have forsaken their first faith. But if
you will needs refer this to the matter there particularly in question, the
fault is, not leaving to be a widow, but forsaking the calling in the Church,
which they had of their own will undertaken. This necessarily ensued upon their
marriage, because only widows had that office of looking to the poor and
diseased. It is farther to be observed, that the Apostle seems to lay the
fault upon their wilful wantonness, and not to grant that there was any
necessity of using marriage for a remedy: when such a case falls out, it is
the judgment of the ancient writers, that it is better to marry, then to
continue in uncleanness. We must (says Ad Demetriadem virginem.
Jerome) plainly charge vowed virgins, whose behavior defames, and shames the
holy purpose of virgins, and the glory of the heavenly and angelical family,
that either they marry if they cannot contain, or contain, if they will not
marry. They marry not (says De sancta virginit cap. 34.
Austin) because they cannot without rebuke, yet better were it for them to
marry, then to burn. It may happen (says 2a. 2ae. q 88. art. 10.
Thomas) that in some case a vow may be either utterly ill, or unprofitable, or
an hinderance unto some other good thing of greater weight. And therefore it
must of necessity be determined, that in such a case a vow ought not to be
kept. An adulterers case (says Lib. 4. epist. 2
Cyprian) is worse then his that has betrayed the faith. And Ambrose, when he
had said that a vowed virgin, if she have a mind to marry, commits adultery,
and is made the handmaid of death; yet adds afterward, that she is twice an
adulteress, which is defiled with secret and privy filthiness, faining her
self to be that which indeed she is not.

Aug. cap. 44. de virg. Bed. 1. Luc. Cle. Alex. lib 3 strom. lib. 1. cont.
louin. In apol. 2. ad Aut. Tertul. ap. 2. cap. 9.
and of the blessed Virgin S. Mary, who Vowed perpetual Virginity. And of
the glorious Apostles, as who S. ^rome witnesses, were in part Virgins; and
all after their follovving of Christ, abstained from the company of their
Wives. And of the best Christians in the purest antiquity, who as Iustinas,
one of the auncientest Greek Authors among Christians: And Tertullian his
peer among the Latins, do testify, did live perpetual Virgins.

Out of these examples, we frame this Argument.

Our Captains and ringleaders, who knew well which was the best way; and
whose examples we are to follovv as near as we can, Vovving Virginity: we
must needs esteem that state for more perfect, specially, when as the single
man cares only how to please God, that to be holy in body and mind (as the
Apostle writs) when as the married are choked with cares of this world. And
unless a man had made a league with hell, or were as blind as a Beetle, how
can he ever persuade himself, that to vvallovv in fleshly pleasure and
satisfying of the beastly apperites, is as grateful to God, as to conquer and
subdue them by Fasting and Prayer.

1. Cor. 9. 5. Vxorem says Vatablus, as indeed the order of the ^ords requires.
the like warrant of scripture, whatsoever some have thought, without any
sufficient ground of reason or authority to the contrary. Peter and Philip
(says Stromat. lib. 3. page 97.
Clement of Alexandria) had children; Philip also bestowed his daughters in
marriage; and Paul Non veretur suam appellare coniugem.
is not afraid in a certain Epistle of his to mention his wife, whom he did
not lead about with him, because he Non ma^no ei opus esset ministerio.
had no need of any great service. Your consequence also is very weak. They
were virgins, therefore it was a state of greater perfection. It was more fit
for those times, and their occasions; yea we grant it is a freer kind of life
for Gods service, and therefore they that can live so, do well to use that
their liberty: but this proves not, that single life is simply better then
marriage. That which you add, of wallowing in filthy pleasure, and satisfying
of the beastly appetites, bewraies the beastly opinion you have of marriage,
and shows, that you would be filthy, though you were married: what you are now
as I know not, so I will not judge. But this I will say, that few or no married
men live so vnchastlie and abominably, as See D Downame of Antichrist, lib.
1. c. 6. 4. 5. 6. 1. Cor. 7.
many of your vowed virgins have done, by record of your own stories.

Paul give counsel to the married, to contain during the time of Prayer,
Priests and religious (that must alvvaies be in a readiness to minister the
Sacraments, and to think upon such things as belong unto our Lord) are
therefore upon a great consideration bound to perpetual chastity.



Perkins in all this question vouchsafes scarce once to name, as though
Virgins and Virginity were no English words, or not as plain as continency.

Perkins did very well approve both of the thing and the word: but because it
was not general enough for this question, as not reaching to all that were
single, he rather chose to use the word continency, being of larger extent.

Cyprian, De habitu Virginum: Intitleth Virgins to be the most noble and
glorious person of Christ's flock: and adds, that they shall receive of God
the highest revvard and greatest recompense.

Saint Chrysostom says, Virginity to be the top of perfection, and the Lib.
3. cont. vitup. vit. neces^.
highest typ of virtue.

And Athanasius, De Virginitate; in the end bursteth out into these words: O
Virginity, a treasure that vvasteth not, a garland that wythereth not; the
Temple of God, the Palace of the Holy Ghost, a precious stone, whose price is
unknown to the vulgar, the joy of the Prophets, the glory of the Apostles, the
life of Angels, the Crown of Saints.

S. Ambrose Lib. 1. de Virginibus paulo post init. Virginity is a principal
virtue, and not therefore commendable that it is found in Martyrs, but because
it makes Martyrs: Who can with humane wit comprehend it which nature does
not hold within her laws, it has fetched out of Heaven that it might
imitate on Earth: neither vnsitly has it sought a manner of life in heaven,
which has found a spouse for her in heaven.

This surmounting the clouds, the stars and Angels has found the word of
God in the bosom of his Father; etc. See who list to read more to this
purpose the rest of the Fathers in their works of Virginity; of which most
of them have written. And S. Jerome, who is behind none of the rest, in his
books against Iouinian and Heluidius, all which do most diligently exhort to
Vovv Virginity; do teach how to keep it, and most vehemently inueigh against
all them that do break it. And if any be so mad as to credit rather our
fleshly ministers, than all that honorable and holy senate of the ancient
Fathers, he deserves to live and die in perpetual darkness.

He calls the estate of marriage, ^l^shly and beasily liberty.
teachers, with the lewd example of their dissolute Disciples, have
corrupted ourage with fleshly and beastly liberty: In the other points, I
vvi^l recompense it with brevity.

These hyperbolicall commendations of virginity show the opinion of some
ancient writers concerning it, but prove nothing. We dissuade no man from
continuing a single life, so he be able to overcome that burning, which the
Apostle condemns: yea rather we exhort them, that have the gift, to use it.
But we deny, either that all have it, or that they which have it do please
God any more by the use of it, that they that have it not; but as they employ
it to the better, and more free serving of God.

It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive. Pro. 28. 7. Give me
neither riches nor poverty. Deuteronomy. 28. 22. Poverty is numbered among the curses
of the law: none whereof are to be vowed. And it is the rule of the holy Ghost,
2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. He that will not labor, namely, in some special and
warrantable calling, must not eat. And verse. 12. I exhort that they work with
quietness and eat their own bread. Now when as men live apart from others,
giving themselves only to prayer and fasting, they live in no calling. And it
is against the general vow made in Baptism, because it freeth men from
sundry duties of the moral law, and changes the proper end of man's life.
For every man must have two callings. The first is a general calling of a
Christian, by virtue of which he performs worship unto God, and duties of
love to men. The second is a particular calling, wherein according to his gift,
he must do service to men in some function, pertaining either to the Church or
Commonwealth, whereof he is a member. And the first of these twain must be
performed in the second: and the second in and with the first. The end of man's
life is, not only to serve God by the duties of the first table, but by
serving of man in the duties of the second table to serve God. And therefore
the love of our neighbor is called the fulfilling of the whole law. Romans 13.
10. because the law of God is practiced not apart; but in and with the love of
our neighbor. This being so, it is manifest that vowed poverty in Monkish
life makes many unprofitable members both of Church and Commonwealth.

Perkins acknowledges, men bestovv all they have upon the poor, and give
themselves to Prayer and Fasting: yet he is not ashamed to avouch that this Vow
is against the will of God, and assaieth to prove it: Act. cap. 20. verse. 35.
It is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

Ans. As the very proposition (that it is displeasing to God to cut off all
cares of the world, and to betake our selves wholy to his holy service and
contemplation of heavenly matters) is in it self profane and ungodly, so the
proof thereof is deuoid of natural wit and sense. Mark the Argument: It is
against Gods will to give away all, because it is more blessed to give, than
to receive: Why, if it be a more blessed thing to give, then they please God
better that give. So that this his proof, improues flatly his own assertion:
But the dreamer means perhaps, that if you give all at once, you shall not be
able to give afterward, but rather stand in need to receive.

Reply. But no such humane prudence can be drawn out of that sentence, which
encourages rather to give for the present, then to provide for hereafter.

Paul himself did: which they did best perform, who had sold all they had
and distributed it to the poor, as the example of Paul himself, and the first
Christians does sufficiently declare, who sold all, and laid the price at the
Apostles feet. Act. 4.


The proposition is true, that it is displeasing to God for a man to sever
himself from all cares of the world, to serve him in contemplation, without
respect of any duty to his brethren. For the cares of the world are part of
every man's lot in this life, and the Phil. 1. 23, 24. 25.
good of our brethren is to be preferred for a time, before our own happiness
in heaven: neither is any service of praying and fasting continually, so much
to Gods glory, as a Christian carriage in some lawful calling.

The argument is good: For he that gives away that upon which he should live,
as your Votaries do, brings himself into a less blessed estate, to live on
other men's alms, than (...)

spirit. The like is to be said of hungring and thirsting, being full and
satisfied, which follows in the same place.

Perkins his texts of Scripture against poverty failing him, he fetches about
another way, saying, that it is a rule of the holy Ghost: He that will not
labor (namely, in some special and vvarrantable calling) must not eat. These.
2.


Ans. I allow both the text and the gloss, and find nothing there against
religious persons, whose calling is special perfect, and therefore best
warrantable; not so (says he) because they give themselves to prayer and
fasting: What a profane stupiditie is this? Is not a life given to prayer and
fasting agreeable to the will of God, and Laws of his Church? albeit many
religious men do over and besides very great services to Gods Church, in
preaching, teaching, and writing of most learned books. But suppose they did
nothing else but fast and pray, did they not very well deserve their
sustenance? yes much better than they which travail To fast and pray, is the
general duty of all Christians.
all the year about the providing of it: For in vain do men labor, if God
bless not their work, with seasonable weather, which he does rather at the
prayer and instance of such good innocent souls, that are to be fed with it,
than for the Plough-mans own labors sake. And if by their Fasting, Watching,
and such like afflictions of their bodies, they do partly satisfy for our
superfluous pampering of the flesh, and teach us by their good example to
bridle and correct it: do they not deserve at our hands bodily sustenance? And
who better performs all duties of the second Table than they, being most
obedient to all their Superiors, and not hurting their neighbor in life,
persons, or any manner of their goods? And so in their several callings offend
no honest men, and do much good both unto the Church and commonwealth.



They no way deserve their sustenance, since they have vowed to take no course
whereby they may provide for it. Their prayers do no good, no not so much as to
themselves, being made with a proud opinion, to merit, by a conceited
perfection. A poor husbandman, that labors all the week for his living, and
uses the best means he can to grow in knowledge and obedience to God, may
look for a greater blessing from God, upon his bodily and spiritual labors,
by his own poor prayers, and the supplications of the Congregation in which
he lives, than by all the fasting and praying of the holiest Covent, Abbey, or
Nunnerie in the country.

As for their satisfactions, they are like a broken reed, which will not only
fail him that trusts to it, but hurt him also. I have showed, that we need no
other satisfaction, being delivered by our Savior Christ's sufferings: and
there are few or none, except perhaps the begging Friars, that had not more
need to satisfy for their own idleness and gluttony, than ordinarily any
other kind of men whatsoever; if we may believe either the reports of
travelers, or the records of your own histories.

Can they be said to be obedient to their Superiors, that in the very making
of their vow oftentimes, wilfully disobey their fathers and mothers? Or may
they be thought to hurt none, who live idle upon the sweat of other men's
brows? and are only a charge to the state, whereof they are unprofitable
members? But not to hurt, is a kindness perhaps, to be commended in thieves:
what due praise it can have in a state of perfection, for my part I cannot see.
Which I speak upon supposition, that they are not so hurtful to men and
women, as it is commonly thought.

and all, in the case of confession, that is, when a man for the religion of
Christ is persecuted and constrained to forsake all he has. For then the
second table gives place to the duties of the first. Mark. 10. 29. II. That,
for the time of persecution, men may withdraw themselves (just occasion
offered) and go apart to wildernesses or like places, Hebr. 11. 37. yet for
the time of peace I see no cause of solitary life. If it be alleged, that
men go apart for contemplation and spiritual exercises, I say again that
Gods grace may as well be exercised in the family as in the cloister. The
family is indeed as it were a school of God, in which they that have but a
spark of grace may learn and exercise many virtues, the acknowledgement of
God, invocation, the fear of God, love, bountifulnes, patience, meekness,
faithfulness, etc. Nay here be more occasions of doing or taking good, then be
or can be in a cloister. III. That, we condemn not the old and ancient Monks,
though we like not every thing in them. For they lived not like idle bellies,
but in the sweat of their own brows, as they ought to Zozom. lib. 1. cap 13.
Epiph. bar. 78. August. de Mon. Eccl. li. 2. c. 31. and de opere Monach. cap.
17.
do: and many of them were married: and in their meat, drink, apparel,
rule, vow, and whole course of life, differed from the Monks of this time, even
as heaven from earth.

Perkins confesses, that a man may upon a special calling, s^ll all his
goods, as the Apostles did. What then (good Sir) shall become of your former
arguments? May one then Vow a curse of the Law, and leave off prayer for
neither poverty nor riches, and say that it is not a blesseder thing to give,
then to receive?

All these arguments which were whilom of great force, must now be nothing
worth: because it pleases M. Perkins, the wind now sits in an other corner,
such weather-cockes surely are to be much respected.

Perkins speaks not a word of selling all a man has, but of forsaking it,
when he has some calling from God, which requires such a course for the
following of it, as will not afford a man leisure to look to his worldly
affairs. But this is no wilful casting away the care of our estate, but
preferring the duties especially laid on us by God, before our own business.
Neither is it any vowing of poverty, with a fond conceit of perfection, but a
faithful laboring in our necessary calling, with neglect of the world, in
comparison of our duty. In such a case a man must rely on Gods providence,
and use the best means he can to provide for himself, that he may not be
chargeable to other, but helpful rather: not renouncing all propriety in
worldly things, but carefully saving, and thriftily spending that, which it
pleases God to send by any good means whatsoever. This overthrows no piece
of any argument Master Perkins brought before.



Perkins purpose, to show that our goods, in some cases, might be forsaken,
though poverty might not be drawn upon us, by any proud vow of supposed
perfection.

He does not condemn those Monks, though he thinks many things they used not
warrantable. The report was (as Lib. 1. cap. 14.
Zozomen says) that Ammon the Monk of Egypt, by the importunity of his
friends, married a wife, though he never companied with her. Which how he
might with good conscience refuse, being married, let them judge that read
what the 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4. (...)
Apostle writes of this matter; yet (as they say) he lived with her eighteen
years in that course, before she was brought into the liking of a Monkish
life. But belike it was lawful then for them to marry, and no man can excuse
this Ammon of great sin, that would adventure to marry one, of whose
continency and willingness to contain, he could have no knowledge before
marriage. Other Monks that were married ere they became Monks, could not vow
without consent of their wives.

If laboring at vacant times be in practice among many religions (as indeed
there is a multitude of religions among you Papists) it is but a work of
supererogation above their calling; for their profession is idleness. But that
this will not serve the turn, De oper. monach. c. 17.
Austin shows directly, enioyning it as a matter of necessity.

Perkins has not a word, wherefore I will briefly supply his want and prove it
to be very grateful to God to sell all, and give it to the poor.

I omit the example of our blessed Savior, (who would not have any poor
cottage of his own, so much as to rest his head in, but would wholly live of
alms) and come unto his heavenly doctrine. He teaches a young man whom he
loved, in flat words, That if he would be perfect, he should Matthew. 19.
go and sell all he had, and give it to the poor, and come and follow him, and
then should have a treasure in heaven. These words are so express and evident,
that there can be but one way to shift from them, which M. Perkins fl^eth unto
page, 244. to wit, that these words were only meant unto that young man, and not
to be applied unto any others, no more than those words to Abraham of
sacrificing his son Isaac. But this seely shift of our poor Protestants is
confuted, manifestly in the same Chapter of S. Matthew, where a little after S.
Peter says. Lord, behold we have left all things, and have followed thee, what
reward shall we therefore have: We have done (as S. Jerome expounds it, and
the very sequel of the text does plainly require) that which thou command
in the words before, to that young man. What answer made our Savior? That his
commandment was only meant unto that young man, and that they had done
foolishly in so doing? nothing less, but promises that they shall therefore
sit with him in twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And that
whosoever would forsake Father, Mother, Lands, Goods, etc. for his sake, should
receive an hundredth fold, and possess life everlasting. Can any thing be more
plain out of the word of God it self, than that, not this or that man, but
whosoever shall forsake all for Christ, does very blessedly?

blame Master Perkins for saying nothing in defense of your Popish party? For
if all you offer to prove were granted you, all were nothing to the purpose.
Say it be grateful to God to sell all and give it to the poor: does it
follow hereupon, that therefore it is lawful to vow wilful poverty, as a
state of perfection? I trow not. But that is the question betwixt us.

You might have done well to omit it indeed, being so little to the matter.
For what kind of conclusion call you this? Our Savior would not have any
poor cottage of his own: Therefore poverty may be vowed as a state of
perfection: or therefore it is greater perfection to have no house, than to
have one. Our Savior being to travel from place to place, both for the
preaching of the Gospel, and his own safety, thought it not convenient to
have any certain dwelling place: yet your Monks, Friars and Nuns have, and
those the pleasantest and richest for the soil and air, that can be found in
the whole countries where they are. But what did our Savior sell, that he
might thereby fall into wilful poverty?

His example helps you not: let us see his doctrine, he teaches a young man,
you say, whom he loved, that if he would be perfect, he should sell all he had
and give it to the poor, and follow him, and then he should have treasure in
heaven. First for our Saviors loving him, which yet Matthew. 19. 21
Matthew records not, but Marc. 10. 21.
Mark, who leaves out that clause of being perfect, it is more then plain,
that this cannot be understood of any special love. For neither did the man
believe in him, as the Messiah, and he was falsely conceited of his own
righteousness, than which nothing is a greater hinderance to salvation, and
therefore nothing less beloved by our Savior Christ. This love therefore
signifies not an approbation of his vain brag, or a desire of making him
perfect, but either a pitying of his conceit, or some kind gesture used toward
him: which later signification especially both the Sea ^^nius on Marc. 10. 21.
Greek and Syriake words will well admit. Secondly I answer, that our Savior
does not intend to show him how he may be perfect, but by urging him to sell
that he had, means to discover his want of love to God, and his neighbor.
That he meant not to persuade him to any perfection, it is evident. First,
because no man, without true faith, which this Iusticiary wanted, can come any
thing near to perfection. Secondly, for that a man may 1. Cor. 13, 2.
sell all that he has, etc. and yet not be perfect. For single life, in your
account, is a matter of no small perfection. But our Savior would make his
vanity in the opinion of his own righteousness, apparent to him and other, as
it fell out indeed. For refusing to obey him in that matter, he bewrayed his
covetousness, which he preferred before following our Savior, whom he
acknowledged to be a worthy teacher, and before the love of his brethren.
Lastly I say, the chief point of perfection here mentioned is not selling of
our goods, but following of Christ, which is a duty Luc. 9. 23.
belonging to all Christians, so that without it no man is a Christian. In the
following of Christ by the works of charity (says your Lyra ad Matthew. 19. 21.
gloss) perfection consists principally in wilful poverty, but as in the
beginning, by way of renouncing that which hinders, and disposing of us,
because by it the care of temporal things is taken away, which hinders the
soul from the love of God, and the soul is fitted to free contemplation of
God. To sell all and give to the poor suffices not to perfection (says Libr.
3. ad Matthew. 19.
Jerome) unless after the despising of riches we follow Christ, that is,
leaving evil do good. And after, Many leave riches, but not follow our Lord.
He follows our Lord who does imitate him, and treads in his steps. And again
afterward, Because it suffices not to leave, he adds that which is perfect,
and have followed me. So that this is no state of perfection, but rather a
remedy against our being drawn away from following Christ, which was as
necessary to salvation both before and under the law, as it is now in this
light of the Gospel: and if without wilful poverty it cannot be done,
doubtless neither those worthies of the former ages, Abraham, Moses, David, etc.
could follow Christ in duties of charity, and we not only may, but must sell
all we have, that we may follow him.

It was spoken and intended only to that young man; neither does Peter say that
the Apostles had sold all, and given it to the poor, which is no where
recorded of them in the scriptures, but that they had forsaken all and followed
him, that is, had left their ordinary callings (by which in likelihood they
might have thriuen) to attend upon our Savior, and to be employed in his
service. And to the following of Christ either only or specially does that of
Jerome belong. Peter speaks confidently (says Libr. 3. ad Matthew. 19.
Jerome) we have left all. And because it is not sufficient only to leave, he
adds that, which is perfect, And have followed thee, we have done that Quod
iussisti. Mat. 4. 19. 22.
thou commaundest, that is, we have given over the hope of our increase in
worldly riches rather then we would not serve thee. But by the way let me put
you in mind, if you will needs have that speech of Ieromes belong to wilful
poverty, you must needs make it a commandment by your own interpretation.

It is not only a counsel but a commandment, that every man should forsake
his goods rather then his profession of Christianity, or any special duty,
to which God shall call him. If any man (says our Luc. 14. 26.
Savior) come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple.

Go and sell all, to be an heavenly counsel given generally unto all. S.
Antonie took them spoken to him, In vita eius apud Athanas. S. Augustine to
him: Ad Hilarium. To omit latter religious Epist. 89.
men, I will only cite S. Jerome who does briefly both declare our Catholic
doctrine, and shows also who was the Author of the Protestants opinion, saying
thus: To that which thou affirmest, that they do better, who Lib. cont.
Vigilant.
use their goods, and do by little and little distribute to the poor, the
profits of their possessions, then others who selling them, give all at once,
not I, but our Lord shall answer: Jf thou vvilt be perfect, go and sell all
thou have and give it to the poor. Christ speaks to him that will be
perfect (not to the young man only) who with the Apostles, forsook both
Father ship and nets: That which thou Vigilantius commendest, obtains the
second and third degree: so that the first (which is to sell all at once) be
preferred before the second and third: Which is, to give by little and little,
the fruit of our revenues to the poor.

knowledge of the ground they built upon, which was a misconceit of our
Saviors speech, begun at the first by some man, who did not sufficiently weigh
the place, and continued from one to another, without any due examination, till
it had got such strength, that it carried away the best learned, who contemning
the world, were easily persuaded to think themselves to be in an estate of
perfection.

Act. (...).
brought the price of them, and laid it at the Apostles feet: and more yet
enforce it by the fact of Ananias and Saphira, his wife, who having sold all
theirs, presented but part of the money unto the Apostles, and reserved the
rest unto themselves. Belike they were of M. Perkins his mind, that it is
better to give then to receive, and therefore kept part to that purpose; but
they therefore were both punished with present death: Which proves inuincibly,
both how laudable it is to sell all, and how dangerous to halte in such holy
works.

But to avoid prolixitie, I do but point at the places: And that Ananias; as
the ^est had promised this to God (which is a Vow) it appears in the text,
where it is said, that he lied not unto men, but unto God, in not per^orming
his promise.

And here we deduce very clearly, that such a Vow is much pleasing unto God,
thus: That which is commended by our Saviors own both example and doctrine,
and was practiced by the Apostles and most holy Christians, that may be Vowed
very laudablie: but to sell all and give it to the poor is such.

Act. 2. 4.
is it not said of them, that they sold all they had; yea the contrary may
reasonably be gathered by the facts of Act. 4. 37.
Barnabas and Act. 5. 1.
Ananias, of whom it is recorded, that they sold each of them a possession that
he had, and laid down the money at the Apostles feet. Now to imagine that they
had no other goods and chattels but that land, nor any moueables, is a conceit
unwarrantable by any reason.

Ananias and Sapphiras mind was to make a show of more bounty then they had
any will to perform. That they had made any vow, or promise to God of any such
sale, cannot be proved by the text, but rather the contrary, because the
Apostle Peter says, that it was in his choice before he sold it, whether he
would sell it or no, and that after he had sold it, it was in his own power,
viz. to give all, or half of it as he thought good. The lie he made was to say
that he had brought in all the money he sold it for, whereas he kept back part.

I have stood the longer upon this argument, because you bring no more but
this, and think this unanswerable. Therefore also beside your custom you draw
it into a Syllogism now at the last. That (say you) which is commanded by our
Saviors own example and doctrine, and was practiced by the Apostles, and most
holy Christians, that may be vowed very laudably: But to sell all, and give it
to the poor is such: Therefore it may be vowed very laudably.


I deny your proposition, because some things have bin commended and practiced
by our Savior, his Apostles, and other holy Christians, of which a man may not
make a vow. For example, both he and they have commended, and endured
persecution for the Gospel: yet does it not follow that therefore a man may
wilfully by a vow bring persecution upon himself, as by the vow of poverty
you cast your selves into a state of beggary.

Your assumption also is false. Neither our Savior, his Apostles, nor other
holy Christians (I speak of the examples you bring out of the Acts) have
practiced any such matter, as in my former answers it has appeared. To which I
add yet further, that they in the Acts so gave that they did give, that
themselves had their relief out of it, if need required, as well as any other.

Of the conclusion I say, that it contains not the whole matter in question
betwixt us, though it be rightly drawn from the premises. For though we
should grant that vows of selling all and giving it to the poor may laudably
be made (which is false) yet is it not proved, that a man may vow wilful
poverty, and refuse to possess any worldly goods. They in the Acts, if they
gave all away, which is al- (...)

made in our Creation, we remember nothing of it, nor never heard speak of it
by any good author, not that we make, or renew any Vows when we receive the
blessed Sacrament. These be but novelties of words, and the rauing of some
decayed wits.

Perkins, for he makes not comparison betwixt your account of baptism, and
ours, but betwixt your estimation of the vow in Baptism, and these other 3.
vows devised by your selves. And though with you the covenant in baptism be
no vow, yet with Ad Psalm. 75
S. Austin it is. What must we vow? says he upon that place which you allege
to prove the lawfulnes of vowing. He answers, to believe in him, to hope for
everlasting life of him, to live well, according to a common manner of living
well.

The vow in our creation Master Perkins calls the bond, by which we are tied to
obedience in respect that we hold all we have of God by creation. As the
benefits sealed to us in Baptism are renewed in the Lords supper, every time
we receive it; so by us in like sort the promise or vow made in baptism is
also to be renewed, which is implied in that name of the sacrament, which
signifies (...).
thanksgiving.

The ninth point. Of Jmages. Our consent.
Conclus. I. We acknowledge the civil use of images as freely and truly as
the church of Rome does. By civil use I understand, that use which is made of
them in the common societies of men, out of the appointed places of the solemn
worship of God. And this to be lawful, it appears because the arts of
painting and grauing are the ordinance of God: and to be skillful in them is
the gift of God, as the example of Bozaleel, and Aholiab declare, Exodus 35. 30.
This use of Images may be in sundry things. I. In the adorning and setting
forth of buildings; thus Solomon beautified his throne with the image of lions.
And the Lord commanded his temple to be adorned with the images of palm
trees, of pomegranates, of bulls, cherubes, and such like. II. It serves for
the distinction of coins: according to the practice of Emperors and princes
of all nations. When Christ was asked, Matthew. 22. whether it was lawful to give
tribute to Caesar or no? he called for a penny and said, whose Image or
superscription is this? they said, Cesars: he then said, give to Caesar the
things that are Cesars: not condemning but approving the stamp or image upon
his coin. And though the Jews were forbidden to make images in way of
representation, or worship of the true God: yet the Sycle of the sanctuary,
which they used, specially after the time of Moses, was stamped with the image
of the Almon tree, and the pot of Manna. III. Images serve to keep in
memory friends deceased whom we reverence. And it is like, that hence came
one occasion of the images that are now in use in the Roman church. For in the
days after the Apostles men used privately to keep the pictures of their
friends departed: and this practice after crept into the open congregation:
and at last, superstition getting head, images began to be worshipped.

Conclus. II. We hold the historical use of images to be good and lawful: and
that is, to represent to the eye the acts of histories, whether they be
humane, or divine: and thus we think the histories of the Bible may be painted
in private places.

Conclus. III. In one case it is lawful to make an image to testify the
presence or the effects of the Majesty of God, namely when God himself gives
any special commandment so to do. In this case Moses made and erected a
brazen serpent, to be a type, sign, or image to represent Christ crucified.
Ioh. 3. 14. And the Cherubs over the mercy seat served to represent the
Majesty of God, to whom the Angels are subject. And in the second commandment
it is not simply said, Thou shall not make a graven image: but with limitation,
Thou shall not make to thy self, that is, on thine own head, upon thine own
will and pleasure.

Perkins in his first conclusion) used privately to keep the Pictures of their
friends departed; which afterward (says he) by abuse came to be set in
Churches and worshipped.

This by the way is a very vvil^ull perverting of those words (to thy self)
which cannot signify, but, to thine own use, that is, to adore them, as is
plainly deelared in the text follovving.

Perkins words as please you. Here (as also otherwhere) you set them down by
halues, as if he certainly affirmed that, which he does but gather by
likelihood. It is like (says he) that hence came one occasion of the images
that are now in use in the Roman Church.

Perkins knew the meaning to be otherwise, which is not to be thought of any
man upon a bare presumption. It may be also he did rather so expound it,
because in Judge. 2. 19. Psalm. 106. 29. 39
diverse places of scripture where the Jews idolatry is reproved, they are
charged to have followed their own Adinuentiones.
inventions, as your Latin translates.

IV. The right images of the new Testament, which we hold and acknowledge, are
the doctrine and preaching of the Gospel, and all things that by the word of
God pertaines thereto. Gal. 3. Who has bewitched you that ye should not obey
the truth to whom Jesus Christ was before described in your sight and among you
crucified. Hence it follows that the preaching of the word is as a most
excellent picture in which Christ with his benefits are lively represented unto
us. And we dissent not from Origin. contra Ce^s. lib. 8. who says, We have no
images framed by any base work, but by such as are brought forth and framed by
the word of God, namely patterns of virtue, and frames resembling Christians.
He means that Christians themselves are the images of Christians.



Council. Constantinop. universe. 7. Action 6.
These are the only pictures that we need, Preaching of the Word, administering
of the Sacraments, and considering the lives of the true Saints, as they are
recorded in the Scripture, and offer themselves to our knowledge, by good
histories and daily sight.

Perkins affirms, the doctrine of the Church of England; which I would
believe, if I did not see the Magistrates publicly to take away Pictures from
Catholics, to tear and burn the^, which were kept but in private places: yea,
their more seruent disciples, cannot abide a Cross standing by the high way
side, or in any, never so profane a place, but either they bea^e and hale them
down, or most despitefully deface them: bevvraying indeed unto all moderate
men, their cankered stomaks against him that died on the Cross: who He will
consound you Idolaters.
will one day (vv^on he pleases) confound them. But to cover this their
malice, they cast over it the mantle of zeal, saying that the Papists make
them their Gods, and that therefore they are to be abolished.

becommed you therefore to forbear both the accusing of the Magistrate, for
doing against our doctrine, and the condemning of our doctrine, as being other
than it is. For the people, though many amongst them justly mislike crosses,
because they are by you ordinarily abused to Idolatry; yet I think you can
bring few examples of any such disorderly course, and I am persuaded none at
all, which the Magistrate has not corrected.

D. B. P. These rhetorical explanations prove nothing. You dvvell by ill
neighbors.
any Protestants ever were or will be: And that small reverence which we
yield unto Images, is more different from the honor and obedience due unto
Almighty God, than the cope of heaven is distant from the center of the earth.

You zealous of the true honor of the living God, whose glory you turn into
the likeness of a mortal man, and of a pigeon? whom you dishonor by stocks and
stones? whom you crush up into a baggage wafer cake? whom you devour and
swallow down into your bellies, and cast out into a place not fit to be named?
There never was the like senseless and barbarous Idolatry among the Gentiles.
If some reverence you give be small, some again is a degree at the least above
that, as (...).
the very words show. But tell me, is it small reverence to give the same
honor to the image, which belongs to the party whose image it is? Do you not
worship the images of the Trinity, and of Christ alone, with divine worship?
Are not you they who maintain that idolatrous second Council of Nice, in
which Carol. mag. de imag. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Constantine Bishop of Constance in Cyprus blasphemously affirmed, that he
received and embraced honorable, holy and venerable Images, according to that
service of adoration, which he gave to the consubstantiall and quickening
Trinity? But of this afterward.

Perkins had to allow of the civil and historical use of Images: I think it
expedient to note here, how in the purest antiquity, Images were made and
respected.

That famous Image of our blessed Savior, which the woman cured of the
bloody fl^xe, set up in Brass at Caesarea Philippi. upon a Pillar of Matthew. 9.
stone, is not unknown unto any that have read the Ecclesiastical History of
Eusebius, Lib. 7. cap. 14. And how God did approve it by giving virtue unto an
herb when it did grow, to touch the hem of that Picture, to cure all manner of
diseases. Which Image, Eusebius himself did see standing until his days,
which was ^300 years ago, as he there testifies: as also, that he saw diverse
others, namely, of Saint Peter and Paul.

Julian the Apostata for malice against our Savior, caused to be broken down,
and set up his own Image in the place of it: but his was presently with
lightning and thunder from heaven consumed into ashes, and our Saviors, by the
Christians Lib. 5. hist. cap. 20.
carried into their Church, as witnesses Sozomenus.

Eusebius delivers that story as a matter of report, not knowledge: They say
that her house is yet to be seen, and that admirable monuments of that benefit
our Savior bestowed upon her, are yet remaining. And it is worth the
observing, that Eusebius makes a difference betwixt that which he knew by the
Gospel, and that which he heard by report. Of her healing by our Savior
Christ he speaks thus: Whom we know by the holy Gospels, that our Savior
freed from her disease. Of her dwelling at Caesarea Philippi, of her house, and
that Image, with the herb and virtue of it: Ferunt.
They say, of the Image also in particular, they say this statue has the image
of Jesus. Neither does he affirm, that he saw it himself: It remained also
(says Eusebius) until our times, as it may be seen of them that go into
that City. But I wonder at your confidence, that ever you would add a word of
the Images of Peter and Paul; Eusebius report and judgment being in that very
place against your opinion of Images. Let us hear himself speak: It may not
seem strange (says Eusebius presently upon the former words) that such of the
Gentiles as were cured by our Savior did these things: seeing we have seen
the Images of his Apostles, viz. of Paul and Peter, and of Christ himself kept
painted in tables: because the ancients, by an heathenish custom of the
Gentiles, were w^nt in that manner to honor those whom they counted their
preseruers. This woman being a Heathen, and perhaps converted, in her ignorance
did like the rest of the Heathen.

The miracle was received, and delivered by Eusebius only upon report; of the
continuance whereof, with the Images enduring, he says nothing. But in this
case I will only put you in mind of that, which Gab^. Biel in can. (...) lee.
49.
one of your own schoolmen writes concerning such miracles, that they are
wrought often times by the operation of Devils, to deceive the inordinate
worshippers of such Images, God permitting, and the infidelity of men
necessarily requiring it. Such might this be, if there were any such.

Sozom. hist. lib. 5. cap. 20.
Sozomen notes in his preface to the story, that this destroying of Iulians
image, showed the power of Christ, and his anger against Julian: but this
proves not that our Savior had any liking of the Image; it was Iulians
malice, as your self call it, that provoked our Savior, not the respect of
the Image. The latter part you report very craftily, as if the Christians had
set up that Image in their Church: but Sozomen says not so; only he tells
us, that when the Gentiles had dragged it to pieces, the Christians gathered up
the pieces, and laid them up in their Church; where they were kept till the
time of his writing.

Abgarus Prince of Edessa, as witnesses Metaphrastes In vita Constantini,
Damascen, and Euagrius, who does in the same chapter rehearse a notable
miracle, wrought by the same Image, to deliver Lib. 10. de imagi. Lib. 4.
hist. cap. 28.
the Town from the sacking of the Persians. And in his fifth book and
eighteenth chapter, records another miracle done by the Image of the blessed
Virgin Mary in a prison at Antioch.

Damasc. orthod. fid. lib. 4. cap. 17.
chief author you allege for this fable, writ 800. years after Christ, and
sets it down but (...).
as a report; as you might have seen, if you had looked in him; which by
Damasc. de imagine. lib. 10.
the wrong quotation, it should seem you did not. Lib. 1. c. 13.
Eusebius, who writ the Ecclesiastical history 400. years before Damascen,
and set down that matter out of the record of Abgarus own country, has not
one word of any such Image. Yea, in his Citante Gregor. Neocaes. in Council.
Nice. secundo, action 6.
epistle to the Empress Constantine Augusta, who writ to him for an image of
Christ, he shows that her desire is not warrantable, and discourses that
matter at large. Lib. 4. c. 26.
Euagrius another of your authors, about six hundred years after Christ,
tells such a story as you mention; not upon his own, but Procopius credit,
who lived in the same age with him, and writ that miracle by the report of I
know not A veteribus co^memorata.
what old men. It is enough to discredit it, that Eusebius makes no mention of
any such Image, though he writ the history of that matter betwixt our Savior
and Abgarus at large; and that, as I said before, out of the records of Edessa,
where Abgarus ruled. If these former authors cannot procure credit to that
story, what should Simeon Metaphrastes do, who Anno 950 Coccius in Thesauro
Catholico.
came some hundreds of years after Procopius, and Euagrius? But of this and
like miracles, if they were indeed wrought, we heard Biels judgment before.

Nicodemus his secret Disciple, which afterward was taken by the Jews, and
in despite of Christ, was crucified, and to their confusion, much blood
issued out of it.

This history is in the ^orke of S. Athanasius that sound pillar of the Church,
entitled De passione imaginis, and is either his, or some other very ancient
and grave vvriters. For it is related in the seventh general council. Act. 4.

Athanasius would record any such story, his Contr. Gentes seu contra idola.
other writings are so directly against all Idolatry. But which of the two
copies will ye ascribe to Athanasius? For he that reads them advisedly, will
rather take them for two several men's doings, than think either of them to be
written by Athanasius. And therefore Praefat. in Athanas.
Nanius a great Doctor of Louaine, makes no bones to place it amongst those
writings, which are none of Athanasiuses: neither indeed was it ever known,
till that idolatrous second Council of Nice, eight hundred years after Christ
very near. Yea the story it self seems to have bin younger, than Athanasius,
almost four hundred years: For In chronic. Anno 775.
Sigibort affirms it happened in the year 775: Histor. ^onibard. legend. cap.
30. D. B. P. Lib. 1. collectam. Lib. 14. hist. 1. 2
the history of Lombardie, in the year 750.

Luke the Euangell drew the Picture of our blessed Lady, is registered by
Theodorus Lector 1000. years ago, and Metaphrasies, In vita Lucae, and
Nicephorus.

Those fragments of Theodor. in Callecta.
Theodorus gathering deserve no such credit, that a thing done more than five
hundred years before he was borne, and recorded by none of his ancients, that
are known, should, upon his bare word, be held for true. But let us grant as
much as you desire, that S. Luke drew the Virgin Mary's counterfeit. What of
that? will it follow that therefore it is fit or lawful to make Images, now in
this certain danger of Idolatry, when no man knows any more of the Virgins
favor and feature, than he does of our great Grandmother Euahs? It should
seem Callistus lib. 2. cap. 24.
Nicephorus did not give any great credit to the story, though Theodorus had
written it long before him. For he brings it in with a suspicious preface: It
is said: And I marvel, if you read it in Nicephorus your self, that you
add not the rest of his report, in that place, of the Evangelist Lukes
picturing our Savior also, and the chief of his Apostles. Simeon Metaphrastes
is too young to witness a matter, done so many years before his birth.

Tertullian, an author of the second hundredth year after Christ, has Lib. 2.
de pudicitia.
left written, that the Image of Christ in shape of a shepherd carrying a sheep
on his shoulders, was engraven upon the holy Chalices used in the Church.

Tertul. lib. 1. de pudicit.
Tertullian has left this written, that the image of a Shepherd carrying a
sheep, was engraven upon the Cups or Chalices: but he never gives any
signification of the holiness of those Cups, nor approbation of the picture,
further than to make them serve his purpose, to show, that by the sheep all
kind of men are signified, as well Heathen as Christians. And surely he that
reads Tertul. de idololat.
his book of Idolatry, and considers that he makes Idols and Images all one
for their nature, will not think him any favorer of Images.

Chrysostom, they were so common, that they were carried in rings, drawn on
cups, painted in Chambers. See Theodoret. Jn histor. relig. in vita Simeonis
Stelitae. Aug. lib. 2. de cons. Euang. cap. 10. And the 7. Synod Act. 4.

This briefly of Images in general: Now a word or two of the sign of the
Cross, which our Protestants have banished from all their followers:
Nevertheless it cannot be denied to have been in most frequent use among the
best Christians of the Primitive Church.

Chrysostomes time, and in all times and places, where the Art of grauing and
painting was used, have Images in Rings, Cups, Chambers. But what Images, or to
what purpose? you neither tell us what they were, nor quote the place, that we
may look and examine the matter.

Hist. Theod. in Simeone cap. 26.
Theodoret speaks not of Images in Rings, Cups, or Chambers, but only tells of
a report, that the people of Rome did set up little Images of Simeon in all In
Officina^, vestibulis, and p^rticibus.
their shopdoores, and walking places, or galleries. But Artificers are no fit
judges in such controversies; and yet it is but a report that they did so.

Aug. lib. 1. de cens. Euang. cap. 10.
Austin jesting at them, who say that our Savior Christ writ certain books to
his Apostles Peter and Paul; wherein the art whereby he wrought his miracles
was contained: I belecue (says he) they hit upon these two Apostles, as the
men to whom he writ, because they had seen him and them in many places painted
together. But what approbation gives he to the use of these pictures? So (says
he) they deserve to err, that seek Christ and his Apostles, not in the holy
books, but upon painted walls. As for that Council. Nicen. 2.
idolatrous Synod, it is ridiculous to urge the authority of that against us,
when you know we wholly disclaim it, and plead against it from the Council.
Francofor.
Council of Franckford, and the book Carolus magnus de imagine.
of Charlemaigne the Emperor, in both which it was refuted and condemned. If
you bring no better proof for the Cross in particular, than you have for
mages in general, I doubt me the Protestants will not repeal the act of
banishment made against it, whatsoever you talk of the most frequent use
thereof among the best Christians in the Primitive Church.

Tertullian has these words, At every going forward and return, when De
corona militis.
we dress us and pull on our shoes, when we wash and sit down, at the
lighting of Candels, and entering into our Chambers, finally, when we set
ourselves to any thing, we make the sign of the Cross on our foreheads.

because, as you say, it is the form that you worship which is made, though it
continue not, and for that your Divines maintain the worshipping of it even
outwardly, as I will show, let it pass in the rank where you have set it.
Now that the sign of the cross is so to be worshipped, first Bella m. de
imag. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Bellarmine shows, where he says, The sign of the cross which is made upon
the forehead, or in the air, is holy, and to be worshipped. Costerus in
Enchir. de sanct. cruce, cap. 11.
Costerus his fellow Jesuit speaks more plain, Christians (says he) ever
since Christ's time, have always worshipped with great reverence both the wood
of our Lords cross it self, and the sign of the cross, with which they daily
fence themselves. Suarez in Thom par. 1. disp. 56. sect. 3.
Suarez another Jesuit is more plain then he, The sign of the cross (says
he) is worthy of reverence and adoration, for it has the use and
signification of a Sacrament, And it skils not that it is made in a matter, or
by an action that passes away, because the only difference of the matter when
the fashion is all one, hinders not the adoration. Jacob, de Graph. decis. aur.
lib. 2. c. 12 sect. 15.
Iacobus de Graphijs gives also the reason of this, We worship it (says he)
with divine honor, for that it puts us in mind of our Lords passion; which is
performed by the sign of the cross on the forehead, as well as by a cross
painted on the wall. Lastly, Vasq. de ador. cultu lib. 3. cap. 4. number. 61. page
493.
Gabriell Vasquez says, that the cross of Christ, by what means soever
expressed, is worthy of veneration, as well as the cross it self on which he
suffered.

That the cross was in common use among the ancient Christians, it was never
denied, yet have we no record of it in any ancient authentical writer before
Ireneus, as Fulke against Marti. Art. 1. fol. ^38.
Doctor Fulke has truly avouched against Martial.

As for the counterfeit writings of Ignat. epist. ad Philip.
Ignatius, Martial. epist. ad Burdeg.
Martialis of Burdeaul. and Dionys. Eccles. hierar. cap. 2. 4. 5. 6.
Dionysius Areopagita, both the style and the matter refute the titles, and
bewray partly ignorance even in the language, and partly authors of later
times. Xystus Betul. ad Lact. lib. 4. cap. 27. Instit.
Xystus Betuleius would have us believe his word, that the ceremony of crossing
was used even when the Apostles laid on their hands, but neither does the
scripture affirm any such thing, neither brings he any authority or reason to
prove it. But let the author of it be unknown as he is, yet if the occasion
and use of it were certain and warrantable, there were more reason to find
fault with the leaving of it. But who can resolve us of this doubt? August. in
Psalm. 141. and de verb. Do^^. ser. 18. and de verb. Apost. ^erm. 8.
Austin seems to be very uncertain, fetching this custom of crossing from a
desire to make profession of Christianity in the sight of the pagans. Aug. de
Catechi^. rudib. cap. ^0 and in Ioa. (...) 55. ad cap. 1^.
He seems otherwhere to attribute it to an imitation of the Jewish Ceremony,
in marking the door posts with the blood of the paschall lamb. What should I
speak of the doubt concerning the form it self, which is the thing that you
professedly worship? What is that form? the sau^^oir or S. Andrews cross?
resembling as some think not the cross of our Savior, but the (...) X (...)
(...).
first letter of his name in Greek, Eusebius. in vit. Constant. lib. 1. cap. 25.
which also was set on the top of Constantines standerd. Or is it nothing else
but two cross lines, cutting each other in a right angle, as it is commonly
made, which some will have to be resembled by that standerd of Constantines,
the staff and the baner making such a cross, Ambros. ser. 56.
like to the mast and the sail yard. It is all one what the form was if the
use were good and lawful. But how shall that be auowed when it is not certain
what it was. All which notwithstanding we are desirous so to interpret the
ancients concerning this point, as that we may free them from superstition if
it be possible. We would gladly therefore expound their speeches of the
efficacy and virtue of the cross, not of the wood nor of the form, but of
the passion and sufferings of our Savior Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 17. 18. Gal. 2.
16. and 6. 14. Ephesians. 2. ^6. Phil. 3. 16. Col. 1. 20.
in which sense the scripture speaks of it most truly and gloriously. I could
to this purpose allege diverse places out of the Fathers, but I must needs
confess that I can bring many other out of their writings which will not bear
that exposition. What if I should say that they used it only as an outward
gesture when they prayed to God for any blessing, and therefore continually
signed themselves as Tertul. de coron militis.
Tertullian, and August. de ^ectit. ^ath. conue^ and de tempor. ser. 1^0.
Austin show? I could cite some places, by which this conjecture might be made
somewhat likely; yea I could add hereunto the judgment of your late Jesuits,
who Coster. Enchir. de cruce. c. 11. page 360.
acknowledge that use of the cross amongst them, and Vasquez de adora. cultu
lib. 3. cap. 5. number. 7. p. 500.
deny that it puts any virtue into the thing that is signed. But neither would
this content you, and many speeches of the ancients are such as can admit no
such interpretation. Wherefore all that I will answer is this, that howsoever
the use of crossing (as it was amongst the Fathers within 200. years after our
Saviors ascension, and for a long time afterward) cannot be sufficiently
warranted by any ground of scripture: yet the Cross was never made an Idol,
by any outward worship amongst them, as it is altogether with you Papists.
Whereupon it follows that the testimonies which you allege out of the Fathers
are falsely applied by you to countenance such Idolatry as they never dreamed
of.

Ambrose exhort, us to begin all our works with the sign of the Sermon. 43.
Cross.

Ambrose I answer more particularly, first, that your quotation of his Ambr.
ser. 84.
84. Sermon is false, for there is not a word of any such matter in all that
Sermon. Secondly, that in Ambr. ser. 43.
the place you mean he says not we must begin all our works with the sign of
the cross, but rather speaks of prayer, according as before I expounded him.
We must (says Ambrose) when we rise give thanks to God, and Omne diei opus in
signo facere saluatoris. 11 S. In loan.
do every work we take in hand all the day in the sign of our Savior, that
is, with prayer to Christ.

Augustine, What is that ensign of Christ, which all men know, but the Cross
of Christ, the which sign, unless it be made on the foreheads of the
faithful, yea, on the water by which they are regenerate, and on the Oil
and Chrisme, wherewith they are anointed, and on the sacrifice vvherevvith
they are nourished, not one of them are orderly and duly administered. Our
Protestants then that have neither holy Oil, nor sacrifice to make the Cross
upon, are in pitiful taking.

Aug. in ^^a. tract. 118.
Austins days the Sacrament was appointed to be so administered, and otherwise
the action was not R^ perficitur.
duly and orderly performed; yet we may and do baptize well enough, as long as
we keep the order commanded by our Savior, and practiced by his Apostles:
Baptize (says Matthew. 28. 19
he) in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy ghost, which they
did as occasion offered it self in any common water, without oil or cross.

D. B. P. And with him is ansvvered. Ca^^^h. 4. You (...) (...) Him. De Spirit
sanct. 27.
same sign of the Cross.

S. Cyrill agreethfully with Tertullian, saying: Make this sign of the Cross
both eating and drinking, both sitting and standing, and walking and speaking,
in sum, at all times.

Saint Basil accounts this making of the sign of the Cross among some of
the principal Traditions of the Apostles.

Basil. de Spirit. sanct. c. 27.
Basil lived 300. years after the Apostles, and recites other customs as
Apostolical traditions, which have neither any warrant by likelihood of
reason, nor some of them allowance by the practice of your own Church. Turning
to the East when we pray, one of his traditions has no ground of reason: so
the soul be present with God (says Eucher. in lib. Reg. comment. lib. 2. cap.
58.
Eucherius) there is no commandment for the site of the body. And Socrat.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 21.
Socrates writes, that the Christians of Antioch turned to the west when they
prayed. Another of his traditions is concerning the words of invocation, when
the bread and wine are showed in the Sacrament, which form of invocation your
Church does not observe at your elevation, nor in any part of your Mass.

Origin yields one reason why we make this sign, affirming that D. B. P.
Hom. 6. in cap. 15. Ex.
fear and trembling does fall upon the evil spirits, when they see the sign
of the Cross made with faith.

That of Origin hom. 6. in cap. 15. Exodus
Origin, as also many other sentences of the Fathers, applied by you Papists to
the sign of the cross, is spoken of our Saviors death upon the cross by a
Metonymy of the subject. What (says Origin) do the devils fear? at what
tremble they? without doubt at the cross of Christ, whereby he triumphed over
them, whereby they were stripped of their principality and power. Fear
therefore and trembling shall fall upon the^ when they shall see the sign of
the cross In nobis fideliter (...).
fixed in us by faith, and the greatness of that arm which our Lord stretched
out upon the cross as he said, Esaias. 65. 2.
All the day long have I stretched out my hands. Therefore they will not fear
thee, Nisi videant in to crucem Christi.
unless they see in thee the cross of Christ, unless thou also can say, Gal.
6. 14.
God forbid I should glory but in the cross of my Lord Christ, by which the
world is crucified to me, and I to the world. But it is not the wooden cross,
nor the sign of it that crucifieth the world, but the power of our Saviors
death.

Gregory Nazianzen reports, that the wicked Apostata Julian, being frighted
with spirits made the sign of the Cross, which he had renounced, D. B. P.
Orat. 1. in lulian.
and yet it delivered him from them.

It is but a report, that Nazianz. in Iulia. orat. 2. quae est 47.
Nazianzen makes upon other men's credit: It is (says he) reported by many, and
Non abhorret ab illius moribus.
it is not unlike his custom. But, which is more to be observed, it must
either come from Julian himself, or the Coniurer who was then alone with him
at his Coniurations, or else it must have been devised by some man that could
not see it. Now judge you what credit is to be given to such report. Yet we
deny not but this might be; the Lord, to Iulians further just condemnation,
showing his mighty power, when he was called upon by him, in so great an
extremity.

Chrysostom most largely discourses of the glorious use of the Cross Ora.
quod Christus sit Deus. See the place, among an hundred other commendations of
it, he has these words: That the heads of Kings are not so decked with their
Diademes, as with the sign of the Cross, and concludes, that all men strive
to pass other in taking to them this admirable Cross, and that no man was
ashamed of it, but esteemed themselves more beautified with that, than with
many Jewels, borders and chains, garnished with Pearl and precious stones.



H^ quantum mutamur ab ipsis: Alas, what a pitiful change is this, that
that which was of the best Christians reputed dear and holy, should now be
accounted a point of superstition and plain witchcraft.



Polemon, a most chaste and holy personage, moved an unchaste woman to change her
life, as out of S. Gregory Synod. 7. act.
Nazianzen is related.

It might become your obedience, to give him such title as his Majesty
vouchsafes him.
manifold commodities, by the discreet and holy practice of them, he must needs
be furiously transported with blind zeal, that makes war against Crosses,
and burns holy Pictures; as of late the Superintendent of Hereford did in the
market place openly.

Here is not one sufficient testimony (as I have showed) to prove that ever
there were any such Images, as you speak of; then what miracles could be
wrought for the countenancing of our Savior by them? It is an honor indeed to
have Images erected in memory of the deceased, but not for him that is God:
neither is it a religious honor, but a civil; proceeding not from our
devotion, but from our love, whatsoever the ground of our love be, in respect
of them whom we so honor.

How slight and vain a motion to the imitation of any man's virtues the sight
of his Image is, let all experience testify; which indeed can bring no more
but the remembrance of it at the most. But suppose there were some more force
in it, all the helps that can be imagined likely to come by it, will not
counteruaile the danger of Idolatry, and so the breach of Gods commandment,
in erecting them for any use of Religion; whereupon Idolatry will most
certainly ensue. That fable of I cannot tell what A man, says Charlemaigne out
of the Colicill. lib. 3. c. 21 page 402.
woman, moved to some civil outward carriage by the beholding of Polemons
Image, seems to have been devised out of the Heathen history of another
Polemon, who was brought to the like civil virtue by hearing the Philosopher
Xenocrates discourse of continency and temperancie; a far more likely
matter, whether it be true or false. But what have we to do with that lying
Conuenticle, which tells us of such a thing out of Athanasius, as was written
(if they say true) some four hundred years before, and never heard of until
that time, when there was such special need of it? No, no, that dealing of
that Council is too well known, to purchase any credit with me^, that will
not wilfully be blinded. In the like sort, they deal with Basil, Cyril,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Gregory, and the Apostles themselves, whose decrees they
fetch out of a counterfeit Synod at Antioch.

The difference.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, or the likeness of any
thing in heaven etc. The Papists say the commandment is meant of the images
of false gods. But, will they, nill they, it must be understood of the images
of the true Jehovah; and it forbids us So says the Roman Catech. 2. Com.
to resemble God, either in his nature, properties, or works, or to use any
resemblance of him for any sacred use: as to help the memory, when we are
about to worship God. Thus much the holy Ghost who is the best expou^der of
himself, teaches most plainly, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. 16. Thou saw no image at al
(either of false or true god) and therefore thou shall not make any likeness of
anything. And again, the Prophet Esaias, c. 40. 18. reproving idolaters asks
to whom they will liken God, or, what similitude will they set up to him. And
verse. 21. Know ye nothing? have ye not heard? has it not bin told you from the
beginning? as if he should say, have ye forgotten the second commandment,
that God gave unto your fathers: And thus he flatly reprooues all them that
resemble the true God in images.

Perkins to prove that unlawful; yet by and by annexeth these words: Let no
man therefore think it to be against religion, and the Law of God, when any
person of the most holy Trinities is pourtraied in such sort as they have
appeared, either in the Old or New Testament, etc. But let the Pastor teach,
that not If you had grace, you would not say so. Belike some nature of God not
pro^^^ (...).
the nature of God, but certain properties and actions appertaining to God,
are represented in such Pictures. If the man be not past grace he will surely
blush at such a foul error. His textes of Scripture are taken out of the same
place of the Catechism, and do prove only, that Gods proper nature cannot nor
may not be resembled in any corporal shape or liknes.

Perkins in this quotation, as I have dealt with you in many, you might have
applied it to the former part, that the commandment is meant of the Images of
the true Jehovah: which your Catechism grants, though only so far as
concerns the expressing of his form by an Image, as your self also confess.
And the Council. Trid. sell. 25. de (...).
Council of Trent affirms that to be un- (...)

being al one in the coveting of wife, and coveting of house, servant, maid,
ox, ass, and whatsoever else, as the Romans 7. 7.
Apostle expresses it, without me^tioning any particular. But the two first
differ almost as much as may be. The first forbidding the worship of any other
God, but the true: the second prohibiting the worshipping of him by an Image or
Idol. The last reason, which only your Catechism brings, beside Austins
authority, and custom of your Church, is insufficient also. For it was very
fit that God should add that reason of promise, and threatening to that, rather
than any of the rest, because he had special care of that, and knew that the
Jews, and all men generally, were likely to worship him after their own
devices, and namely by Images. Beside, is not the reason annexed to the third
Commandment as general, that God will not hold him guiltless which breaks
any of his laws? why then do you not make that also a part of the first
Commandment?



Perkins goes on and says, that our distinction between Image and Idol
(that an Image represents a thing that is, but Idol, a thing supposed to be,
but is not) is false and against the ancient writers, who make it all one: We
prove the contrary, First, by the authority of the ancient Doctors, Origin and
Theodoret, who in express words deliver the same difference of Image and
Idol: which is taken out of How. 8. in Exodus Q. 38. in Ex. 1. Cor. 8.
S. Paul, laying that an Idol is nothing in the world: that is, such Idols as
the Heathen take for their Gods, are nothing formally, that is, though they be
great pieces of wood or stone materially; yet they represent a thing that is
not, that is, such a thing to be a God, which is nothing less. Let M. Perkins
but quote one place in the whole Bible, where they are used both for one.

I will cite some, where if you use the one for the other, you must offend all
good Christian ears; As where man is said to be made after the Image of God,
may you say after the Idol of God? Christ is said to be the Image of his
Father; will you call him the Idol of his Father? Surely he cannot deny, but
the seventh general Council holden about 900. years past and gone, is so far
off from making Image and Idol al one, that it does accurse al them, who call
the Image of Christ and his Saints, Idols.

Perkins says no more, but that it is false, without adding, that it is
against the ancient writers; and yet he might have said so well enough, for
all Origin and Theodoret. For they two are but a few of many, and by their
other writings overthrow that distinction betwixt Image and Idol. To make the
case plain, we must understand, that they call an Image the resemblance of any
thing that has a being in nature. For example, if you carue, grave, paint, or
cast the form of a man, horse, tree, plant, foul, fish, Sun, Moon, Star, or
any such like thing, you make an Image: but if you make a monster, as a man
half flesh, half fish, like our Mairmaides; or a beast compounded of diverse
parts of sundry creatures; for example, the head of a man, the body of a
horse, the feet of a lion, etc. or in a word, as the common opinion is of
Gryphins, which are said to have the forepart like an Eagle, and the hinder
part like a Lion; that is an Idol: because in truth there is no such creature
in the world. By this it is manifest, that no shape of a man, by their
doctrine, can be an Idol. For that shape has some thing like it in nature.
Yet Origin. lib. 1. in cap. 1. ad Romans
Origin doubts not, with the Apostle, to condemn them of Idolatry, who
worshipped God in the likeness of an Image of a corruptible man, of fowls,
fourefooted beasts, and creeping things. So does Theodor. de de curan. Graec.
affect. ser. 3. de Dijs and Angel.
Theodoret, where he disputes against the Gentiles, out of that same place of
the Apostle, reciting his words, who calls those Idols of the Gentiles, (...).
likenesses of the image of a corruptible man.

Theodoret grounds his interpretation upon the words of the commandment
mistaken, but he meddles not so much as by any signification with that place of
the Apostle. Indeed Origin has it, but not in your sense, as appears by
your exposition, which agrees not with Origin nor Theodoret about the
difference betwixt an Image and an Idol. For you coming nearer to the 1. Cor.
8. 5.
Apostles meaning, expound that Nothing, to signify no God, or divine power,
as if the error were in making that a God, which is nothing less. But they
upon whom you would build your distinction, make an Idol such a shape as has
no substance answering to it in nature. And therefore they deny that the image
of a man is an Idol, though it be worshipped, as I showed before: you make it
an Idol, be it of what shape it will, if it represent such a thing to be God,
as is nothing less. He makes an Idol (says Origin) who (according to the
Apostle that says an Idol is nothing) makes that which is not. Mark you what
Origin says? That which is not; you say, that which is not God. But he
proceeds. What is that (says he) which is not? a shape which the eye has not
seen, but the mind faines to it self. For example, if a man be made with a
dogs head, etc. And Theodoret propounds for example of an Idol Sphinx the
monster, Hvginus fab. (...). c. 151.
which had a maids face, a birds wing, and a dogs body, and the Tritons or
Sea-gods, half men, half fishes; and the Centaures, half men, half horses.
So that the only authors you can bring of that distinction, make nothing at all
for it, as you understand it: yea they make against it, calling that an Image,
which you term an Idol, namely the statue of Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and the
rest of the heathen Idols, who both had the shapes of men or women, and that
such men and women as had a true being in nature, though they were no Gods.
Besides, Origin the first founder of that distinction, brings it but
doubtfully, with Opinor.
I think; though Theodoret 150 years after came to affirm it without
doubting. But what skils it whether there be such a distinction or no betwixt
the Greek words, seeing the Exodus 20. (...)
Hebrew, wherein the Commandment was written will not admit any such
difference, and both Origin and Theodoret hold Images forbidden by the
Commandment as well as Idols; and your vulgar translation follows not the
Greek, but the Sculp^^le.
Hebrew? Yea the Greek translators (...). 16 1. Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and 1^. (...). and
(...). 15. Iud. 17. 13. 14. and 18. 14. 18. 30.
otherwhere and that often for the same Hebrew word, give the (...).
general Greek word, that expresses it very fully, and sometimes the very
word (...).
Image.

But I must handle this point more largely then I thought, because you
challenge us to bring one place in the whole Bible where they are used both for
one, which I show thus. The word which in the Commandment they translate
Idol, in Isay. 40. (...).
another place they interpret Image. He seeks a cunning workman to prepare an
Image; and in the 19. verse, The workman melts an Image. Besides, the word
Image is often put for the Idols of the heathen. 2. Reg 1^. 1^
Then the people of the land destroyed the house of Baall with his Alters and
his Images; Ezech 7. (...) (...) 16. 17. and ^3. 14.
They made Images of their Abominations. Thou made thy self Images of men.
When she saw men painted upon the wall the Images of the Chaldeans, that is,
the Idols o^ the Chaldeans, attired after the fashion of the people of that
country. Lastly, that (...) word which the Chal^e Paraphrast (...).
uses in the Commandment, and so generally, where the word of the
Commandment is in the Hebrew, the Greek does commonly translate Image, as you
may see in the places last recited.

I think it is very hard to find any two words that agree in all
significations, both proper and tropicall. Neither do we say that Idol may be
used wheresoever image may, for custom is the rule of speech. But we deny
both that distinction which Origin devised, and that which you would have past
for current, as if Idol did signify some certain kind of shape, and not
generally any form, as the word Image does.

Tertullian De Idol. c. 3.
says, that every form or representation is to be termed an Idol.

Tertullian (says M. Perkins) affirms them to be all one; not so De Idololar.
neither: For he makes Idolum a diminuture of ^^dos, which signifies a form
or similitude: So that Jdolon, is but a small similitude or slender Image, not
so much for the quantity, as for that it represents but darkely.

Perkins does not say so of Tertullian, that he affirms them to be all one,
but that Tertullian says Every form or representation is to be termed an
Idol. (...) (says Tertull. de Idolola^^ 3.
Tertullian) in Greek signifies formam, a form or shape, from thence by
deriuation (...) is framed, and has in like sort with us made the word
Formulam, therefore Omnis for^, (...) formula.
every shape great or little must be called an Idol. Thence comes Idolatry,
which is any service about any Idol. Judge your self now whether Master
Perkins did not report Tertullians opinion truly, and whether you do not wrong
him by making him say that he never meant. So do you Tertullian himself, in
giving a false reason of the word not intended by him. And howsoever the word
may in deriuation be a diminutiue, yet in use it is not so, but signifies any
shape great or little, representing a thing perfectly or imperfectly, as the
word (...) does.

Isidore Etym. lib. 8.
says, that the heathen used the names of image and idol indifferently in one
and the same signification.

Eustathius and excellent Greek interpreter, upon the eleauenth book of Homers
Odyssea, describes Idolum to signify a vain and vanishing Image, as the
shadow of a man, a ghost, or fantastical imagination. And so it cannot be,
that al profane Authors use these two words indifferently, seeing both in
proper signification, and by the declaration of the learned, there is great
difference between them.

Eustath. in Hormer. Odyss. 11.
Eustathius does not undertake to deliver in that place the proper nature of
the word, but to show what Homer there means by it, namely, that he uses it
to signify the ghosts or shapes of men departed, (...).
fashioned of air, or (...).
imprinted in the air by a certain shadow or slight resemblance, where the
(...).
very word coming from image, is put to express the likeness. The same word
(Idol) Homer uses Homer. Iliad. lib. 5.
otherwhere to signify the shape or likeness which Apollo made of Aeneas to
save him from Diomedes. Both these kinds of Idols Virgil (who understood Homer
well enough, and knew the nature and use of Greek and Latin words) calls
Images. For the former, viz. the shapes of the deceased, thus he speaks of
Aeneas wife Creusa, Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2.
Infoelix simulachrum atque ipsius vmbra Creusae, visa mihi ante oculos, and
nota mayor image: where having termed Creusas ghost first a likeness, and then a
shadow, last of all he calls it an Image, and presently after comparing it to
the wind, and to a sleep or a dream, he gives it the name of Image again.
Ter frustra comprensa manus effugit image, par leuibus ventis volucrique
simillima somno. So he speaks of Virgil. Aeneid. (...). 3.
Anchises ghost, using the very same verses, and in the Lib. 4.
fourth book. Turbida tenet imago; so again of him Tua tristis Imago. And of
Adrastus, Lib. 6.
Adrasti pallentis Imago; yea the apparitions of the Centaures, and
Sea Monsters, which by Origens distinction are Idols, Virgil calls Lib. 6.
-- Tenues sine corpore vitas, and says that they fly up and down, -- Caua
sub imagine formae. The other shapes made of air, or some such thin stuff, he
describes by the same word Image, as in that fiction of Aeneas shape, made by
Juno to draw Turnus out of the battle, which he cais Lib. 10
-- Tenuem sine viribus vmbram, and compares it to the ghosts of the deceased,
and to apparitions in dreams. This he calls an Image, At primas laeta ante
acies exultat imago, which Homer would have termed (...).

Whom would you refute by this? Isidor. Etymol. lib. 8.
Isidore is the author, Master Perkins the reporter only. But you strike at
adventure, not respecting where the blow light, but where you mean to hit; yet
you should have said no more then they do, that the heathen use the names
indifferently; not that all profane authors do so, and you should have
understood them aright too, as I showed before; not that both words are used in
all significations, in which either is, but that they are used indifferently
for any kind of shape, whether it have something or nothing answering to it in
any true natural being.

Steven in his apology, Act. 7. 41. calls the golden calfe an Idol.

Stephen calls the golden calfe an Idol, so it was indeed: What is that to the
purpose?

Act. 7. 41.
S. Stephen calls the golden Calfe an Idol? it directly overthrows the
distinction against which Master Perkins disputes. For a Calfe is a thing that
has a real being in nature, and is not an imagination of the brain, as
Sphinx, and Triton, and such like are, according to the authors you allege in
this case.

Hierome In Isai. 37.
says, that idols are images of dead men.

Ierom says, That Idols are the Images of dead-men (add) that are taken for
Gods: True, many Idols be Images: all such as truly represent any person that
was once living here; but no Images be Idols, unless it be taken for a God:
And so Idols requires besides the Image, that it be made a God, or the Image of
a false God.



barbarous Nations, Scythians, Numidians, Seres, and Persians; he answers, that
they agree indeed in the matter, refusing to build, or use any Altars and
Images, but that the reasons of their opinions are diverse; they following I
know not what fancies, the Christians refraining these things, in obedience to
Gods Commandments, namely the first and second, which he there recites.
Therefore Origin holds it forbidden in those Commandments to make, or use any
Image in the service of God.

To this doctrine of Origin the practice of the Primitive Church is agreeable,
that I may please you with more testimonies. We are slatly forbidden (says
Clemens Alexa^ in (...) ad ge^s.
Clement of Alexandria) to use that deceitful craft or art. For the Prophet
says, Thou shall not make the likeness of any thing in heaven, or earth below.
And again, We have no (...).
material image, but such an Image as is perceived by the understanding: God,
who only is the true God, is conceived by understanding, not by sense. Clemens
Stromat. lib. 6.
In another place: Moses, many ages ago, made a direct law, that we should
not make any graven, cast, or painted image; that we might not ^sed sensible
things, but might pass to the consideration of those things which are
perceived by the understanding. And further, Ibid.
The daily fight or beholding of an Image, causes the majesty of God to
become vile and contemptible; and, to worship, by a material thing, that which
is conceived by the understanding, is to make it vile by sense.

God (says Tertul de Idololatr c. 4.
Tertullian) forbids as well the making as the worshipping of an Idol. And
afterward, For this cause, namely to root out the matter of Idolatry, the law
of God proclaims, Make no Idol: and adding, nor likeness of any thing in
heaven, in earth, or in the Sea, forbids the servants of God all over the world
to use that Craft. In Tetul, de coron. militis. cap. 20.
another place: John says, Babes keep your selves from Idols; he says not
now from Idolatry, as from the service of them, but from Idols, that is, from
the shape of them. For it is an unworthy thing, that Vt imago Dei vini, imago
idoli and mo^^^i fiat.
the image of an Idol, and dead thing, should be made the image of the living
God.

That I will not let pass (says Lilius Girald. de dijs gentium. Syn^. (...).
Lilius Giraldus) that we Christians, as sometimes also the Romans, had no
Images in the Primitive Church.

Optatus an ancient Bishop of Africa, counted it a defiling of the Altar, to
have an Image set upon it, and Optat. lib. 3. pene in extremo.
says, that when it was reported, that Paul and Macarius would come and place
an Image on the Altar, they that heard it were astonished at it, and accounted it
as execrable to partake with it.

Images (says August. in Psalm. 113.
Austin) are of more force to corrupt the miserable soul, because they have a
mouth, eyes, ears, nosthrils, hands, and feet, than to instruct it, because
they speak not, hear not, smell not, handle not, walk not: out of which
place of Austin, Cassander. in consul. ad Masimil imperat. de imag cap. 21.
Cassander concludes, that there was no use of Images in Churches in Austins
time. The reason is alike, wheresoever they be used to religion.

Arguments of the Papists.
Salomons temple were erected Cherubines, which were images of angels, on the
Mercieseat where God was worshipped: and thereby was resembled the Majesty of
God, therefore it is lawful to make images to resemble God. Answ. They were
erected by special commandment from God, who prescribed the very form of
them, and the place where they must be set: and thereby Moses had a warrant to
make them; otherwise he had sinned: let them show the like warrant for their
images if they can. Secondly the Cherubins were placed in the holy of holies
in the most inward place of the Temple, and consequently were removed from the
sight of the people, who only heard of them: and none but the high Priest saw
them, and that but once a year. And the Cherubins without the veil, though
they were to be seen, yet were they not to be worshipped. Exodus 20. 4.
Therefore they serve nothing at all to justify the images of the Church of
Rome.

Object. II. God appeared in the form of a man to Abraham, Genesis 18. 1. 13. and
to Daniel, who saw the ancient of days sitting on a throne, Dan. 9. Now as
God appeared, so may he be resembled: therefore (say they) it is lawful to
resemble God in the form of a man, or any like image, in which he showed
himself to men. Answ. In this reason the proposition is false: for God may
appear in whatsoever form it pleases his majesty; yet does it not follow;
that man should therefore resemble God in those forms; man having no liberty
to resemble him in any form at all: unless he be commanded so to do.
Again, when God appeared in the form of a man, that form was a sign of Gods
presence only for the time when God appeared, and no longer; as the bread and
wine in the sacrament are signs of Christ's body and blood, not for ever, but
for the time of administration: for afterward they become again, as common
bread and wine. And when the holy Ghost appeared in the likeness of a dove,
that likeness was a sign of his presence no longer then the holy Ghost so
appeared. And therefore he that would in these forms represent the Trinity,
does greatly dishonor God, and do that for which he has no warrant.

You ouerweene your self. You should show why. Genes. 18.
Images, to represent some property or action of God; I now come unto the
Catholic proof of them. The first reason set down by M. Perkins I reserve
to the next point: the second is; God appeared in the form of a man to Abraham
and to Daniel, Who savv the ancient of days sitting on a throne. Now as God
has appeared, so may he be purtraied Dan 9.
and drawn: M. Perkins his answer is, not so, unless it be expressel^^
commanded by God.

Reply, This first is flat against his own second conclusion, where he
holds it lawful to present to the eye in Pictures, any histories of the
Bible in private pla^es, both the foresaid apparitions be in the Old Testament,
and therefore may be painted in private places, which cannot be truly done
without you do represent God in the same liknes, as there he appeared. And what
reason leads in words to represent those actions of God, the same serves to
express them in lively colors: Not so says M. Perkins, because when God
appeared in the form of man, it was a sign of Gods presence, for that time
only, and for no longer: be it so, it might notwithstanding be recorded in
writing, that the memory of such majesty joined with loving kindness might
endure longer. And if it pleased God, that this short presence of his should be
written to be perpetually remembered, even so the same might be engraven in
brasle, to recommend it to us so much the more effectually: For as the famous
Poet does by the light of nature sing.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus. Such worthy acts as by the ears are
to the mind conueide,
Do move us less then that which is by faithful eye descride.


Perkins is not alive to answer you, who was better able to express his own
meaning, than any otherman can be. But, in my opinion, it was his purpose, in
that second conclusion, to grant the pourtraying of those histories only,
which had nothing to be painted that was forbidden, as he always took the
resembling of God to be. That was general, as rules of Grammar are; exceptions
are not contradictions, but rather parts of those rules.

If you speak of that reason, which moved God to inspire Moses for the writing
of that story, we grant that he might to the same end have also enjoined the
painting or engrauing of it. But since it pleased him not so to do, we
answer, that your argument proves nothing: There is the same reason (say you)
for painting that, and such stories; therefore they may as well be painted, as
written. The consequence is false: For the one was inspired, as I said, and the
other not. Upon the writing, because it is Gods word, we may look for a
blessing from him. Not so upon our own devices, accompanied with danger of
Idolatry. For my part (saving other men's better judgment) I persuade my
self, that God, who commanded the Israelites to write the words of the law
about their houses, and in other places for instruction and remembrance, would
have enjoined the painting of his especial miracles and works in their
favor, if he had not seen it to be dangerous, in respect of Idolatry that
might ensue. For questionless, a picture or an Image is of great force,
chiefly if the word be added for exposition of it; as we see in Emblems and
Impresas. But this help, in the most wise judgment of God, was not thought so
much worth, that for it the danger of Idolatry, to which all men are so prone
by nature, should be adventured. Therefore we must not be led in this case by
the show of humane reason, but assure our selves it was not for nothing, that
God, when he taught the Jews by signs and shadows, appointed not the use of
painting divine histories, for instruction, memory, or devotion.

Concerning Horat. de art poetic. ad Pison.
Horaces testimony, if you had seen as far into the meaning of it, as you
imagine he did into the use of Pictures, you would never have alleged it to
such purpose, as now you do. For you might easily have perceived, that the
Poet grounds not his precept upon any light of nature, but upon experience of
men's affections; and (which is the principal thing) that he speaks not at all
of any dumb pictures, but of the lively gestures of Players upon the stage.
Some things (says he) are acted on the stage, some are only reported there,
and supposed to be done in some other place. Now betwixt these is this
comparison made, that those things do more affect which we see done, than
those that we only hear reported; what is this to pictures? your Poetry
fails you, as well as your Divinity.



But some qualities of Angels (say you) which are spiritual substances, and
the qualities of Angels and men, which we call virtues (and which, by your
leave, have as true a being as other creatures, though they never be of
themselves, but adjoined to some spiritual subject) may be counterfeited and
resembled. Therefore why may not some property or action of God be in like
manner reputed? First, I think, you are hardly able to prove your antecedent,
that such things may be resembled in outward forms for Gods service. Secondly,
though that be granted, yet your consequence is naught. For there is a
commandment of God against the later, as we heard out of Clement, least his
Majesty should by such resemblances grow into contempt; to which I add, least
Idolatry should ensue upon it.

Abraham and his entertainment, he must then resemble God in the same likeness
of a man in which he showed himself to Abraham.

Daniel 9.) to instruct us how he is eternal, insinit, wise, and of most
redoubtable majesty: in either of these two latter sorts, we hold that God In
the idolatrous second Council at Nice.
may be represented, and so in the seventh general Council, the drawing of
the holy Ghost, in form of a Dove, as he appeared. Mat. 3. is approved.

Your discourse of the diverse representations intended by pictures, I pass
over, as nothing to purpose. For the reason of our denying images, is not only
because God can not be resembled, as being a spirit and infinite, but
principally, because he himself has forbidden it, as a certain occasion of
Idolatry.

This painting of Angels like fair young men with wings, (...)

of denial from the Tabernacle built by Moses, wherein you will not remember
that the pattern showed to Moses, was a direction for Solomon, and a warrant
in all things that were agreeable to Moses work. But Master Perkins might have
had enough to say, though he had answered directly, viz. that Solomon was a
Prophet, and had also direction for his building from the kingly Prophet David
his father. And therefore it does not follow, that because Solomon made such
Cherubins, every man that builds any Church may set up the like. Or, to speak
indeed directly according to his consequent, it is not lawful for us to make
images to resemble God, because Solomon adorned the Temple with Cherubins.

Moses indeed had an express precept for the making of them, as he had for the
Curteines and Curteine-rods, and every particular belonging to the Tabernacle.
But Solomon without any special commandment For it was a pattern
appointed by God for his house.
out of his high and holy vvisdome, understood that he might most lavvfully and
laudably imitate that heavenly pattern of Moses: And as the building was
far more sumptuous and stately: so in the number and quantity of Pictures
exceeded, which is a sufficient instruction and vvarrant for all men after his
days to make and set Images in the Church. And this finally M. Perkins seems
to grant, when he says, that these Cherubs without the veil, were there to
be seen, but not to be worshipped: so that we have gotten one step further;
that Images may not only be made, but also set up in the Churches.

In Salomons temple there were Cherubins within the holy of Holyes, and without
upon the walls and doors. Therefore all holy pictures may be placed in
Churches. First concerning your Antecedent, it must be remembered, that those
Cherubins were not in the utter court, where the people used to come and pray,
but in the holy place where the Altar of Incense stood, and where Luke 1. 9. 10
Leuit. 16. 17.
none came but the Priests, and in the holy of holies, into Exodus 30. 20 Leuit.
16. 2. Heb. 9. 7.
which the high Priest only might enter, and that but once a year, where the
Ark was. So that these images were removed out of the peoples sight, and that
by Salomons prophetical wisdom. Secondly there was no use of these images to
any purpose of religion, but they served only for ornament and state, as the
other work of the temple did, except the two Cherubins upon the mercy seat.
Ere I answer to your consequence, I may not forget to note, that in your
co^sequent or conclusion you call Images holy, as if by I know not what
holiness, they had some right to be placed in Churches, as also you speak
afterward, where should holy pictures of holy men be more properly bestowed
then in holy places? Nothing is to be counted holy, but that which either has
a quality of holiness in it, as all that are sanctified have, or else is
belonging to the service of God. And whatsoever is of this later kind is rather
hallowed then holy, and has no holiness in it, but by being consecrated to such
a use. Neither is this consecration, as that of the Ceremonial law was,
whereby a thing was made indeed holy ceremonially, as nothing with us can be,
the ceremonies being abrogated. So that such things are no longer nor farther
holy, then they are employed in that service; and therefore the water with
which we baptize, and the bread and wine with which we celebrate the Supper of
the Lord, after those actions are past, are no more holy then any other matter,
bread, or wine. Images therefore can no way be holy more then any other work
in Churches: therefore setting apart this bare title of holiness, I deny the
consequence of your Enthymem: Solomon adorned the inner parts of the Temple
where the people came not with pictures of Cherubins, Therefore it is lawful
to set up images in Churches where the people ordinarily come. Who sees not
great difference between the Antecedent and the Consequent? To omit that which
I answered before on Master Perkins behalf, concerning Salomons warrant for
his so doing, his father and himself being Prophets.

Tertullian, in the place cited before: where he says, that our Savior was
Pictured upon holy Chalices, which were used at the Altars: and of Sozomenus,
who witnesses that our Saviors Picture was taken into the Church.

Tertullian says, Christ was pictured like a Shepherd upon the chalices:
Nazianzen trimmed up Images: Basil allowed of the Martyr Barlaams picture in
the Churches: Damasus says Constantine set up a silver image of our Savior:
Chrysostom and Austin say, that the Cross was on the holy tables, Therefore
it is lawful to set up Images in Churches. Of the Antecedent by and by, in the
mean while I deny the consequence. They allow of Images, therefore they are
lawful. If your Church think it possible for these men to err, as I am sure
it does, then may it not be taken for lawful because they approve it.

But to the Antecedent, what does Tertull. de pudicit. lib. 1
Tertullian but tell us what the Chalice-maker had done in likelihood, for the
setting forth of his work? both this, and that of Sozom. hist. lib. 5. cap. 20.
Sozomens report is answered before: it is not proved there ever was any such
Image of our Savior.

Gregory Nazianzen makes mention of Images in the Church of D. B. P. Epist.
49. Orat. in Barlaam.
Neocaesarea, trimmed up by himself.

Saint Basil, points to that holy man's Picture, standing in the Church.

Nazianzen. epist. 49. ad Olympium.
Nazianzen and Basil. orat. in Barlaam Martyr.
Basil speak not of images to any use of Religion, whereof only our question
is, but either for ornament, as the former says, Nazianzen. omne nostrum in eo
exornando studium.
All our labor and care in the beautifying of it; or for honor to the martyr,
which was civil, not religious, and yet scarce justifiable.

Damasus In vita Silu.
shows how Constantine in the Church of S. John Lateran erected a silver
Image unto our Savior.

Chrysostom (...) demonst. quod Christ. sit Deus: And S. Augustine Sermon. 19.
de sanct.
do teach, that the Cross was on the holy Tables, and used at all holy
functions.

This Da^us in vita Syluestri.
report of Constantines erecting a silver image, seems to depend upon the
tale of his being baptized at Rome by Syluester, whereas it is apparent by
Eusebius. le vita Constable. lib. 4. cap. 62.
Eusebius and Theodoret. hist. Eccles. lib. 1 cap 32.
Theodoret that he was not baptized till the very end of his life, and in Asia,
many hundred miles from that Church of Saint John Lateran in Rome, in
Nicomedia, now called by the Turk who possesses it, Nichor, a town of
Bythinia.

Chrysostom. in demonst. quod Christus sit Deus.
Chrysostom speaks of the general use of the cross in all places, not for
any holiness of the sign, but as a mark of profession. The cross (says he)
is in the purple robes, in the Crowns; the cross is at our prayers, the
cross is in our armor, the cross is upon the holy table, the cross is over
all the world, yea, the cross glisters above the sun. If this cross were an
Image, Optat. lib. 3.
Optatus (as we heard before) counts the presence of it a defiling of the Altar.

That place of Aug. ser. 19. de Sanct. if it be Augustines.
Austin intreates of the cross, both for the sign, and image of it most
superstitiously: ascribing strange effects to it, which no moderate or
reasonable man can defend, except he will expound it as I showed before, of an
outward ceremony used in prayer, to which purpose we may apply that speech
of his in the end of that discourse, Look what the presence of Christ's body
did upon the earth, that does the famous memory of the victorious cross, with
a faithful calling upon the name of Christ. Otherwise it is wonderful strange
that Austin should so highly esteem of the cross, whereas Optatus a worthy
Bishop of the same country, in Anno 380.
the beginning of Austins time accounts so meanly of it.

Paul teaches,) is most conveniently decked up Hebr. 9. They are
representations of them, as they were earthly creatures.
with Images, the representations of heavenly creatures: that men entering into
that holy place, may by the view and consideration of such a heavenly show,
retire their minds from worldly business, and lift them up unto the sovereign
Monarch of both heaven and earth.

Hebr. 9. 23.
Apostle says no such thing of any Church now, but affirms, that the
Tabernacle of the Jews was ceremonially a shadow of heavenly things. And yet
it would be remembered, that the Tabernacle and Temple had no Images, but in the
holy places, where the people came not. We hold it very convenient to have our
Churches modestly adorned, rather than sumptuously, and with such kind of
ornaments, as may not carry away the mind by the outward sense, either to a
vain imagination, or to some superstitious conceit.

Perkins, which see me to be against the erection of Images in Churches. The
first is out of the Council of Eliberis cap. 36. which commands, that
nothing should be painted on the walls of the Church, that was adored of the
people.

Ans. That if the Council speak of the Image of God (in which sense. M.
Perkins cites it, and the word (adored) does insinuate) then it may be said,
that the Council inhibiteth that sort of Gods Images, which are made to
express the divine nature. If it be extended unto all sorts of Images: I
answer, that they were then forbidden to be drawn upon the Church wales,
but not to be set in Tables upon the Altar, or in any other place. The reason
is, because that Council was holden in time of persecution, as appears by
the twenty five Canon of it: and then, if the persecutor had found out the
place of their assembly, as they often did: those Pictures must needs either
have been defaced by themselves, or left unto the derision and despite of the
Heathens; And Pictures also painted upon such poor walls as they had then to
their Churches, would either by the moisture of the wales, or other
incommoditie, have bin quickly disfigured: wherefore, to the greater honor of
such sacred things, those grave Fathers thought it not meet to have them
drawn upon the Church wales, there being many more meet places for them in
the Churches.

Council. Eliber. cap. 36.
come back now to those two allegations, which should, and might have been
answered as fitly in their due place. Your first answer has no show of reason
in it. For it is absurd to imagine, that any Christians, to whom only the
Council speaks, would think the divine nature, which is spiritual and
infinite, could be expressed by any picture. But if it be possible for the people
to be so blind, yet the Bishops and Ministers, who had the charge of such
places, must needs know it to be unlawful, and impossible. Besides, if they
meant to forbid such Images only, why do they not call them Idols after your
distinction? why do not they express their meaning more plainly, but speak
so dangerously, to make all Images thought unlawful?

As the word (Adored) was (in your opinion) a warrant for Master Perkins to
apply that Canon to the Images of God; so by the same reason is the other word
(worshipped) which the Council has, a sufficient authority to stretch the
decree to all Images that may be worshipped. Your conjectures are mere
shifts, refuted by the very words of the Council. It is decreed (says the
Council) that there may be no Images in the Church: what will become then of
your Images upon Altars, unless you will remove your Altars out of the Church?
That which follows, does not respect the walls, more than any other part of
the Church; but names them specially, upon which Images most commonly were
painted. But what a toy is it, that you talk of persecutors finding out the
place of their assembly, when they could hold a Council, and had Churches to
repair to? Could their Churches be unknown? Further, if their care had bin to
provide, that the moisture of the walls might not disfigure the Images, they
would have said plainly, We will have no Images on Church walls, least that
which is adored and worshipped, come to some disgrace: and this would also have
included the other reason of the persecutors despite. But it is manifest, that
the meaning of the decree is this, that they will not suffer any Images in
Churches, because that which is worshipped and adored, may not be resembled by
pictures. The decree indeed speaks only of the Images of God, to whom only
religious adoration and worship is due, and may lawfully be performed.

Epiphanius letter, unto John Patriarch of Jerusalem, in which is written, as
M. Perkins falsely reports: that it is against the authority of Scripture, to
see the Pictures of Christ, or of any Saint to hang in the Church.

Ans. It is there only, to see the Picture of a man. Now that he should It is
expr^ said.
mean of Christ or of some Saint is only gathered, yet M. Perkins makes no
bones to thrust them both into the Text: even so do we think that some old
enemy of Images added that postscript unto Epiphanius letter. Our reasons are,
because it has no coherence with the former letter or st^e. Again, in the
seventh Council, when all that could be found out of antiquity, was cited
against Images: no tidings there of this place, which if it had bin true, might
have bin one of the principal. Thirdly, in the same Council, other two
places brought, as it were out of Epiphanius (...) 6.
works, were found to be none of his: And for Images was alleged, that
Epiphanius own disciples erected an Image to their Master, and set it in the
Church; which they would never have done, if he had taught them to be against
the Scripture so to do.

Perkins does not undertake to report Epiphanius words, but his matter, which
he performs truly. I found (says Epiphan. (...) ad ^^an. (...) osol.
Epiphanius, speaking of a Church at Anablatha, in his travel to Bethel) in
the Church door a veil hanging, stained and painted, and having the Image as
it were of Christ, or some Saint: for I remember not well whose image it was.
When I saw this, that against the authority of the Scripture, the image of a
man hung in the Church of Christ, I rent it. These are Epiphanius words;
whereout I observe, first, that it is against the authority of the Scripture,
and therefore against Gods Commandment, that the image of a man should hang in
Christ's Church. But the Images of al your Saints are such, and those of the
Trinity too, except that Dove for the holy Ghost. Secondly, I add, that it
is rightly gathered by necessary consequence (which is as good every whit, as
plain words) that it is against Scripture to have the picture of Christ, or
any Saint in the Church. For he says expressly, that the Image he saw, was the
image of Christ, or some Saint; and that it was unlawful to have any Image of
a man there.

There is no reason to call it a postscript; unless every last point of any
letter not depending upon the former, be a postscript. Hieronym. ^n illa epist.
Hierome, that translated the Epistle out of Greek into Latin, found no such
diversity of style in it; neither indeed is it to be found: and this latter
part is brought in according to the course of writing in the former. Epiphanius
cleeres himself to John Bishop of Jerusalem, for having ordered a Deacon in
his Diocese, he begins his excuse thus: I have heard etc. In the latter part
he defends himself concerning the renting of the veil, and begins that also
in the like sort, I have heard. This was written, and translated three hundred
years before that Idolatrous Council, though perhaps they thought it no
wisdom to take knowledge of it. The other places, brought in that Council,
were for Images, and so allowed of by that Council, and have since been
discerned to be counterfeit; as that is of his Disciples, no thanks to that
counterfeit Synod: which deals in the same sort also with Basil (you
afterward allege the place for Images) with Cyrill, Ambrose, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Gregory, and the Apostles themselves, as I showed before.

Perkins observes a special reason in Epiphanius other counterfeit testimony:
That Images must not be suffered in the common house, because we must carry
God in our minds. To which we answer, that Images must be suffered in all
places, that we may the better carry-God in our hearts, being by the sight of
them, both often put in mind of him, and much moved to honor and love him.

Epiphanius, you go about under hand to strike at him thorough Master Perkins
sides; but there is no great force in your blow. For (as I said erewhile) there
is more danger of Idolatry in the suffering of Images, especially in any
place where God is to be worshipped, than hope of instruction or devotion by
the sight of them. And (as Epiphan. cont. Encratit. citat. in Council.
Constantinop. 7.
Epiphanius says in this place) It is not meet that a Christian should be
exercised by the eyes, but by the meditation of the mind: For such sight (as
Clemens Strom. lib. 6.
Clement taught us before) abaseth the Majesty of God, and begets in us
erroneous opinions.

Object. III. Man is the image of God, but it is lawful to paint a man, and
therefore to make the image of God. Ans. A very cavil: for first a man cannot
be painted, as he is the image of God, which stands in the spiritual gifts of
righteousness and true holiness. Again, the image of a man may be painted
for civil or historical use, but to paint any man for this end to represent
God, or in the way of religion, that we may the better remember and worship
God, it is unlawful. Other reasons which they use, are of small moment, and
therefore I omit them.

Differ. II. They teach and maintain, that images of God and of Saints my be
worshipped with religious worship, specially the crucifixe. For Sum. part. 3.
quaest. 25. art. 3.
Thomas of Watering says, Seeing the cross does represent Christ, who died
upon a cross, and is to be worshipped with divine honor: it follows that
the cross is to be worshipped so too. We on the contrary, hold they may not.
Our principal ground is the second commandment, which contains two parts:
the first, forbids the making of Images to resemble the true God, the second
forbids the worshipping of them, or God in them, in these words, Thou shall
not bow down to them. Now, there can be no worship done to any thing less
then the bending of the knee.

Perkins makes the second of our difference: That Images may be not only made
and set in Churches, but also worshipped.

M. Perkins holds the contrary: and his principal ground is the second
commandment; which contains, says he, two parts. The first, forbids the
making of Images to resemble God; the second, the worshipping of them or God
in them, in these words: Thou shall not bovv down to them.

Ans. If it be only forbidden to make the Image of God, and to adore it: then
the making and worshipping of the Image of Christ, or of any other creature, is
not there prohibited: And so this second commandment more than thrice
alleged, will not serve the turn against any other Image but God only. And
in plain reason, according also to Master Perkins his own confession, the
Commandments of the first Table, touch only our duty toward God, that we
give him all his due honor, and do not give any part thereof unto any thing else
whatsoever: Wherefore divine and godly worship is only there spoken of, and not
such worship as we give unto any creature, or to the picture of it: and
consequently, there is nothing there against the worshipping of our holy
Images.

Perkins said before) to make an Image of any thing in the way of Religion, to
worship God, much more to worship the creature thereby. Therefore the
Assumption, that should be added to that proposition of yours, if it be only
forbidden, etc. namely; but it is only forbidden to make the image of God, and
to adore it, is false, and so the second Commandment is against all Images for
Gods service.

The Commandments of the first table touch only our duty to God. True; and
it is an especial part of our duty to him, that we give no religious honor to
any thing whatsoever, but to him only. For as Religion is a duty of the
creature to the Creator, and not any bond betwixt creature and creature: so is
religious honor due only to him, to whom religion is appropriated. Therefore
the Heathen were never so sottish, as to worship any man or thing with
religious worship, whereto they did not first ascribe some kind of divinity,
according to which they proportioned their worship thereto.



There is a third kind of worship, yet meaner then the other; which is a kind
of dependant and respective worship; as when a servant is honored or
cherished, not for his own, but for his masters sake. And this is that
worship which we allow unto Images, which for the Saints sake whom it does
represent, we do either reverently regard, or take off our hat, or bovv our
knee unto it. This third kind of worship, being all we allow He is altogether
an idolater that so worshippeth any Image.
unto Pictures, were he not that understands it, more than half frantic, that
should think it a great disparagement unto the incomprehensible worship of
God, that to one of his servants Pictures, I should yield some such petty
reverence; or that God should forbid this in the forefront of his ten
Commandments? nothing less.

that the honor ascribed to men and Angels, is absolute in it self, and to
what purpose is it here alleged? Thirdly, the chief reason of worshipping
God, is our dependence upon him, as (...). d^ (...). lib. 1.
the Heathen acknowledge, and experience shows, in that civil worship we give
to Princes and Magistrates. And howsoever Epicurus denying the providence of
God, and his governing of the world, thought to avoid some blame in allowing
worship to the Gods, as you do, in regard of their excellent and blessed
nature; yet neither was that accounted sufficient by the statesmen or learned,
and in truth it procures generally rather a reverend opinion, than any true
worship. Lastly, I pray you remember, that the worship, which afterward you
divide into civil and religious, is here in the general nature made civil,
yea even that to Angels.

That which the creatures lack in weight, it seems you will make up by
number. They may not have (say you) the sovereign worship due to God. But to
make the^ amends, you allow them two kinds of worship: civil, in regard of
their natural resemblance of God, and religious, in respect of their
supernatural likeness to him. Whereas God, having nothing in him
supernatural, must have but one of the two only, and that as it may seem by
proportioning the worship to creatures, not Civil, but Religious. For why
should God have religious honor for those properties, above all degrees, and
creatures for the same, have but civil in their degrees? since in your
judgment they are capable of that honor also, which is religious? Besides, is
this difference of honor in respect of the gifts, or of the manner of giving?
if the latter, it is God, who must then have this diverse worship, according to
his diverse manner of working, and not man in whom he works. So shall civil
honor belong to God for the natural gifts he bestows upon men. If you regard
the excellency of the gifts, why should they not be accounted of proportionably
in the Image, which is man, as they are in the substance and pattern, which is
God? But in him those properties, the resemblance whereof you call natural in
man, are of as great excellency as the other, which in man you term
supernatural; yea, which is more; though in God, his nature and his properties
be all one, yet in man the natural qualities are the more principal, and the
other as it were but adjuncts thereunto. The natural parts of the soul, that I
may so speak, are the understanding and the will; all gifts and graces
whatsoever, are but qualities belonging to these two, which are the very
substance of the soul. Further, there is no reason why any religious worship
should be performed to man, by reason of these qualities, because none was due
to him before his fall, when he had these: else should Adam have bin worshipped
by Eve, with religious worship, and she by him; For each of them had the Image
of God, according to the nature of such creatures, entire and perfect; and if
we believe your Popish doctrine, they had those qualities by an especial grace
of God above nature. Moreover what reason can you give, why Angels should not
perform religious worship to the Saints departed, and both they and the same
Saints to those men living here on the earth, who have received those
supernatural qualities from God, for which religious worship is due to them, on
whom they are bestowed? Therefore this distinction of religious and civil
worship, is a mere devise, without any ground of true reason; and all
religious worship is due to God, civil worship only belongs to men.

That respective worship is no other but civil; as it may easily appear,
because it may be, and must be given even to profane and reprobat men, if any
such be employed by God in government over us. For howsoever the outward manner
of the honor we give to Princes, and Magistrates, depends upon the Laws and
Customs of the Countries, wherein we live; yet the duty of honoring them, lies
upon us in conscience to be performed, because they are Gods Lieutenants and
Stewards.

This worship if you accounted it civil, you might give to whom you thought
good, and should not be condemned of us for Idolatry, but for folly, though
you gave it to Images. Yet such folly, as the Gentiles are not guilty of, who
never used such reverence to the statues of any famous men, but where first
they had an opinion of some divine nature.

I marvel how you could persuade your self to write so untruly, that the
honor you give to Images, is meaner then the former; and that you would
craftily deceive the ignorant, as if taking off your hat, and bowing your knee
were all the honor you give them. Why did you not then refute Thomas, whom M.
Perkins brings in speaking thus. Thom. 3. q. 25. art. 3.
Seeing the Cross does represent Christ, who died upon the Cross, and is to
be worshipped with divine honor; it follows that the Cross is to be
worshipped so too. Did you never read that of Bellarmine, let this (says he)
Bell^ (...) (...) ^mp. (...). (...). (...). (...).
be one preposition, that the Images of Christ and the Saints are to be
worshipped not only by accident and improperly (this is your dependent and
respective worship which you say is all you allow unto Images) but also
properly, so that the A^o.
worship rest in the Image, not only as Vt ^^eem ge^^^ ex^mp^^^s.
it is instead of the party; whose Image it is?

Will you hear a third speak yet more plainly? It is the constant opinion of
Divines (says Azorius Inst. lib. 9. cap 6.
Azorius) that the Image is to be worshipped with the same worship and honor,
with which he is worshipped whose Image it is. Belike you are no divine, or
else you would acknowledge another manner of worship due to Images.

Let us hear another Jesuit. The old Schoolmen (says Gabr. Vasq. de ador.
lib. 2. disp. 8. cap. 3. and cap. 8.
Vasquez) absolutely affirm that the Images of Christ are to be worshipped with
divine worship. Now for the particular worship, Council. Trid. ^elf. 25. de
venerat.
the Council of Trent, as crafty and wary as it was, says more then you do,
that you fall down before Images, and kiss them. But who knows not, that
you perform all outward worship to them; you perfume them with incense, though
they cannot smell; you set up lights before them, though they cannot see. (and
yet it is hard to say whether you or they be the blinder.) You kiss them, you
kneel down to them, you lie prostrate on the ground before them, you pray,
sing, and say your special services before them; How could you do more outward
worship to our Savior Jesus Christ, then you do to these babies, and puppets?

Was it not more then need think you, that the Lord of heaven and earth,
should in the very heat of his jealousy, make a law against such
abominations? we may well see it was not for nothing, that he threatens so
long a continuance of his heavy wrath upon the breakers of the second
Commandment.

yet when the people burned incense to it, 2. King. 18. 4. Hezekias brake it in
pieces, and is therefore commended. And when the devil bad our Savior Christ,
but to bow down the knee unto him, and he would give him the whole world:
Christ reiects his offer, saying, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. Matthew. 4. 10. Again, it is lawful for one man to
worship another with civil worship, but to worship man with religious honor is
unlawful. For all religious worship is prescribed in the first table: and the
honor due to man is only prescribed in the second table and the first
commandment thereof, Honor thy father, which honor is therefore civil and
not religious. Now the meanest man that can be, is a more excellent image of
God then all the images of God or of Saints that are devised by men.

Perkins his argument: His second is; the brazen Serpent was an Image of Christ
crucified, appointed by God: yet when the children of Israel burned incense
unto it, Ezechias brake it in 4. Reg. 18.
pieces.

Ans. So when Christians generally give godly honor to Images, as those
Israelits did to the Serpent, let them also be broken by their lavvfull
superior, if no better remedy may be found: But as that very brazen Serpent
duly worshipped many hundred years by the same people before they fell to
Idolatry (as witnesses S. Augustine, where he reckons the brazen Serpent,
among those signs which are vvorthie of religious worship) so good
Christians, may worship all sorts of holy Pictures, so they think no God to
dwell in them, nor put any trust in the Pictures, but use them only to stir
up devotion, to keep their minds from wandering after their domestical
affairs, and to conserve the memory of Gods happy servants.

godly honor English men understand, not that which is proper to God, but that
which is agreeable to the will of God. If to burn Incense to the brazen
Serpent, were to give it divine honor, your Images are ordinarily worshipped
with divine honor. Besides Ioh. 3. 14. 1^.
this brazen Serpent was an Image of Christ crucified, and therefore by your
Divinity, might and ought to be worshipped with divine honor, as Christ
himself. Yet Hezekiah brake it down; that is the Magistrate: it is pity he
lacked you to have advised him of some better remedy. But Aug. de ciuit. Dei
lib. 10 c. 8.
Augustine commends him for it, as Religiosa potestate Deo ^e^^iens, cum magna
pieta it is laud contr^^^t.
having in it done a special service to God, with great commendation of piety.
But what speak I of Augustine? does not the 2. Reg. 18. 3. 4.
holy Ghost reckon it amongst the actions of his upright walking in the sight
of God, according to all that David his Father had done? Does he not join it
with taking away the high places, breaking the Images, and cutting down the
groves, actions precisely commanded by God himself?

The brazen Serpent was never worshipped by the people, but Idolatrously,
namely with Incense burned to it. Unto those days (says the 2. Reg. 18. (...).
holy Ghost, speaking of Hezechiahs time) the children of Israel did burn
Incense to it; As for Aug. lib. 3. de Trinit. c. 10
Augustine, he gives no suspicion of any such thing. All he says is this,
that such things as God has appointed to signify some action of his person,
Honorem habere possunt vt religiosa.
may have honor, as things used to religion. What honor is this, but a reverend
estimation according to the use, to which they are applied by the commandment
of God? which may appear, because he ioynes with the brazen Serpent, Sicut and
literae
the writings that God ordained to the like purpose: viz. the Scriptures, which
are inded to be reverently accounted of, but cannot be worshipped without
Idolatry.

The common sort of Papists do put as great trust in their Idols, as ever the
Heathen did in theirs. Do you not teach them to pray to the Cross, O crux aue
spes vnica.
All hail our only hope? To entreat of the Cross, that it Auge pijs
iustitiam, reisque dona veniam.
would increase righteousness in the godly, and give pardon to the guilty?
Neither may it be shifted off, with saying that this belongs to Christ's
Passion, and not to the Cross. For Thom. 3. q. 5. art. 4.
Thomas Aquinas proves by that Hymn of the Church, that the very Cross is to
be worshipped with divine worship, and hope of salvation to be placed in it.
Thus he reasons; we must give divine worship to that, in which we place the
hope of our salvation. But we place the hope of our salvation in the Cross.
This Assumption he proves by the authority of that Hymn: whereupon he infers
his conclusion. Therefore the Cross of Christ is to be adored with divine
worship: Is not the chief use of your Images, to please God, and to do service
to them, whose Images they are, by worshipping of them? Did I not show a little
before out of Bellarmine and other, that the Image must have the honor due to
the party, whose Image it is? yea that f Ita vt te^^^net^^ ano^tio in (...) D.
B. P. (...) the Seas to Rome and Rhemes have wild wits. O ^harit^^^e P^t!
the honor must rest in the Image?

Bezas ensign, or of their Master the devil, or any of his hel-hounds.

Our Saviors refusing to bow his knee to the Devil, is not brought to prove
the unlawfulness of worshipping Images, (and yet some of your saints are not
much better then Thomas Becket) but to show that bowing the knee is a worship,
how light soever you account of it, forbidden by God himself under the name of
worship to be given to any but himself.

Perkins his fourth reason: A man (says he) may be worshipped with civil
honor; not with religious, which is wholy prescribed in the first Table, and
yet the meanest man is a more excellent Image of God, than any painted one.

Ans. A man may be worshipped with religious honor, in respect of his
supernatural gifts asvvell as with civil honor of his natural properties,
as has bin before declared: and no other religious honor is either And before
consu^ed.
prescribed or proscribed in the first Table, then such only as is proper to
God.

Perkins holds, that all religious worship is proper to God, and therefore
contained in the first Table: you answer, that no religious honor is
prescribed, or proscribed (was it you that found fault with Master Perkins
ryming?) in the first table, but such only as is proper to God. Your adversary
grants as much, and adds, that all religious honor is proper to him. Part.
3. qu. 2^ (...). 3.


Thomas of Watering holds, that the Crucifixe is to be adored with the same
honor that Christ is. Leaving Thomas of Watering and of VVapping to them that
deserve it: I answer to the place of To Traiterous Jesuits and such other
Papists.
S. Thomas of Aquine, that he speaks (like a most learned Philosopher and
divine) very profoundly; that the Image may be considered in it self, and so
he says, it is not to be worshipped at all: or as it does convey our mind
unto that which it does represent: and so because there is but one and the
same motion of our understanding and will toward Christ and the Crucifixe:
we do adore them both at once with the same act of adoration, but in a far
different degree: for Christ we adore properly as the true God, but the
Crucifixe accidentally as a thing joined with Christ. Even as (says he
expounding himself) art. 4. when one does his homage unto the King, he
vvorshippeth vvithall his purple garment, not that any worship is due to the
robe, but the whole is given unto the person, which cannot be separated from
that which is so closely joined to the person: Even so the divine person of
Christ is properly adored, but improperly all things conceived together with
it, are said also by that deep Doctor to be adored. He that has care of
hearing, let him hear: for our purpose it suffices to know, that he assigns
very small worship to themselves.

Thomas of waterings is the old english name of Thomas de Aquino; the place may
so be called, because of some Chapel or religious house built there in honor
of him. It was not Master Perkins intent nor his vein to disgrace Thomas by
that name, though he do not acknowledge any such sainctship belonging to him.

In your answer, first you grant, that Tho. 3. q. 25. art. 3.
Thomas says, We must worship the cross of Christ with divine worship.
Therefore you grant as much as Master Perkins affirms, and thereby prove
that to be false, which before you delivered, that the worship you give to
Images, is very small: for you worship some of them by your own confession,
with divine worship. It appears also by this answer, that your Images are
not only to stir up devotion etc. but to be worshipped too. Secondly I would
feign know how this doctrine of Thomas can agree with that of Bellarmine, who
will have the honor to rest in the Image, and not to be only accidental, and
improper? Thirdly, this distinction does in no sort satisfy us, who deny that
an Image may be worshipped in any respect whatsoever. To the proof out of
Arist. de memor. and reminise.
Aristotle I answer more particularly, that Thomas presupposes that which we
deny, that it is lawful to have such an Image to such purposes. Besides, if
all he say be granted him, he does not prove that it is lawful to intend
worship to the Image, but that the worship performed to the party whose Image
it is, by occasion of the Image, is also given to the Image, though to the one
principally, to the other but accidentally. Lastly to the similitude I say, it
is not true that he which does his homage to the king does worship his purple
garment, because it is no part of him; neither should he that had worshipped
Christ hanging on the Cross at the time of his passion, have worshipped the
Cross together with Christ, no more then he that worships the king being on
horseback, worships the horse on which he rides. Indeed he that worships
Christ, worships him God and man (though the worship be done to him only in
respect of his Godhead) but the reason is, that Chrst is as well man as God.
There is no such conjunction betwixt the Image, and the party whose image it
is, and therefore for our purpose it suffices to know, that how small honor
soever he or you assign to the Images themselves, if it be religious it is
Idolatrous, if civil, ridiculous.

But what should I spend time in refuting this distinction of Thomas, when as
one of your own Schoolmen has done it Anno 1350.
long ago: our Countreyman Robert. Ho^ cot in lib Sapient. l^ct. 7.
Holcot having propounded the question, whether it be lawful for Christians to
adore any Images, and having proved it unlawful, as by other reasons, so by
the second Commandment, objects against himself out of Thomas in this sort.
To this question (says he) Thomas answers, That an Image may be considered
two ways, either as it is an Image, and so no honor is due unto it, as none is
due to wood or stone: otherwise it may be considered, as there is the same
motion to the Image, and to that, whose Image it is, and so the same honor is
due to the Image, and to him, whose Image it is. But against this answer
(says Holcot) I object, first thus, Divine honor is due to God only, But no
Image is God, Therefore such honor is due to no Image. Therefore it implies a
contradiction, to say, that divine honor is due to God only, and yet that it is
due to the Image of Christ, and to Christ. Beside, if the same honor be due to
the image of Christ, and to Christ, the same honor is due also to a stone and
to Christ, and by consequence, the same honor is due to Christ, and to a
creature, which is not to be believed. Again, he that worships any thing with
divine honor, confesses it to be God. Therefore if any man might lawfully
give divine honor to the image of Christ, he might lawfully protest, and
confess something that is not God, to be God. Therefore (says Holcot in his
conclusion) It may otherwise be said. That no adoration is due to an Image, and
that it is not lawful to adore any Image. For true adoration is in spirit and
devotion, and in the highest degree of love; and this we may not direct to any
creature.

Augustine, and long after him Gregory, in plain terms denies Images to be
adored.

^^ins says, without quoting any place that Augustine and Gregory in
plainetearmes deny Images to be adored; and so do we too, taking adoring as
they do for the worship that is proper to God.

Perkins quotes: for Edit. 1598.
he quotes both particularly, though you deny it. August. de morib. eccles.
cap. 35.
Austin speaks of the Idols of the Gentiles; and I hope you will not allow
them any kind of worship, not only not adoration. Master Perkins truly
holding all your Images that you worship to be Idols also, condemns the
adoring of them by that place of Austin, though it be intended specially
against the Idols of the Heathen.

Gregor. lib. (...). epist. 9.
Gregory's testimony, in the place quoted by Master Perkins, allows no
further use of any Images, than to be Lay men's books. They are not set up in
the Churches (says he) to be adored, but only to instruct the minds of the
ignorant. If they were set up to be worshipped with any kind of worship, how
is this speech of Gregory's true? But indeed there was no religious worship
but adoration known in Gregory's time, and that was proper to God, as religion
it self is.

99. 5. Cast down your selves before his footestoole. Answ. The words are
thus to be read, Bow at his footestoole: that is, at the Arc and Mercieseat,
for there he has made a promise of his presence: the words therefore say not,
bow to the Arc, but to God at the Arc.

The first reason by him proposed is this Psalm 98. Cast down your selves
before his sootes^oole, which was the Arc: now if the Arc were to be
worshipped, because it represented Gods footstool, much more may the Image
be worshipped. M. Perkins answers, that the words must be englished thus,
Bo^ at or before the Arc, notto the Arc, but to God before the Arc.

Reply. If it were so, yet must they admit that we must kneel, at or before
Images, so we kneel to honor or pray to God: against which, some of their
Preachers do crielike madmen: but the Hebre^ phrase carries, that we must
kneel to the arc, as they who be sk^lfull in the language do know, and that
the arc was worshipped of the Israelites is otherwise very evident: for first
none but the high Priest might come into the place where it was: and it was
carried before the campewith great solemnity 1. Reg, 4. Cap. 6.
to search out a reasting place for the whole host. And when they were to sight
against the Philistines, * they had great confidence in the presence of the
arc: and cap. 6,50000. of the Bethsamites were slain for seeing the arc; and
1. Reg. 2.
Oza was by God smitten to death for touching the arc. Does not all this
convince in what reverence the arc was had, even by Gods own testimony?

If the Arc were to be worshipped, because it represented Gods footstool;
much more may the Image be worshipped. But the Arc was therefore to be
worshipped: Therefore much more may the Image be worshipped.


I deny your whole Antecedent: first the consequence of your proposition: For
it does not follow, that we may worship Images devised by men to represent God,
because we may worship the Arc, where God himself promised his presence, and
which he did appoint as an assurance of his presence. If you can show us the
like promise to your Images, you say somewhat; else nothing.

Your Assumption also is false; The Arc was not to be worshipped. To your
proof Master Perkins answers truly, that the Psalm does not command
worshipping of the Arc, but worship before the Arc. You reply first, that
therefore it is lawful to kneel before Images. I answer, your consequence is
false, because your Images are your own wicked devices, and have no promise of
Gods presence: therefore it is senselesnes to kneel before them, not madness to
cry out against such folly.

Your second reply is, that the Hebrew phrase carries it, that we must kneel
to the Arc, as the skillful in that language know. First remember, that these
are Authors in the air, as you answered about that place of Daniel. Secondly
know, that they that are skillful say otherwise. What say you to the Chaldae.
Paraphrast. ad Psalm. 99. 5.
Chaldee Paraphrast, who expounds it; Worship in the house of his Sanctuary;
and yet he keeps (...)
the proposition that is in the Hebrew. So does the Latin translation in the
same Psalm, where the same proposition is used, Verse. 9. Adorate in monte
sancto eius.
worship in his holy mountain: the Chaldae. Paraphrast. ad verse. 9.
Chaldee has, in the mountain of the house of his Sanctuary: the Graec. 70.
(...).
Greek, not much unlike, In, or toward his holy hill. The same seems to have
been Theodor. in Psalm. 98.
Theodorets judgment of the place in question: His footstool was sometimes
thought to be the Temple at Jerusalem; but now the Churches, which are over all
the earth, and Sea, wherein we worship the most holy God. Of the same opinion
is Vatablus ad Scabellum.
Vatablus: Cast down your selves before his footstool, that is (as he
expounds himself in his note there) In the Temple, or before the Arc, in
which God exhibited his presence. So does Lyra ad Psalm. 99.
Lyra interpret it, who was a Jew borne, and a Christian by profession, worship
his footstole, that is, before his footstool. The Glosla ordin. and interlin.
ibi.
ordinary, and Interlinear glosses expound it out of Chrysostom. de Trinit.
Ambros de spirit. sanct. lib. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
the Fathers, of Christ's manhood to be worshipped, by reason of the
hypostatical union of it with the Godhead; what is that to the worshipping of
Images? For the further auowing of that translation, we have also R. David
Kimchis ibid.
R. David Kimchis authority.

Lastly, you bring diverse proofs, that the Arc was had in great reverence;
all needless: for who denies it? Was there not great reason to esteem highly
of that, whereby God was extraordinarily present with the Jews, as with no
people, nor in any place of the world beside? What then? was it therefore
worshipped by the Priest, when he went in once a year where it was? Did the
people worship it, when it was carried before them? As 1. Sam. (...). (...)
for that confidence the Jews put in it, they got little by it, because they
superstitiously abused it, against Gods commandment, putting trust in the
presence of it abroad, when it should have been in the Tabernacle where God had
promised his presence with it. Was this worship to the Arc, which the Lord
delivered into the hands of the Philistines? 1. Sam. 6. (...).
Neither were those 50070. Bethsamites slain for not worshipping it, but for
presuming to look into it; and 2. Sam. 6. (...)
Vzzah for touching it, not because he did not worship it.

Ierom, Epist. 17. ^ap. (...).
who does teach that it was the more worshipped for the Cherubines and
pictures of angels that were erected at the ends of it* whereby he declares
that he thought Images vvorthie of religious worship.

Ieroms 17. Epistle, alleged by Master Perkins to prove that Rome is Babylon,
you answer thus: Good sir, if S. Jerome had meant, that that Epistle should
have had his authority, he would have set it out in his own name: which
seeing he thought it not expedient, set the authority of it aside, and urge
his reasons, if you think it worth your labor, and you shall be answered.
These your own words shall serne in steed of answer. But for the satisfying
of all men I will set down Ieromes words, that they may see with what care and
truth you cite the testimonies of the ancient writers. The Jews (says Jerome)
in former times Venerabantur sancta sanctorum.
worshipped the Holy of Holies, because there were the Cherubins, and the
Propitiatory, and the Arc of the Testament, Manna, Aarons Rod, and the golden
Altar. Does Jerome teach in these words, that the Arc was the more worshipped,
for the Cherubins and pictures of Angels, that were erected at the end of it?
First, he makes no mention of any pictures of Angels, but only of the
Cherubins. Secondly, he speaks not of worshipping the Arc, but the Holy of
Holies, because of the things that were in it. Thirdly, he makes the
Propitiatory, Manna, Aarons Rod, and the golden Altar, causes of that worship,
as well as the Cherubins. Lastly, in the words following, he counts the
Sepulcher of our Lord Venerabilius.
more worthy of worship. But to answer plainly to your false allegation of
Ieromes authority; what an indignity were it to the Majesty of God, that the
assurance of his presence should be the more worshipped, because of the
Cherubins and pictures of Angels, that were erected at the ends of it; which
also, with the Arc it self, were hid from all men's sight, in the Holy of
Holies? Jerome means, that those things made the people conceive more
reverently of that Holy of Holies, and struck them with a kind of awe.

Paul, Hebr. 11.
that Jacob by faith adored the top of his son Joseph's rod: so does the
Greek text of S. Paul say, as Erasmus also translateth it: The Protestants
mangle the text pitifully, to avoid the place: see the Annotations of Rhemes
Testament.

Heb. 11. 21.
The text in the Greek is according to your own editions, (...).
worship upon the top of his own staff. So does your Interlin. bibl. ibi.
Interlinear read it. So Arias Montan. ibi.
Arias Montanus. Erasmus, Ad.
Erasmus notes the error of your old translator in leaving out the preposition
which he himself interprets, ad, as it were to ward the top. The Syriac.
inter. Pagnin. ibi.
Syriak translateth as we do, upon the top of his staff. Vatablus ibi.
Pagnine thus, he worshipped leaning upon his staff. Ad summum ^aculi.
Vatablus keeps the words of the old translation, but he expounds them in
this sort, Adored, that is (says Vatablus) give thanks: The top of his
staff, (...) toward the top of his staff, that is, Innixus baculo suo, prae
senecture.
Leaning upon his staff for age. Theodor. ibi.
Theodoret makes the adoration civil, to figure out the kingdom of Israel in
the tribe of Ephraim Jacobs younger son. Your Glossa interlin.
Gloss says, he worshipped Christ by whom he had domination, and a scepter of
authority in Egypt: or the kingdom of Christ, which in that was sigured to
be, and to come among the Gentiles. Glossa ordin.
Another gloss says directly, he worshipped God, presently upon his son
Joseph swearing. Lyra. ibi.
Lyra lays out the matter more largely, and plainly after this manner: Jacob
(says Lyra) believed that Christ should be buried, and rise again in the Land
of promise: therefore he made Joseph swear, that he would cause his body to be
carried thither. After he had sworn, he worshipped God with thanks, turning
himself toward the beds head, according to the translation of S. Jerome; as
it appears Genes. 47. The 70. translate as it is in this place, and both are
true. For he worshipped toward the beds head, which stood west; toward which
part the Jews do worship; and because he was old, he had a staff, upon the
top whereof he leaned, when he gave thanks to God. Therefore we must not
conceive, that he worshipped the top of the Scepter or staff, but he
worshipped God, leaning upon the staff. So does Theoph ib^
Theophylact expound it, Leaning and resting upon his staff for age. Though he
does also follow the exposition of Chrysostom. in Hebr. hom. 26.
Chrysostom concerning the kingdom of Israel in the Tribe of Ephraim. The
same exposition brings Occumenius the Greek Scholiast, out of Photius apud
Oecumenium
Photius, upon the top of his staff, that is, (...)
being now old, the same bring Lombard, Thomas. Caietan. ibi.
Lombard, Thomas and Caietan.

It is strange, that a man professing knowledge, should speak so untruly. Do we
mangle the text pitifully? or rather do not you slander us shamefully? we
neither take away, nor alter any word, syllable, letter, or accent in the text:
but leaving that whole, only add two words in a different letter, to make the
meaning more plain; and that by Aug qq. in Genesis q 162.
Augustines authority, as your Rhem. Test. ad Heb. 11. 2^.
Rhemists confess, and as I have showed with the allowance of your best
Interpreters, for both the words. I will conclude with that of Jerome; in this
place (says Hieron. in quaest. Hebr. in Genes.
he) some feign without cause, that Jacob worshipped the top of Joseph's
Scepter, because forsooth, honoring his son, he honored his power. But in the
Hebrew, it is far otherwise. And Israel worshipped (says the Hebrew) toward
his beds head: namely, because after his son had sworn to him, being assured
of the thing he had requested, he worshipped God, Contra caput.
over against his beds head.

Object. II. Exodus 3. 5. God said to Moses, Stand a far off, and put off thy
shoes: for the place is holy. Now if holy places must be reverenced, then
much more holy images, as the cross of Christ, and such like. Ans. God
commanded the ceremony of putting off the shoes, that he might thereby
strike Moses with a religious reverence, not of the place, but of his own
Majesty, whose presence made the place holy. Let them show the like warrant
for images.

Exodus 3. Where God said to Moses, Put off thy shoes, for the place where thou
stand is holy. Now if places be holy and to be reverenced by reason of the
presence of Angels: why not, asvv^ll the Image that represents an Angel or
some Saint, which is equal to Angels? Master Perkins his answer rather
confirms than solueth this argument: for he says, that the Ceremony of
putting off his shoes, was commanded to strike Moses with a religious
reverence; not of the place but of the person there present, which was not
God but an Angel, as the text there expresses. Exodus 3.
The place then being holy, required the reverend respect of putting off his
shoes, and that reverence done to the place; stroke Moses with a religious
reverence of the Angelspeaking in the person of God: even so holy pictures
being first duly reverenced, do strike men with a religious regard of the
Saint represented.

If places be holy, and to be reverenced by reason of the presence of Angels,
why not as well the Image, that represents an Angel or some Saint, which is
equal to an Angel? But places are holy and to be reverenced by reason of the
presence of Angels. Therefore the Image that represents an Angel or some
Saint, equal to an Angel, is holy and to be reverenced.


I deny your whole Antecedent; and first the consequence of your proposition.
Because although we should grant that some place were holy, because of the
presence of the Angels; yet would it not follow that therefore Images are holy,
where there is no presence of an Angel. For all your consecrating and
coniuring of Images cannot make any Angel, or Saint to afford his presence in
them. Your assumption is false. There is no holiness in places, because of the
presence of Angels; as may appear by the Scriptures, where their apparitions
are described, no action of reverence at all being performed to the places of
their presence. In particular to your proof M. Perkins answers, that this
was done, not because the place where Angels appear is holy, but upon an
especial commandment of God, to strike Moses with a reverence of Gods
Majesty, who was there present.

You reply, first that God was not present there, but an Angel; I answer that
God was there present, as it is plain, because the Angel was lehouah. Exodus 3.
2.
And lehouah saw that he turned to see. And Verse. 7.
lehouah said. Yea the whole discourse shows, that God himself was the
Angel, namely the second person in Trinity, who is called Malac. 3. 1.
the Angel of the Conenant, because he was sent for the salvation of Gods
elect. So Act. 7. 31. 33.
Stephen though he call him an Angel, calls him ass the Lord. And indeed
who but God could say, I am that I am, Exodus 3. 14.
as the Angel there does?

Secondly, you say the Answer rather confirms than solues the Argument:
Because as that astion struck Moses with a reverence of the Angel, so holy
Pictures duly reverenced, strike men with a religious regard of the Saint
represented. What is this but to beg the question? you take it as granted,
that there may be Images, and that religious reverence may be given to them:
but these are the very doubts, we dispute of. Inded if it were true, that
there may be such Images, and that religious honor is to be yielded to
creatures, there were somewhat in your Similitude to the purpose: and yet
similitudes do not prove but illustrate. The sorce of your reason is, that
Moses was commanded by god to put off his shoes, that he might be stricken
thereby with reverence of God: Therefore we must worship Images, that we may be
stricken with reverence of Angels and Saints. The consequence is naught. Gods
particular charge to Moses at that time, warranteth not men to enjoin worship
to Images, that Angels may be worshipped by them.

Exodus 12. 1^.
And the vestments of Priests Exodus 28. 5.
, because they are dedicated and employed to holy uses: even so Images which
are made in honor of God and his Saints, and erected to move and teach us to
embrace heavenly courses.

holy: for of worshipful days I think no man ever heard, though your Latin
translation say, Eadem festiuitate venerabilis.
The seventh day shall be venerable, with the same festiuitie, that is, shall
be kept with like solemnity to the first. The words in the Hebrew are all one,
in the former and later part of the verse, and therefore so should the
translation be; Now in the former your translation is, the first day shall be
holy and solemn. The Hebrew as Arias Mon. ad Exodus 12.
Montanus translateth it, on the first day (shall be) a convocation of holiness,
and on the seventh day shall be a convocation of holiness; that is (as Vatab.
ibi.
Vatablus truly expounds the Hebrew phrase) An holy Convocation. So does
Pagnin. ibi.
Pagnine also translate it. But this holiness which you rightly expound to be a
dedication or employment to Gods service, neither does require, nor will admit
any worshipping of the days or garments: but Images are not holy, for they are
neither commanded of God, nor allowed.

Object. III. It is lawful to kneel down to a chair of estate in the
absence of the king or Queen: therefore much more to the images of God, and of
Saints in heaven glorified, being absent from us. Answ. To kneel to the
chair of estate, is no more but a civil testimony, or sign of civil
reverence, by which all good subjects when occasion is offered, show their
loyalty and subjection to their lawful Prince. And this kneeling being on
this manner, and to no other end, has sufficient warrant in the word of God.
But kneeling to the image of any Saint departed, is religious, and consequently
more then civil worship, as the Papists themselves confess. The argument then
proves nothing, unless they will keep themselves to one and the same kind
of worship.

Prince, whom it represents: even so the Images of holy personages that
reign now in heaven, are to be worshipped with a holy and religious kind of
courtesy: for as Temporal honor is due unto a Temporal Prince, so religious
and spiritual honor, is due unto spiritual and most holy personages: And as
a good subject testifyeth his loyalty and good affection toward his Prince,
by honoring his regal throne: So does a good Christian give testimony of his
dutiful, both estimation and devotion toward those heavenly creatures, by
giving honor unto their Images. At leastwise, why do not the Protestants
exhibit civil reverence as well unto the representations of Gods Saints, as to
the shadows of the secular majesty? unless it be because they are fallen
out with the Saints of God, and are become adorers of sinful men.

Perkins drew your argument from a comparison of quantity, as the Logicians
call it, from the greater to the less; you fetch it from a comparison of
quality by way of Similitude, which, as I answered before, serves to make a
thing more plain, not to prove it true, as the other comparison does, if it
be rightly made.

You report his answer by halues, for he denies the consequence of the
argument which he propounded; adding this reason of his denial, that the
civil worship has warrant sufficient in the word of God, but your religious
worship has not: so that either you must make your worshipping of Images
civil, or else your comparison holds not.

His answer is sufficient to overthrow your reason, as you propound it, for it
denies that the things are alike, adding farther against your proof, that no
religious honor is due to any but God only: if you can show warrant for it in
the word, he yields. But alas you cannot, your chief Champion Thomas of Aquine
having made an objection against worshipping of the image of Christ with divine
worship, because there is no tradition to be found in Scripture for the adoring
of Images, is feign for answer to flee to unwritten traditions. We must
answer (says Thom. 3. q. 25. Act. 3 ad 4.
Thomas) that the Apostles by the familiar instinct of the holy ghost,
delivered certain things to the Churches to be observed, which they have not
left in writing, but only in the observation of the Church by the succession of
the faithful. And surely he that will take pains to consider the allegations
of the seventh Council, the s^d at Nice, which was called of purpose to
establish the worshipping of Images, shall find very pitiful proof out of
Scripture. Therefore having warrant and charge to perform all civil honor to
princes, we do accordingly; having neither for any devotion or religious
reverence to Angels or men departed, though Saints in heaven, we dare not
worship their images: which also we know to be particularly forbidden in
Scripture.

And that is the reason why we give no reverence to any idolatrous
representations of holy men now in heaven, devised by men to a purpose, that
has no warrant by commandment, or example in scripture. As for civil
reverence, it is due to them only with whom we have some dealing in worldly
matters, and so cannot belong to any in heaven, and much less to their
pictures, without any liking of themselves.

Differ. III. The Papists also teach, that God may be lawfully worshipped in
images, in which he has appeared unto men: as the Father, in the image of an
old man: the Son, in the image of a man crucified: and the holy Ghost in the
liknes of a dove, etc. But we hold it unlawful to worship God, in, by, or at
any image: for this is the thing which (as I have proved before) the second
commandment forbids.

Master perkins makes a third point of difference, that we may not worship God
in any such Image, in which be has appeared unto men. In this we do not
differ, unless he takes it otherwise then he delivers it. Those Images we
hold more reverend than any others, as representations nearer approaching unto
the divinity, yet because they do not express the deity, God is not
directly apprehended not worshipped in them, but only by collection: as for
example. The form of a ^raue old man, in Daniel, does not represent Gods
person, but we gather by that ancient form Gods eternity, whereby we a^^se
to a more perfect conceit of God, whom we adore: now other Images of Christ
and his Saints, do carry ou^ minds directly upon their proper persons, whom
in their Images we adore and worship after their degrees. But we worship
Images with far meaner reverence than any of the Saints, in regard only,
that they do represent such presonages, and do induce us more to love and
honor them, and do stir up our dullness more often and ardently to honor
God in the Saints, and the Saints in their degrees: as also to imitate their
holy example as has bin said more than All religious honor is Gods
once, that all may understand how far off we are from giving Gods honor unto
either Saint or Image.

Perkins in worshipping God in the images in which he has appeared? First, he
says, that it is unlawful to worship God, in, by, or at an Image, those are
his words in this very place. Secondly, do you only hold those Images more
reverend then other? Do you not give them divine honor, even the same honor
that is due to God himself, though accidentally, as you hold against
Bellarmine? Is not Thomas his reason for worshipping the Image and Cross of
Christ with divine honor, as strong for the image of God the Father, and of
God the holy ghost? But what should I go about to prove so plain a matter. I
would your being ashamed to defend so gross Idolatry, would make you forsake
it. Do you not grant that you worship God in these Images, though, as you say
here, not directly? How do you then agree with Master Perkins, who delivers his
meaning plainly, that in such images God may not be at all worshipped, no not
by them, nor at them? and yet for very shame you would not be thought to speak
against so manifest a truth, though without shame you make show of agreement
where there is none, and against all equal dealing accuse Master Perkins of
seeming to take the matter otherwise then he delivers it.

By person you mean one property of God common to all three persons, or else
the nature of the Godhead. But I pray you tell me, by what warrant of scripture
you paint God the Father like this old man in Daniell, if you do it not by the
authority of this place. If it be the end of this picture to signify Gods
eternity, surely he that appropriates this image to the Father, makes the
Father only eternal. This is that more perfect conceit of God that you come
to by this image, namely, to deny the Eternity, and so the Godhead of the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. Further, give me leave to understand you if I can.
What can you possibly know concerning Gods eternity, by the sight of this
grave old man? If you did not believe that God is eternal, before you looked
upon that image, it is not possible you should learn it, or give credit to it,
by seeing the picture, especially if it represent not as you speak the person
of God. But indeed the gazing on such Idols is more likely to draw men into a
conceit, that God grows old, and so his eternity is wearing away, then to
teach them that he never had beginning, and never shall have end. You will
reply, that Daniell does so describe him. True, as the scripture every where
does for our capacity, applying affections, parts, and actions of men to God.
The Lord, who of his infinite wisdom appointed the penning of these things for
our instruction, has promised a blessing to every part of his word, that it
may be read and heard without danger; but Idols are accursed by him, even such
pictures of old men, because whatsoever the pretense of making them be, they
fill ignorant people with error and superstition.

What Images mean you? sure not all, for you worship the image of the Father,
of Christ, of the holy ghost, yea, the Thom. 3. q. ^5. art. 4. Bellarm. de
Imag. lib. 2. cap. 27.
wood of the cross on which he died, and every part and piece of it, though
never so little a scrap, with divine honor. To other Images (as I showed
before, out of your own writers) you give the same honor that you do to the
Saints themselves, because Thomas teaches you out of Aristotle, that there is
but one motion of our understanding and will, toward the Saint, and the image
of the Saint.

Aaron says, To morrow shall be the solemnity of Jehovah: whereby he does
give us to understand, that the calfe was but a sign of ^ehouah whom they
worshipped. Object. It seems the Israelites worshipped the calfe. For Aaron
says, verse 4. These be thy Gods (O Israel) that brought thee out of Egypt.
Answ. Aarons meaning is nothing else, but that the golden calfe, was a sign of
the presence of the true God. And the name of the thing signified is given to
the sign, as upon a stage he is called a King that represents the King. And
Augustine says, that images are wont to be called by the names of things
whereof Ad Simpli^. (...) 2. q. 3.
they are images, as the counterfeit of Samuel is called Samuel. And we must
not esteem them all as mad men to think that a calfe made of their earings,
being but one or two days old should be the God that brought them out of
Egypt with a mighty hand many days before.

And these are the points of difference touching Images, wherein we must
stand at variance for ever with the Church of Rome. For they err in the
foundation of religion, making indeed an Idol of the true God, and
worshipping an other Christ then we do, under new terms, maintayning the
idolatry of the heathen. And therefore have we departed from them: and so must
we still do, because they are idolaters: as I have proved.

Exodus 3^.
and yet the Israelits worshipped not the Calfe, but God in the Calfe, to which
we say, they did not worship the true God in the Calfe, but the God of the
Egyptians, which was taken by them to have the shape of a black Calfe, with
white spots. See S. Augustine. Lib. 18. de ciui^. cap. 5.
And therefore making the golden calfe to represent this false god, and
att^ibuting their deliverance, unto that supposed god, and not unto the God of
Israel, committed idolatry, which the text proves most manifest, De not.
deo^, Verse. 4.
these be thy gods that brought thee out of Egypt. M. Perkins answers, that
the meaning is nothing else, but that the golden Calfe was a sign of the
presence of the true God: such glosses without any authority of the ancient
fathers is ^idiculous, being against the plain text: but says he, we must not
think^ them so ^adde, as to take a Calfe made with their care-rings to be their
God, no: but we may well think them so ungrateful unto the true God their
deliverer, that they did ascribe their deliu^rance not to him, but unto that
God, which the Egyptians served, whose purtraiture was that Calfe.

Jehovah in or by the Calfe, which we prove by the text it self. s Exodus 32.
4.
These be thy Gods that brought thee out of the la^d of Egypt. But it was the
true God that brought them out of Egypt, even t Exodus 3. 14.
Jehovah. You answer, that they attributed their deliverance to that false God
of the Egyptians. Then did they think the Egyptian God to be Jehovah; for to
Jehovah do they consecrate the day of dedicating the Calfe. u Exodus 32. 5.
Tomorrow shall be the holy day to Jehovah. But how ridiculous a conceit is
this, to feign, that the Jews should imagine that the Egyptians God was their
deliverer, whereas they knew, that the great wise men of Egypt, the chief
worshippers of that God, had striuen against Moses, and their deliverance, by
all means possible, Exodus 8. 19.
till at last they and the power of their God were overcome? So that indeed,
it was impossible they should be so sottish as to dream, that the Egyptian God
had delivered them. And if this had bin their fault, being a thing so monstrous
and sensles, God would certainly have charged it upon them, when he laid out
their sin to Moses. But he rather accuses them for breaking his
commandment by making a molten Calfe, affirming to it, and proclaiming, Exodus
3. 8.
These are thy Gods that brought thee out of Egypt. This is farther confirmed
by those two calves, which in imitation of this, 1. Reg. 11. 28
Jeroboam set up to worship the true God by, and so continued even by 2. Reg.
10. 16. 29.
Iehu, who destroyed the heathen Idols.

The text proves nothing for you, These be thy Gods that brought thee out of
Egypt. For the Egyptians had no such Calfe to their God, though the Ox or
Calfe called Apis (as August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 5.
Austin ^aith in the place alleged) was consecrated to their chief God
Serapis. If we brought nothing for our exposition but authority, you might
stop our months with the contrary judgment of the ancient writers, but
against reason authority is of small force, and yet you bring none for your
self, nor answer Master Perkins, showing that Images are called by the names
of the things they re^ (...), and so that calfe, made to be a token of Iehouahs
presence, that brought them out of Egypt, is said to be the God, that brought
them out of the land of Egypt.

^alm^^. Ord. 2. tra^ (...). a^ (...) ^od (...). Act. 5. A ba^ba^ous Persian
Xenias, as (...) N^ (...)* 16 cap. 27. Then Ma^^met the great god of the
Turks. Al^ (...) 15. and 17. with such like infidels, ^o^^^ers, and the
skumme of the earth.

See Cardinal Bella^mme de Jmag. lib. 2. cap. 6.

Genesis 35. (...)
Jacob, who made all his household give him their Images, which he buried under
an Oak, that was by Shechim, about the year of the world 2270? The
commandment of God given on Mount Synah, the preaching of the Prophets, and
the zeal of many worthy Kings of Judah, were long before the Jews Talmud,
Talmud begun to be gathered 300. years after Christ.
which was begun to be gathered, and written more then 300. years after
Christ, and was not Finished about the year 506.
finished till about the year 506. long before which time, as I have showed,
Origin and Clement did not only speak against the Heathen Idols, but defend
the Christians, for refusing to have any Images, and prove that the use of them
was unlawful and unfit.

I In my answer to the Epis^le Dedicatory.
showed before about this matter of Xenaias, who at soonest was above 400.
years after Christ, that Images were withstood as unlawful, even in the
beginning of preaching the Gospel. This Nicephorus wrote not much more then 300.
years since.

As for Blasphemous Mahomet, who patched up his abominable Alcoran, with
pieces of all kinds of professions, though his intent was damnable, and his
writing most sottish, yet has he many things agreeable to the truth, taken out
of the books of Moses; and in this point of Images, his acknowledging of the
truth, shall make the more to your condemnation.

What should we do looking in Bellarmine? if there were any thing for your
advantage, more then that which you have alleged, you might and would have
made bold with it, as you do generally in all your answers. Bellarmine there
tells us a story of the mislikers of Images, but he neither begins where ^e
should, and dissents without any sufficient reason, from Alphonsus a Castro,
and makes that seventh Council his chiefest bulwark.

I ^ctant. I^ car. de pass. Christ. Kne^le down and adore the venerable w^od
of the Cross.

H^^rome, (...) vita Paulae: She adored prostrate before the Cross, as if she
had se^^e Christ hanging on it.

Basil against J^lian cited, Act. 2. Synod. 7. I honor the history of the
Images, and do properly worship them.

Finally, in the 7. general Council holden 900. years past, they are
condemned of heresy, that deny the use and worshipping of holy Images.

Lactantius, though he were an ancient Christian, was not divine; and in these
verses (if they be his) he shows himself liker a light Poet then a grave
writer; whose authority should be taken in so great a matter.

Ierom reports what Paula did in Jerusalem. For which he that well
considers what it was, may find more cause to commend her zeal, then to like
of her actions. She went into the Sepulcher, and kissed the stone of his
resurrection, which the Angel had removed from the door of the Tomb; The
place of his body, where the Lord had lien, as if she had thirsted for the
desired waters, she lickt with her faithful tongue. who sees not more zeal
then knowledge, in this behavior? Neither P^ter, nor John, nor any of the
Disciples, are reported to have done any such thing, though they came to the
grave by and by after our Saviors resurrection. Was she more devout? no, but
more ignorant, and passionat.

This testimony of Basil is no where to be found, but in this Council, which
was packed for the nonst to confirm Idolatrous Image worshippers. I showed the
like practice of the Council before, concerning other writers.

Now for a conclusion of this point, I will briefly note the beginning of
Images among the Christians, and speak a little of that seventh Council so
often alleged against us. The first use of any Images, after our Saviors
ascension, was brought in by Simon the Sorcerer, who was also the first, and
principal Heretik. Of whom Theodore^. haerer. lib. (...) princip.
Theodoret and August. d^ haeres. cap. 1.
Austin write, that he gave his own, and his strumpet Selenes Images to his
followers, to be worshipped by them. After him, one August. ibid. cap. 7.
Marcellina, of the sect (as it is said) of the Carpocratians, worshipped the
Images of Jesus, Paul, Homer, and Pythagoras. The Gnostics presently after
her, worshipped the Images of Christ, and are condemned for it by Irenae. lib.
1. cap. 23. 24.
Irenaeus. They have painted Images (says Epipha. lib. (...). ^om. 2. haeres.
27.
Epiphanius of Carpocrates, and the Gnostics) which they say are the Images of
Jesus, and that they were made under Pontius Pilate, while our Savior lived:
but they keep these Images secret yet (as he observes) they worshipped those
Images. Amongst true Christians the beginning of Images may well be thought to
have bin such, as Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 17.
Eusebius guesseth it was, namely an imitation of the Gentiles, who used to
make and keep the Images of them, by whom they had received any special good.
Yea the Gentiles, being newly converted, could not by and by be weaned from all
use of Images, more then from other superstitions. It was necessary (says
Tertull. d^ ^oro. militis.
Tertullian) in former times, to yield many things to the Christians, who (for
the most part) were converted from Paganism to religion, when they were old,
and so could hardly leave those things, to which all their life time they had
bin accustomed, But as yet they had no Churches, nor use of Images, in their
assemblies. That seems to have grown by the Basil. in orat. de Ba^laam
Ma^^yre.
painting of the histories of Martyrs in tables, and setting them up in
Churches. Which advantage the Devil, that always watches his opportunity, to
bring in Idolatry by little and little, greedily apprehended and followed, and
at the last brought to such a height, that the Leo 3. Isau^cus.
Emperor Leo, the third surnamed Isaurius, was feign to call a Council.
Constantinop. anno 729.
Council at Constantinople, about the year 729. wherein it was decreed, that
the Images should be pulled down. This Gregory the second Bishop of Rome, who
some 13. years before had caused Images to be allowed in a Council. Roman. sub
Cregor. 2.
Council at Rome, took very hainously; and so much the rather because the
Emperor had required obedience of the Latin Church, to the decrees past in
that Council at Constantinople. But the Bishop was so far from yielding
obedience, that he took this commandment of the Emperor, as an occasion to
withdraw his allegiance from his Sovereign, and seized into his hands all the
authority, that was yet remaining to the Empire in Italy. This contention,
after the death of Leo, grew more hot; in so much that his son Constantine
Copronymus, to make some good end of the matter, assembled another Council.
Constantinop. sep^imum sub Constantino Coprony mo.
Council at Constantinople, about the year 755. which he calls the seventh
general Council, where there were present 308. Bishops, and wherein Images were
again condemned.

About some 34. years after, Jrene; widow to the Emperor Leo 4.
Irene daughter to a King of the Tartars, and widow to the Emperor Leo the 4.
(a Pagan by birth, and little better in religion) during the nonage of her
son Constantine, called a Council at Constantinople, wherein a great number
of Bishops maintained by the word of God, that Images ought to be abolished.
Which the Empress perceiving, found means to break up the Council; and
afterward appointed another again the next year at Council. se^^nd. Nicen.
(...) ^rene.
Nice in Bythinia: wherein it was decreed, that Images should be worshipped,
and that Council of Nice should be counted the seventh general Council, and
not the other, which had been held before at Constantinople against Images.
This is that seventh Council which our Papists so magnify; and it passes
under the name of that famous Council of Nice, wherein Arius was condemned,
every man not knowing, that this was a second Council betwixt three and four
hundred year after the former. But that all men may be the better able to
judge of this foresaid Council, let me propound the speeches of some of the
Bishops on the behalf of Images. Carol. Magnus de imag. lib. 3. cap. 17.
I receive and embrace honorably (says Constantine Bishop of Constans in
Cyprus) holy and reverend Images, according to the service of adoration, which
I perform to the Consubstantiall and life giving Trinity: And them that do
not so think, nor glorify them, I separate from the Catholic and
Apostolical Church, and lay them under the Curse, and join them with such as
have denied the Incarnation of Christ our God, for our salvation. Joan.
Oriental. legatus in Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 4.
The holy Father has said plainly, that the Image of the King is called the
King, and yet there are not two Kings: so that it is clear that he which shall
adore the Image, and say it is Christ, sins not. The most holy Patriarch,
Tharasius i^ cod. Council. Act. 3.
Tharasius said, let us observe that the old Scripture ^ad signs, and that out
of it the new hathtaken Cherubins of glory, shaddowing the propitiatory. The
holy Synod answered very well Sir, so is the truth. The most holy Patriarch
said; if the old Scripture had Cherubins shadowing the Propitiatory, we also
will have the Images of Jesus Christ, and of the holy mother of God, and of the
Saints shadowing our Altars. Theodosius apud. Carol. Magn. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Theodosius Bishop of Ancyra said, whatsoever things are written, are written
for our learning; therefore the holy Images and Pictures graven, and painted,
are painted and set up for our learning, zeal, and example. Elias apud Carol.
vbi supra.
Elias the most holy Bishop of Creet, said, According to the most reverend
letters of Adrian, most holy Pope of old Rome, I confess and hold Images to be
holy and worthy of worship, never laying them away, but adoring them perfectly;
them that confess otherwise, I accursse. The othet most holy Bishops and
venerable Monks cried out; Council. Ni^ cen. 2. Act. 3.
And we all together receive, and embrace, and adore Images, with very great
honor. Council. eod. Act. 2.
Stauratius Bishop of Chalcedon said, I receive, embrace, and honor Images, as
being the pledges of my salvation. Ibid.
Peter Bishop of Nichor said, I receive venerable Images, and adore them, and
will always teach the doctrine, that I may one day give account to God our
Judge, in the world to come. Act. 4.
John the most religious Priest, Lieue-tenant of the Apostolic thrones said.
Therefore an Image is greater then prayer. And this is come to pass by the
providence of God, for ignorant men's sakes. Act. 1.
The same man counts the denying of worship to Images, the worst of all
heresies, as that which overthrows the government of our Saviors house. I
forbear to set down their reasons which are taken from Tradition, miracles,
and some places of Scripture so ridiculously applied, that it is little better
then blasphemy to make the holy Ghost president of so Idolatrous and sottish a
Council. Bergomensis lib. 10. Centur. 8. cap. 9. col. 629.
Constantine having subscribed to this Council by his mothers persuasion and
example in his none-age; after he came to years of discretion, and his own
government, by the advice of diverse learned men, repealed the decrees of it
concerning Images; and ere long after took the whole sway of the Empire from
his mother (who had usurped it as protectrix) into his own hands, which
dealing of his did incense the ambitious, and idolatrous woman, Zonar. tom. 3.
Paul Diacon. lib. 23. Sigebert. Anno 798.
that she caused certain traitors, first to pluck out his eyes; and
afterward to murder him: yea so great was her malice and fear, that she
ceased not, till she had made his sons her grand-childrens, or neuewes eyes
to be pulled out also: such an author, and patrones had that Idolatrous and
wicked Council; the chief foundation of Popish Images. Such as it was
notwithstanding, the decrees of it were sent by Pope Adrian the first to the
Emperor Charlemaine, that he might allow of them: But he held another Council.
Francofor. sub Carolo Magn.
Council at Franckfort; wherein it was concluded, that the second Council of
Nice, whereof we have spoken, should not be held either for general, or for
the seventh, or for a thing of any worth. The decrees of that Council
condemning Images, were by this repealed, and a book written by express
commandment of the Council of Franckfort, and published in the name of
Charlemaine, in which, as the Council of Constantinople is reproved, for
taking away all use of Images, even for history and memory: so that second
Council of Nice is particularly confuted and condemned. The like entertainment
found the decrees of that Council, amongst our countri-men here in England, as
you shall see by the testimony of a Monk, that writ 300. years ago. The Anno
795. Mathae. Westmonast.
same year (says Matthew of Westminster) Charles King of the Frenchmen sent
into Britain Librum Synodalem.
a book of decrees, wherein many things were found contrary to the true faith,
and that especially, that it was determined by the joint consent of almost all
the Doctors of the East, That Images are to be adored, which the Catholic
Church utterly detests. Against this, Albinus writ an Epistle wonderfully
endited, according to the authority of the holy Scriptures ^^d carried together
with that book of decrees to the King of Fr^ce in the name of the Bishops and
Nobles.

Yet was not this Council of Franckfort, nor the Epistle written by Albinus,
nor the book set out in Charlemaines name of sufficient strength to stop the
course of Idolatry, so violent it is where it finds any way made for it,
whereupon Claudius Taurinens. Episc.
Claudius Bishop of Turin having bin brought up and preferred by Charlemaine,
opposed himself by writing afresh against it, and (as Jonas Aurelianens. Epist.
Jonas Bishop of Orleans says, who writ against him) proceeded farther to cast
them out of all the Churches of his dioces. This opinion and fact of his, Jonas
writ against, yet so, as that he wholly agreed with him about the unlawfulness of
adoring Images against the second Council of Nice. But in the East the
quarrels about Images were more hot and dangerous, Synod. Parisiens. page 8.
which moved the Emperors Michaell and Theophilus, to send their Ambassadors
into France to the Emperor Lewis Le debon naire.
the courteous, son of Charlemaine about the year 823, to signify to him,
that the superstitious abuse of Images in their dominions, had made them
assemble a Council about the matter, in which it was decreed, that they should
not be worshipped with incense, lights, kneeling prayers, songs and service
before them, all which notwithstanding, that some of their clergy refusing to
yield obedience, had withdrawn themselves to the Pope of old Rome, complaining
to him, and slandering the East Church, that they therefore had sent their
Ambassadors both to him, and to the Pope, for the clearing of themselves of all
such false imputations, and that they might understand what the judgment of
their Churches was in those points. Hereupon Lewis the Emperor called a
national Council at Paris the Anno 824.
year following 824. wherein the conclusion was (as in the Council of
Franckfort) against both pulling down, and worshipping of Images, as appears
by an Epistle sent from the said Synod to Lewis and Lotharius, by two Bishops,
Italitgarius, and Flamarius, and according thereunto answer was returned to
the Emperors Michaell, and Theophilus. Thus much I thought good to set down,
as briefly as I could, he that would read of these matters more at large,
may find enough to content him in that excellent treatise of the Plessy of the
Mass. lib. 2. cap. 2. 3. 4.
Lord Plessy against the Mass, in the second book, the second, third, and
fourth Chapters. The judgment of all these matters I leave to all men
whatsoever, that will vouchsafe to weigh things by the Balance of the
Sanctuary, with the hand of true reason. Others, that had rather believe what
is told them, then try that they believe, I commit and commend to the mercy of
God. Whom I beseech, according to his good pleasure, to enlighten our hearts,
and incline our affections every day more and more, that we may discern and
acknowledge his most holy truth, to his glory, the good of his Church, and our
own everlasting salvation, through his Son Jesus Christ. To whom with the
Father, and holy Spirit, one God, immortal, invisible, and only wise, be all
glory, power, obedience, and thanksgiving for ever and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 11. lin. 1. read, in our time p. ead. l. 29. r. yes. p. 17. l. 11. r.
were not dedicated p. 36. l. 22. r. out. p. 44. l. 10. in the margin, r. Popes
breast p. 45 l. 21. r. and that. p. 57. l. 17. r. etc. p. ead. l. 35. r. them
Cardinal p. 68. lin. 18. r. is moved. p. cad l. 22. dele as. p. 87. l. 4. in
the margin, r. Appetit. p. 100. l. 10. in the margin, r consentientis. p. 129.
l. 34. r. he. p. ead. l. vlt. in margin, r. (...) p. 132. lin. 34. r.
conscience. p. 136. lin. 12. r. thereby. p 144 l. 15. r. uncertain. p. 148. l.
9. r. since. p. 155. l 23. dele, to. p. 158. l. 5. in the margin, r. take heed
your. p. 159. l. 9. r. his. p. 181. l. 9. r. it is not a short, p. 183. l. 27.
I. cannot cover two. p. 208. l. 24. dele, only. p. 250. l. 29. dele, your. p.
252. l. 4. r. he. p. 262. l. 30. r. But that this. p. 296. l. 35, r. for though
Christ. p. 353. l. 11. r. temporal satisfaction. p. 359. l. 2. in the marg. r.
way. p. 380 l. 27. r sin. p. 390. The measure of our Ladies most holy foot. p
ead. l. 3. r. ^^zes. p. 403. l. 22. r. good. p. 405. l. 17. r. three. p. 422.
l. 16. r. authority. p. 425 l. 18. (...) (...). p. 426. l. 30. r. is at those.
p. 441. l. 39. r. away. p. 451. l. 28. r. (...). p. 461. l. 36. r. Russin. p.
464. l. 6. r. Menandrians. p. 466. l. 24 r. Cerdon. p. 476. l. 4. dele be. p.
488. l. 31. r. Canon law. p. 502. l. 33. r. Austin. p. cad. l. 35 r. our
opinion. p. 506. l. 21. r. refraining. p. 521. l. 10. r. commended. p. 527.
lin. 7. dele by. p. 548. l 36 r. terret. p. 552. l. 34 read, that the image of
the living God should be made the image of an idol. and dead thing. p. 580. l.
14. r. the preposition. lin. 26. the same preposition. p. 592. lin. 30. read,
offering to it.


