Palladis Palatium: WISEDOMS PALACE. Or The fourth part of Wits Commonwealth.



LONDON ^mprinted by G. Elde for Francis Burton. 1604.

(...) me, again to present your worships with an other parcel of the same
man's labors, in hope that you both will (as formerly you have done) yeald a
favorable allowance unto this work, and also a kind construction of my rude,
though well meaning, Epistle. The book for argument contains variety of
many excelent sentences, collected out of the choicest writings of the ancient
fathers. Here may wit find pleasant and sweet flowers to suck hunny from.
Here may youth find wholesome precepts to derect his future life. Here may the
mind that reads with an intention to profit, reap singular commodity. Here
may the wearied and defatigate spirit, recreate it self with variable
delights. Here may most (good) dispositions light upon some things to firte
their desires. And here I doubt not but both your worships shall find much
matter of contentment, when your leasures will affoorde you time to peruse it.
I trust that I need not frame any Apology in the defense or excuse of the
book it self, for virtue is to be loved for it own sake, and therefore I
hope that the matter it self, will win favor unto it self. If not, yet I
know that, Virescit vnlnere virtus: Virtue if she be wounded can heal it
self, and will appear by so much more glorious, by how much more eagerly vice
endeavors to dim the brightness thereof.

Wherefore in full perswatio^ that it

(...) (...) alas virtue is well near banished, vice has almost gotten the
upper hand, wisdom is derided of fooks, and the seeming-wise approve
themselves to be witless, by their heedlesse courses, for Exitus acta probat:
the end tries the truth of the matter, and the rash conceits of young unripe
heads, are comptrouled by the approved experience of riper judgments. Many are
the excelent precepts which the works of the learned afford, and not few also
are the idle fancies of vain and witless heads. The latter sort men much hunt
after whereby they increase their follies, but the former sor^ is much
neglected whereby wisdoms reputatition is not a little impaired. Let there be
by stealth, or any other unlawful means, any idle Pamphlet, stuffed with more
then villainy, set to sale (to corrupt virtuous minds) and it shall not want
utterance, for Nitimur in vetitu^ semper cupimusque negat^, But let there be
many excellent books of much worth, co^piled, (if duly regarded) yet if some,
more then extraordinary matter be not therein contained, they may hap to lie by
the walls. The consideration whereof might easily discourage many good men from
pains taking in that kind, and terrify those who undertake the publishing
thereof, from aduenturing so far in a matter likely to prove so little to their
advantage. But yet hoping that the approved sayings and experimented sentences
of the worthy authors herein contained, will be some stay unto rash-headed
folly, and yield some content unto wisdoms lovers, in the perusal hereof: as
the Author has bestowed his pains in colecting hereof, so have I adventured
the Charges in Printing hereof, being hereunto the better encouraged by reason
of the good success that this authors former book entitled The sorrowful
Souls solace, or Tears of true repentance, shed for sin: has already
obtained at his readers hands: Thus gentle reader wishing that thou may
gain double as much pleasure in perusing hereof, as the author did pains in
collecting hereof, I rest thy friend and well-willer.

F. B.

A table of the principal heads contained in this Book.
Abstinence. page. 1. Abuse. page 4. Acceptance of persons. page 6. Aid. page
9. Anger. page. 12. Blessedness. page 14. Benefits and benefitting. page 16.
Blasphemy. page 20. Bondage. page 21. Charity. page 23. Chastity and
continency. page 26. Coryection. page 29. Curiosity. page 31. Conversation.
page 32. Discipline. page 34. Discord and Dissension. page 35. Delight and
pleasure. page 37. Desperation. page 38. Detraction. page 39. Devil. page 42.
Envy. page 44. Exercise. page 47. Excuse. page 48. Example. page 52. Flattery.
page 54. Faith. page 57. Grief. page 59. Guile and deceit. page 62. Heresy.
page 64. Humility. page 66. Ignorance. page 68. Infirmity. page 70. Justice.
page 71. Knowledge or wisdom. page 73. Learning. page 78. Liberality. page
81. Misery. page 83. Mercy and pity. page 86. Nature. page 88. Necgligence.
page 90. Nobility. page 91. Obedience. page 92. Obstinancie. page 94. Order and
degrees. page 95. Poverty. page 97. Preaching. page 99. Quareling, strife, and
contention. 101. Quietness, peace and tranquillity of mind. page 104.
(...) the sweetness of trifling toys, and what a joyful thing is it unto me
now to let go those things which before I feared to loose? For thou (oh Lord)
did cast the^ out of me, and thou, (oh chiefest sweetness) did enter
in their rooms: thou more sweet then all pleasures, but not to flesh and
blood: Thou that art more clear then all light, more inward then any secret,
and more excellent then all honors, but not to those that are high in their
own conceits. Aug. confess. Abstinence is the mother of health, and pleasure
of sickness, for without meat and drink lust quickly cease. Hierom. in his
epist. Moderate, and temperate meat, is commodious both to the soul and
body. Hierom. ad Rusticum. Great abstinence is daingerous unto the tender,
before they come unto ripe age, Idem ad latam. Abstinence, if it be so thou
tame not the body as much as it can abeare, is no virtue: and it is very
inordinate, if the body be brought lower then it ought. Greg. lib. 20. mor. Not
the flesh, but the vices thereof are through abstinence to be extinguished: so
it is necessary that every one be so far forth continent as may destroy the
vices, not the flesh: for oftentimes in pursuit of the enemy, therein, we kill
the citizen whom we love: and oftentimes also while we do, as it were spare our
fellow Citizen, we further the enemy in the skirmish, Idem. The appetite and
not the meat is faulty: for oftentimes we eat dainties without any fault
finding: but we do distaste those meats that are more gross, without any
feeling of conscience, Idem lib. 30. moral. Nothing is so pleasant as meat
well digested and decocted: nothing so available unto health, nothing so much
surthereth the sharpness of the senses, nothing so much repelleth sickness as
moderate refection. For sufficient not only nourishes us and preserves
health, but also begets delight: But superaboundance, or excess causes
diseases, brings molestations, a young man disobedient: a rich man that will
give no alms: a woman that is unchaste: a master without virtue: a contentious
christian: a poor man proud, an unrighteous king: a negligent Bishop: a common
wealth without discipline: and the people without law. Augustine. Acceptance
of persons.
GOD forbid that into the Tabernacles, rich men should be accepted before
poor, or noble before them of low condition: when thou rather have chosen
that with the weak thou should confound the strong. Agusti. Greatest is the
offense of ministers, because they respect not the causes, but the persons, and
the just poor man being despised, the unjust rich men are honored. Ambrose.
In judgment let not favor bear sway, but give sentence according to the
equity of the cause. Idem. It is not consanguinity, but the bond of virtue that
linketh men together. Idem. The affection urges us to do many things: for
whiles we regard the alliance of our earthly bodies we oftentimes offend the
creator both of bodies and souls. Hierome. To accept the person of a man, is
not to honor him as he is a man, but for some other thing wherewith he is
endewed. Gregory. Unjust judges, while they consider the calling of men, do
err in judgment yea very oftentimes the judges themselves do corrupt the
upright when as they themselves do shamfully defend the guilty and unjust.
Isydore. The acceptance of a man's person is a certain slender reverence or
regard given unto any one, not of desert, but for fear or profit. Cardinal
Hugh. Judgment is easily perverted by the rich man's bribes: but a poor man
wanting what to give is not only^ contemned, but also against equity is
oppressed. Isydore. The persons of men, not the justness of the causes are
accepted: bribes not laws are regarded: not what reason speaks, but what the
will affects: not what the mind thinks, but what the mind desires: not
what is lawful but what pleases is regarded: nay the eye is never so single,
that the whole body may be light, but always some leaven is mixed wherewith
the whole lump is corrupted. Innocentius. The poor man's cause is with delays
neglected: and the rich man's cause instantly prosecuted; To the poor all
rigor is showed, to the rich all curteste used: the rich men's bad causes are
hardly looked unto, but the poor are charged with heinous crimes. The poor
man's tale is negligently hard, but the rich man's words are highly esteemed.
Idem. The poor man cries, and no man hears: the rich man speaks and every
one applaudeth: the rich man speaks and all men hold their peace, and his
words are exhalted unto the clouds: the poor man speaks, and they say, who
is this man? and if he offend ever so little, he is quite overthrown. To the
rich they say: sit down here and rest thee well: but to the poor they say,
stand there, or else sit at my foote-stoole. Idem. Aid.
ALL men ought to be loved equally, but if thou be not of ability to profit
all men, succor those especially who by reason of the times or the places, or
by any other opportunities, are by a certain lot united unto thee. Augustine.
It is upright counsel, that if thou desire to be helped of those that are thy
betters, thou thy self should yield succor unto thine inferiors. A
friend will bear his friends burden. Idem. It was prettily said of a certain
man who falling into a Well was almost choked with the water, and an other man
coming unto the Well wondering said: how come thou hither? I pray thee said
the man in the well bethink thee of means to help me forth and ask me not
how I fell in. Idem. Those aides are not easily gotten in adversity which are
not sought for in prosperity. Idem. If one man cannot be helped unless another
be hurt, it is better that neither be profited then one hurt or hindered. Idem.
It is impudent begging to require aid of him in necessity and trouble, whom in
thy prosperity thou thy self contemnedst. It behooves him to fear damnation
who having liberty of speech with the rich does not make intercession for the
poor as well as he can. Gregory. He that may help, and yet does not, makes
himself a part-taker: he that furthereth another good sets forward also
his own. Idem. To help the poor is a deed of charity, but to desire the
helps of the mighty is an argument of pride. Idem. To withdraw somewhat from
thine own pleasures and bestow it upon thy brothers necessities, argues that
there is a temperate mean in the love that thou bear unto thine own self.
Bernard. Do so for others that thou leave not thine own business undone, for
we are not bound to profitt our friends and hurt our own selves. Cass. He
that denies aid unto another man, thinks that he needs not the help of
other men. Lactantis. It is an extreme grief to an honest man to be forced to
help him whom to help he has no delight. Seneca. It is reason that he who in
prosperity holps others, should in adversity be helped him self. Idem.
Whosoever may save ones life that is ready^ to perish and yet does not, is
himself guiltye of murder. Idem. It thy friend fall into poverty study to
help him: nay rather (if thou can) to prevent his need. Idem. In vain
do thou seek for aid of him of whom thou have deserved to be punished: as
thou have done to others, ^o expect that others should do unto thee. Idem.
Anger.
AS Vinegar if it remain long multeth the vessel, so anger if it continue
until the morrow poisoneth the heart. Augustine. The anger of a brother if it
be inueterate, is turned into hatred: Anger troubles, hatred extinguisheth:
Anger is a moate, hatred is a great beam. Idem. No man that is angry,
supposes himself to be angry without a cause. Ide^. Resist anger if thou
can, if thou can not, give place thereto: if Anger shall prevent, and
preoccupie thy mind, and shall seize upon thee, leave not thy place: thy place
is patience. Ambrose. It is no mean thing to mittigate anger: it is no less
then not to be at all troubled in mind: this latter belongs unto our selves,
the former unto nature. Idem. He that is moved with himself for being soon
angry, cease to be angry with an other: but he that will justify his own
anger, is more inflamed, and soon offends. Idem. It is an excellent thing to
temper the motion with council: neither is it accounted less virtuous to
bridle thine anger, then not at all to be angry, seeing that for the most part
this is esteemed the less, the former the greater. Idem. Praiseworthy is the
saying of Architas of Tharectum, who being angry with his Bayliffe, said: Now
were I not moved with anger I would surely beat thee. Hierome. Through anger a
man becomes so foolish, that he knows neither what to do, or in what order
any thing ought to be done. Gregory. B.
Blessedness.
WRetched is the man who knows all things but thee (oh God.) But he that
knows thee and all things else, is blessed, not for that be knows other
things, but for the knowledge of thee alone. Augustine. Blessed are the
unspotted in the way: as if it had been said, I know thy desire: thou seek
happiness. If therefore thou desire to be blessed, live unspotted. Idem. That
blessedness is impersect, of whose eternity thou stand in doubt. Idem. He
is not blessed who possesses those things that he desires, if be so his will
be inclined unto evil: But happy is he that obteincth all that he wishes, and
wishes nothing unbeseeming or evil. Idem. Blessed is he who longs not after
those things, which being enjoyed become burdensome: being beloved yet do
defile: being lost, do vex and torment a man. Is it not sufficient with honor
to despise those things which thou partest from with grief? Bernard. Albeit
all men are not a like exalted upon earth, yet their bliss in heaven shall be
alike: and the very remembrance of the fault shall be possessed with that
blessedness, not which distaineth, but which tyeth us more nearly unto joy.
Idem. Happy is he by whose height to his friends is given cause of joy, to his
enemies of grief, to his posterity renown, to the strong and lusty an
example, and unto the slow and sluggish allurements unto virtue. Cassius. That
(unless I be deceived) is true and perfect felicity, which makes a man
sufficient, mighty, reverend, famous and joyful: and (that thou may know
that I have deeply wayed it) which can perfectly perform every one of these,
(because all things are the same) that I acknowledge to be true and perfect
felicity. Boethius. Benefits or Benefitting. The definition.
A Benefit is a willing action of the mind, giving and receiving joy, by
bestowing that which it does. Augustine. In Gods sight the hand is not empty
of a gift, if be so the coafer of the heart be full of good will. Idem. Thou
ought to give that which may hurt neither thy self nor yet another man.
Gregory. No man does well against his will, albeit that which he do be of it
own self good. Idem. Virtue knows no measure of thanksgiving: neither is
contented to repay that which it has received, but desires to requite double
that which if has taken. Augustine. There is great difference between the
matter of a benefit, and the benefit it self: for neither silver, nor gold,
nor any other thing which we receive of our friend, can be termed properly a
benefit, but the benefit is the very affection and will of the giver: But the
ignorant only call that which is given the benefit: An emperors crown,
apparel, and chariot, neither of these is properly honor, but the ensign of
honor: So likewise that which appears to the sight is not the benefit, but
the sign of the benefit. Seneca. There are many that will accept of no good
turns at an other man's hands because they are unwilling to do any good turns
to others themselves. If contrary to thy expectation thou receive a benefit,
although the same (in value) be bestowed on others also, yet is the benefit
greater unto thee because it came vnlcoked for. This ought to be the law of a
benefit between two: he that conferreth it, ought presently to forget it, but
he upon whem it is conferred ought always to remember it. Seneca. Oftentimes
it falls out that those things which are requested are ^urtfull if they be
granted, and therefore ired of those from whom thou unjustly tak^^t, then
goodwill of those unto whom thou unwisely give. Seneca. It is a very
commendable thing to prevent the request of an honest man by yielding unto his
desire before he has altogether uttered his mind, for he will be half
ashamed to ask, where is a knave in asking wtil be impudent. Nothing is more
dearly bought then that which is by much entreaty obtained, for it is a heavy
and greanous saying, with a delected countenance to say, Sir I entreat you.
Seneca. Many men will do a good turn unto other, but it will be with such
frowning and angry words that a man would repent him to have obtained a
venefit at their hands. Blasphemy.
Their offenses are as great who bla^p^eme Christ r^igning (...) heaven, as
ar^the sins of those who crucified him upon the earth. August super man It
was a death unto the Jews, when they heard any blasphemy, to rent their
clothes, as Paul and Barnabas when they should be bonouted with divine worship,
rent their garments. Bondage.
Whosoever is dismayed with fear, ensnared with delight, leo with lust,
exasperated by anger, or oppressed with sadness, is in bondage: for every
passion is scruile, Augustine. A good man although he be in bondage is free,
but an evil man although he be free yet is he in bondage. Idem. Bondage is the
obedience of a discour aged mind, which wanted his own judgment. Cicero. All
bondage is miserable, but to serve an dishonest unchaste and effeminate person
is intolerable, and most wretched. Idem. Many men are in bondage, one to lust
another to covetousness, a third to ambition, but most to fear. There is no
bondage more dishonest then that which is voluntary. Idem. Whosoever is angry
with his servants, and is cruel withal, does sufficiently demonstrate (...)
he wants nothing but power and ability against others also. Idem. Whosoever
judges that bondage happens unto the whole man, erreth: for the body is
bound unto the will of the master, but the mind is free, and subject to no
human law: Idem. Behave thy self cheerfully with shy servants, not proudly,
for they had rather reverence thee as their better and superior, then fear
thee. Idem. Diogenes should have been sold for a bond-slaue, and a certain
man who was willing to buy him, demanded of him what service he knew: who
answering said; I know how to command freemen: wherefore he set him at
liberty, and delivering unto him his own sons, said, take and rule these my
children, Aulus Gall. Art thou willing that thy flesh should serve thy soul?
let thy soul serve God: before thou thy self gouernest, thou ought to be
governed. August. No man can in one and the selfsame thing serve God and Gods
enemies: for he which pleasureth Gods enemy, shows himself a back-friend
unto God. Gregory. Many valiant men are oftentimes compelled to attend a whole
day upon an earthly judge, when as yet God who is judge of all, dispatcheth
those that call upon him seruently in the minute of an hour. Idem. C.
Charity.
In Charity a poor man may be rich, but without charity all men are poor.
August. Charity is the root of all goodness, and covetousness the root of
all evil: both of which cannot be in one man, because unless the one be
rented out, the other cannot be planted: in vain does he seek to crop the
boughs, which endeavors not to pull up the root. Idem. Charity sedeth the
hungry, so also does pride: the one that God might be glorified, the other that
it self might be praised. Idem. Whatsoever has charity, never wants
whereof to give. Idem. I never remember that he dyed an evil death, which
willingly exercised the works of charity: for he has many intercessors, and
it is impossible that the prayers of many should not be heard. Idem. Even as
many boughs spreede out of one root, so many virtues proceed out of Charity
only: neither has the bough of good-worke any greenenesse if it remain not in
the root of charity. Gregory. Stubbernesse will not suffer us to enter into
other men's hearts, neither does suspicion suffer us to believe that we are
beloved of others: This double disease is cured with a double charity, to wit,
that Charity which seeks not its own, and that Charity which believes all
things. Bernard. Charity which is of God, is as a certain forcible power of
virtue, under which happy pleasure buddeth, and holy works fructify, it is in
adversity patient, in prosperity temperate: mighty in humility and joyful
in affliction: wishing well unto the bad, and ouercomming the evil with good.
Cassiod. What (oh Charity) can in praise of thee be more spoken then this that
thou causedst God to descend from heaven, and also man to ascend from earth to
heaven. Great I say is the veriye of thee, which causedst God to humble
himself unto the dust, and raisedst men from dust to heaven. Hugo. Charity is
the strength of faith, and faith the bond of love: and then is the name true,
and the fruit of them both perfect, when asthere is an indissoluble knot
between them both, for where soever they are not both present they are both
absent: because the one cannot served lust. They are altogether unworthy of a
reward who have endured no trauiale to deserve it, for it is fit that those
that have sought best should have the glory of the victory. Isydore. Chastity
is an ornament of noblemen, an exaltation of inferior persons, the nobility of
the ignoble, the beauty of the deformed, the joy of mourners, an increase of
all comeliness, an ornament of religion, a lessener of others offenses, a
multiplier of deserts, and a friend of all creatures which God has made.
Cyprian. Six things conserve chastity uncorrupted, to wit: Sabrietie, labor,
roughness of apparel restraint of the senses, little talk vitered honestly,
shunning of opportunity both of the person, time, and place. Cassiodorus. It is
a greater matter to root up the fuel of lust in our own nature, then to
expel unclean spirits out of others. Beda. It is an easier matter to
restrain the unknown pleasure of the flesh, then once having tried it, to
forgo it. Idem. Chastity is a virtue, not only bridling the assaults of
lust, but also shunning the occasions. Cicero. Correction.
TO bridle by the rain of reason, an inbred error, or caused by custom, may
rightly be termed Correction. Augustine. We never ought to thide others for
their offenses, unless out own conscience do first inwardly tell us, that it
proceeds from love, and not of hatred, ambition or vain glory. Idem. Love
heartily and then speak what thou will. Idem. The Physician unto the raging
frantic man is troublesome, and the father seems troublesome in nurturing
his son, the one by binding, the other by beating, but both by loving: But if
either Parent or Physician by neglect should suffer either of both to perish,
it might be more rightly termed exactlie then love Idem. Public offenses ought
to be publikly forth into the maine Deean, and then being unable to pass
further, are forced to retire the same way they come even so they began in
ignorance, and ended in ignorance. Chrysostom. Curiosity is the searching out of
super flnous matters which nothing belong unto a man Hugo. We ought not to pry
into those secrets which God would not have known: but those things which he
has revealed are not to be neglected, least in the former we be fonnd over
curious, and in the later damnably ungrateful. Prosper. Conversation.
HOly conversation c^onfoundeth a man's enemy, edifi^th a man's neighbor, and
glorifieth God. Isydo. It is an excellent thing to live uprightly justly, and
holyly amongst the wirked and ungodly. Gregory. It is no great praise worthy
matter to be good amongst the good, but to be good amongst the wicked: for as
it is at greater offense not to be good with the good, so is it most worthy and
like a valiant champion, to be good amongst the bad. Idem. The Ministers of
Christ so ought to behave themselves, that their inwards lives may be
answerable to their outward conversation. Bernard. Pythagora^, when a certain
man in his hearing said, that he had rather be conversant with women then with
Philosophers, answered, so had Swins rather wallow in the mire then in the
clear water. Val. Max. So behave thy self toward thy inferior, as thou
would have thy superior to behave himself toward thee. Seneca. D.
Discipline.
HE that but a little while, for shams refuses discipline, shall ever after
remain in the shame of foolishness. Pythagoras. Humility is the beginning of
discipline, whereof (there being many documents,) these three are most
principally to be regarded of the learner. First that he esteem not basely of
any man's writings or science. Secondly that he be not ashamed to learn of any:
Thirdly when he has gotten knowledge, that he condemn not others. Hugo. Oh
how settled discipline causes every state both of the body and also of the
mind to be. It subiecteth the neck, setleth the eye liddes, orders the
countenance, rules the eyes, bridleth laughter, moderateth the tongue,
tempereth the throat, asswageth anger, passifieth rage. Bernard. We ought
carefully to beware that he which seeks knowledge, despise not discipline.
Hugo. Education and discipline form manners, and every one is wise in that
which he has learned. Discord and Dissension.
BY concord and disagreement small things become great, but by discord and
disagreement great things vanish and become weak. Whosoever out wardly
asslicteth his body, but abhors concord, praises God outwardly, but hates
him in his heart. Hierome. As nothing is more acceptable unto God then love, so
nothing is more welcome then chiding and brawling unto the devil: whosoever
therefore by railing and scoulding drineth his neighbor out of charity,
serves the devil and not God. Gregory. Contentions men can offer no
arceptable sacrifice unto God, as long as they are out of love and charity
with their neighbors. Idem. Discord is the falling out of some who before were
tied together with the bond of love. Concord is an agreement of minds in honest
and upright manner: but he that sows strife, or hatcheth contention is a
seditious person: the beginning of discord is, to claim that properly his
own, which was common unto others: nothing is more unbeseeming, then to fall
out with those with whom thou have lived familiarly. Fly contentions
especially, for to ^^riue with thine equal is doubtful, to contend with thy
superior is madness, to fall out with thy inferior is baseness, but
especially to enter the listes with one that is light headed, for he hurts
him that is absent which strives with a drunkard. Isydore. Delight and
pleasure.
THey soonest feel afflictions, who have been before acquainted with
continual delights. Bernard. Those most often draw vexations from the flesh,
who are most delighted with the pleasutes of the flesh. Gregory. He that in
his youth gives himself unto delights and pleasures, in old age shall
undergo many sorrows. Idem. Pleasure and delight beat a man and so leave
him, wound a man and then give him the slip, make him wretched, and then leave
him in misery. Ambrose. Corporal delights are greatly desired before they be
had, and when they are had they presently make a man weary thereof: but
contrarily spiritual delights, when a man has them not, are loathed: but
being had are more and more desired: in the formet the appelite begets
fullness, and fullness disdain: but in the latter the appetite begets
fullness, and fullness appetite: For spiritual delights do increase the
desire thereof in the mind even when they do also fill. Gregoric. Desperation.
DEsperation is an assured death, and the murtheret of the soul. Ambrose. To
commit any sin is death unto the soul: but to despair throws it quite
into hell. Isydore. Repentance is appointed as an haven against despair: and
the day of death is uncertain, to the end we should not increase our sins.
Augustine. Let no man despair: Judas perished not so much for his offense, as
because he despaired of pardon. Idem. The first way to salvation, is to abhor
the offense, the second not to despair of pardon. Hugo. Desperation shuts
heaven gates against us: hope opens, and faith makes a broad entrance.
Isydore. In man's life his end is to be respected and not his beginning, for God
regards not what manner men we line, but what we dye. Idem. Oh Judas more
wicked then all men, who by repentance turned unto God, but by desperation
yielded himself unto the devil. Leo Papa. He relyeth upon worldly virtue,
that dispaireth of Gods aid and assistance. Ambrose. Detraction.
Our patience is tried by detraction. Augustine. Nothing is more east then for
one that is idle and slothful to detract from other men's labors. Hierom.
Detract not from any man's good deseruings: and if be so thou desire to seem
praise worthy by an other Devil.
THere is a certain wicked and crafty spirit, an enemy unto man, and an hater
of justice. This spirit (the Devil) not fortune, lays trappes for all men,
and those that know not God he hinders with error, he outtwhelmeth with
foolishness, he compasses with darkness that they may not come unto the
knowledge of God, in whom alone wisdom and everlasting life consists: but
those that know God, those he assaulteth by craft and subtlety, that he may
hinder them by lust or incontinencie, or if they be (as all men are) stained
with sin, he threateneth them with death, and if crast sail, he assayeth to
quell them by force. For they which attribute unto fortune the power to bestow
good and evil, are too credulous unto worldly and vain opinions. Lactantius.
The Devil enuieth mankind, desiring to subject that unto himself, because
he foresawe that man would become God. Bernard. It is the Devils part to
suggest evil, it is ours not to consent. As often as we resist them, so often
we overcome them, we honor God who visits, that we should sight: helps,
that we may overcome: strengthens us, that we quail not. Idem. The Devil is
a crastie enemy, whose first suggestion if we resist not, he possesses wholye
before we are awares. Isydore. The Devil when he intends to deceive any man,
first endeavors to know his nature, and thereby gath^reth unto what sin he
is most a^^^. Idem. By how much the Devil per^^^ueth the end of the worl^ to
approache nearer, by so much the more he pers^cuteth, desiring that he may
bring many unto hell, whereunto he knows himself to be forthwith condem^^^.
Idem. rest him whom thou enuiest: Idem. Whiles the elect profit in goodness,
the reprobates are moved unto extreme rage, and do persecute those growing
good things, which themselves would not imitate. Nazianze. I am a man, but I
know not how to shun the envy of worldly things, it is easier for a poor man
to fly contempt, then for a rich man to anoyde envy. Cicero. Thou can no
ways more gaul and sret the envious man, then by being sernant unto virtue
and good living. Idem. Understand what Envy is: It is a repining at another
good. And understand also this, that no virtuous man enuieth any man. Idem. The
envious man is angry closely, but enemy like. Idem. Exercise.
EXercise is a continual use and custom. Cicero. Man's life may sitly be
compared unto Iron: for Iron if it be used, is worn by little and little: but
if it be not used, it will be presently consumed with rust: even so by
exercise, a man at length is spent: but if thou exercise nothing, sloth and
idleness will more consume thee then continual exercise. Aulus Gell. All
arts, and all manner crafts, by daily use and practice do profit, which seeing
it is true in small matters, how much more carefully ought it to be used in
great and weighty matters. Vegetius. By diligence the hardness of any work
is eased: even so prudence without justice is little worth: but justice without
purdence is of much value: and likewise knowledge with practice is little
worth: but skill and practice conjoined are very available. Boethius.
Experience proves, that all arts without practice are hardly kept: and even
as the arms by long intermission from their business become unfit and unapt,
so likewise wit if it be not used, decays. Cassiod. Reading is a way to
instruction, but conference being conjoined profits more: for conserence
canseth docibilitie more then reading does, because by conference all doubts
are resolved, and often by questioning the hidden verity appears, which
otherwise had been vureuealed. Isydore. Excuse.
THe multitude of companions, causes not the fault to be alowable or
unpunishable. Augustine. He offends twice, who seeks to excuse a bad turn
by defending it. Idem. Whatsoever company thou frequentest, beware that thou
intermedle not much with others conversation, and if it be so that any amiss
be committed, seek rather to excuse the matter, then to accuse the dooer.
Bernard. A man's own conscience is an assured excuse, howsoever he be censured
by others. Idem. Every man can frame some excuse; the proud man would seem
constant: the prodigal, liberal: the covetous man a good husband, the rash
and hasty would be thought valtant: the cutthroate miser, a sparer: the
sluggish, quiet: and the fearful wretch would seem wary. Prosper. Lay aside
excuses, no man sins un willingly, for all sin is voluatarie. Idem. A
child is excused by his age, a woman by her fire, a stranger by liberty, an
household body by familiarity, and a friend is as ones self. Cicero. Give not
hard sentence against thy neighbor, but rather excuse him. If thou cannot
excuse the fact, yet excuse the intention, suppose ignorance to be the cause of
the offense, suppose mishay, suppose over sight. But if the certaintle of the
matter will not admit excuse, yet persuade thy self, and say unto thy self
thus: The temptation was great, and forcible, and I my self might have been
overcome by the like, if it had happened unto me. Bernard. If a man commit an
escape or offense, his intention and meaning being good, God forbid that it
should be objected unto him, because he did evil against his will. Augustine.
Those are not fault worthy, who commit small offenses, that greater may be
anoyded: for it is not loss to loose a little, if by the loss thereof a great
deal may be saned. Idem. It oftentimes happens that whilst wicked men
cannot defend those faults whereof they are accused, become impudent, and so
wax proud in their own defense, and seeking to find out faults in him who
accuses, thereby think themselves blameless: and i^ be so they cannot find
out ought which they may justly blam^, then they find hoales where no hoales
are, that they may have wherewith to cloak their own vices. Gregory.
Although things are true, yet ought they not to be beleened without sufficient
proof, or confession of the delinquents themselves: for not he that is
accused, but he that is convicted, is guilty. Bernard. This is a great fault
in many men, that when they should repent them of their faults, they frame
excuses, and so ^^^end more by drawing defenses for their faults from thence,
whenes repentance ought to proceed. Cassiod. Example.
HE that lives well secretly, and gives no example unto other men's,
proceedings may be compared unto a coal which, burns inwardly, but outwardly
seems to be dead. But he who leads ^n upright life both privately and
publicly may be compared unto a Lamp, which burns it self and gives light
also unto others. Gregory. It is a thing ingraffed by nature, that a shamefast
man should love him that is chaste, a wise man him that is discreet, a
pitiful man him that is liberal: and that all men should love their own
virtues in other men also. Oftentimes the very countenance of an honest man is
a chastisement unto the unjust, and a joy unto the upright. Ambrose. There are
many men who are more readily drawn unto the love of heaven and heavenly
things, by example, then by preaching. Gregory. I esteem no counsail^ better,
(...) (if thou desire to instruct thy brother ^^ those things which ought to be
done) that thou stir him up unto better ^^uing, not persuading him by (...)
but by deed and actions. Idem. No man is more hurtful in the Church, then he
who living (...), cloaketh his actions with the name of holiness, or by reason
of his order or degree. For no man presuming to reprove him because of his
ministry, his faults are more hurtful by example unto others, because others
(...)rence the offender, by reason ^^ his order, and think that lawful ^^ be
(...) by themselves, which their gho(...)there does before them. Idem. Every one
who being a ruler, (...) wickedly and vniusly in the sight of those over whom
he rules, as much as in him lies, destroys them and although it may so fall
out that some not imitating him escape, yet all as for him, perish. The later
day is a Scholar unto the former: A wise man by an others fault will endeavor
to amend his own. It is good to tread our prede^essors steps, if they have
gone well before us. Seneca. Every good Christian, ought to take example of
good life at Christ and his actions. Bernard. F.
Flattery.
Whosoever flattereth evil livers, lays a pillow under the slugg^^ds head:
insomuch that he who ought to be reprehended for his sault, being encouraged
therein becomes worse and worse. Gregory. As the scoape of the Orator is by
love to persuade, and of the Physician by medicines to cure: Even so the
slatterer intends by his fair words naught but to deceive. Chrysostom.
Every flatterer is an enemy unto virtue, and does as it were strike a nail
into his eye with whom be communicates: and ought by so much the more
diligently to be looked unto, by how much the more he seems to love.
Chrysostom. Nothing so much corrupts men's minds as flattery: for his
tongue cutteth more keen then the weapons of our persecutors. Hierom.
Deceiuable flattery is a most creuen thing. Augustine. The tongues of
flatterers bind (...) in their vices: for it delights a man to do those
things, for which he fears not the reprehender, but also looks to be
praised for performing them. Idem. When we are passing unto our heavenly
country, we ought not to give ear unto the Syrenian songs of flatterers.
Hierom. Flattery is the very nurse of sin, which is accustomed to administer
matter unto those who do amiss, as eyls yields liquor unto the flame. Beda.
We are then faithful, when we perform in deed that which we promise in
words. Idem. Infidelity is by nature like unto a sandy barren ground which is
always fruitless be it never so well watered. Chrysostom. That man has all
in himself, which has himself: but no man has himself which has not God,
and he has God who believes in him, and acknowledges him to be the author of
his salvation. Cassiod. He that loses his faith has nothing else for to
loose. Seneca. Faith is an assured conceiving of the truth without any
knowledge of the cause thereof. Idem. As to be always learning argues that a
man is never perfect, even so always to seek for witnesses argues that a man
unwilling to believe. Chrysostom. As the hard stones being wrought in a work
are permanent, so the Gentiles albeit they are hardly brought unto belief, yet
once believing they persevere therein. Idem. Do not understand that thou
may believe, but believe that thou may understand: for understanding is
the reward of faith. Augustine. Faith is more wealthy then all wordly riches,
more strong then all human strength, more wholesome then all earthly Physic.
G.
Greese.
THere is no grief which by tract of time is not lessened and diminished.
Cicero. A good courage in extreme grief is a remedy thereof. Idem. No man can
grieve long and much withal: for so has loving nature disposed, that our
grief might be either short or tolerable, and this is a comfort in ex^reame
anguishes, that either they will endour lives or we overcome them. Senaca.
Grief if thou yield unto it will break t^y heart: but if thou resist it it
will be overcome of thee. He more easily undergoes grief, who is accustomed
thereunto, then he that has seldom tasted thereof. Cicero. Every man is by so
much the more perfect, by how much he does more thoroughly conceive another
grief. Gregory. A due consideration of the cause thereof, does mittigate the
sharpness of the grief. He that is endued with fortitude, despises and
sets light both by grief and death it self. Cicero. We may hardly believe
a grieved mind: for grief will compel the innocent sometimes to frame a lie.
Seneca. He is rich, who is able to bear with an upright mind whatsoever
euilles or vexations do happen. Idem. We have greater cause to grieve when
ones own desert caused the same, then when we are punished wrongfully; for we
ought rather to joy, then grieve, when we suffer unjustly. Idem. Inward grief
sooner brings a man unto the grave, then outward sorrow which comes not
them the heart. Idem. If thou suffer affliction, if want, and necessity, if
persecution, if slanders, and unjust defamations, or what soever else, take ^^
patiently and grieve not, and Gods holy spirit shall minister unto thee
sufficient strength to undergo all miseries and calamities. Idem. Be ready to
administer comfort unto the grieved soul, and add not grief unto grief.
Guile and Deceit.
Poisons that they may deceive, are enuolued in Dunnie, and vices deceive not
but under the show and appearance of virtues. Ambrosius. Many men live plainly
and prosper in all things, and many deal always subtlety and yet are always
behind hand. Idem. Many men live plainly and prosper in all things, and many
deal always substillie and yet are always behind hand. Idem. A man may more
easily shun the dangers of a professed she, then of a sained friend, because
for the one he will be always armed, but for the other he is unprovided. Idem.
A guilefull enemy endeavors to make a show of love: and yet desires to
wound. Idem. It is deceit when one thing is done, and another made show to be
intended. Idem. He is crastie who imitateth virtue by guile and deceit. There
are many who being endued with sharp wits, abuse their good guists by
conuirting them unto deceit and guilefull dealings. Idem. He deals not
deceitfully in Gods work, who when he gives himself unto good studies,
disireth not humane praises nor worldly preserments. He deals deceitfully who
by concealing the truth, seeks either his own commodity, or another
discommoditie. Aulus Gel. Words are appointed not that thereby men should
deceive one another, but that thereby one man might open his thoughts unto
another: wherefore to use words to deceive and not to that end that they were
appointed, is a great sin. Gregory. Persidiousnes is an hidden and
deceinable evil, whose most effectual powers, are to deceive and slatter. Val.
Max. He who deceives his friend that reposeth his trust in him, is more to be
detested then he that deceives him that reposed no confidence in him. H.
Heresy.
HE is an Heretic, who for desire of any temporal commodity, and especially
of glory and renown, broacheth new opinions. Augustine. He is an Heretic who
obstinately defends an error, after the truth is manifested. Let Heretics
dispute wholly out of the Scriptures, and not insist upon such points as the
Pagans and Infidels do, and their opinions will easily be overthrown.
Tertullian. Heretics bring in a great number of Apocrysall books and bassard
writings, that they may amaze the indiscreet, and such as are ignorant in Gods
book. Ireneus. Heretics searing to be overcome by the truth, and thereby
compelled to shake hands with us, fall a railing, or else stop their cares,
that they may not hear, or their eyes that they may not see the truth, and so
be converted. Lactantius. Heretics respect not so much honest life, civil
conversation, and bountiful pity toward the distressed, as to be praised
and boasted, if be so they may but seem to overcome by syllogismes, sallacies,
and false arguments. Sozome. Rotten flesh is to be eaten away, and scabbie
sheep to be separated from the sheepfould, least the whole man and the whole
flock be destroyed, and infected. Arrius was but one spark in Alexandria, but
because he had not been at the first suppressed, the whole city, and country
was set on fire and destroyed. Augustine. As those that have a wicked opinion,
albeit their conversation be outwardly good, are to be taken heed of, even so
are they also to be taken heed off, who are of sound opinion, and yet live
wickedly. Chrysostom. Many seeking by comtemplation to obtain more then they
are able to conceive, run into perverse errors: and whiles they refuse with
humility to be the Scholars of truth, they become masters of errors.
Gregory. Humility.
EVen as a Tree to the end it may grow an bright, ought to have good root
downward: so whosoever has not his mind fixed upon humility, is exalted
unto his own ruin. Augustine. Thy country is on high, and humility the way
thereunto, wherefore then if thou desire to come unto thy country do thou
leave the way which leads thereunto. Idem. Humility oftentimes boweth that
which neither force, nor might could cause to bend. Ambrose. By humility all
our deeds are seasoned. Augustine. Whosoever death not here on earth
himself, shall hardly be partaker of the glory in heaven. Gregory. Humility
is a glorious thing, and pride it self desires to be cloaked with the name
thereof, least it grow into contempt. Bernard. It is true humility for one to
esteem basely of ones own self, and to commend good parts in another
without either malice or ranckor. Gregory. Whosoever thinks to be truly
virtuous without humility, does as he who gathers duste upon an heap, and
places it in the wind, which is no sooner down but it is carried away. Idem.
He that is humble in mind, and esteems of others more then himself,
desires not superiority: and dignity slieth from him that prosecutesh it,
but proseeuteth him that flies from it. Chrysostom. To be truly humbled, is a
sure argument of grace. Humility is the way unto humility, even as patience
is the way unto peace, or reading unto knowledge, therefore if thou desire to
be humble walk in the way thereunto, for he only that is truly humble spares
his own soul, who because he would not be thought to be that which he was
not, as much as he can desires not to be known to be that which he is.
Bernard. Humility especially consists herein, that we subject all our
actions unto Gods will. Idem. I.
Ignorance.
IGnorance of God, for the most part is the mother of despair. Bernard. Many
things are unknown, which ought to be known, which happens either by
carelessness to know, or sloth to learn, or shame to enquire, and this
ignorance is intolerable. Idem. It is as great an offense is be ignorant in
that which one ought to know, as it is to do some things that ought not to be
done. Seneca. He that sees the light knows how to judge of darkness, for he
that is ignorant of the light, approoueth darkness for light. Gregory. They
flatter themselves unto their own condemnation, who that they might have the
more liberty to sin, are willingly ignorant. Bernard. He that is most
expert, wise, or witty, may justly confess that he is a scholar, yea
altogether ignorant in some things. Cicero. When as we know our own ignorance,
we will the more willingly be are others burdens. God never forsakes him who
truly knows his own sins. Gregory. Knowledge is two ways necessary unto
salvation, to wit, knowledge of God and of thy self: because as by knowledge
of thy self thou learnest to fear God, and by knowledge of God to love God
likewise: Even so contrarily ignorance of thy self engenders pride, and by
ignorance of God thou fallest into desperation. Bernard. It is better to be
ignorant then to err, and faithful ignorance is better then rath knowledge.
August. Infirmity.
IN all diseases there are three espeaciall greeses, to wit, fear of death,
bodily pain, and the intermission of pleasure. Seneca. Many men live as they
lust, and yet are always instie: and many never stray from Hyppocrates rules,
and yet are always sickly. Idem. Health is more welcome unto those that have
been grievously sick, then unto those that never knew what sickness meant.
Seneca. No man is without some infirmity, therefore bear with another man's
infirmity, as thou would another man should bear with thine. Idem. Laugh
no man to scorn in his infirmity, least another man do the like by thee
also. Idem. Justice.
EVen as a Lanshorne in the night gives light, but in the day time the light
thereof is not discerned, so also man's instice being compared with Gods
instice, is altogether injustice. Gregory. Justice rather seeks others
commodity then ones own, preferring the common good before a man's own
private gain. Ambrose. All other virtues are contained under the name of
justice alone. Hierom. It is justice to love men for justice sake, and not to
think scorn of justice for the persons sakes. Gregory. Justice is the
liberty of the minds giving unto every one his proper dignity, to wit,
reverence unto ones better agreement with ones equal, discipline unto ones
inferior, obedience to God, holiness unto ones self, patience unto ones
enemy, and pity unto the dissressed poor. Anselme. Justice respects
neither father nor mother, but the truth only: it accepts no man's person, it
imitateth God. Cassiod. There is no greater injustice then theirs, who when
they most especially deceive, yet so handle the matter that they would seem to
be honest men. Cicero. A just man will never think himself just enough, but
always hungreth and thirsts thereafter: insomuch that if he should live
never so long, yet would he always covet to be more just. Bernard. The justice
of the King, is the subjects quiet, the defense of the country, the freedom of
the common people, the care of the distressed, the joy of all men, the
temperatenesse of the air, the caime of the Seas, the fertility of the land,
the comfort of the poor, the heritage of sons, and unto himself the hope of
eternal happiness. Cyprian. Justice gives unto every one his own: give
therefore unto three that which belongs unto them: to wit, unto the Prelate
reverence and obedience, the one whereof comes from the heart, the other
belongs unto the body: give unto thy equal counsel to instrua his
ignorance, and aid to succor his infirmity: give unto thy inferior
admonition, that he may beware, and correction that he proceed not in stnning.
K.
Knowledge or Wisdom.
HE most espeacially defireth to know God, who for the desire that he has unto
virtue, would gladly be ignorant in worldly matters. Gregory. They can never
attain true wisdom, who deceive themselves with their own vain
foolishness Idem. The thiesest wisdom is an upright life, and just heart to
Godward, whereby the pure with the pure, and the godly with the godly are
conjoined. Nazi. Idleness is the mother of foolishness, and labor of
knowledge, the travail of knowledge is threesould; to wit, the labor of
discipline, exercise, and doctrine: in childhood discipline, in youth exercise,
and in old age doctrine: in childhood to learn that that is unknown, in
youth to practice that which in their childhood was learned, and in old age to
instruct others therein. Hugo. Knowledge cannot be taken away by violence, nor
corrupted by age, it is decreased by disuse, and enlarged by practice. Cassiod.
Knowledge ought to be greatly esteemed, for no man can faithfully seek that
whereof he is ignorant, and an unknown evil is neither feared, nor can be
prevented. Chrysostom. There are some who desire to know, to that end only that
they may know, and that is meare curiosity: some likewise are desirous of
knowledge that they may sell it, to wit, for money, for honors, and that is
dishonest gain: and some there are that desire to know that they may be
known, and that is idle vanity: and some there are who are desirous of
knowledge, that they may instruct, and it is charity: and some also are
desirous to know, that they may profit thereby, and it is wisdom. Bernard. A
wise man will admire nothing when once it is come to pass, nor yet judge any
thing impossible before it be effected. Cicero. No man can live well, nor yet
in a mean, who cares not for wisdom. Sen. To know althings except God, and to
be ignorant of God, is to know ney^ther God nor any thing else. For he that is
ignorant of God, is ignorant of his salvation, and he who is ignorant of his
salvation, all his knowledge tends unto his greater condemnation. Idem. To
say that a man knows that wherein he is ignorant, is over rashness: and to
say that he knows not that which he does know is ingratitude. Augustine. A
man ought to know that he is of himself nothing, but what he is, he is of God,
and for God. Idem. Nothing more encourages our hope to attain knowledge, then
the consideration of this one thing, to wit, that those who in times passed
have been very ignorant and unlearned are now become for their judgment and
knowledge admirable. Idem. Unto a wise man and one that is endued with
knowledge, all places are alike, he supposes himself to be no where a
stranger, but every place is unto him as the place of his education. Idem. He
that is in love with himself being a fool, shall never become wise, neither
shall he become that which he would be, unless he despise that that he is.
Augustine. In learning the wiseman finds that whereby he may be made more
wise, the warrior whereby he may be in mind encouraged, from thence the
Prince learneth how to govern his people quietly: and to be brief, there is
no state of life which the excellent knowledge of letters may not better, and
profit. Idem. Nothing is more seruently loved then wisdom, nothing more sweet
in possession: herehence it proceeds that many desire to become wise, but
they fail in the attaining thereof: but all men may be just if they perfectly
desired to be just. A man may love wisdom exceedingly, and yet fail to
attain it: but by how much more a man loves justice, by so much shall he be
more just. Many having atteined unto learning end knowledge, use it not unto
Gods glory, but abuse it unto their own praise, being puffed up therewith, and
so sin grievously thereby from whence they ought to take good lessons for the
amendment of their sinful lives. Idem. The wisdom of the just is, to feign
nothing by oftentation, but to open the truth thereof in words, to love the
truth as it is truth, and to hate falsehood: to do good freely, and rather to
bear evils patiently then off^r any willingly: to esteem reproache for the
truth sake, gain; but this simplicity of the just is derided of the world,
because they esteem the purity of virtue foolishness. Gregory. L.
Learning.
EArthly prosperity comfort the body, but the tongue of the learned,
preaching the glad tidings of the Gospel, brings far more comfort unto the
soul. He that reprooueth all men by leading a life conformable unto his
doctrine, sufficiently declares himself to be learned: neither is young age
in a Doctor to be despised whom both his life and indgement do commend.
Ambrose. As it is a wise part to gather vine branches in an hedge, and clusters
of grapes among thorns warely, least that whiles thou seek the profitte
thereof, thou prick thy fingers: even so great care ought to be had, that thou
imitate not him doing evil, whom thou have heard speak good things.
Augustine. A man's life ought more to be regarded then his learning: for a good
life without learning is commendable, but learning without a good life lacks
integrity. Ambrose. It is as godly an act to instruct the mind with wisdom,
as it is to give sustenance unto the body when it lacks. Bernard. In reading,
not the words but the truth is to be regarded: for oftentimes the plain
truth, and crafty falsehood are commixt, whereby simple men are oftentimes
intrapped, and sweet words make fools feign: for the love of worldly skill
does naught else but puff a man with vain praises: and look by how much
greater a man's studies have been, by so much the more does it cause a man to
swell with disdain. Isydore. The sinner has his mouth shut, because be that
has not taught himself cannot instruct another. Origin. Little worth is
learning unless it be approved by industry, study, labor and diligence.
Cicero. The noble possession of learning, being divided amongst many is not
destroyed, and being divided into parts seeleth not any lessoning at all, but
waxes daily so much the more durable old, by how much the more it has been
made common. P. Blesen. By other men's actions a man ought to learn what a man
ought to do himself. Cicero. It is more available to hear one teach, then
to study upon the book, because thereby a more deep impression is made in
the mind. Val. Max. Liberality.
IT skilleth of what mind and not of what state he be that gives, for it is
not praiseworthy which is done of compulsion or bravery. Seneca. Beware that
thy liberality be not greater then thy ability, for in such liberality there
is always a desire of getting, either by huck or cruck, that thou may have
always somewhat to give: and most commonly thefts ensue such liberality: for
when by such manner giving thou beginnest to be in necessity, thou art forced
to lay hands upon other men's goods, and in so doing thou precurest greater
hatred of those from whom thou have wrongfully taken, then love of those to
whom thou have unwisely given. Cicero. A good turn quickly done is twice
done. He is leasse deceived that is quickly denied, then he that is put in hope
to obtain by fair promises. If a man deny to give unto one whom he has
always been accustomed to give, he enforces him to seek it by crooked
means. Seneca. Well answered Alexander a certain man unto whom he had given
a city: for the man said, that so great a gift became not his base fortune,
Allexander replied, I esteem not so much what it becomes thee to receive, as
what it becomes me to give. Idem. The hand never wants what to give, if the
heart be filled with goodwill. Hierom. Liberality always makes have, and it
is proper unto a liberal man to do that which he does quickly. Idem. For if
a man profit an other, and yet protract time from day to day before he perform
it, he loses two especial things, to wit, both the time and the opinion of a
friendly mind. Seneca. Liberality is not defined by heaping up of riches, but
by the affection which thou have to give. Idem. It is more greenous unto a
liberal man, not to have bestowed that which was behooue full, then to have
bestowed that which was not behoouefull. Idem. M.
Misery.
HE knows well how to bear temporal miseries, who knows how to rejoice
with inward hope. Gre. Misery, is the abundance of tribulation, and want of
consolation, when a man is many ways cruciated, and yet cased by no man. Idem.
If we diligently consider of the the matter, we shall find that the general
misery of mankind is threefould, for we are east to be seduced, weak to
effect ought, and unable to make resistance. If we would judge between good
and bad, we are deceived: if we assay to do good we saint: if we desire to
resist evil we are weak and easily overcome. Bernard. A wise wretch is more a
wretch, then a clownish miser: for the former knows how to exagerate the
causes of grief, but the latter does not. Boethius. Sinners are to be adjudged
by so much more miserable, by how much the more often they are suffered to
proceed in their sins vnchastened. Gregory. Wherefore was I borne unto
labor and travail? my days are spent in confusion. If he who was sanctified
in the womb, spoke such words of himself, what shall I wretched man say of
my self, who was conceived in sin, borne in sin, and yet vile wretch
remain in sin? woe unto me poor wretch whom thou my mother have brought
forth even the child of vexation and sorrow. Wherefore had I not dyed before
I was brought forth? Wherefore was I taken up upon the knees and nursed?
wherefore did I suck the dugges to prolong my life in misery? better had it
been for me, if dying in the womb, I had never been brought forth, or being
borne I had been presently brought unto the grave, that thereby I might have
escaped the miseries which now I endure. Innocentias. Man was made of dust,
dung, and ashes, and which is worser, of most filthy seed, conceined in the
lust of the flesh, in the heat of lust, in the stinking of luxury, and which
is worst, of and in the spots of sin, borne was man to labor, fear and
grief, and which is more miserable, unto death. He does wicked things,
whereby he offends God, he offends his neighbor, and displeases himself.
He commits dishonest things, whereby he d^fileth himself, staineth his
credit, and tormenteth his conscience. He does vain things, whereby he
neglects things profitable and necessary. His meat becomes a fire which
burns always, and is never quenched: his food a woorme which always
grows without ceasting, an heap of filthe which always stincketh most
horribly. Idem. Mercy and Pity.
A Man ought to have a great care with what mind he spares for as there is a
punishing pity, so there is a sparing pity. Augustine. It is a great
comfort unto the troubled soul, when as a man being as it were wrapped in
vices, and seeing himself deprived of virtues, flies only unto the hope of
Gods mercy. Greg. God is merciful and of great pity; God is merciful unto
all men, and his mercies are above all his works. Oh vile man do thou hear
of so great mercies and yet relyest upon thine own virtues and deseruings.
Idem. All men are found guilty, both Jews and Gentiles, and all have need of
Gods mercy. Ambrose. When as man's help most fails, then ought we most
especially to rely upon Gods favor and succor. Idem. Pity consists in
giving alms, in forbearing wrongs, in remitting injuries, and in instructing
the unskillful. Mercy is the helmet of salvation, the ornament of faith, the
propitiation of sins: this is it which proves the just, strengthens the
godly, and comfort those that serve God devoutly. It is a more merciful
deed to succor and help the poor that want, then the rich that lack not:
for he that gives unto one that has not need thereof, does as it were power
water into a vessel which runs over before. Cass. Let not him that has
understanding be silent, neither let him which has plenty with hold his hand
from giving: let him that has opportunity and ^^tte means, not fail but make
intercession with the rich for the poor, least he incur the penalty of
damnation of retaining their talent. Raba. Mercy is so great a virtue, that
without it, other vert^es, although they be, cannot avail: for although a man
be faithful, chasse, sober, and endued with other worthy vertuas, yet if he be
not merciful, he shall not obtain mercis. Leo Papa. N.
Nature.
NAture is content with the least and smallest things. Nature does make many
signs and tokens unto us that we might understand what she means: but we
become deaf, not hearing what she says. Cicero. Education alters nature,
as by the example of the two Dogs proceeding from one Dam at one litter, the
one whereof being used unto the pot, the other unto hunting, before which ^^
Hare and a pot of Pottage being placed, the one followed the Hare, and the
other can presently unto the Pottage pot. Idem. It is good to break those that
are of a stubborn nature whiles they be young, least when they become elder
they be too strong to be ruled: as by the example of the twig, which when it is
young may be bowed any way, but being grown unto some bigness is not able to
be bended. Idem. That which is bred in the bones will never out of the flesh,
neither is it possible, that man that is borne of sinful flesh, should be
clean without spot of sin. Idem. God and nature have made no things in
vain, for all things serve unto some purpose, but man wants knowledge to
apply every thing unto his proper end. Aristotle. We ought to hold the same
course that nature has prescribed unto us, not declining there from: all
things are easy and plain unto those which have an insight thereinto, but
those that resist nature do as it were strive against the stream. Idem. Man
is by nature wicked, naught, and corrdyt, neither can so much as a good thought
proceed from us, unless our nature be seasoned with the salt of Gods holy
spirit, which is the true guide that leads us unto eternal bliss, which our
own nature cannot attain unto. Nature is an upright dispensor, distributing
unto every one that which is agreeable. Negligence.
NEgligence is the sloth of the mind, whereby every one is negligent in the
performance of that whereunto he ought to have an especial regard. Hugo. If
sometimes we be seduced to let slip small things without any respect
thereunto, we will in time grow more bold to commit greater ouer-slippes
without any care. Idem. We are all of us very circumspect in small matters, but
very negligent in great and weighty affairs, and the occasion hereof is
because we are ignorant of the true lise. Hiero^. A great punishment hangs
over their heads, who do the Lords work negligently, as especially over the
heads of Preachers and Pastors, who for lack of spiritual food suffer their
flocks to perish, and to become a pray unto the devil, whiles they themselves
neglecting their own charge, give themselves unto sloth and idleness. Idem.
We ought not to do our business negligently, but with care, heedfulnesse, and
warily: and especially servants ought not to be idle, but well eccupyed,
whether they be in their Masters sight or not, knowing that the Lord their
spiritual Master sees at all times whether they be negligent or not. Idem.
Nobility.
THe chiefest liberty is to be with God, and not to serve sin: and the
chiefest nobili^ie with God is to excel in virtues. Hierom. I cannot greatly
praise Nobility: for a good man seems unto me noble: but he that is iniust
although he be descended of a better stock then Jupiter himself, seems unto
me base and ignoble. Demosthenes. The Nobility of our kindred little avails,
unless we our selves be good and noble: for by how much the better thou art by
birth, if thou excel not in virtues also, thou art by so much the more
culpable and reproouable. Idem. O.
Obedience.
IT is better to obey God then man, and it is better to obey our masters then
our fellow Scholars: and it is also better to obey those that have rule over
us, then strangers: wherefore without doubt, not to obey those whom most
especially we ought, is most de^estable. Bernard. Certainly he that shows
himself ready to obey before he is commanded, deserves more thanks then he
that obeys after commandment given. Idem. We ought to obey, not with servile
fear, but with affectionate love, not for fear of punishment, but for love of
justice, and for right cousnesse sake. Gregory. Perfect obedience is ignorant
of the law, neither is it restrained with bounds. Yea it does perform more
willingly then is commanded of necessity. Idem. Nothing is more unjust, then
that a man should desire to be obeyed of his inferiors, who himself will not
yield obedience unto his superiors. Augustine. In obedience this is a
general rule to be observed, that by how much more difficult the matter is, by
so much the more praiseworthy is obedience: and by how much more easy the
matter is to be performed, by so much more great is the offense if it be not
effected, then the matter deserved praise if it had been fulfilled. Bernard.
Disobedience proceeds from the obstinacy of a stubborn mind, not willing
to obey him that justly commands. Idem. If (thy superior commanding the
contrary) thou use any words at vnawates, it is an offense: but if thou speak
rashly and willingly, the offense is by so much more the greater. Obstinacy.
THere are three sorts of obstinate men: the first is of those who profit
nothing by correction: the second of those who by correction are made worse,
and the third of those who promise amendment, but do not accordingly: by
correction Manasles was made better: Naball by admonition became worser: and
Pharao by affliction was more hardened. Hugo. It is mere obstinacy, out of
the unreasonable and uncontrolled pertinacie of the mind, to refuse to yield
obedience unto better things. Cicero. Then is our infelicitie consummated, when
as dishonest things do not only delight, but also please, and hardly can
there be any place for remedy, when as those things which have been vices,
are accoumpted virtues. Seneca. Order and degrees.
BY order things are conserved, but by disorder things come unto ruin and
confusion. Not our degrees and dignities make us nearest unto God, but our
loves either good or bad, do conioyne us unto him, or sever us from him.
Collumb. Every man ought to acknowledge his own order and degree, and to
understand what belongs thereunto, and so to order and gouerue his actions,
words, gestures and manner of his habit, that it be agreeable unto his
degree, least he hear this said unto him by God. Because my name was
blasphemed among the Gentiles for your sake, etc. None ought to be admitted
unto holy functions, but those whose integrity of life has been formerly
approved. Idem. He that orders his own steps rightly, gives light also
unto others how they ought to walk. Children ought not to be admitted unto
holy orders, least they do by so much. the sooner fall and come unto ruin, by
how much the greater have they made to clime unto promotion. Idem. P.
Poverty.
MIserable is the state of the poor man: if he beg he is ashamed, if he
beg not, he pineth with hunger, and yet to beg necessity compels him.
He blames God as unjust, because he has not rightly (in his judgment) divided
the wealth of the world: he accuses his neighbor of envy, because he
yields him not succor: he frowneth, murmureth, and curses: where upon the
wise Solomon said; It is better to die then to live in want: and to be brief,
if thou be poor thy brother will forsake thee, and thy friends depart from
thee. Innocentius. The poor man that has almost nothing, yet being content
possesses all things, and on the contrary, the rich man which has many
things, yet wanting content, is as he that has nothing. The poor man cannot
be happy in his own mind, unless he have seen those that have been in
prosperity to have suffered shipwreck: joyful poverty is an honest thing,
but it cannot be poverty, that is borne cheerfully, for he that takes
poverty patiently is is a rich man: and not he that has little, but he that
desires much is a poor man. Seneca. Poverty ought to be loved, if for
nothing else, yet for this cause only, because thereby thou t^yest who are thy
friends, and who not. Idem. Poverty has this one discommoditie, because it
wants wherewith to succor those that are in adversity. Idem. Poverty is
the beggerie of the mind, and not the want of wealth. Gregory. Those that are
poor in spirit, when they have done any good thing, glorify God: if any
evil, they accuse themselves. Augustine. It is an heinous offense with a
soornfull eye to despise our poor brethren, and disdainfully to contemn them
because of their poverty (who otherwise were our equals) is no less
offensive. Idem. The poor when all worldly means fail, yet then are they
comforted in the Lord. Idem. Preaching.
IT is a grievous offense, for three causes to conceal Gods words, to wit,
either for fear, sloth or flattery. Hierom. Every Sermon that edifieth not
the hearers, is turned into their greater condemnation. Idem. Every doctor that
peruerteth those sharp sayings of Scripture (whereby he ought to recall his
bearers) unto smooth sayings, and speaks in such manner that he correct not
but delights his auditorie, corrupts the pure juice of Gods holy word, and
mingleth it with his own exposition. Idem. Many make long and tedious sermons,
but without knowledge, and some again speak few words but much matter.
Idem. A man ought to be first himself clean, and so to cleanse others: to be
wise himself, and then to teach others wisdom: to be a light, and then to
lighten others: to be sanctified, and then to sanctify others. Idem. A
Preacher ought not to declare all things unto the unlearned which himself
knows, because the ignorant ought to be first instructed in more easy
points, before they can be able to conceive the more deep and secret
mysteries. Idem. He gathers large and ample fruits of his preaching, which
does before exercise himself in good works: for the words want authority,
if good deeds be wanting. Nazianzene. If thou neglect to fulfill that which
thy self teach, thou sowest thy self, and others gather in the harvest.
I Would. A Preacher ought to have an especial regard unto the time and place, and
capacity of his auditors, for one word well and fitly placed, edifieth more
then many unadvisedly offered. Idem. As the flesh waxes strong by mea^e and
delights, even so the spirit is nourished with Gods word. A Preacher ought not
to preach himself, but Christ. Idem. Q.
Quarreling, strife, and contention.
CHristians ought to forbear and forgive one another, if be so that one have a
quarrel against another, even as Christ forgave us, for how can we expect
forgiveness at Gods hands, if be so we our selves will not forgive those that
have offended us. Colossians. 3. 13. It is good to speak wisely, and warily,
for oftentimes much coutention, quarrelling and debate, arises of a word ill
placed, though well meant. Augustine. Nuarrell not with one that is mightier
then thou thy self art, for he has the advantage of thee: might overcomes
right. There are many who do naught else but sow the seeds of quarrels and
contentions between neighbors, but Christ says; Blessed are the peacemakers,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. He that delights in quarrelling, shall
not want with whom to contend, for rather then he will be quiet, he will be at
debate with his own self. Gregory. It is better to dwell in a small cottage
with a quiet wise, then in a sumptuous and stately house with an unruly and
quarrelling woman. It is a grievous thing to dwell with those who when they
have said what they can, and spoken the worst, yet always seek new occasions
of new quarrels. Augustine. Where strise, quarrelling and debate are there
godly living is wanting. Idem. As nothing is more precious in the sight of God,
then love: so nothing is more desired of the devil then the quenching thereof,
for from thence arise debates contentions quarrellings, fightings, murders,
and many other very heinous and grievous sins. Gregory. No room is large
enough for those who cannot well agree, but a small corner is spacious enough
unto those whose minds are united by love and goodwill. Ambrose. Quietness,
peace, and tranquillity of mind.
THe quietness and tranquillity of mind, is more to be esteemed then any
worldly, wealth whatsoever: for what though a man possess infinite riches?
what though he want not any outward things that might serus for his delight?
what are all these to be accounted of, if be so thy mind within thee be still
tormented with unquiet thoughts, and discontented cogitations. Nazianzene. A
guilty conscience condemns a man's own self, when as no man else accuses
him: but a clear conscience is accompanted with quietness, peace, and
tranquillity of the mind, when as many falsely accuse him. Hier. Enough
consists not in the abundance of wealth, for he that has a little and a
contented mind, has more then he that enjoys much and yet is not
contented. August. God most commonly blesses the poor with quietness, peace
and content of mind, when as yet the rich though they enjoy more, have less
content and tranquillity of mind, then the poor have: and this is one
especial token of Gods goodness toward the needy and poor, that he endueth
them with so much the more ample measure of the one, by how much more they are
scanted of the other. Hugo. By how much more excellent the mind of man is,
then his body: by so much more are those things that bring content unto the
one, to be esteemed, then those things that bring pleasure unto the other. By
the quietness, peace, and tranquillity of the mind, the life is prolonged, but
sorrow, and care hasten death. Cassiod. It is a good thing to live in quietness
with our neighbors, and friends, and it is a good thing so have rest and quiet
from war with foreign Nations, but it is a more blessed thing to have
quietness and peace, between God and thine own soul. Oftentimes the poor
laboring man cesseth quietly after his labors, upon a bed of straw, when as
yet the rich man's mind is so oppressed with cares, and thoughts concerning
worldly matters, that he cannot sleep upon a bed of down. R
Resurrection.
THe just man shall arise that he may judge, the unjust to be judged, and the
wicked to be punished without judgment. Cassius. Our redeemer died that we
should not fear death: he showed his resurrection, that we might have an
assured hope of our resurrection. Greg. In every deed and action which a man
undertakes he has some hope of future commodity: for he that ploweth does it
that he may reap. He that fights, fights that he may overcome, and to be
without hope of resurrection, all respect of godliness is set apart. Chrisost.
Some there are who considering that the spirit leaves the body: that the
flesh is converted unto rottenness, rottenness into dust, and dust unto
elements that cannot be discerned with bodily eyes, do therefore despair of
the resurrection. And respecting the dry bones only judge it impossible that
they should again be covered with flesh. Who if be so they have not an assured
hope of the resurrection by obedience: yet ought they assuredly to believe this
by reason. For what but the resurrection rooth the continual course of the
elements declare. For by the courses of times and seasons we see that trees
do loose their green leaves, and likewise they do cease to bear fruits,
and yet suddenly as it were out of dry wood we see (as if a resurrection were
coming) the leaves to spring, the fruits to grow unto bigness, and the whole
tree to be as it were again clothed in a fresh garment. Christ came into the
world, and by his birth, life, words, deeds, passions, death, resurrection,
and ascension, he fulfilled all the prophesies, and sayings of the prophets,
August. The Son of God was in his assumptio^ translated from his humanity
unto divinity: in his resurrection from passibility unto immortality: in his
ascension, from low degree unto equality with his Father, because that look^
how low was his fall from his Fathers bosom unto the cross, so high likewise
might be his exaltation from the cross unto the right hand of his Father.
Idem. Let us weigh with our selves the small seed of any tree that is cast
into the earth that a tree may proceed there from, and let us if possibly we
could comprehend, how in so small a seed so great a tree should be enclosed,
that there-hence proceeds. Where is the wood, where the bark, where the
green leaves, and where the plenty of fruits. Was there any such matters to
be perceived in the seed, when as it lay ouer-couered in the earth? what
wonder then is it if so it please God, who is able of so small seeds to
produce so great trees, to make again a man of the small dust, being converted
into his proper elements. Greg. We that are afflicted and tormented in Christ's
passions, shall again rejoice and be glad in his resurrection. It was not by
chance that the Disciples, seeing the Lord yet the beloved Disciple was
absent, but coming afterward might hear, and hearing might doubt, and
doubting touch, and touching might believe. I say it was not done by hap,
but that by seeing and feeling, he might be made an assared witness^ of his
resurrection. Greg. Reverence.
Reverence is a virtue whereby we do yield unto our betters, dutyfull regard
and respect, in the humality of the body, in gesture, behavior bowing of the
head, and by utterance of words. Cicero. We cannot adiudge them worthy of
reverence for their honors, whom we judge to be unworthy of honors.
Boethius. Reconciliation.
HE thinks vainly who judges that God will be so pleased with him, who
himself will not be pleased with his neighbor. Chrysostom. If thou have
offended in thought make amends and be reconciled in thought: if in words, by
words, if in deeds, by deeds, for thou can not pacify him whom thou have
offended with deeds, without deeds. Thou do foolishly to desire of the
Lord, thou do vainly to give alms of these things which thou have spoiled
others of. For what avails it thee if one pray unto the Lord for thee, and
an other against thee, according unto that in Ecclesiastes the 34. The Lord
allows not the gifts of the wicked. Riches and rich Men.
THose are true riches, which being once had cannot be lost. August. epist.
140. It is as hard a thing for a rich man not to be proud, as it is for a
chollericke man not to be angry. Riches are gotten by much labor, travail,
and pains taking: are kept with continual care, and left with ertreame
sorrow. Gregory. Most commonly the prodigal spend, thrist consumes that in
sewe days, which his pinchfist father scraped together in many years. Riches
if we come by them justly, and use them rightly, are the blessings of God, but
if we abuse them they were given us unto our greater condemnation. It is an
easic matter for a man that is rich to seem to despise riches: but it is a
very difficult matter for him that is poor, not to desire to be rich.
Gregory 11. moralium. It is not a sink to be rich: but not to distribute
thereof unto the necessity of the poor, that is heinous in the sight of God.
Chrysostom. Where riches are honored, good men are despised. If thou have
plentiful, spend neither too prodigally, nor yet keep together too niggardly,
so shall thou be neither in future time need, nor yet in bondage unto thy
riches. Solon. It is a thing very common that the children of poor and mean
men become very wealthy: when as yet the children of rich men decay and come
unto indigencie: which proceeds partly from hence, that the one because he
has little, is sparing, and painful, the other having much and not knowing
how it was gotten, spends prodigally, not thinking that ever his wealth will be
consumed. He is truly rich whose life is virtuous, and abounding with good
works. Augustine. Repentance.
HE that by repentance turns unto the Lord, shall be made pertaker of
eternal bliss with the Angels in heaven. August. There are many who are more
ashamed to repent, then to sin, oh wonderful madness. Art thou not ashamed
of the wound it self, and yet blushest to have it bound up and healed: is not
the wound loathsome and stinking: hie thee therefore unto the Surgion, repent
thee, acknowledge thy sins and say, oh Lord, I have sinned against thee,
pardon mine iniquities, for I have done amiss. August. de penitent. To sin
and not repent therefore. is a more heinous offense in the sight of God then
was the sin it self. Chrysostom. As the penitent thief upon the cross by
his example of repentance, and his being received unto mercy, gave good
reasons unto many sinners, that they should not despair of Gods mercies: so
likewise it is to be feared that many presuming upon the like grace, do throw
themselves headlong into damnation, not beginning to repent until such times
that they have no time of repentance left them. Repentance is derived as it
were of punishing, because that man does by repentance as it were punish the
evil that he has committed. For these three things which by the outward
striking of the breast are signified, to wit the breast, the hand, and the sound,
denotes that we repent us of those things which we have done amiss by
thought, word and deed. Hugo. S.
Sloth.
Sloth is a certain drowstnesse of the mind, whereby any man neglects to
do any good things, or to finish ought being begun. Barnard. Of Idleness no
profit, but discommodity and loss arises: Esaw being slothful lost the
blessing of his birthright, because he had rather take meat^ then seek to get
it. August. The slothful man will and will not: he is noted by the name of a
slouthful man who will willingly reign with God, but is unwilling to take
pains for God. Beda. Rewards please him when they are promised, but spiritual
combats terrify him when they are commanded. Slothful men judge that nothing
can be done, which they themselves cannot perform, giving sentence according
unto their own infirmities For we suppose those things whereunto we are not
accustomed, hard and intolletable to be endured. We esteem it a torment to
want wine, or to arise at the break of the day, yet are not those things
difficult, but we are fe^eble and weak. Security.
IT oftentimes happens that he who by the battle of temptation could not be
overcome, has yet greatly been damnified by his own security. Greg. Security
ought to be in our hope, and fear in our conversation, that thereby those that
strive may be cherished, and those that are secure punished. No man ought to
live securely in that life which is called altogether a temptation, knowing
that as of bad he may be made better, so contrariwise of good he may become
worse. August. Many men by a secure carelessness in a small time run into
more dangers, and incur greater losses, then after in all their life long
they are able again to recover, be they never so vigilant. He that is secure
in his own business, will surely be remiss in another. Scripture.
HE has learned most who does most: but if I perform that which thou
declarest, and thy self net perform it, my deeds do rather hold off the
scriptures, then thy speech which thou vainly hablest. Hierome. We ought to
use the holy Scripture in steed of a looking glass, by correcting that which
is amiss, concerning those things that are well and decent, and by reducing
those things that are in a mean unto a more perfect order. Idem. The
meditation of the Law, consists not so much in reading the Scripture, as in
executing the precepts therein contained. Idem. If there be ought in the
world that may be a stay unto a wise man, and may persuade him (being
pestered with the hurly burlies, and troublesome turmoyles of this world) to
bear all things patiently, that I assuredly persuade my self to be
principally effected by reading and meditating the holy Scriptures. Idem. We
ought neither to speak or do ought, for which we cannot be warranted by the
holy scriptures. Basilius. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: but faith
comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God, therefore without the
scriptures all our actions want a true ground which is faith, and so
consequently al our actions which are not directed by the holy scriptures, are
sin. Idem. We may say unto a man falling from his state: Let no man wax
proud: and we may say unto a man that is risen from his fall. Let no man
despair. Behold how wonderfully the scripture uses the selfsame word to
depresse the proud, and to exalt the humble. It recalleth the proud unto the
sear of humility, and the humble unto the assurance of faith. Oh inestimable
medicine of a strange nature, which being laid after one and the selfsame
order, by pressing down dries up the swelling humors, and by raising up
infuseth dry. It terrifieth us from the fall of evil things, but comfort
us with our reperation. T.
Tribulation.
BY afflictions and tribulations we loose earthly things, but by patiently
sustaining thereof, we multiply heavenly joys. Greg. The Lord makes the way
through which his elect are to pass unto him, rough and hard least that being
delighted with the pleasure thereof, as it were with the joys and delicates of
this life, they should rather choose to linger in their journey then hasten
unto him, and so respecting the pleasantness of the way, should forget their
country whereunto they were going. Idem. As the stars do shine in the night
but are not seen in the day time: even so true virtue which oftentimes in
prosperity is not apparent, yet in adversity and tribulation is seen most
evidently. Barnard. Be not angry though the wicked flourish in this world, and
the godly suffer tribulation, because it is not proper unto true Christian
Religion, to be exalted but to be depressed. The wicked have no inheritance in
heaven, nor the godly in the world: But the godly ought to rejoice in this life
with all assured hope of their future felicity in heaven. Beda. Let us bear
patiently small matters and crosses, remembering what he suffered for us upon
the cross who inuiteth us unto that heavenly banquet in heaven. Cassi. No man
knows how much he has profited but in adversity: because every one receives
the blessing of Gods grace in rest and quietness, but how much he has
received is declared only in the sufferance of tribulation and adversity.
Greg. God is a Physician, and tribulation a medicine for our health, and not a
punishment for our damnation: man coming under the hands of the Physician is
tormented, wounded, and cries out bitterly, but the Physician hears not
according unto his patients mind, but as it may be for his health: even so
likewise the Lord afflicts his beloved with tribulations, crosses, and
anguishes, that he may bring those unto him by that means who otherwise would
run headlong into perdition. Temptation.
Our ancient enemy the devil cease not every where to lay snares, that he may
weaken the faith of believers by any means whatsoever for he knows whom to
alure with the lusts of the flesh, into whom to infuse the poison of envy, and
to whom he may appose the alurementes of luxury: he knows whom to vex
with grief, whom to deceive with joy, whom to oppress with fear, and whom
to seduce with admiration. He prtes into all men's ma^ners, he winnoweth out as
it were their causes, he searches al men's affections, and there ^ence seeks
to produce causes of their hurt, wherein every one is most bustly occupted. Leo
Papa. The devil, before he assay to tempt any man, first diligently waigheth
his nature whom he means to tempt and so apptieth himself by fair and
smooth means to cause a man to offend in that case, whereunto he is by nature
most inclinable: unto those that are of gentle and mild behavior, he opposes
ryotousnesse, and vainglory: but unto those that are of a more stern
conversation, be instanateth anger pride and cruelty. Prosper. Whiles we breath
in this pilgrimage our life cannot be without shine, it cannot be without
temptation: because our p^ogresse is made through temptations, neither does any
man know himself aright valesse he be tempted, neither can he be crowned
unless he overcome, neither overcome without fight, neither can be fight
unless be have enemies with whom he may fight. Augustine. In all temptations
resist the devil and he will fly from thee, but if thou give ground unto him
he will pursue thee. The Lord by Jeremy says unto Jury, how long shall
wicked thoughts harbor in thee, he asks not wherefore they come but
wherefore they stay: for many good men are oftentimes overtaken with evil
thoughts but yet they will not yield their consents thereunto. Ambroie. V.
Virtue.
ALl virtues are so linked together that he that lace^eth one, lacks all, and
he that has one has al. Hierome. The mind cannot have virtues kingdom,
unless it first shake off the kingdom of vices. August. A poor man that has
nothing at all, may be virtuous as well as the rich man, that has all things
in abundance. He is endned with many virtues. who loves virtue in another as
well as in himself Seneca. There can no more perswasiue means be used to
pursue v^rtue, then the consideration and remembrance of our own sins. Hugo.
Virtue which is constrained is not virtues, for that cannot be said to be a
virtuous deed (in respect of the agent) which is of necessity commanded to be
done. What is virtue but a mederine, and what; is vice but a wound, where, as
therefore we do make a wound of the medecin, God makes a medicine of the
wound, that those which are wounded with virtue, might be healed with vice.
Greg. Virtue ought to be more esteemed of us then any possessions, any wealth,
and abundance of earthly, treasure, or what soever transltory, and momentarie
riches, because the one remains for ever our own, but the others are no
longer ours then whiles we enjoy them here in this world: and besides all
goods, wealth, riches, or any earthly possission, many be diverse ways lost,
and are subject unto many casualties, but veriuo goes with us unto our grave,
and leaves us not here, neither in the world to come. A good work man
conuerteth all things unto the best use that may be, and a veriuous man
undergoes all things patiently, and apylyeth every thing unto the furtherance
of godliness. Envy attends upon virtue, ready always to blemish her best
actions. Vows.
ENforced vows are not to be kept. Better is it not at all to vow then to vow
the performance of an evil action: and better is it to break the performance
of a bad vow, then to execute it. Let it not repent thee to have vowed thy
service unto virtue, but rather rejoice that thou art restrained from that
which would incur thine own loss and hinderaunce. It is an happy
necessity which compels unto better things. Augustine. He is justly
enforced to pay that promises of his own accord freely. Barnard. If thou have
made a wicked vow, break promise therein, and in a dishonest cause alter thy
decree: perform not that which rashly thou have vowed: badde is that vow which
is performed with sin, as for example, if rashly and in thy fury thou have
vowed the death of any man, is it not better that thy vow be broken then kept.
Isydore. In making a vow first consider whether it be agreeable unto Gods will,
and next whether thou be able to perform it, If both these concur then see
that thou have a care diligently to perform that which so justly thou have
bound thy self unto. Miserable is the state of some roysting ruffians, who in
a bravery or any other wicked humor vow the performance of many vile and odious
acts, but more miserable is their estates who not only vow, but more wickedly
perform that which so unadvisedly they enterprised. If thou have vowed any
good act, delay not the time of performance thereof for he that is not now apt,
to morrow wilt be more unapt, and allwaies the longer the doing of good is
delayed, by so much is it the worse. Vice.
VIces do first possess the mind, as it were under a show of virtue, or at
the least wise under pretense of some colorable reason, thereby to seem more
tolerable, but having once taken possession, it grows unto an habit, and so
by custom the most detestable and odious vices seem toiletable which were
they indeed wayed in the balance of justice, would be exceedingly detested.
Hierom. Every vice is a sin, and even as custom in sinning takes away the
feeling thereof, so likewise the frequencie of some vices make them seem unto
the vicious, no vices. Idem. There is a certain affinity, (as I may so say)
between some vices, as the dissolutenes of the spirit, the appetite of the
throat, and the beast linesse of luxury, much prattling, deceit, and
forsooearing: by the dissolutnesse of the spirit, the mind is drawn to
gurmandize, and the belly being crammed with meats, the flesh is provoked unto
lust: By much prattling, deceit steppeth in, because it is a hard matter for
him that talks much, to be void of lying, and oftentimes daily is bound with
an oath thereby to deceive men. Greg. Many are so bewitched with those vices
that they possess, that they will rather enforce arguments to defend them,
they be induced by any reasons to forsake them. Seneca. Vices seem to allure
with rewards, asconeteousnesse promises good store of money, rioteousnesse
makes she we of many pleasers, and fleshie delights: Ambition with braveness
of apparel, and the applause of the people, and consequently of power, and
might, and whatsoever utay therefrom arise. Idem. Godly parents have not
always good children, neither have wicked parents always vicious and bad
children, as appears by holy David, who had wicked Absolon, and so likewise
of others who being themselves bad yet had godly children. Bernard. Vice is an
inordinate natural affection, and an act exceeding order above measure, when
as it is moved to perpetrate that that ought not to be done, and exceeding
measure when as it is moved more then it ought. Hugo. Forsake not thy friend
for one vice, but rather bear with one impersection, if thou can st not
reclaim him: for Nemo fine crimine viuit: there is noe man but has some
sault. Idem. It is an exceeding great vice to be prying into the actions of
other men and not to regard thine own, for none but Christ could ever rightly
say who can accuse me of sinne's From the heart of man proceed his thoughts,
and most commonly such as are the outward actions of the body, such likewise
are the inward thoughts of the mind, for albeit none but God alone can rightly
understand the secrets of man's heart, yet the outward actions being vicious, a
man may judge that the mind from whence they proceed is likewise corrupted,
for such as is the tree, such is the fruit likewise: and such as is the heart,
such likewise are the actions, either good or bad proceeding from thence.
Nazian. Happy art thou (oh man) who descending from a vicious stock, art yet
thy self virtuous, for thy virtues do by so much the more shine in thee, by
how much the more the vices of thy progenitors darkened their glory, and spotted
their good names. Hugo. W.
Women
SAmpson a courageous and valiant man strangled a Lion, but he could not bridle
his own love. He brake his enemies bonds, but he could not rule his own
passions. He burnt other men's haruests, but he himself being kindled with a
woman's love, lost the harvest of his own virtue. Ambrose. Wittily and not
untruly was it answered by one, who being demanded what was lighter then the
fire, said the smoke? what lighter then smoke? the air? what lighter then the
air? a woman? what lighter then a woman? nothing. What avails it thee to
watch thy wife so narrowly, seeing that an unchaste wife cannot be kept from
dishonestie, and an honest and chaste wife nodeth no custody. For necessity is
an unfaithful keeper, but she is to be accounted chaste who had liberty to
play the harlot and yet would not, and not she that would have played the
strumpet, and yet could not. What else is an evil woman but the enemy of
amity, an unavoidable punishment, a necessary evil, a natural temptation, a
desired calamity an household enemy, ^ delightful loss, an evil
ouershadowed with the color of goodness! Therefore if it be a sin to send
her packinge, it is a torment to keep ber, and of necessity a man must either
commit adultery, or else andure daily wars, and skirmishes. Chrisost. Trust
not a woman for her weeping, for she will decea^ue thee with her tears if thou
take not the better heed, tears are unto women as ready as milk to be drawn
out of a new melch cowes teates, they make show of great sorrow outwardly when
inwardly they ar^e no whit greeded: whereupon arose this saying. It is as
muchpitty to see a woman weep as it is to see a Goose go barefooted. Better is
it to dwell in the corner of an house with a quiet woman then in a wids house
with one that is a skoulde. If a Woman's will were as much bente unto goodness,
as her wit is apt unto evil a Prince need no better counsailers. Wine and
Women make men runnagates. A Stockfish, a Woman,
and a Walenut tree,
The more they are beaten,
the better they will be.
Women are wily,
and subtle withal,
He that ouerreacheth them,
is a Man strong and tall.
As by a woman our first parent Adam was seduced to eat of the forbidden
fruit, eauen so likewise by a woman was the chiefest pillar of the church who
had before confessed the son of God, enforced to deny his Lord and Master.
Who is so mad as to disclose any sec^ret unto a woman, who only can conceal
that which she knows not, and nothing else. Women when they are met together
keep a chirping like the parliament of birds: whereof arose this twofolde
saying;

Many Geese much gagling,
Many women much babbling.
And again.

Many Guess many (...)
Many women many words.
A Cage for a ^ueane, a (...) for a Rogue, and a wispe for a skould, are as
fit as meat for the body, clothes for the back, or a rod for a wanton boy. A
woman if once she take a stomach against any one is in exorable, and where she
hates she hates deadly. A fair woman given unto Iewdnesse is the greatest
temptation that any one can have, for with her eye the alureth, with her words
she enticeth, and with her love she kills. Wisdom, Foresight, and Providence.
THose things which many seeming wise do approve for exe^^lent, being waighed
in the balance ^^ Gods wisdom, are merely foolish. for the wisdom of the
world is foolish^^^ with God. Bernard. Albeit the aduer^^^^es of religion do
and ever did seek by all means possible to ^^^une the light of the Gospel,
and to bring gross; and palp^ble errors into the Church of Christ there by in
time thanking utterly to extinguish the truth of God, yet are all their
ende^^ur^ vain, for the for^eseeyng wisdom of God knows how to convert
their wicked purposes unto the good of the godly. And albeit they kill and stay
the constant professors thereof, yet has God appointed that the blood of the
Martirs shall be the serde of the Church. Sanguis Martirum, semen est
ecclesiae. A wise man is so termed, as it were foreseeing, for he will provide
for and preuente uncertain happes. Isidore. By the wisdom and prouidenc^ of
God all things are ordained and that which in man's judgment cannot but fall
out to the worst, yet his wisdom disposes it to a good end: and that which
we esteem as a punishment, God turns it unto a medicine. Hierome. A wise and
foreseeing man will cast before hand what his charges and expenses are like to
^rise unto least that running one in an headlonge course, his purse be not able
to discharge the charges that his own follye has procured. Idem. A sudden
mishappe and vnexperted is more hardly borne then that which comes expected,
Nam leuius ledit quicquid preuideris ante. Cato. Wisdom judges not of
things at all aduentares, neither does it meddle with matters not pertaining
unto it: but being brought in as a judge in any case, it waygheth the reasons
that were the causes thereof, considers of the circumstances inducing thereto,
and then pronouncing sentence according as the quallitie of the cause shall
require, there by endenouring that neither she may be rightly accused of
rashness, nor yet ^ findiscretion. A man endued with wisdom ought so rank his
actions into three parts, ordering well his actions present, forecasting for
those that are to ensue, and calling to mind those that are passed: for be
that never thinks of his deeds passed destroys his own life, and he that
foreseeeth not those to come, falls at unawares into many dangers, and
inconveniences. Senec. de quatuor virtutibus. Wisdom, (or providence,) is a
present knowledge, thoroughly considering and pendering the future event Ibidem.
Y
Youth.
Even as in old men, sobriety and perfection of manners is required, so
likewise, ought youth to be obedient, tractable, and willing to learn. Cyp^i.
A young man can hardly be wis^, ^^cause that wisdom is learned by experience
which youth has not tried. Aristotle's Ethics. He that in his youth has
learned to obey well, is most likely in his old age to govern well. Youth had
need to be virtuously treyned up in time of yongyeares, for how hardely many
(who have in their young years had the rain in their own hands) are
restrained from those vices which in youth they learned, experience it self
daily teaches. Good education forms manners, and if thy children in their
young age be virtuously instructed, in thy old age they will be a comfort unto
thee, but let them have their own will when they are young, and when thou art
old they will not reg^ard thee. Youth is hot, because the blood is then mo^^
fresh, and it is a hard matter in youth to be free from lust. He that dying
rich leaves his wealth unto prodigal youth, at the years end shall have as
many angels in his Coffine as the other has in his purse. As it is an
excellent thing to see youth well murtured, so is it a most odious thing to see
an old man who is ready to go unto his grave, void of good manners. Use no
unseemly speeches in the presence of youth, for there by thou thy self shall
be censured for vndisereete, and youth will be easily corrupted by thy lewd
and Idle communications. For all of us by nature are more ready and apt to nose
and mark any idle and vain words then to imitate any godly or virtuous
actions. If then love thy child, in youth give him correction, for he that
spares the rode spoyleth the child. Quo prius induta est, seruabit odorem
testa diu:

Look with what liquor a vessel or cask is first filled, and it will long
retain the smell thereof, so likewise youth, etc.

The headlong courses of youth cause repentance in old age when as experience
tells us how vain a course we have run. Bernard. Youth is unstayed,
unconstant, rash, he^^y, and unadvised but when it has run his course, and
sees his own fully, their begins to look back unto the paths that it
has trod, and seeks to redeem the time mispe^t, when it has no time lest
to recover it. August. It is a death unto youth to be restrained of his
liberty, but when riper judgment has taken possession of his understanding,
then it confesses that had not youth ben bridled, old age had been like to go
a b^gging. Even as the Rose that in y^ morning florisheth, but in the evening
fades a way and withers, even so is the life of man, soon ripe soon
rotten, no sooner at years of understanding, and judgment, but presently
ensues death before stayed experience can have time to amend the giddie
errouts of wanton youth. Bernard. He that marries a child, most. commonly
dies a beggar, he that marries for beauty, oftentimes dies a cuckold, he
that marries a skould, has a shrewde goose to pull, and he that in youth
betaketh himself unto lust, before old age come shall want an hairy bushe to
keep his brains warm. Idem- Youth may be compared unto a fertile ground,
wherein whatsoever seed be sown it will prosper, even so youth, if the
precepts of virtue and godliness be so wen therein, they will fructify and
grow unto a good increase, and likewise if vice be therein planted it will not
be barren of corrupt living. To late comes repentance (...) old age, when
youth has consumed the treature that should maintain thee in thy later
years. Many in their old age and especially toward their death are so
tormented with the remembrance of their wicked youth spent in ungodliness,
that they are all most as it were in despair of pardon thereof. Hugo. Z
Zeal.
IT avails nothing to have the zeal of God without knowledge: the Jews
being blind thought that they had the zeal of God, yet were they sacrilegious
unto the son of the Almighty, for they being ignorant of the righteousness
which came by the son of God, thought to cleave wholye unto their own
rightcousnesse, and so refused to submit themselves unto the righteousness of
Christ, where unto they ought to have cleaued, Origin. The first occasion of
well doing is the commendation of honest actions: for praise begets zeal:
zeal procures virtue, and virtue acquireth bliss, and this is the principal
mark whereat all honest men's actions are chiefly bent. Nazian. The zeal of
the Lord is a grace which searches and overcomes, yea it infuseth it self
into the breast of the righteous. The zeal of God is life. Those that have the
zeal of the Lord. judge all men that are enemies unto God to be theirs also,
although they be father, mother, brother and sister, Ambrose. There is no
sacrifice so acceptable unto the Almighty as is the zeal of souls. Greg.
Zeal is the feruentnesse of the mind prone unto compassion of nature, the
punishment of offenses, and the love of grace and goodness: zeal therefore
profitably scourges a bad servant, gives wholesome correction unto a froward
child, and carfully observes the bonds of wedlock. The first by punishment,
the second by compassion, and the third by love. Hugo. The Lord in his zeal
will consume those that walk stubbornely after the invention of their own
hearts. Deuteronomy. 29. 20. Blessed is the man that is zealous for the Lord of hoasts
sake, the Lord will requite them with eternal felicity. There is a zeal unto
life, and a zeal vnte death, the zeal unto life keeps Gods commandments,
and for his name sake abhors to do evil, such was the zeal of Phinees.
The Lord of his mercy grant that we may be all zealous for his sake, and not
suffer so many abuses uncontrolled as now we do. Certain celected sentences,
both brief and pythy.
THe remembrance of the godly (albeit they returns to earth as other men do)
endures for ever. Man does his endeavor, but it is God that gives the issue.
A wise man loves to be admonished; but afoole hates correction. We ought to
use temporal riches, but not to repose confidence therein. A sorrowful heart
pineth the body. Unto the godly all things sort unto the best. We have all
sinned, and have all need of a savior. As we are most sure once to die, ^^
are we most unsure when we shall die. The longer we live, the more are our
crosses. The wicked take counsel together, but God overthrows their
purposes. We ought not to give sentence, before we have hard both parties, for
one man's tale is good until another b^ toulde. Man's life is a warfarre, and
if he mean to purchase heaven, he must fight manfully against the world, the
flesh and the devil. To care for the body only and to neglect the soul, is
the right way to the devil. God depresseth the proud, but gives grace unto
the lowly and meek. Despise not the poor for we are all Gods creatures. He
that takes council against the Lord, strives against the stream. Despair
not in afflictions, for thereby God tries thy faith. As is a blubbe upon the
water, even so is the life of man, to day a man tomorrow none. Where Judges are
corrupted with bribes, there the poor go home by weeping cross. The lawier
and the leache may well be compared, for the leache never has enough till his
belly break, nor the lawier until he want breath. He that goes to law for
every trifle, will help to make the lawier rich and himself a beggar. He that
makes himself beho^ldinge unto his enemy, sells his own liberty. A
feigned trend is more daingerous then aprosessed so. He that thinks to get
any thing out of the courtous man's purse, is as much deceived, as he that
thinks to wring water out of a stone. Eat not over much for cloying thy
stomach. Feed not over fast, lest thou strangle thy self against thy will.
Fast not over long, least evil smells annoy thy stomach. As near as thou
can!, observe a diet, for it is healthful for thy body. Observe due seasons
in taking thy meat, for then thy appetite most commonly will be sharp set.
Plenty (of the choysest daynties) is no dainty. If thou desire to have well, do
well. He that is in poverty, and asks of one that has as much need as
himself, may go to bed hungry, and he that being unseen in any matter,
asks council of one that has as little skill as himself, may seek about
for a fool, and find him in his own bosom. Beauty is like unto a pleasant^
flower which in the morning florisheth, but in the evening is dried away and
withered. He that by wisdom guides himself, shall receive glory for his
reward, but he that suffers himself to be led by folly, shame shall be his
ending. Nascimur in commune bonum.
FINIS.

