A Friendly Admonition to Martine Marprelate, and his Mates. By LEONARD WRIGHT.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

To Martine Marprelate and his Mates: L. Wright wishes the spirit of grace,
wisdom and charity, with speedy reformation of former follies.
HE that reproves a wise man (says Solomon) wins love and favor, but who
so medleth with a scornful person, gains nothing but reproach and dishonor.
Pro 9.10.9 13
This Proverb Martine, is verified in thee and thy fellow workers: who (like
as the spiteful spider conuerteth his food into poison, and the venomous
serpent regards not whom he sting: so whatsoever as yet has been said unto
you, though never so learned, pithie, or sensible, have converted the same into
poisoned malice: returned it with ridiculous scoffs, and augmented it with
slanderous reproaches. Notwithstanding though in small hope of more courteous
entertainment at your hands, then as well my self, as others my betters have
lately found, I have thought good, not in way of revenge, to requite you with
evil for evil, as tant for tant, squib for squib, or scoff for scoff: but
rather in friendly and charitable manner, gently to admonish and entreat you,
to cease your grievous railing, disdainful mocking, and bitter contention:
which yields occasion for our enemies to laugh at our folly: our friends to
lament our misery: and al neighbor countries to wonder at our curiosity.

Alas Martine, I pity thy want of discretion, who in publishing thy
unprofitable and immodest conceits, breaking the unity of the Church,
hindering the course of the Gospel, and disquieting the peaceable state of the
realm: have set thy self upon an open stage, in the view of the whole world,
to be scorned, hated, and detested for ever.

Oh merciful Father, what Christian subject having either civil honesty,
fear of God, or spark of grace, could so presumptuously take upon him, to
encourage the commens to cast off the yoke of obedience, Look Martins
conclusio^s

And their book entitled. D. Some laid open in his colors.


and resist her Majesty's laws establyshed, against her crown and dignity:
so disdainfully to harden his heart and sharpen his tongue against his poor
brethren, for showing their dutiful allegiance to her Highness proceedings, or
with such spiteful malice, raging fury, and desperate boldness (as though
neither Prince, Magistrate, nor Law durst control them: to deride, slander
and discredit those ancient grave Fathers, godly learned pastors, and chief
pillars of our church, reverenced for their special gifts, placed in
authority for their rare virtues, and honored of all good men for their
callings, by whom the doctrine of salvation has been so plentifully planted and
taught, during her Majesty's most happy reign, and taken such deep rooting in
the hearts and consciences of many thousands in England (to Gods honor be it
spoken) as neither Papist, Martinist, nor Atheist, are able to seduce or remove
them.

Rom 2.23. Mark 7.6 Math. 2.12
Is this the sincerity of doctrine, purity of living, and preciseness of
consciences, which thou and thy mates pretend and boast upon? Is this your
brotherly kindness, to love your neighbor as your self, Esaias. 3
and do unto all men as you would be done unto? Is this the honest nature,
charitable disposition, and courteous behavior, beseeming a civil religious
Gentleman? No, no Martine, If Martine be a Gentleman, it is only by
profession, not by condition.
thy odious railing scoffs, and vile carterly rethorike (more fit for Skogan,
Will Summer, or a vice in a play) bewraieth in thee rather a vile, base, and
churlish condition.

Again, if thou and thy fellows were not even blocks in sense, and monsters
in malice, you might with grief perceive, and with shame enough confess,
that forasmuch as we have the Gospel of Christ sincerely preached, and his
Sacraments (as seals annexed thereunto) duly ministered, the substance
whereby the true Church is known, with such a godly reformation and uniform
order, by law therein established (not only touching faith, doctrine, and
remission of sins, in every point to the sacred word consonant and agreeable:
but also touching external policy, discipline, decency, ceremonies, rites
and fashions, in no point to the same repugnant or contrary) as al ye churches
in Europe do honor, reverence, and commend it, and by the judgment of M.
Cartwright himself, M. Cartwright his Epistle to Harison.
do give the right hand of society in the house of God, unto ye church of
England. There is no just cause of our parts therefore, why you should in sects
and factions separate your selves from us. As for your assertions, by the
judgment of the profoundest divines in this land (as D. Fulke for one (whose
words I am able to justify) they are false and erroneous, your reasons obscure
and senseless, and your challenge most arrogant and presumptuous, whose
arguments are either framed upon grounds of your own diuices, to draw things
indifferent to faith and religion, or else under a shadow of things which God
has commanded, to prove those he never commanded, which has bin always the
special grounds of sects and scismes in the Church, and your chief points
(of ye best learned) have bin sufficiently answered already, to satisfy any
reasonable man deceived through ignorance, and for him that is drowned in
wilful blindness, all that can be said will not suffice, for such as be
naturally inclined to contention, will never want cauelling words.

The mightier that men be (says Jesus Syrach) the greater is their wrath, and
the longer that strife endures, the more it burns. Eccle. 28.
Christ himself confuted the Pharesies, yet could he not put them to silence.
To pester therefore more paper in answering every selfe-willed fool in his
foolishnes, were not only unprofitable, Prou. 26. Prou. 17.10.9.23.9.
but mere ridiculous. One reproof does more good to a wise man says
(Solomon) then an hundred stripes to a fool. Whom Pasquin very aptly compares
to an Ape, which the more sagely he is looked upon, Eccle. 22.6
the more he grinneth: so the more substantially a fool is reasoned withal,
the less he understands.

I, but Martine in his own opinion, is a man of most deep and profound
judgment, It were good he had less art and more grace. In old Martins
protestation.
able to see further in matters of state and religion, then all the learned
Bishops in the land, whose conceits must needs be pure and perfect without
errors. For why? he is resolute to confirm and seal them with his blood. Yet
Martine, remember thou art but a man, and man is subject to error, yea and as
it is proper to God only not to err: so is it seldom given unto man to hit
the truth. He is wise that can perceive his own folly. If thou and I had been
judge between the Publican and the Pharesie, which of the^ were the honester
man, Luke. 18
I doubt we should both have erred. Again Campion the Jesuit was as learned,
and resolute to die as thou, and yet but an obstinate Papist. Copin and Helias
the Brownists as resolute to die as thou, and yet but rebellious traitors?
Jews, Cole and Ket at Norwich, as resolute to die as thou, and yet but rank
heretics?

But Martine and his mates, are men specially endued with divine wisdom, The
gifts of ye spirit are rife, but the fruits are rear.
godly zeal, and other spiritual gifts above the rest.

I, but we have fair warning not to believe every spirit, for many false
Prophets are gone out into the world, in whom satan transformeth himself into
an Angel of light, 1 John. 4.1 2. Tim. 4.3.4 2 Cor. 2.13.14 Math. 7.16
Et ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos, Let us therefore try those spirits,
whether they be such in deed as they would seem, yea or no.

The spirit of wisdom (says Solomon) is loving, mild, and modest, Wisdom.
1 Ephe. 5.9 James. 3 Psalm. 25.8 Eccle. 3
whose fruits (says the Apostle) do consist in all goodness, righteousness,
and truth. The wisdom that is from above (says Saint James) is peaceable,
courteous, and easy to be entreated. Those that be meek shall the Lord guide
in judgment, says David, and such as be gentle, them shall he learn his
way. The children of wisdom (says Jesus Syrach) are a congregation of the
righteous, 1. Corinthians. 13
and their exercise is obedience and love.

Ephe. 4.31
Love is humble, patient, and courteous, Love is bountiful, liberal, and
friendly, Love covers the multitude of sins, and judges charitably of all
men. Ezech. 13 Romans 12.1^ Romans 2.1 Math. 7 Math. 23 1. Tim. 4.2
Contrariwise, these Martinists are so fierce, fell, and furious, so obstinat,
wilful and malicious, so churlish, disdainful and presumptuous, so captious
over other men's manners, so ready to spy a moate in other men's eyes, so busy
in laying open other men's infirmities, and so painful in binding heavy
burdens to lay upon other men's shoulders, as it yields just occasion to
suspect them, for men possessed rather with spirits of error. They are very
diligent laborers, I confess. But what do they? even as the venomous waspes,
Judas 9. 2. Pet. 2
assemble together to make honey combs like good bees: so do these (under the
title of a pure unspotted Church) associate themselves, with such spiteful
railing slanders, to vex and persecute the true members of Christ, as the
Angel durst not give to the devil himself.

They plow the forrowes of falsehood, sow the seeds of iniquity, and feed the
multitude with lying fantasies. They lead them up and down by the ears, That
ran ix. miles to suck a bull.
to hear their vain conceits, as it were a fool to the stocks, till they
prove as wise in the end as Waltams calfe.

Whose doctrine, by wringing, wresting, and abusing the meaning of the holy
Ghost to a wrong sense, appears so dark, obscure and doubtful, as the people
do feel their minds more profitablie edified, their consciences more soundly
satisfied, and their faith more comfortably strengthened, by hearing the only
words of the text distinctly read without any addition at al, then by many
such long, Whereby (though against their wills the people are brought by
experience to know and feel, that public reading (in some measure) is
preaching. 2. Pet. 2 2. Tim. 3 Judas.

Whose mouths, (says the Apostle) must be stopped. Psalm. 140 Iere. 9 Psalm 35.20
Ezech 13 Esaias. 5 Psalm. 59 2. Cron. 36. Iere. 37 4. King 2.4 Luke. 15 Math. 23


dark, and tedious discourses, as commonly proceed from the scull of their
seditious braules, and falsely applied to serve their own purpose

Thus Martine, the conditions. manners and doctrine of thee and thy fellow
workers (rightly considered) do plainly bewray you for no other, then those
vain ianglers. presumptuous talkers, and false dissembling hypocrites, of whom
the spirit of truth has so often and so earnestly forewarned us, that should
obstinatly stand in their own conceits, despise government, and speak evil of
those that be in authority, promising liberty to them that follow their
damnable ways. Resembling much that peevish brood, of whom the Prophet David
so grievously complains, that go to and from the evening, grinning like dogs,
bend their tongues like bows, and shoot out bitter words like arrows,
imagine mischief in their hearts, against those that be quiet in the land, and
stir up strife all the day long. But woe be to such foolish prophets as are wise
in their own conceits, follow their own spirits, and speak where thy see
nothing. For the sins of their mouth, and the words of their lips, they shall
be taken in their own pride. For why? their preaching is of cursing and lies.

The Israelites for deriding Gods prophets, were brought to confusion. The
tribe of Judah for contemning his servant Jeremy, were cast into loathsome
captivity. The obstinate Jews for pesecuting Christ and his Apostles, were
brought unto miserable slavery: and your selves for abusing the true
messengers of God (without speedy repentance) must needs come ^o some fearful
end.

In the fear of God therefore, I do friendly admonish you: nay more, our
sovereign Lady and mistres, by her princely authority, does straightly command
you, our loving mother the church of England, in sorrow and grief for your
offense, does courteously entreat you, and the Apostle himself in most christian
and charitable manner, does vehemently exhort you, that if you have conceived
any feeling in the fatherly kindness of God, our merciful creator, any
consolation in ye precious death of Christ our loving redeemer: Phil. 2 Cleanse
your hearts from malice, and your tongues from slander. Ephe 4 Wisdom 1.
or any fellowship in his holy spirit, our comfortable instructor: to cease
your bitter contention, confess your folly, detest your errors, repent your
wickedness, and be reconciled to God and his church. Turn your scornful
mocking, into pensive mourning: your spiteful railing into sorrowful weeping:
your presumptuous prating, into humble praying, and your busy meddling in
matters of state, into speedy reformation of your own misbehauior: call to
God for grace betimes, least with his fearful judgments he strike you
suddenly: Romans 2.4.
despise no longer the riches of his goodness, patience, and long suffering,
which leads to repentance. Abuse no longer the favorable and charitable
dealing of those godly reverent fathers, who (notwithstanding your vile
slanderous reproaches) have courteously sought from time to time, not your
deserved confusion, but desired conversion. Submit your selves to ye mercy of
our gracious soueraign, crave pardon for yt is past, and learn to know from
hence forth, yt the displeasure of ye prince, is a messe^ger of death, Prou. 20
and therefore more dangerous then seemly for every mean person, to call in
question matters of government, or meddle in princes affairs. The fox for
prying in ye lions den, had his skin plucked over his ears: and surely if your
wound be so incurable, as neither friendly caveat can warn you, gentle
admonition allure you, nor the fear of God withdraw you, but ye still you
mean to persist in your devilish enterprise, then must you know and feel, yt
her Majesty bears not the sword for naught. Romans 13
Where lenity cannot reclaim, severity must correct, duro nodo, durus cuneus.

Finally (my brethren in general) forasmuch as we are all fellow servants of
one household, and none of us without his imperfections, and shall all appear
before the iudgemen^ seat of Christ, ye only searcher of man's heart, 1. Corinthians.
4.5 Romans 14.10 Psalm. 7.10 Gal. 6.5 1 Cor. 3.8 Ephe. 4 Colos. 3.12.13. 1. Cor.
10.12. Romans 14.4 James. 3.13 Augustine. 2. Timo. 2.24 Galath. 5.15
where every one shall bear his own burden, and receive reward according to
his own labor. Let us learn of ye Apostle to deck our selves with humility and
lowlines of mind, and be more loving, friendly and charitable one to another.
Let him yt stands take heed least he fall. As for his brother, whether he stand
or fall, yt pertains to his own master. Let him yt is endued with knowledge
and learning, show it forth in meeknes and discretion. Let us learn of S.
Augustine to agree together in fear, least we perish in error. It becomes
not the servants of God to be stubborn, waywarde, or contentious, but quiet
and peaceable unto all men. If you bite and devour one another (says the
Apostle) take heed lest you be consumed one of another. The Lord of his
fatherly kindness, at his good will and pleasure, relent and mollify our hard
stony hearts, lighten our ignorant minds, and prevent our obstinate wills, and
indue us with his heavenly grace, Romans 14.19 Ephe. 5.15.16 Phil 2.2.3.16. 1.
Pet. 2.17 Heb. 13.17
circumspectly to follow those things that make for peace, and study to be
quiet, especially considering our days are dangerous, yt with one heart one
mind, one will, and one judgment, we may join together in due obedience, to
glorify our God, honor his Prince, and reverence his Prelates.


