THE DESCRIPTION AND USE OF THE SPHAERE. Divided into three principal Parts.
WHEREOF The first entreats especially of the Circles of the uppermost
moveable SPHAERE, and of the manifold uses of every one of them severally. The
second shows the plentiful use of the uppermost Sphaere, and of the Circles
thereof jointly. The third contains the Description of the Orbs whereof the
Sphaeres of the Sun and Moon have been supposed to be made, with their
Motions and Uses.

By EDWARD WRIGHT.

The Contents of each Part are more particularly set down in the Table.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. Fawcet, for John Tap, and are to be sold at
his Shop at S. Magnus corner. 1627.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF this Book.
The first Part. Of the Circles of the uppermost SPHAERE, and their several
uses.
THe Definition and division of this Sphaere, Chap. 1. The description of the
Horizon, Chap. 2. The uses of the Horizon, Chap. 3. The description of the
Meridian, Chap. 4. The uses of the Meridian, Chap. 5. The description of the
Houre-circle, and Poles of this Sphaere, Chap. 6. Of the Equinoctial circle,
and why it is so called and how divided, together with his manifold uses, Chap.
7. The description of the Zodiac of this Sphaere, Chap. 8. The uses of the
Zodiac, Chap. 9. The description of the two Colures, together with the uses
common to them both, Chap. 10. The uses of the Equinoctial colure, Chap. 11.
The uses of the Solstitiall colure, Chap. 12. The description of the two
Tropickes, Chap. 13. The uses of the Tropickes, Chap. 14. The Polar circles,
Chap. 15. Uses of the Polar circles, Chap. 16. Of the Zones, Chap. 17. The
difference of shadows that the Sun makes in these Zones, Chap. 18.
The second Part. Of the uses of the uppermost Sphaere, and of the Circles
thereof jointly.
TO rectify the Sphaere, that is to set the Sphaere to the Latitude of that
place for which you would use it, Prop. 1. To know* the place of the Sun by
this Sphaere, Prop. 2. To know the declination of the Sun, or of any point of
the Ecliptic, Prop. 3. To know the right Ascension of the Sun, or any point
of the Zodiac, Prop. 4. To know the oblique ascension of the Sun, or of any
Star or point in the Zodiac, Prop. 5. To find the difference of Ascension,
Prop. 6. To find at what time the Sun rises or sets, Prop. 7. To find
the length of the Artificial Day or Night, Prop. 8. To know the time of the
Sun rising, or Sun setting, Prop. 9. To find the length of the artificial
Day or Night, otherwise by the Sphaere, Prop. 10. To know the Meridian altitude
of the Sun at any place, whose latitude is known, Prop. 11. To know how high
the Sun is about the Horizon at any time of the day, Prop. 12. To find the
hour of the day by the height of the Sun, the place of the Sun, and height
of the Pole being given, Prop. 13. To find the breadth of the Suns rising or
setting, that is, how far he rises or sets from the point of true East or
West at any time, Prop. 14. To find the place of the Sun, his declination,
and the quarter of the year being known, Prop. 15. To find what day of the
month it is by knowledge of the Suns declination, Prop. 16. The day of the
month being known to find at what time the day breaks, Prop. 17. To find
how long the twylight continues, Prop. 18. To find how much the declination
of the Sun must alter at any time of the year, to make the day one hour
longer or shorter, Prop. 19. To find how many days it is ere the day lengthen
or shorten an hour, Prop. 20. To make an horizontal Dial by the Sphaere,
Prop. 21. How to make a direct murall Dial by the Sphaere, Prop. 22. To make
any direct inclining, or direct reclining Dyall by the Sphaere, Prop. 23. To
know at what time the Moon, or any other of the Planets, or fixed Stars that
are within the breadth of the Zodiac rise or set, or come to the Meridian: as
also with what degree of the ecliptic they rise set or midde Heaven, together
with their declinations, and their right and oblique ascensions, and
descensions, and their amplitudes or bredths of rising or setting, Prop. 24. To
know how long the Moon, or any of the Planets or fixed Stars do shine, or
continue above the Horizon, Prop. 25. To find which of the Planets of fixed
Stars (that are within the compass of the Zodiac) are above or under the
Horizon at any time of the day or night, Prop. 26. To find in what time any
Sign, or part of the Ecliptic, rises or sets, Prop. 27. To find the
hour of the Night by any of the Planets, or fixed Stars in the Zodiac, that
appear above the Horizon, Prop. 28. To know at any time of the year, what
Stars in the Zodiac arise or set Cosmically, Achronycally, or Heliacally,
Prop. 29.
The Meridian Line.



Of the use of the SPHAERE and GLOBE. Pars, 1.
The Description of the Sphaere and Globe, divided into three principal parts..

Whereof this first entreats specially of the Circles of the uppermost
moveable Sphaere and of their peculiar uses.

CHAP. I. The definition and division of the Sphaere.
THis Sphaere, is nothing else but a representation of the Celestial orbs
and circles, that have been imagined for the easier understanding, expressing,
and counting of the motions and appa^ences, either common to the whole Heavens,
or proper to the Sun and Moon.

The circles of this Sphaere are either inmoueable, as the two greatest and
utmost circles, the Horizon and Meridian, (whereto is adjoined the little hour
circle that is fixed to the Meridian) or else moveable* as all the rest
contained within these.

CHAP. II. The Description of the Horizon.
THe greatest and utmost circle of the Sphaere that lies level on all sides
from the ground, is called the Horizon, which is divided into 7. limbs, or
borders. The first and utmost of them conteyneth the 32. points of the
Compass, or the winds (as they are at this day divided and used by Seamen)
with their Latin names adjoined unto them. The second limb conteyneth the
names and divisions of the 12. Winds as they were wont to be divided in old
time. The third is divided into the months and days of the new Calendar,
first established by Pope GREGORY the XIII. and now used in many places beyond
the Seas. In the fourth limb are set down the months and days of the
ordinary Calendar used in England. Next within this, are placed the 12. Signs
and degrees of the Zodiac, that so the place of the Sun might be presently
known for any day of the year given, or contrariwise, that the day of the
Month might be readily found by the place of the Sun. After this, follows
the sixth limb containing the 32. Winds or points of the Compass, with
letters representing the names now in use amongst English Mariners. The
seventh and last limb next the innermost edge of the Horizon, is divided into
360. degrees with figures set to every tenth degree, beginning from the points
of East and West, and ending at North and South; that so the number of any
degree of the Horizon might be the easilier known: Which Circle appears
most plainly to them that are in a plain Champion Country, or upon the Sea
close by the water in a clear calm day.

CHAP. III. The uses of the Horizon.
1. IT deuideth the upper and visible part of the Heavens from the nether half
that is hidden out of our sight.

2. It shows partly the difference of a right and oblique Sphaere, for when
this circle and the Equinoctial, cross each other at the right Angles, it is
said to be a right Sphaere, otherwise when they make oblique Angles one with
another, it is called an oblique Sphaere.

3. In an oblique Sphaere this circle seuereth those Stars which never rise
nor set, but are always either above or beneath the Horizon, from such Stars
as rise and set in every 24. hours. For all the Northerly stars that are no
further distant from the North pole, then the North pole is from the Horizon,
do never set, but are always above the Horizon: And contrariwise, those
Stars that be about the South pole, no further distant from it then it is
from the Horizon, do never rise, but are always hidden out of sight under the
Horizon.

4. In respect of this circle, the Sun, Moon and Stars, or any other part
or point of the Heavens, are said to rise or set: For when they come up from
under the Horizon, they are said to rise; otherwise when they go from above
the Horizon down underneath the same, they are said to set.

5. And hereof it comes that the ascendent, and descendent are found by this
Circle: for that part of the Ecliptic that is at the East part of the Horizon
arising, is the Ascendent; and the point opposite to this at the West part of
the Horizon, may be called the Descendent.

6. This Circle partly shows the difference of ascension of any part or point
of the Heavens.

7. In this Circle we reckon how far the Sun, the Moon, or any Star, or
point of Heaven, arises from the point of due East.

8. The Horizon determines the time of the artificial day and night: for we
call the time w^^rein the Sun abides above the Horizon, an artificial day:
And the time that he continues under the Horizon, is the artificial night.

9. This Circle shows the reason of the equality of artificial days and
nights, in a right Sphaere: and of the inequality of them in an oblique
Sphaere. For in a right Sphaere, the Horizon deuideth all the paralels of the
Sun or Circles of the natural days, into equal parts: But in an oblique
Sphaere, it deuideth them into unequal parts.

10. By means of this Circle, we know what Stars, and what Eclipses,
Conjunctions, or other aspects of the Planets may be seen in our Hemisphere
at any time.

11. From the Horizon is measured the twilight: For in the morning the Sun
being under the Horizon about 18. degrees of the vertical, Circle, the
twilight begins: And when the Sun is so much under the Horizon at Evening,
the twilight ends.

12. This Circle is of especial use in Geography, for from it we begin to
account the elevation of the Pole, and of the Equinoctial circle, whereby the
Latitude of any place is known.

13. In Astrology for erecting a figure, this Circle shows the beginning of
the first and seventh Houses.

CHAP. IIII. The description of the Meridian.
NExt the Horizon, succeeds the Meridian standing upright on edge, and crossing
the Horizon at right angles in the points of North and South. This circle is
divided on both sides at the inner edge into 360* Degrees, with figures set to
every tenth degree, beginning at the Equinoctial, and ending at the Poles with
90. and beginning also at the Poles, and ending at the Equinoctial with 90.
The numbers beginning at the Pole, serve to set the Sphaere readily to any
elevation desired. The other numbers beginning at the Equinoctial, show
presently the declination of any degree of the Zodiac, or of any point
assigned in the Sphaere, one quarter of the Meridian on either side thereof
from the Equinoctial to both Poles, shows the Climates, and the quantities
of the longest days.

CHAP. V. The uses of the Meridian.
1. IT deuideth the World into two halfes or Hemisphaeres: that is, the East
and the West hemisphaeres. The Easterly hemisphaere is all that part of the
world which is on the East Side of the Meridian, and the other half may be
called the West hemisphaere.

2. It shows the North and South parts of the world, for the two
intersections of the Meridian with the Horizon, show the very points of North
and South. The South point is that which is directly under the Sun at noone:
And the point right over against this, is called the North-point.

3. It deuideth the arches of the Equinoctial, and of all his Paralels, into
two equal parts both above and beneath the Horizon.

4. And therefore it deuideth the artificial Day and Night into two equal
parts.

5. And consequently, it shows midday and midnight.

6. In an oblique Sphaere it serves in stead of a right Horizon (that is) an
Horizon that makes right angles with the Equinoctial.

7. Therefore the Astronomers begin their account of times (which are measured
by the equal motion of the Equinoctial) from the Meridian: the principal of
which times, is the natural day which is usually begun from midday, or
midnight.

8. This Circle shows the highest and lowest heights of the Sun and
Stars, which is most manifest in those Stars that are always above the
Horizon. These heights are called the Meridian altitudes of the Sun or Stars,
which heights are chiefly observed by Astronomers and Nauigators with great
diligence.

9. In this Circle, we observe the distance of the Tropickes, and the greatest
obliquitie of the Zodiac.

10. In this Circle, we observe and count the Latitudes of places, the height
of the Pole, and of the Equinoctial. For the height of the Pole or
Equinoctial, is nothing else but the arch of the Meridian contained between
the Pole or Equinoctial and the Horizon. The height of the Pole is always
equal to the Latitude of the place. The height of the Equinoctial is equal
to the Complement of the Latitude and therefore it being subtracted out of 90.
(...) shall remain the height of the Pole.

11. The Meridian shows the longit^^^ of places in Geographie.

12. In the Meridian, are measured the breadth of the Zones and Climates.

13. This circle in Astrology, shows the highest and lowest parts of Heaven,
which are the beginnings of two principal Houses: that is, the fourth and the
tenth houses.

CHAP. VI. The description of the Houre-circle, and Poles.
THe little Circle fastened to the Meridia^ is called the Houre-circle, which is
divided into 24. equal parts, signifying and representi^^ unto us so many
equal hours, whereof both the (...) hours are fixed just upon the Meridian,
becaus^^ ^hen the Sun comes to the Meridian, it is just twelve a clock:
the upper XII. serves for the Day; and the other XII. beneath serves for the
Night.

The Index, or the Painter in form of an Arrow, fastened upon the Pin that
comes through the midst and Center of this circle, is made to show and point
out the said hours as need shall requite, in the use of the Sphaere.

The use of this hour Circle shall be showed hereafter, when we shall speak
of the common use of many circles of the Sphaere together. And these two
Circles (that is, the Meridian and Horizon) are called immovable, because they
keep themselves always, and in all places over the same parts of the Earth;
where as all the rest (contained within these two) move round about altogether
with one motion in the space of four and twenty hours.

This motion (being common to the whole Heavens) is made about two Points or
Poles, represented in this Sphaere, by the two Wyre pinnes about which the
Sphaere is turned; whereof the one that comes through the midst of the
little Circle fastened to the Meridian (which we call the hour Circle)
represents unto us the Pole Articke or the North Pole: the other because it
is opposite to this, is called the Antartick pole, that is the right opposite,
to, or right over against the North pole, which is also the South pole.

CHAP. VII. Of the Equinoctial Circle.
THat Circle which compasses about the midst of the Sphaere, Why this Circle
is called the Equinoctial or Equator.
and is every where of equal distance from both Poles, is called the
Equinoctial circle, or the Equator; either because it is equally distant from
both Poles of the world; or ^^se because the Sun coming under this Circle
makes equality of days and nights throughout the world.

It is divided at the utmost edge, or both sides thereof into 360. Degrees,
with figures (...) to every tenth degree, beginning at the beginning of Aries,
and proceeding Eastwards, till you become about to the same point again.

This Circle has many uses.

1. It is the measure of the first (...). For this only amongst all the Circle
of the Sphaere is moved equally both in a right and (...) Sphaere, because ^
alone being perpendicular to the (...) world, about which the Sphaere is
equally turned, is divided into two haltes by every Horizon in the same points.

2. It is the measure of time; because it measures the quantity of the
artificial and natural days, of which Months and Years are made: It
measures also the quantity of Hours and of other times which the Sun
makes going under the Zodiac. And therefore the degrees of the Equinoctial
are called tempora (that is) times.

3. It shows the two Equinoctial points in the Eclipticke, cutting the
Ecliptic in two places, which are the beginnings of Aries and Libra: and the
Sun when he comes to those two points, is equally distant from both Poles of
the World, and makes equality of days and nights in all places; which
happens in our time about the 10. or 11. day of March, and the 13. or 14. of
September.

4. The irregularitie of the Zodiac, and of all the Signs and degrees
thereof, is measured by this Circle. For seeing the most part of the apparences
of the first motion are referred to the Zodiac, which is not turned about his
own Poles, but about the Poles of the Sphaere, and therefore must needs be
unequally turned about; it was needful that this inequality should be ruled
and measured by some other equal motion.

5. It deuideth the Sphaere into two halfes (which they call Hemisphaeres) that
is, into the North half or hemisphaere, wherein is the North pole, and into
the South hemisphaere, wherein is the South pole.

6. So it deuideth the Zodiac into the North half, and the South half; or
into the North signs, and the South signs.

7. From this Circle are numbered the declinations of the Stars, and of the
degrees and parts of the Eclipticke, and of any other point of Heaven.

8. And in this Circle are counted the right ascentions of the same Degrees and
Stars, etc. For the right ascension of any star or point of the Heavens, is
nothing else but the Arch of the Equinoctial circle contained between the
beginning of Aries and the Meridian, the same Star or point being first
brought under the Meridian.

9. In the Equinoctial is counted the ascentionall difference and the oblique
Ascension and Descention of any point of Heaven. And from the same Circle is
reckoned the distance of the Sun rising from the true East point. For the
oblique ascension or descention is nothing else but the arch of the
Equinoctial, contained between the beginning of Aries, and that point of the
Equinoctial Eastwards, which arises or sets together with the Star or
point that is given, in an oblique Sphaere. And the difference ascentionall or
descentionall is naught else but the arch of the Equator, whereby the right and
oblique ascension or descention of a Star, or any other point in Heaven do
differ each from other. The distance of the suns rising from the true East
point (which in Latin is called Amplitudo ortiua,) is the arch of the Horizon
contained between the Equinoctial and the parallel of the Sun, or his
Center when he rises.

10. In Geographie we count the Longitudes of places in this Circle; and from
it we reckon the Latitudes, in the Globe of the earth, and in Maps, and sea
Charts. For the longitude of a place is nothing else but the arch of the
Equinoctial circle contained between two Meridians, whereof one goes by the
canary Islands, and the other by the place that is given, And the latitude of a
place is the arch of a Meridian contained between the Equinoctial, and the
Zenith of the place that was given.

11. In Dialling this Circle is of especial use. For by means of it the
spaces of the hours are divided in all kinds of Dials, horizontall, erect,
direct, declining, inclining, reclining, etc.

12. In Astrology the twelve Houses are set out by the equal divisions of
this Circle into twelve parts, according to the way devised by Regiomontanus,
which way is commonly called rational or reasonable. And this Circle governs
the directions, whereby things to come are artificially foretold.

CHAP. VIII. The description of the Zodiac.
THe great broad Circle that compasses about the Sphaere obliquely, coming
nearer the Pole of the Sphaere in one place then in another, is called the
Zodiac.

Round about through the midst of this Circle, is drawn the Circumference
commonly called the Eclipticke line, dividing the whole Sphaere, and the whole
breadth of the Zodiac throughout, into two equal parts.

In this Sphaere there are represented unto us two Eclipticke lines. The one
may be called the middle, or fixed Eclipticke, which keeps always the same
distance or obliquitie from the Equinoctial. The other may be called the true
or moveable Eclipticke, because it makes not always the same angles of
intersection with the Equator, but sometimes greater, sometimes less. For the
greatest obliquitie of the Zodiac, which not long before Ptolomees time was
observed to be 23. Degrees and 52. Minutes; in Copernicus his time, was hardly
found to exceed 23. degrees 28. minutes, according to his observation, and
therefore he thought that the difference between the greatest and least
obliquitie of the Zodiac, was 24. Minutes: and the middle or mean obliquitie
between both these, to be 23. Degrees 40. Minutes.

The manner of the variation of this obliquitie may in some sort be showed by
this Sphaere, if we suppose the fixed Eclipticke drawn round about through the
midst of the Zodiac to be 23. degrees 40. min. distant from the Equinoctial
at the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn: and the moveable Eclipticke (fastened
as it were upon two Poles at the beginning of Aries and Libra, and so having
always the same points of intersection with the middle Eclipticke and
Equinoctial) to be moved up and down above and beneath the middle
Eclipticke, by the space of 12. Minutes at the beginning of Cancer and
Capricorn: and this motion to finish his revolution once in 3432. Julian
years.

The breadth of the Zodiac is bounded by the greatest latitudes of the
Planets, especially of Venus and Mars, which sometimes has almost 7. degrees
of latitude.

The Zodiac is divided by the Equinoctial into two semicircles.

The one above the Equinoctial is called the Northerly semicircle: the other
half beneath the Equinoctial, is the Southern semicircle of the Zodiac.

So long as the Sun moves under the first of these semicircles, the days
are longer then the nights, otherwise they are shorter.

Each of these semicircles is again divided into two parts, and so the whole
Zodiac into four quarters: the first from Aries to Cancer, may be called the
vernall or Spring-quarter, which in this Sphaere is also showed by the word Ver
(signifying the Spring:) The next from Cancer to Libra, the Summer quarter,
wherein is written the word Ae^tas signifying the Summer. The 3. from Libra to
Capricorn, is the Harvest quarter, wherein you shall find in this Sphaere the
word Autumnus which signifies Autumn or Harvest. The fourth and the last,
from the beginning of Capricorn to Aries, is called the winter Quarter, which
in this Sphaere is showed by this word Hiems, which signifies the Winter. And
these four quarters of the Zodiac are thus called by the names of the
Quarters of the year, because the Sun moving under those quarters of the
Zodiac, makes those four Quarters of the year. Every one of these quarters
of the Zodiac is again divided into three parts, and so the whole compass
of the Zodiac into 12. which are called the 12. Signs, whereof every one
contains 30. Degrees in length from West to East, and is in breadth equal to
the breadth of the Zodiac. These Signs, and the Zodiac it self have their
beginning from that common meeting, or crossing of the Eclipticke, and the
Equinoctial, where the Eclipticke begins to arise above the Equinoctial
toward the North pole: and they are called by these names; Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarie, Capricorn, Aquarie,
Pisces. That is to say, The Ram, the Bull, the Twins, the Crab, the Lion,
the Virgin, the Balance, the Scorpion, the Shooter, the Goat, the
Water-pourer, the Fishes. And they are signified by these
Characters,,,,,,,,,,,. This division of the Zodiac into 12. Signs and of
every sign into 30. Degrees, nature it self seems to have showed by the
motions of the Sun and Moon. For in what time the Sun moves once about the
whole compass of the Zodiac, the Moon makes twelve reuolutions through the
same. Therefore as the time of a year is divided into 12. Moons, so the
Zodiac is divided into 12. Signs: And as every Month contains 30. days,
so every sign is divided into 30. parts, which they call Degrees, which
signifies as much as steps, because the Sun steppeth, or goes forwards
almost so much as a degree in every day, from the West Eastwards under the
Zodiac.

The Zodiac is otherwise also divided into two semicircles, the one (from
Capricorn to Cancer) ascending, because that so long as the Sun or any of
the Planets are in that semicircle, they still ascend and rise higher and
higher above the Horizon. The other semicircle of the Zodiac, from Cancer to
Capricorn, is called descending, because the Sun or Planets being in that
semicircle, come down every day lower then other.

The 12. Signs are by the Astrologians diversely divided, first into chief,
mean, and common signs. The chief signs (which are also called Cardinal,
that is the principal signs) are Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn,
because they come next after the principal points of the Zodiac, that is,
the two Equinoctial points at the beginnings of Aries, and Libra; and the two
solstitiall points of Cancer and Capricorn. The mean signs (which are also
called fixed) are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius. They are called mean,
because they are placed between the chief or principal, and the common
signs. They are called fixed signs, because that when the Sun is in those
signs, we find a more perfect temperature of the Air, then when he is in
the other signs.

The common signs (which are also called double bodyed) are Gemini, Virgo,
Sagitarie, and Pisces. They are called common, because they take part of the
nature of the fixed signs going before them, and of the Cardinal signs
following after them. They are called double bodied, by reason of their Images,
as they are imagined in the eight Sphaere, which are compounded of two bodies:
For there be two Twins; and the Virgin holds an ear of corn in her hand;
Sagitarie is made of a Man and an Horse; and there are two Fishes. The placing,
and nature of these signs brought in this division.

The Astrologians also divide the 12. Signs into four trigons of
triplicities, so called because they are distant the third part of a Circle,
one from another. The first triplicitie contains Aries, Leo, and Sagitarius;
and is called the fiery trigon, or triplicitie: The second triplicitie
contains Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; and is called the earthly trigon. The
third triplicitie contains Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius; and is called the
ayrie trigon. The fourth triplicitie containing Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces; is
called the watrie trigon. Nature it self is the cause of this division of the
Signs also. For into these Trigons of the signs, she has distributed the
Conjunctions of the three superior Planets: especially the conjunctions of
Saturn and Jupiter, which the Astrologians call great conjunctions. For
examples sake, if there be a great conjunction in Aries, the same shall be
twenty years after in Sagitarie, and other twenty years after in Leo; and
after as many more years, it returns again into Aries. The revolution of
one Trigon contains almost 200. years, after which time the same great
conjunctions remove into the next trigon.

CHAP. IX. The use of the Zodiac.
1. THe Zodiac is the measure of the second motions, as the Equinoctial is
the measure of the first motion.

2. For in this Circle we reckon the longitudes, and from it we count the
latitudes of all the Stars. For the longitude of a Star is nothing else but
the arch of the Ecliptck contained between the beginning of Aries, and the
circle of the Stars latitude. And the latitude is the Arch of a great circle,
drawn by the poles of the Ecliptic, contained between the Star and the
Ecliptic.

3. According to this circle, the whole Heaven, yea, the whole world is divided
into twelve Signs. Whereof it comes that because of this Circle, as well the
fixed, as the wandering Stars which we call Planets, yea, and those Stars
also that appear of a sudden, as blazing Stars or Comets, and other Meteors,
are said to be in this or that sign; and that three manner of ways.

First, to be in a sign, is to be under some one of the 12. parts of the
Ecliptic. Thus the Stars which are under the Ecliptic, but especially the
Sun which runs always under it, are said to be in the Signs.

Secondly, because the Zodiac has latitude, those Stars are said to be in a
sign, which although they be beside the Ecliptic, yet are under the Zodiac,
and so any of the other Planets, which for the most part wander beside the
Ecliptic, may be said to be in some sign.

Thirdly, if we understand six great Circles to be drawn by the beginnings of
the twelve signs, and by the poles of the Eclipticke; by these circles the
whole heaven (or rather the whole world) is divided into twelve parts, which
with a general name are called signs: Thus all the Stars as well fixed as
Planets and Comets, which are without the Zodiac in any of these parts, may
be said to be in some sign.

4. In this circle are noted the degrees of the signs, with which the Stars
do rise and set, as well in a right as in an oblique Sphaere. For because this
circle is the chiefest, all Caelestiall apparances (or at least the most part
of them) are referred unto it, and not unto the Equinoctial. But the
Equinoctial measures the times of their risings and settings.

5. The obliquitie of the Ecliptic is the cause of the inequality, as well of
natural days in both Sphaeres, as of artificial days in an oblique Sphaere.
For seeing it is moved unequally, because it is moved upon other Poles then his
own, the Sun which is the author, and maker of times moving under it, must
needs make unequal days.

6. The chief times are defined by this circle, as the time of a year, by the
motion of the Sun; the time of a month by the motion of the Moon, through
the whole compass of this circle. Also the four quarters of the year,
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, whereto may be added Plato his great
year, which is the time wherein the fixed Stars make one revolution about
the axtree and poles of the Zodiac, if God would have the world to last so
long.

7. The Eclipticke line shows the places, and times of the Eclipses: For the
Sun and Moon, are Eclipsed only under it, or near unto it.

8. As the description of the Tropicks depends on the obliquitie of the
Eclipticke, so the polar Circles are described by the Poles thereof.

9. Hereof it comes, that by reason of the same obliquitie, the Zones and
Climats are set forth and bounded.

10. This Circle is of especial use in Astrology, for it distinguishes the
points of the 12. Houses, and in it the Aspects and configurations of the
Planets are observed. The chiefest judgment as well in casting Figures as in
reuolutions and directions is taken from this circle.

CHAP. X. The description of the two Colures.
THe two circles crossing each other at right Angles in the poles of the
Sphaere, are called the Colures: whereof the one that passes by the common
meeting of the Eclipticke and Equinoctial, is called Colurus aequinoctiorum,
that is the Equinoctial Colure, or the colure of equal days and nights. The
other passing by the poles of the Eclipticke, and the Solstitiall points, is
called Colurus solstitiorum, the Solstitiall colure, or colure of the
Sunne-standings.

Uses common to both Colures.
1. By means of these two Colures, all the mouable circles of the material
Sphaere are framed together, that so they might be turned about, like as the
whole Heavens are moved. 2. The Poles are fastened in the common meeting of
these two Circles: and the Poles are also showed by the same common meetings.
3. They show the four principal points of the Eclipticke; that is, the two
Equinoctial, and the two Solstitiall points. 4. These circles show those
points of the Eclipticke, wherein the Sun is either equally distant from both
poles of the Sphaere, or comes nearest to either of them: In which points the
Sun makes the days longest or shortest, or of a mean length between both
these in an oblique Sphaere. 5. They divide the Ecliptic into four quarters,
in which the Sun makes four quarters of the year, the Spring, the Summer,
Autumn, and Winter. 6. They divide the Ecliptic and Equinoctial into such
four quarters, as in a right Sphaere do rise together in equal time.
CHAP. XI. Uses of the Equinoctial Colure.
1. THe section of this Circle with the Ecliptic; shows the Equinoctial
points, wherein the Equinoctial and the Eclipticke do divide and cross each
other. In which points the Sun makes equality of days and nights throughout
the whole world: whereof this circle is also called Colurus Aequinoctiorum;
that is, the colure of equal days and nights, or the Equinoctial colure.

2. It deuideth the Eclipticke into the North and South halfes.

3. It deuideth the Signs wherein the Sun makes the days longer then the
nights, from those signs wherein the days are made shorter then the nights.

4. It shows which halfes of the Eclipticke and Equator, do arise together
in equal time in an oblique Sphaere.

5. It shows the two high Sunne-standings in a right Sphaere, in the time of
which Sunne-standings, the Sun passes by the Zenith.

CHAP. XII. Uses of the Solstitiall Colure.
1. THe common meetings of this circle with the Ecliptic, show the Solstitiall
or Tropicall points; in which points the Sun seems to stand, and then
returns back again: for which cause this circle is called the Colure of the
Sun-standings. These points are called tropicall (which is as much to say as
turne-points, or points of return) because that when the Sun going always
under the Eclipticke comes to these points, which are furthest distant from
the Equinoctial circle, it returns again toward the same circle. But they
were called Solstitiall or Sun-ding points, because that whilst the Sun is
about those points, the difference of the Suns returning is (for certain
days) insensible. Hereof the Sun is said to make his station, or to stand,
when he comes to either of those points. They that dwell without the
Tropickes, have two sunne-standings, that is the Summer sun-standing, or high
sun-standing (when the Sun in Summer time is at the highest, and next unto
our Zenith being in the beginning of Cancer) and the winterly, or low
sun-standing, when the Sun in Winter time is lowest in the Meridian, and
furthest from our Zenith. But they that dwell within the Tropicks (by a
certain similitude taken from our sun-standings, wherein the Sun is either
highest or lowest) are said to have four sun-standings; that is two high
sun-standings, when the Sun passes by their Zenith (the highest point in the
Heavens) which happens twice every year in two places, equally distant from
the beginnings of Cancer and Capricorn: and two low sun-standings, when the
Sun is in the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn.

2. In this Circle by the arch contained between the Equator and Eclipticke,
we measure the greatest declination of the Sun, or obliquity of the
Eclipticke, which in Ptolomees time was 23. degrees 51. minutes, and one third
part of a minute. But ever since that time it has been found by observation
to decrease; so as in this our age, it is no more then 23. degrees and one
half, or little more: Notwithstanding Copernicus thought that the greatest
obliquity was 23. degrees 28. minutes.

3. It shows the places of the Eclipticke, in which the Sun (coming
nearest to our Zenith) makes the artificial day longest; or going furthest
from the same point, makes the same shortest.

4. It deuideth the Zodiac into two halfes, the one ascending, and the other
descending.

5. Hereby also the signs are distinguished, which do rise rightly, and which
rise obliquely in an oblique Sphaere. For the descending half rises rightly,
and the ascending half rises obliquely.

6. So the points of the Eclipticke are showed by this Circle, wherein the
greatest difference of right and oblique ascensions happens. It
distinguishes those signs in which when the Sun moves, the artificial
days are increased, and the nights decrease; from those signs wherein the
days are diminished, and the nights increase.

7. In this circle are the bredths of the Zones bounded; for the obliquity of
the Eclipticke doubled, shows the breadth of the torrid or burnt Zone: the
distance of the poles of the Ecliptic, and of the Poles of the Equator, show
the breadth of the cold or frozen Zones; and the other two Arches remaining,
show the bredths of the temperate Zones.

CHAP. XIII The Description of the two Tropickes.
THe two smaller Circles Equidistant in all places from the Equinoctial, and
coming under these Solstitiall points of the Eclipticke on both sides, are
called the Tropicks, that is circles of return.

And they are so called, because that when the Sun comes to them, it
begins to return back again toward the Equinoctial circle. Or else they
may be so called, because they are described by the turning about of the
Tropicall points of Cancer and Capricorn. They are also called solstitiall
Circles; that is Circles of the sun-standings; because that by reason of the
insensible alteration of the declination of the Ecliptic, for some space both
before, and after the Tropicall points, the Sun (in respect of his Meridian
altitudes, or in respect of the motion he has toward the North or South, by
reason of the obliquity of the Eclipticke) seems to stand (as it were) for
certain days in those places.

There be two Tropicks, the Tropic of Cancer, and the tropicke of Capricorn.

The tropic of Cancer, touches the Ecliptic in the beginning of Cancer,
which is the most northerly point of the Ecliptic: or it is the Tropic
described in the first mouable Sphaere, by the Summer solstitiall point.

This circle is called the Tropic of Cancer, because it touches the Ecliptic
in the beginning of Cancer.

It is also called the Summer Tropic, and the Tropic of the Summer
sun-standing, because that when the Sun comes to it, the Summer begins.
It is called the North tropic, because it is in the North part of the world:
and the Circle of the high sunne-standing, because the Sun coming to it, is
highest in the Meridian, and next unto our Zenith which dwell in the North part
of the world, without the Tropicks. The Tropic of Capricorn is the Tropic
which touches the Ecliptic in the first point of Capricorn. It is called the
Tropic of Capricorn, because it touches the Ecliptic in the beginning of
Capricorn. It is called the winter Tropicke and Tropic of the Winter
sun-standing, because the Sun comes to it in Winter.

It is also called the circle of the lowest Sunne-standing, because that when
the Sun comes to this Tropicke, it is furthest distant from our Zenith, and
has his lowest height in the Meridian.

CHAP. XIIII. Uses of the Tropickes.
1. THe Tropicks show the Tropicall, or Solstitiall points of the Eclipticke:
that is, the points wherein the Sun seems to stand, and begins to
return back again.

2. They bound out the greatest declinations of the Sun, which in our times
is about 23. degrees and an half.

3. Therefore they do also bound out the obliquity of the Ecliptic, for they
are the bounds of the Suns way, beyond which the Sun goes not at any time.

4. The Sun coming to either of these circles, is either nearest, or
furthest distant from our vertical point.

5. In an oblique Sphaere, they measure out the shortest, and longest
artificial day and night.

6. The Tropicks (as well in Heaven as in Earth, conteyne betwixt them the
Torrid Zone, and separate it from the temperate.

CHAP. XV. The Polar Circles.
THe two smallest circles that are next about the poles of the Sphaere, are
called the polar circles. They are drawn by the poles of the Eclipticke, and
are every where Equidistant from the Equinoctial, and from the poles of the
Sphaere.

They are called polar Circles, either because they are near the poles of the
Sphaere, or else because they are described by the motion of the poles of the
Eclipticke.

And therefore there be two polar Circles, that is, so many as there are poles
of the Ecliptic: the Polar circle Artick, and the Polar Antartick.

The Articke polar circle, is that which passes by the North pole of the
Ecliptic, or which is described by the North pole of the Ecliptic being
carried about with the motion of the first moveable Sphaere.

The Antartick polar circle, is that which goes by the South pole of the
Eclipticke, being described with the first motion by the Antartick pole of the
Ecliptic.

The distance of these polar Circles from the poles of the Sphaere, is equal
to the distance of the tropicks from the Equinoctial, which in our time is
about 23. degr. and an half: for so much as is the obliquity of the Zodiac
(whereto the distance of the Tropicks from the Equinoctial is always equal)
so much are the poles of the Ecliptic distant from the Poles of the world.

CHAP. XVI. Uses of the Polar Circles.
1. THe Polar Circles show the poles of the Zodiac, and show their distance
from the poles of the Equinoctial.

2. The temperate Zones are bounded by these polar circles; for the Articke
circle boundeth the North side of the North temperate Zone; and the Antartick
circle boundeth out the South side of the South temperate Zone.

3. The Polar circles separate the temperate Zones, from the cold Zones which
they compass round about, and enclose within them.

Therefore the four lesser circles, that is the two Polar circles, and the
Tropicks, divide Heaven and Earth, into five Zones.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Zones.
A Zone is a space of Heaven, or Earth, contained between two of the smaller
Circles; or enclosed within the compass of either Polar circle.

They are called Zones (that is as much to say as girdles) because they
compass about Heaven or Earth like a girdle.

The Zones are divided by ancient Writers into two kinds; that is into
temperate, and intemperate Zones.

A temperate Zone is the space of Heaven or earth, contained between either of
the Tropicks, and the next Polar circle.

There be two temperate Zones; the one North, the other South.

The North temperate Zone is contained between the Tropicke of Cancer, and the
Artick polar circle.

The South temperate Zone is that which is contained between the Tropicke of
Capricorn, and the Antartick polar circle.

They are called temperate Zones, because they have a better temperature of the
air for the most part, and more mere for habitation, then the intemperate
Zones. The breadth of either temperate Zone is always equal to the complement
of the distance of the Tropicks, and therefore in this age is about 43.
degrees, that is 2580. English miles.

There be two kind of intemperate Zones, the one exceeding in heat, the other
in cold, for the most part.

The hot intemperate Zone, (called also the Torrid; that is, the burnt or
broyled zone) is that space of Heaven or Earth, which is contained between the
tropicks.

It is called the burnt Zone, because that by reason of the Suns continual
going over that zone; and casting his beams directly down thereupon, it is
scorched with overmuch heat, and is not so meet to be inhabited as the
temperate zones.

The breadth of this Zone is always equal to the obliquitie of the Zodiac, or
greatest declination of the Sun, doubled; which in our time is about 47.
degrees, that is 2820. English miles.

The cold or frozen zones, are the spaces of Heaven or earth, contained within
the Polar circles.

There be two cold zones, the one North, contained within the compass of the
Articke circle: the other South, contained within the compass of the Antartick
Polar circle.

These zones exceed in cold, because they want the sight of the sun for a
great part of the year, and when the Sun appears unto them, his beams
fall so obliquely upon them, that they can (in all likelihood) receive but
small heat thereby for the most part.

The breadth of these Zones is measured from the Poles of the world to the Polar
circles, and therefore must always be so much as the Polar circles are
distant from the Poles: that is, in our age about 23. Degrees and a half,
which make 1410. English miles.

CHAP. XVIII. The difference of Shadows that the Sun makes in these Zones.
THey that dwell in the torride Zone, do cast their shadows which the Sun
makes at noone (which we may therefore call their noone shadows) both toward
the North, and toward the South: toward the North, when the sun is betwixt
their zenith and the south point of the Horizon; and toward the South, where
the sun is between their Zenith and the North.

For seeing the zenith of them that dwell in that Zone is between the
Tropicks, the sun must needs be sometimes Northwards from their zenith, and
so make a south shadow: and sometime Southwards, and then make a north shadow.
For which cause they that inhabit this Zone are called Amphiscij; that is,
such as cast their noone shadows on both sides.

But they that dwell in the temperate Zones, are called Heteroscij; that is,
such as cast their shadows at noone, one way only. For they that dwell in the
North temperate Zone, have the Sun always at noone from their Zenith
Southwards, and therefore must needs always cast their noone shadows
Northwards. Whereas contrariwise they that inhabit the South temperate Zone,
having the Sun at noone always Northwards from their Zenith, must needs have
their shadows at noone, always toward the South.

And they that are in the cold Zones, are called Periscij; that is, such as
cast their shadows round about them. For seeing the Sun continues every
year for certain days together, always above their Horizon, and therefore
moves round about them without setting: it must needs be, that their shadows
also are carried round about them, falling toward all parts of the world in
the space of 24. hours. *

THE SECOND PART. Of the uses of the uppermost SPHAERE, and of the Circles
thereof jointly.
PROP. I. To rectify the Sphaere to the Latitude. etc.
FIrst find by observation, or otherwise the height of the Pole, or Latitude
of that place for which you would rectify the Sphaere. Then (by turning about
the Meridian of the Sphaere; lift up or put down the North Pole of the Sphaere
(about which the hour circle is fastened) till the arch of the Meridian from
the North part of the Horizon upwards unto the Pole, be just so many degrees as
the elevation of the Pole or latitude of the place was found to be: for so have
you the Sphaere duly rectified.

As for example, the Latitude of the City of London is 51. degrees and 32.
minutes, therefore if you lift up the North Pole of the Sphaere, above the
North part of the Horizon, so many degrees and minutes you shall have your
Sphaere rectified for that place.

PROP. II. To know the place of the Sun; etc.
Look the day of the month (for which you desire to know the place of the
Sun) in the Horizon, and see what sign and degree of the Zodiac upon the
Horizon answers thereto; for there have you the place of the Sun.

Take for example the 25. of December: look this day therefore in the Horizon,
and you shall find answerable thereto 13. degrees, and about 40. minutes of
Capricorn, which is the place of the Sun at that time.

PROP. III. To know the declination of the Sun, etc.
BRing the point whose declination you desire to know, unto the Meridian of the
Sphaere, and look what number of degrees and minutes of the Meridian is
contained between that point, and the Equinoctial, for so much is the
declination.

As if you would know the declination of the 10. degree of Taurus, bring that
degree to the Meridian, and you shall find the arch of the Meridian between
that degree and the Equinoctial, to be 14. degrees and about 51. minutes.

PROP. IIII. To know the right ascension of the Sun, etc.
BRing that point (as before) to the Meridian, and see then how many degrees
and minutes of the Equinoctial are contained between the beginning of Aries
and the Meridian: for that is the right ascension of that point. So you shall
find the right ascension of the 10. degr. of Taurus to be 37. degr. 35. min.
for if you bring that degree of Taurus to the Meridian, you shall find so many
degrees and min. between the beginning of Aries, and the Meridian.

PROP. V. To know the oblique ascension of the Sun, etc.
SEt the Sphaere to the elevation of the place for which you desire to know the
oblique ascension; then bring the Sun, Star, or point whose oblique
ascension you would know, unto the East semicircle of the Horizon, and look
how many degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial circle, are contained between
the East point of the Horizon, and the beginning of Aries; for so much is the
oblique ascension desired: As for example, if you see the Sphaere to the
Latitude of London 51. degr. 32. min. and then bring the 10. degree of Taurus
to the East part of the Horizon, you shall find about 19. degrees and an half
of the Equinoctial, at the same East part of the Horizon; which is the oblique
ascension of that degree of Taurus, for the Latitude of the City of London.

PROP. VI. To find the difference of Ascension.
COmpare the right and oblique ascensions of the Sun, (or of any point of the
Zodiac) together, and subtract the less from the greater, for the remainder
shall be the difference of ascension. As for example, the right ascension of
the 10. degree of Taurus, being found by the 4. Propo. to be 37. degrees, 35.
min. and the oblique ascension of the same degree at London, by the 5. Prop.
19. degree 30. min. by subtraction of the less out of the greater, the
difference shall be found to be 18. degr. and 5. minutes, which is the
difference of ascension sought for.

PROP. VII. To find at what time the Sun rises or sets.
REduce the difference of Ascension into hours and minutes (taking for every
15 degrees 1. hour, and for every one degree that remains 4. minutes, and
for every minute of a degree 4 seconds) for these hours, minutes and seconds,
being added to 6. hours, if the Sun be in any of the South signs; or
subtracted, if he be in the North signs, shows the time of the Sunrising.
And contrariwise, the same hours and minutes subtracted from six hours when
the Sun is in the South signs, or added when he is in the North signs,
shows the the time of the Sunne-setting.

As for example, the Sun being in the 10. degree of Taurus which happens
about the 20. or 21. day of April) I would know at what hour and minute the
Sun rises, and sets at London: Having therefore found by the former
Proposition the difference of ascension to be 18. degr. and 5. minutes I take
for 15. degrees thereof one hour, and for the three degr. remaining, 12.
minutes of an hour, and for the 5. minutes, 20. seconds of an hour. Which
hour, minutes and seconds being subtracted out of 6. hours, because the Sun
is in a North sign, there remains the time of the Suns rising at 4. a
clock 47. minutes, 40. seconds. And adding the same hour, min. and seconds to
6. hours, you have the time of the Sunsetting that day at 7. a clock, 12.
min. and 20. seconds.

PROP. VIII. To find the length of the artificial day or night.
THe artificial day, is the time contained between the Sunrising and the
Sunsetting: and the artificial night is the time between Sunne-setting and
Sunrising. The length of both these is found after this manner: having found
the difference of ascension, and reduced it into hours and minutes (as in the
former Proposition) double th^se hours and minutes, and add them to 12.
hours if the Sun be in the North signs, or subtract them from 12. hours if
the Sun be in the South signs, for so shall you have the length of the day:
But (contrariwise) subtract the same hours and minutes (being doubled) from
12. hours, the Sun being in the North signs; and add them to 12. hours
when he is in the South-signes; so have you the length of the night.

Or else, double the time of the Sunsetting, so have you the length of the
day. And double the time of the Sunrising, so have you the length of the right.

As the time of the Sunrising being found by the former Proposition to be 4
hours 48. minutes after mignight at London, the Sun being in the 10. degr.
of Taurus, by doubling the time of the Sunrising, the length of the night
shall be found to be 9. hours and 36. minutes. And doubling the time of the
sunsetting that is 7. hours, and 12. minutes, you have the length of the day,
14. hours; and 24. minutes.

PROP. IX. To know the time of the Sun rising and Sun setting.
THe place of the Sun being found by the 2. Proposition, bring the same to
the Meridian, and withal set the point of the Index of the hour circle, to
the 12. hour in the same circle: Then bring the place of the Sun to the
Horizon Eastwards; and the point of the hour Index shall show you in the hour
circle, the time of the Sunrising. But if you bring the place of the Sun to
the Horizon Westwards, the point of the Index will show in the hour circle the
time of the Sunsetting.

As for example, the Sun being in the 10. degree of Taurus, bring the same
degree to the Meridian, and bring the point of the hour Index also to the
Meridian: then (the Sphaere being set to the Latitude of London) bring the same
10. degree of Taurus to the East part of the Horizon, for then the hour Index
will show you in the hour circle, that the Sun rises at 4. of the clock
and 48. minutes.

And bringing the same degree to the West semicircle of the Horizon, the same
Index will show the time of the Sunsetting to be 7. hours and 12. min. after
noone.

PROP. X. To find the length of the artificial day or night.
BRing the place of the Sun (being found as before to the East semicircle of
the Horizon: set the hour Index 12. a clock in the Hour circle: turn about
the Sphaere from the East Westwards, till the place of the sun come to the
Horizon, and mark how many hours the Index has run over upon the Hour
circle in the mean time, for so much is the length of the day.

And to find the length of the night: Bring the place of the sun to the West
semicircle of the Horizon, and set the Index to 12. a clock as before; Then
turning forwards the Sphaere from East Westward till the place of the sun
come to the East semicircle of the Horizon; see how many hours the Index
passes over in the Houre-circle, for so many hours long is the night.

As for example; supposing the Sun to be as before in the 10. degree of
Taurus, bring the same degree to the East part of the Horizon, and the point of
the Index to the Meridian: then turning about the Sphaere, till the same degree
come to the West part of the Horizon; you shall find that in the mean time,
the point of the Index shall pass over 14. hours and 24. minutes, which is the
length of the day. Likewise, if you bring the same 10. degr. of Taurus to the
West part of the Horizon, and the Index to the Meridian, and turn about the
Sphaere, till that degree come to the East semicircle of the Horizon, the
number of hours that the Index runs over in the mean time upon the Hour
circle, shall be found to be 9. Degrees, and 36. Minutes.

PROP. XI. To know the Meridian altitude, or the height of the Sun at noone,
for any time and place.
SEt the Sphaere to the latitude of the place where you desire to know the
Suns height at noone: bring the place of the Sun (being found as before by
the 2. Prop.) to the Meridian, then see how many degrees of the Meridian, are
contained between the Horizon, and the place of the sun, for so much is the
height of the Sun at noone.

In like sort it may be known how much the Sun is under the Horizon at
midnight, after this manner: Bring the place of the sun in the Zodiac to
the Meridian under the Horizon, and see how many degrees of the Meridian, are
contained between the vpper-side of the Horizon, and the place of the Sun
downwards: and so shall you have that you sought for.

Or else if you cannot well come to the Meridian under the Horizon: bring that
point of the Eclipticke which is opposite to the place of the sun, unto the
Meridian above the Horizon; for the arch of the Meridian, or the number of
degrees and minutes of the Meridian, between that point and the Horizon
shows how much the sun is under the Horizon at midnight.

After this manner* the Sun being in the 10. degr. of Taurus, you shall find
that his Meridian altitude at London is 53. degrees, and about one half.

As also that he is under the Horizon at midnight about 23. degrees and a
half at London.

PROP. XII. To know how high the Sun is above the Horizon at any time of the
day.
BRing the place of the Sun (found by the 2. Prop.) to the Meridian: set the
hour Index to 12. a clock upon the hour circle: turn the Sphaere about till
the Index come to the hour at which you desire to know the height of the Sun
above the Horizon; take the distance of the place of the Sun from the Horizon
with a large pair of Compasses: then set both feet of the Compasses in the
Ecliptic, and look how many degrees are contained between them, for so much
is the height of the Sun.

Thus may you find by the Sphaere, that when the Sun is in the tenth degree
of Taurus, his height at 10. of the clock in the fore-noone (the Sphaere being
duly rectified by the first Proposition) shall be about 45. degrees and an
half at London.

PROP. XIII. To find the hour of the day by the height of the Sun; etc.
SEt the pole Artick of the Sphaere to his elevation for that place where you
desire to know the hour of the day: bring the place of the Sun in the
Zodiac to the Meridian, and the hour Index to 12. a clock of the hour
circle: take so many degrees of the Ecliptic between the feet of your
Compasses, as the height of the Sun amounts unto.

Then set one foot of your Compasses in the place of the Sun, and turn the
Sphaere about, Eastwards, if it be in the fore-noone, or West-wards, if in the
afternoon, till you can but only touch the Horizon with the other foot of
your Compasses; for then the Index points out the hour of the day in the
Hour circle.

As suppose you observe the height of the Sun being in the 10. degr. of Taurus,
and find him to be 30. degrees high in the fore-noone: you shall find
(following the directions prescribed in this Proposition) that it shall then be
about 8. of the clock in the morning.

PROP. XIIII. To find the Amplitude or breadth of the Suns rising, or
setting, etc.
THe pole of the Sphaere being set to his elevation, and the place of the Sun
to the East semicircle of the Horizon: see how many degrees of the Horizon, are
contained between the place of the Sun, and the true East point, for so you
shall have the breadth of the suns rising.

Thus the sun being in the 10. degree of Taurus, you shall find by the
Sphaere, that (for the latitude of London) he rises about 23. degr. and a
half Northwards, from the true East point, and that he sets as many
degrees toward the North, from the true West point.

PROP. XV. To find the place of the Sun, etc.
THe quarter of the year being known, bring the quarter of the Eclipticke
that is answerable thereto, under the Meridian; and turn the Sphaere to or
fro, till there be so many degrees and minutes of the Meridian, contained
between the Ecliptic and the Equator, as the declination comes to: then
look what degree of the Ecliptic is under the Meridian, for that is the place
of the Sun.

As suppose the declination of the Sun in some day of the Springtime of the
year be found to be 14. degr. 51. min. (turning therefore the Sphaere to and
fro, till some part of the spring quarter of the Ecliptic, come right under
that degree and minute of declination in the Meridian) you may find that the
Sun is then in the tenth degree of Taurus.

PROP. XVI. To find what day of the month it is, etc.
THe place of the Sun being found by his declination (as is already showed)
seek the place of the Sun in the Horizon of the Sphaere, and look what day
is answerable thereto, for that is the day of the month which was sought for.

As the place of the Sun being found by his declination (as is showed in the
former Proposition) to be in the 10. degree of Taurus, the day of the month
shall thus be found to be the 21. of April.

PROP. XVII. The day of the month being known, to find at what time the day
breaks.
Find the place of the Sun (by the 2. Prop.) and bring it to the Meridian,
then bring the hour Index, to 12. a clock upon the hour circle.

Find out also the point of the Eclipticke that is right over against the
place of the Sun: then take between the feet of your Compasses 17. degrees
of the Eclipticke, and setting one foot of the Compasses in the point opposite
to the place of the Sun, turn the Sphaere Westwards, till you can but only
touch the Horizon with the other foot, for then the Index shows in the hour
circle at what time the day breaks.

So the 21. of April, the Sun being in the 10 degr. of Taurus, you shall find
that the day breaks about half an hour past 2. of the clock in the morning.

PROP. XVIII. To find how long the twylight continues.
Find out by the former Prop. at what time the day breaks, and learn also
at what time the Sun rises by the 7. or 9. Prop.

Then subtract the lesser from the greater, and there shall remain the length
of the twylight.

Or else thus: having brought the point that is opposite to the place of the
Sun to be 17. degrees above the Horizon West-wards, in such sort as is showed
in the former Proposition; and keeping the Sphaere in that position, bring
about the point of the hour Index unto 12. a clock upon the hour circle;
then tune the Sphaere Westwards until the degree or point of the Eclipticke
that is opposite to the place of the sun come to the Horizon: and see how
many hours the point of the Index has run over in the mean time upon the
hour circle: for so many hours continues the twylight.

By either of these ways, the Sun being in the 10. degr. of Taurus, you
shall find that the twylight (that is the time from the break of the day till
Sunrise) is about 2. hours and 20. minutes.

PROP. XIX. To find how much the declination of the Sun must alter at any
time of the year, to make the day an hour longer or shorter.
BRing the place of the Sun (found by the second Prop.) to the East
semicircle of the Horizon, and mark what degree or point of the Horizon it
falls upon; bring one of the Colures to the same degree or point, and there
make a prick in that colure; and holding the Sphaere immovable,) mark
withal what degree of the Equinoctial, or of either of the Tropickes is then
at the Horizon: Then turn the Sphaere 7. degrees and an half forwards,
toward the West, if the days shorten: but contrariwise if the days lengthen;
and holding the sphaere there immovable, make another prick in the colure at
the Horizon: for the distance of these two pricks in the colure taken with the
Compasses and brought to the Ecliptic, or Equinoctial, shows how much the
Suns declination must alter to make the day an hour longer, if the days
increase; or shorter, if they decrease.

After this manner you shall find that the sun being in the 10. degree of
Taurus, his declination must increase about 5. degrees, (or little more) to
make the day an hour longer; but when the sun is in the 20. degree of
Pisces, his declination, or rather his Meridian altitude, must increase about
6. degrees to make the day an hour longer: and when he is in the beginning of
Capricorn, his declination decreaseth scarce 5. degrees to make the day an
hour longer.

PROP. XX. To find how many days it is ere the day lengthen or shorten an
hour.
BRing the foresaid pricks (made in the Colure by the former Proposition) unto
the Meridian, and there make two marks justly answerable unto those pricks in
the Colure: turn about the Sphaere till the Eclipticke line come just under
one of those marks, and there make a prick in the Eclipticke: then again
turn the Sphaere till the Ecliptic come just under the other mark made in
the Meridian, and there make another prick in the Eclipticke: (But here it is
to be noted, that whereas the Eclipticke may be brought under that mark
whether way soever you turn the Sphaere, it must (I say be noted that the
Sphaere must be turned that way which may soonest bring the Eclipticke under
that mark. (Lastly, find out amongst the signs and degrees described upon
the Horizon, the like arch to this, that is contained between these pricks in
the Eclipticke: For the number of days answerable to this arch in the Horizon,
is the time wherein the day grows an hour longer or shorter.

Thus shall you find, that when the Sun is in the beginning of Aries, it
will be about 18. days after, ere the day be one hour longer. But when the
Sun is in the beginning of Capricorn, you shall find that it will be almost
twice so much, that is near 34. days before the day will be an hour longer.

Hereby therefore the error of them manifestly appears, which think that in
every 15. days, the day is lengthened or shortened an hour, whereas indeed
the lengthning or shortning of the days, keeps no such rule. For when the
Sun is about the Equinoctial points, the days lenghthen or shorten very
fast: but when he is near the Tropicall points, they grow longer or shorter
very slowly.

PROP. XXI. To make an Horizontall Dial.
SEt the Sphaere to the elevation of the place for which you would make the
Dial turn about the Sphaere, till the solstitiall Colure be 15. degrees
(measured in the Equinoctial) from the Meridian; and where the Colure crosses
the Horizon, there make a prick; then turn the Colure yet 15. degr. further,
that is 30. degrees from the Meridian; and where the Colure crosses the
Horizon, there make an other prick: again turn the Colure forwards yet 15.
degrees. more, (that is 45. degrees from the Meridian) and at the common meeting of
the Colure and Horizon, make the third prick in the Horizon; and so proceed
with the rest, till you have made so many pricks on that side of the Horizon as
there are hours in halse the longest day. Then look how many degrees the
first, second, third, fourth pricks, etc. are from the Meridian, for so many
degrees must the hour lines of 11. a clock, and one a clock; of 10. and 2,
of 9. and 3. of 8. and 4. etc. be from the 12. a clock line in the Horizontall
Dyall.

After this manner in an Horizontall Dial made for the Latitude of London,
(which is 51. degr. and 32. minutes (you shall find the distances of all the
rest of the Houre-lines from the 12. a clock line as follows: Betwixt twelve
and 11. and twelve and 1. are conceyned 12. degrees almost: Between 12. and
10. and 12. and 2. there are contained 14. degr. and an half: Between 12. and
9. and 12. and 3. 38. degr. Between 12. and 8. and 12. and 4. 53. degr.
Between 12. and 7. and 12. and 5. 70. degrees and an half.

Between 12. and 6. both before and after noone, 90. degr. The other hour
spaces before 6. in the morning; and after 6. in the evening, are equal to the
Hour spaces after six in the morning, and before 6. in the afternoon.

PROP. XXII. How to make a direct mural Dial.
SEt the Pole artick of the Sphaere so much under the Horizon as is the
complement of the Poles elevation: the Horizon therefore being thus set as it
were to the Zenith of the Sphaere, and so representing the vertical Circle of
East and West (that is the plain super fices of a direct mural Dial) you
shall find the distances of all the houre-lines, (both before and after noone)
from the 12. a clock line, in such sort as you did before for the Horizontall
Dial.

So you shall find the distances of the houre-lines in an erect direct murall
Dial made for the Latitude of London to be as follows: Between the twelve a
clock line and the lines of 11. and 1. 9, degr. and about one third part of a
degree: Between 12. and 10. and 12. and 2. 19. degrees and one quarter;
Between 12. and 9. and 12. and 3. 32. degr. or little more: between 12. and
8. and 12. and 4. 48. degrees: between 12. and 7. and 12. and 5. 67. degr. or
little more: between 12. and 6. both before and afternoon 90. degrees.

PROP. XXIII. How to make any direct inclining, or direct reclining Dial.
REckon from the Equinoctial upwards in the Meridian, so many degrees as the
height of the Pole comes to at that place where you would make your Dial;
for there is the vertical point or Zenith of that place: from this Zenith
reckon Southwards in the Meridian, the inclination of south Dials, and the
reclination of North Dialls; but contrariwise, reckon from the Zenith
Northwards the inclination of North Dialls, and the reclination of South
Dialls. Then bring that degree of the Meridian, where this reckoning ends to
the Horizon, for so the Horizon represents unto you the plain or the flat
superficies of the Dial which you would make. Therefore you shall find how
(...) every one of the hour lines should be dist^^^ from the 12. a clock line,
in such sort as you did before in making the Horizontall Dial.

Thus in a South direct Dial inclining 30. degr. or in a North direct
reclining 30. degrees made for the Latitude or elevation of the Pole at London,
you may find the distances of the eleven a clock line, and of the one a clock
line, from the 12. a clock line, to be about 14. degrees.

But the hour lines of 10. in the forenoone, and of 2. in the afternoon, are
distant from the 12. a clock line 28. degr. and one half; From 12. to 9. and
to 3. you shall find 43. degrees. From 12. to 8. in the forenoone, and 4. in the
afternoon, you shall have 58. degrees. and an half: also from 12. to 7. and to 5.
shall be about 74. degrees. And from 12. to 6. in the morning, and 6. afternoon
90. degrees.

Likewise in a South direct reclining, or North direct inclining 20. degrees. for
the elevation of London; the spaces between 12. and 11. and 12. and 1. shall be
about 5. degrees. or little less: Between 12, and 10. and 12, and ^. about 10.
degrees. and ^. third parts. From 12, to 9. in the forenoone, and 3. in the
afternoon, 18. almost* From 12. to 8. and 4. ^g. degrees. or little more. From the
1^. a clock line; to the line of 7. a clock in the forenoone, and 5. in the
afternoon, 50. degrees. or thereabouts. From 12. to 6. both before and afternooe*
90. degrees. as in the former kinds of D^. In all which it is to be noted, that
there is always (...) distance between the hour lines of 5, and ^. and 4,
and 6. that there is between 7, and 6. and 8, and 6. in the forenoone, and
between 5, and ^. and 4, and ^. and 7, and 6. and 8, and 6. in the afternoon.
So as the distances of all the hour lines from the 12. a clock line being
found from 6. in the morning, till 6. at night, the distances of the other
Houre-lines before 6. in the morning, and after 6. at night shall easily be had.

PROP. XXIIII. To know at what time the Moon, or any other of the Planets or
fixed Stars, that are within the breadth of the Zodiac; rise or set, or come to
the Meridian, etc.
Find the place of the Moon, or any other of the Planets, both in longitude
and Latitude, by the Epheme^ides: and find the place (that is, the Longitude
and Latitude) of any of the fixed Star^es in the Zodiac by some table of the
fixed Stars, or otherwise; and mark the same place of the Moon; Planet or
Star, in the Zodiac of the Sphaere: and having set the Sphaere to the
Latitude of the place, bring the place of the Sun (found by the 2.
Proposition) to the Meridian, and the Houre-index to 12. a clock upon the
houre-circle^, then turn the Sphaere till the place of the Moon, Planet or
Star marked in the Zodiac, come to the East semicircle of the Horizon; for
then the Index shows the time when the Moon, or that Planet or fixed Star
rises.

Al^^ the number of degree in the Horizon, contained between the point of the
Moons, Planets, or Stars rising, and the point of true East, shows the
breadth, ^^denesse, or amplitude of rising; And you may at the same instant,
(...), what degree of the Ecliptic rises with any of them, and what the
oblique ascension of any of them is: For if you tell hour many degrees of the
Equinoctial are (...) between the beginning of Aries in the Horizon,
proceeding Eastwards, or according to the order of the signs: you shall have
the oblique ascension of the Moon, Planet or Star, that (...) for.

But bring the same place of the Moon, Planet, or Star to the Meridian, and
the Index shows in the hour circle at what time they come to the Meridian:
where you may also see, first what degree of the Zodiath middeth Heaven (that
is, (...) to the Meridian) with any of them; secondly, you may see how much the
declination of any of them is; for count how many degrees of the Meridian are
contained between the Equinoctial and the place of the Moon, Planet, or
fixed Star, and so much is the declination. Thirdly, you may there see what
the right ascension of any of them is: for the place of any of them being
brought to the Meridian and there (...), r^ckon Eastwards how many degrees of
the Equinoctial are contained between the beginning of Aries and the
Meridian, so have you the right ascension. Lastly, bring the place of the
Moon, Planet or Star, to the West semicircle of the Horizon; for then the
Index shows the time of their setting; and the number of the degrees of the
Horizon between the point where any of them sets, and the Equinoctial, or
true West point (where the Equinoctial, and Horizon cross each other) is the
amplitude or breadth of the setting of any of them, showing how much they set
from the true West point.

You may there also see what degree; either of the Ecliptic, or of the
Equinoctial, sets with any of the^ and consequently you may know the
oblique descension of any of them, by reckoning how many degr. of the
Equinoctial there are from the beginning of Aries Eastwards, till you come
about to the West part of the Horizon.

Take for example the great Star called the Bulls eye, whose place in
longitude is about the 4. degr. of Taurus, and his latitude about 5. degrees
and an half Southwards.

Following therefore the directions prescribed in this Proposition, you shall
find that upon the first day of April this present year, 1600. the same
Star rises here at London about half an hour past 7. of the clock in the
morning, and sets about a quarter of an hour past 10. at night, and comes
to the Meridian about 3. a clock afternoon: Also you shall find that it
rises with the 15. degree of Gemini, and sets with the last degr. of
Taurus, and comes to the Meridian, or middeth Heaven, with the 5. degrees. of
Gemini: Thirdly you shall find his declination to be about 15. degrees. and 2.
third parts, his right ascension 63. degr. and a quarter, his oblique asce^sion
43. degr. and his oblique descension about 84. degrees. and an half: and lastly
his amplitude of breadth of rising or letting about 25. degr. and an half from
the true East and West points toward the North.

PROP. XXV. To know how long the Moon, or any of the Planets of fixed Stars
do shine or continue above the Horizon.
THe Sphaere bring set up the latitude of the place, and the place of the
Moon, Planet, or fixed Star, being found and marked in the Zodiac, hoth in
Longitude and Latitude, (as in the (...) Prop.) bring the place of the Moon,
Planet, or Star, (...) East semicircle of the Horizon, and the Index of hours
to 12. a clock: Then (...) about the Sphaere West-wards, till the same place of
the Moon, or (...) the same Planet, or Star, come to the West semicircle of
the Horizon, and mark (...) how many hours the Index runs over in the
mean time upon the hour circle, for so many hours continues the Moon,
Planet, or Star above the Horizon.

Thus shall you find that the foresaid (...) The Bulls eye (...) the Horizon
at London, about 14. (...) and 3. quarters.

PROP. XXVI. To find which of the Planets or fixed Stars are above or under
the Horizon at any time, etc.
THe place of the Plants or fixed Stars being marked in the Zodiac of the
Sphaere, as in the former propositions, and the place of the Sun brought to
the Meridian, and then the Index to 12. (...) Sphaere (...) the Index (...) to
that hour upon the hour (...) at which you desire to know what Planets are
above or under the Horizon; and then hold still the Sphaere, and mark what
Planets or Stars are above or under the Horizon in the Sphaere for the same
Planets or Stars are above or under the Horizon in the Heavens.

As for example: the 1. of April 1600 at 9. of the clock at night, you may by
the Proposition find; that the most part of the fixed Stars, that are in the
constestation of Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and Libra, together with
the three superior Planets, (...), ^upiter, and Mars, are at (...) to be seen
above the Horizon, and that the rest of the Planets and fixed Stars, that are
within the compass of the Zodiac, are under the Horizon, and cannot then be
seen.

PROP. XXVII. To find in what time any Sign or part of the Ecliptic rises
or sets.
BRing the beginning of the Sign, or part of the Ecliptic to the East
semicircle of the Horizon, if you would know in how long time it rises, or to
the West part of the Horizon, if you would know in what time it sets; then
set the Index to 12. a clock, and turn forwards the Sphaere, till the whole
sign or part of the zodiac be risen, or set: For then the Index shows upon
the hour circle in how long time, that sign or part of the Zodiac rises or
sets.

Thus you may find (for example) that the whole sign of Aries here at London
rises in one hour or somewhat less, and sets in two hours and three
quarters, or something more: And that the whole quarter of the Zodiac, from
the beginning of Aries to the beginning of Cancer, rises in less then four
hours, but sets in more then 8. hours.

PROP. XXVIII. To find the hour of the night by any of the Planets or fixed
Stars in the Zodiac, etc.
THe place (that is to say, the longitude and latitude) of any Planet, or fixed
Star in the Zodiac, that is above the Horizon, being first found, and
marked in the Zodiac of the Sphaere; bring the place of the Sun (found by
the 2. Proposition) to the Meridian, and the Index to 12. a clock upon the
hour circle: Then having found the height of the Star, or Planet by
observation, and the Sphaere also being set to the Latitude of the place of
observation, take between the feet of your Compasses, so many degrees of the
Ecliptic, or Equinoctial, as the height of the Planet, or Star observed,
comes to; and setting one foot of your Compasses in the place of the Planet,
or fixed Star that you observed in th Zodiac, turn the Sphaere forwards or
backwards, till you can but only touch the Horizon with the other foot: for
then the Index in the hour circle, shall show you the hour of the night.

Suppose (for example) I should observe the height of the foresaid Bulls eye,
and should find the same to be 29. degrees the first day of March at evening:
finding therefore the place of that Star in the Zodiac of the Sphaere, and
bringing it (with help of the Compasses) to the height observed (having first
set the place the Sun and houre-Index both together to the Meridian) the
Index of the hours will show, that when that Star has that height of 29.
degrees, it is about 9. of the clock at night.

PROP. XXIX. To know at any time of the year, what Stars in the Zodiac, arise
or set, Cosmically, Achronically, or Heliacally.
SVch Stars as rise together with the Sun, are said to rise cosmically: and
such Stars as set when the Sun rises, are said to set cosmically; But those
Stars which set together with the Sun, set achronycally; and those Stars that
rise when the Sun sets, are said to rise achronically. Lastly, those
Stars that rise a little before the Sun, rise heliacally; and those that
set a little after the Sun, set heliacally.

All which may thus be found: Bring the place of the sun to the East
semicircle of the Horizon: for the Stars that are then a little above the
Horizon rise heliacally; but those that are in the Horizon in the East, rise
cosmically; and they that are in the West semicircle of the Horizon set
cosmically: But bring the place of the Sun to the West semicircle of the
Horizon, for those Stars as are at the West part of the Horizon at the same
time, set achronycally; but those that are then in the East semicircle of the
Horizon, rise achronycally: and they which are a little above the West
semicircle of the Horizon set heliacally.

Thus you may know that upon the 26. or 27. day of May (it our latitude of
London) the Bulls eye rises cosmically, and the Stars in Serpentarius his
right foot, set cosmically, you may see also that the same day the Star in
the Bulls South horn sets achronycally: and the Northermost star in
Serpentarius his right foot, rises achronycally: and lastly, you may find
that about the same time the Ple^ades and the Star in the Bulls North home,
rise heliacally, and that the same Star also, and the former Twins feet set
heliacally.

PROP. XXX. To find the four principal or Cardinal points of Heaven (as the
Astrologians call them) at any time.
THese four Cardinal points are nothing else but four points of the
Ecliptic, whereof one is at the East part of the Horizon, ascending, and is
therefore called the Ascendent: another is at the upper part of the Meridian
above the Horizon, and is called the midst of Heaven, and the heart of Heaven:
the third is at the West part of the Horizon descending, and may be therefore
called the descendent: the fourth point is that which is at the nether part of
the Meridian under the Horizon. Which four points are the beginnings of the
first, tenth, seventh, and fourth Houses. Therefore to find these points at
any time by the Sphaere, bring the place of the Sun (being found for that
time by the 2. Proposition) to the Meridian, and the Index to 12. a clock:
then turn the Sphaere till the Index come to that hour at which you desire to
know those four points, and there hold the Sphaere that it move not: and look
withal, what points of the Ecliptic are at the East and West semicircle of
the Horizon; and at the upper and nether parts of the Meridian: for those be
the four principal or Cardinal points you sought for.

Take for example the time of the Suns entrance into Aries this present year
1600. which was upon the tenth day of March about eight of the clock in the
morning, or little after with us here at London, Having therefore brought the
beginning of Aries together with the hour Index to the Meridian, and then
turned back the whole Sphaere till the Index come to 8. of the clock upon the
hour circle: you shall find the ascendent at that time, to be the 27. degree
of Taurus; the midst or heart of Heaven, the 27. of Capricorn* the
descendent, the 27. degrees. of Scorpio; and the lowest part of Heaven the 27.
degree of Cancer.

PROP. XXXI. To find out the breadth of any climate, etc.
LIft up, or put down the pole of the Sphaere, till you find that there are
7. degrees. and an half of the Tropic of Cancer, more or less above the Horizon,
then there were before; and mark with all how much the pole of the Sphaere is
raised, or let fall in the mean time, more then it was before; for so much is
the breadth of that climate.

As far example: having set the Sphaere to our Latitude of London of 51. degrees.
and an half, with the point of your Compasses, holding and guiding some point
of the Tropic of Cancer right under the Horizon; then lifting up the Pole till
you find 7. degrees and an half more above the Horizon then were before, you
shall find the Pole elevated about 2. degr. and an half more then it was
before.

Likewise, if you put down the Pole till there be 7. degrees and an half of
the Tropicke of Cancer, fewer above the Horizon then was before; you shall
find the elevation of the Pole to be about 3. degrees less then before.

PROP. XXXII. The reason of the inequality of natural days, etc.
THe reason hereof is showed partly by the inequality of the differences of
right ascentions answerable to equal arcks of the Zodiac; and partly by the
unequal apparent motion of the Sun. For the first: the differences of right
ascentions answerable to the parts of the Ecliptic, about the Tropicall points
of Cancer and Capricorn, are much greater then about the Equinoctial points
of Aries and Libra.

In so much that whereas the difference of right ascension answerable to one
sign, or 30. degrees taken about those Tropicall points, is more then 32.
degrees and an half: about the Equinoctial points it is little more then 27.
degrees and an half; as it may appear by the Sphaere. So as you may hereby
gather, that the difference of ascension answerable to one degree, which about
the beginning of Capricorn is one degree, and about 6. minutes; about the
beginning of Aries, or Libra, is only 55 minutes. Secondly, the apparent
motion of the Sun is much swifter about his Parig^^^, in the sign of
Capricorn, then about his Apogaeum in Cancer, or in other parts of the
Zodiac: so that whereas the Sun being in Capricorn moves 61. minutes and
something more in a day: in Aries or Libra he moves but 59. min. or very
little more in the same time. Therefore seeing the natural day is nothing
else, but the time wherein the Sun moves from the Meridian about, till it
return again to the same part of the Meridian; it must needs be that always
in one natural day, there is made one whole revolution of the Equinoctial
circle, and so much more as is the difference of right ascension answerable to
the apparent motion of the Sun in the mean time: which differences of
ascension because they be unequal, for the two causes before alleged; the
natural days must needs also be unequal, the motion of the Equinoctial
circle about his own center being (as it has been always supposed to be)
equal, that is moving always an equal space in equal time.

Which by this example may most plainly appear: The Sun being in Capricorn
moves 61. minutes in a natural day: difference of ascension agreeable thereto
is 67. minutes, or something more. Therefore at that time, in the space of one
natural day, the Equinoctial circle must make one full revolution, and 67.
minutes more. But when the Sun is in Aries, moving only 59. minutes in a day,
and the difference of right ascension answerable thereto, scarce 54. minutes
more then one revolution of the Equinoctial circle; there shall pass only
54. minutes more in a natural day; so as here the Equinoctial circle moves
not about so much in one day as before by 13. minutes. Seeing then that 15.
degr. or little more of the Equinoctial circle do pass the Meridian in every
hour, and consequently one degree of the Equinoctial passes the Meridian in
4. minutes of an hour, and one minute of a degree in 4. seconds of an hour;
therefore 13. minutes of the Equinoctial shall pass the Meridian in 52.
seconds: that is, almost in one minute of an hour: Whereby it manifestly
appears that the natural day, that is to say, the space of 24. hours, which
is the time wherein the Sun moves from the Noone-stead to the same
noone-stead again, is in our age greater almost by one minute of an hour,
when the sun is in Capricorn, then when he is in Aries or Libra*

PROP. XXXIII. To find by the Sphaere how much the natural days are longer
at one time of the year then at another.
FOr this purpose it will be best to take a good number of days together; as
for example, take the whole month of December, and the whole month of March:
both which months consist of the same number of 31. natural days: find the
place of the Sun for the beginning and ending of both months, which you may
find by the second Proposition to be for the beginning of March this present
year 1600. about 20. degrees and 13. minutes of Pisces; and for the ending
about 20. degr. 48. minutes of Aries: Also for the beginning of December the
same year 18. degr. 46. minutes of S^gitarie; and for the ending, 20. degrees
24. minutes of Capricorn: Then seek out the right ascensions of the same
places of the Sun for the beginnings and endings of both those months by the
fourth Proposition, and the differences of ascension answerable to the motion
of the Sun in each month, by the sixth Proposition; which you may find by
the Sphaere to be about 33. degrees, 24* minutes for December, and 28. degrees,
39. minutes for March. Lastly, find out the difference of these differences of
ascension by substracting the lesser out of the greater; which in this example
is 4. degrees 45. minutes; which resolved into minutes of an hour, by taking
for every degree 4. minutes of an hour, and for every 15. minutes of a degree,
one minute of an hour shall amount to 19. minutes of an hour, that is a
quarter of an hour and 4. minutes. And so much is the month of December
longer then the month of March; Notwithstanding both of them consist of the
same number of 31. natural days.

The third Part.
Of the Orbs whereof the SPHAERES of the Sun and Moon have been imagined
to be made, and of their Motions and Uses.
CHAP. I. Of the Orbs whereof the Sphare of the Sun is made.
WIthin the Sphaere or Orb containing all the Circles that we have hitherto
spoken of, and representing unto us the Primum mobile; that is, the first and
highest moveable Heaven, that has been imagined by the Astronomers, to show
the reason of that daily motion, which appears to be in all the Heavens, and
of all the apparences that follow thereupon, are included the Sphaeres and
Orbs of the Sun and Moon.

The sphaere of the Sun contains three Orbs: The uppermost of them (which
in this Sphaere is signified by the yellow Circle that comes next within the
compass of the Zodiac) is called Deferens apogaeum Solis; that is, the Orb
which carries about that point, wherein the sun is furthest distant from the
earth.

Next within this Orb is placed the Eccentrick carrying about the body of the
Sun; which in this Sphaere is represented by the green colored circle that
comes next under the Deferens apogaeum.

Again, within this Eccentrick is included the third Orb of the Sphaere of
the Sun called Deferens Perigaeum solis; that is, the Orb carrying about that
point wherein the Sun is nearest to the Earth. This is the nethermost of the
three Orbs of the sun, and in this Sphaere is represented unto you by the
yellow colored circle next under the suns Eccentricke.

CHAP. II. Of the uppermost and nethermost Orbs of the Sphaere of the Sun,
more particularly.
IN the uppermost and nethermost of these three Orbs, there be 4. points
especially to be considered: That is, the points where they be narrowest and
where they be broadest, and where they are of a mean breadth betwixt the
narrowest and broadest. For at the narrowest part of the uppermost Orb, where
you may see written Aux solis, and the broadest part of the nethermost Orb, is
the place of the suns Apogaeum; so that whenever the Sun comes there, he
is furthest distant from the earth. As you may easily try, if (with a pair of
Compasses, or otherwise) you take the distance betwixt the Earth and the Sun,
being brought about to that place, and compare the same with the distances that
the Sun has from the Earth in other places. This point is called Aux Solis,
and Longitude longior, that is, the point of the suns furthest distance from
the earth. But under the broadest part of the uppermost and uttermost Orb,
where you see printed PERIGAEVM, and right above the narrowest part of the
nethermost Orb, is the place where the Sun comes nearest to the Earth, as
you may easily find (with your Compasses, or otherwise) in like sort as before
was showed. The point where the Sun comes nearest to the earth, is called
oppositum A^gis, and longitudo propior, that is, the point opposite to the
Apogaeum, and the nearest distance. And at those parts of this Orb, which are
in the midst between the former; the Sun has a mean distance from the
earth: a mean (I say) between the least, and greatest distance. The very
point wherein this mean or middle distance happens, is showed by the points
that are just in the midst between the short lines AB, and IK, which are
drawn overthwart on either side of this Orb. These points are called
longitudines media; that is, the mean distances of the Sun, because the
sun coming to these points, has a mean distance between the least and the
greatest. About these points also, the true motion of the sun, is as it were in
a mean between the slowest, which happens the sun being about the Apogaeum,
and the swiftest, which happens about his Perigaeum.

Moreover the lines A, and K, show the places wherein there is the greatest
Prosthaphaerisis, or Equation of the sun: that is, the greatest difference
between the true, and middle, or mean place of the sun.

Lastly, the distance between the lines I, and K, or A, and B, show how much
the eccentricitie of the suns eccentricke is, that is, how far the Center
of the eccentricke is distant from the Center of Earth.

CHAP. III. To find how much the Sun is nearer or further from the earth, at
one time then at another.
BY means of this Circle, you may easily find with your Compasses, how much
the Sun is nearer to, or further from the earth at one time, then at another:
for having set one foot of the Compasses upon the utmost edge of the Deferens
Apogaeum, under the place of the Sun in the Zodiac, found by the second
Prop. stretch out the other foot, to the innermost edge of the same Orb; for
then, if you set one foot of your Compasses, upon the utmost edge of this Orb,
at the Apogaeum, the other foot turned inwards toward the center of the
Sphaere, will show you how much the Sun is nearer to the Earth at that time,
then when he is in his Apogaeum: for so much as that foot reaches within the
inner edge of the Orb, so much is the sun nearer. Likewise if you set one
foot of your Compasses, upon the uttermost edge of this Orb, at the Perigaeum,
and turn the other foot toward the center of the Sphaere, so much as this
foot of the Compass, is from the inner edge of the Deferens Paerigaeum, so
much is the Sun further distant from the earth at that time, then when he is in
his Paerigaeum.

CHAP. IIII. Of the situation and motion of the uppermost, and nethermost Orbs
of the Sun.
THe uppermost, and nethermost of these three Orbs, called Deferens Apogaeum,
and Perigaeum solis, do always answer each to other, in such sort that the
broadest part of the one, is always against the narrowest part of the other:
And therefore both of them are moved thgether, with one motion about the Axtree
and poles of the Ecliptic, making one revolution under the Zodiac, in the
space of 17000. years almost. For in Ptolemee his time (that is about the
year of our Lord 134.) the place of the Suns Apogaeum, was about the midst
of the 6. degrees. of Gemini; as it may appear by the 4. Chapter of the 3. book
of his Almagest. But in our time we find that it cannot exceed the 7. degr. of
Cancer, although after the account of Copernicus, and of the Prutenicke tables,
it should be in the 9. degr. of Cancer. So as, if the rest of the motion of the
Suns Apogaeum, that is to come hereafter, be proportionable to that is past,
the whole revolution thereof shall be finished in 1699. years under the Zodiac.
For in 1463. years betwixt Ptolemee his time and ours, it has moved about 31.
degn therefore it shall move 300. degrees, (that is, the compass of the whole
circle) in 16990. years.

Which number of years being divided by 360. it shall appear that the
Apogaeum of the Sun moves one degr. in little more then 47. years whereby
the yearly motion thereof may be sound to be little more then one minute and a
quarter.

CHAP. V. How to find the place of the Suns Aux or Apogaeum, etc.
THerefore the place of the Suns Apogaeum, being found for the year 1600. to
be about 7. degr. in Cancer, the place thereof for any other year before or
after, may easily be found in our age, only by subtracting, or adding for
every 4, years 5, min. and for every single year 1. minute and a quarter,
Although indeed we need not stand so precisely neither upon quarters of
minutes, neither yet upon whole minutes, in the place of the suns Apogaeum,
which cannot be by any Art so exactly found, but that the diligentest man that
is, may err many minutes therein.

Take for example the year of our Lord 1558. (in which our gracious Q.
Elizabeth began her happy reign, which is now 42. years since) taking
therefore for every 4. years 5. minutes, that is, for 40. years 50. minutes,
and for the two years remaining 2. minutes and one half; that is in all 52.
minutes and an half, and subtracting the same out of 7, degrees of Cancer, there
shall remain the place of the suns Apogaeum at the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, in 6. degr. and about 8. min. of Cancer.

The uses of these two Orbs are these.

1. First to make the sphaere of the Sun concentricall; for these Orbs be
framed together, that the narrowest part of the one, answers always to the
broadest part of the other: it comes to pass by this means, that both the
outside, and the inside of the Sphaere of the sun, have always the same
center, that the world it self has.

2. The second use is to show the reason, and manner of the motion of the
Suns Apogaeum and Perigaeum.

CHAP. VI. Of the eccentrick of the Sun, etc.
THe Orb contained between the two former, and carrying about the body of the
Sun it self, is called the eccentricke of the Sun; because it has another
center, then the center of the world. The especial reason, that moved the
skillful in this celestial science, to make this Orb (wherein the body of
the sun is carried) eccentricall, was because they found the apparent motion
of the sun under the ecliptic line to be unequal, that is, swifter in the
Southerly Signs: and slower in the Northerly.

For Hipparehus, and Ptolemee found in their times, that the sun continued in
the Northern semicircle of the ecliptic, from Aries to Libra, 187. days: and
in the other half of the Zodiac, that is Southward from Libra to Aries, 178.
days and a quarter only. But in our time by diligent observation it is sound,
that the time of the suns continuance in the first of those semicircles from
Aries to Libra, is 186. days 14. hours and an half: and consequently in the
other semicircle, from Libra to Aries, 178. days 15. hours and an half.
Taking it therefore for a ground, according to the doctrine of Aristotle, that
the motion of the celestial bodies is circular and equal; it must needs
follow, that a greater part of the circle described by the proper motion of the
sun must be contained under the Northerly semicircle of the ecliptic, then
under the Southerly: and consequently that the circle or Orb that caryeth
about the body of the Sun under the ecliptic, has another center then the
center of the Ecliptic.

2. Another reason to prove, that the Sun is carried in an eccentricall
Circle, is the unequal apparent, bigness of the Suns diameter, the Sun
being of the same height above the Horizon and the air alike affected, and
alike clear; so as if there were any refraction by reason of the thicknes of
the air, it must needs be the same in both places. For in Summer, when the Sun
is at, or near his Apogaeum, his apparent diameter has been found by
exquisit observation to be 13. minutes 48 seconds. But in winter being about
his Perigaeum 33. min. 54. seconds, as it may appear in Copernicus his
reuolutions 4. book 21. Chapter.

Therefore seeing every visible object appears greater when it is near, and
less when it is further removed from us, it is manifest that the Sun appearing
greater in winter, then in summer, must needs be nearer to the earth in
winter, then in summer.

The reason of which appearance is most easily showed, by supposing the Sun to
be moved, in an eccentricall Orb.

3. A third reason may be the unequal greatness and continuance of the
eclipses of the Moon, even at those times when she has had the same latitude,
or distance from the Ecliptic, and the same distance from the Center of the
earth: which argues that the conicall sharp pointed shadow of the earth, in
the place where the Moon in time of the Eclipse passes through that shadow,
at the same distance from the earth, is sometimes greater, and sometimes
lesser: whereof there can no cause be showed more reasonable then this, that the
Sun is sometimes further distant from the earth, and the makes the shadow
greater and sometimes nearer, and so makes it lesser. Whereby it is also
manifestly proved, that the Sun is moved about another center then the center
of the earth, and therefore that the circle or Orb, wherein the Sun is
moved, is an Eccentricke.

CHAP. VII. Of the uses of the Suns eccentricall Orb.
THerefore the uses of the Suns eccentricke may be these:

1. First to show the reason of the apparent inequality, which seems to be
in the motion of the Sun: for although the Sun mo^e equally in his own
O^be, and about his own center; yet to them that are at the center of the
world, or upon the earth, he shall seem to move unequally; that is, swiftly
when he is in that part of his eccentricke which is nearest unto the earth; and
slowly when he is farthest from the earth. And therefore in summer, when the
Sun is about his Apogaeum, and in his greatest distance from the earth, he
seems to move little above 57. min. in one day. But in winter, being about
his Perigaeum and nearest unto the earth, he seems to move more then 16.
minutes: whereas notwithstanding he moves equally in his Eccentricke, every
day about nine and fifty minutes and 8. seconds; and so finisheth his
revolution in 365. days, and six hours almost.

2. The second use of the Suns Eccentricke, may be to show the reason why the
Sun appears greater at one time then at another; for the Sun being in those
parts of the eccentrick that are nearest unto us, seems greatest, and when he
is in those parts of his eccentrick that are furthest from us, he appears to
be least.

3. And lastly the inequality of the Suns distance from the earth, caused by
his eccentrick, is one especial cause of the inequality of the Eclipses, both
of the Sun and Moon.

CHAP. VIII. The definitions of certain Astronomicall words of art, for the
better understanding of the Theorick of the Sun.
1. WHat the Aux or Apogaeum of the Sun is it has been partly showed
already: that ^^mely it is that part, or rather point of the Orb carrying the
Suns Apogaeum, wherein the said Orb is thinnest, or narrowest: Or it is that
point of the eccentrick which is furthest distant from the earth, and is
always showed by a right line understood to be drawn from the center of the
world, by the center of the eccentrick, unto the Orb carrying the Suns
Apogaeum. Which line is therefore called the line of the Sun his Aux or the
line of the Suns Apogaeum.

2. The motion of the Aux, or of the Apogaeum of the Sun (which is also
called the Suns Aux in the second signification) is nothing else but the arch
of the Ecliptic, contained between the beginning of Aries, and the line of
the Suns Apogaeum, drawn forth to the Zodiac; where this line also shows
the place of the Suns Apogaeum.

3. The middle or mean place of the Sun in the Zodiac, is showed by a line
drawn from the center of the world unto the Zodiac, equidistant from the
center of the Eccentricke, and of the Sun.

4. This line is therefore called the line of the mean or middle place of the
Sun.

5. The middle or mean motion of the Sun is the arch of the ecliptic
between the beginning of Aries, and the middle place of the Sun.

6. The true place of the Sun is showed by a straight line drawn from the
center of the earth by the center of the Sun unto the Zodiac, which line is
therefore called the line of the true place of the Sun.

7. The true motion of the Sun is the arch of the eclipticke from the beginning
of Aries, unto the true place of the Sun.

8. The argument of the Sun (at the (...) ^erme it) or the motion of the Suns
Anomalie (as Copernicus calls it) is the arch of the ecliptic contained
between the place of the Suns Apogaeum and the middle place of the Sun
according to the order and succession of the Signs. This arch is called the
argument, or motion of the suns Anomalie or irregularitie, because that by it
is always found how much the suns true motion which (is unequal and
irregular) differs from his middle motion; which difference they call the
Suns equation, or prosthapheresis.

9. The equation, or prosthapheresis of the Sun is nothing else but the arch of
the ecliptic contained between the true, and middle places of the sun.

This arch is called the suns equation, because it makes the suns middle
motion equal to his true motion, being added to it or subtracted from it, as
occasion requires: for which cause it is more significantly and fitly called
Prosthaphaeresis, that is as much to say, as that which is to be added to or
subtracted from the middle motion, that so we might have the true motion. For
so long as the Sun is in the semicircle of his eccentrick, discending from
his Apogaeum to his ^^^gaeum, so long this Prosthapheresis is to be subtracted
from the middle motion: but the Sun being in the other half of his
eccentrick ascending, the Prosthapheresis or equation of the Sun must be added
to the middle motion, that (...) motion and place of the Sun may be found,
Because that in the first semicircle of the eccentricke descending, the middle
place of the Sun goes before the (...), and the middle motion is (...)
greater (...) the Sun, and therefore the difference of these (...) motions,
(that is to say, the (...) or Prosthaphaeresis) must be subtracted, to finds
(...) for the true place of the Sun goes always (...) motion and place of
the same,

CHAP. IX. Of the uppermost Orb of the Sphaere of the Moon carrying the
Dragons head and tail.
NExt within the Orbs of the Sun in this Sphaere are contained the Orbs of
the Sphaere of the Moon: which (...) in number.

The uppermost of them (which in this Sphaere is next under the Orb that
caryeth the Suns Perigaeum and is colored with red) is called the Caryer of
the Dragons head and tail, or (...) which is as much to say as the Caryer of
the knots, that is of the two intersections, or points wherein the rest of the
Orbs of the Moon, do cross ouer-thwart this Orb. This Orb is divided into
four nineties of degree, for the easier reckoning of the motion and place of
the Dragons head or tail in this Sphaere. And it is moved about in 18. Julian
years 224. days 3. hours and 5. minutes almost, from the East Westwards,
under the ecliptic. By reason of this motion it comes to pass, that the
Eclipses, or rather the places wherein the eclipses of the Sun or Moon do
happen in the Heavens, are removed continually more backwards in the Zodiac,
contrary to the order and succession of the Signs.

As for example; the eclipse of the Moon happening this present year 1600. the
20. of January near unto the Dragons tail about the 9. degree and 40. min.
of Leo; the next eclipse that shall happen near the same intersection of the
Dragons tail, in the year 1601. the 29. of November, shall be in 17. degrees
and an half of Gemini; And that eclipse which shall be the next year after
near the same intersection the 19. of November in the morning, shall be about
the 6. degree and 40. minutes of Gemini, etc.

All this removing of the Eclipses backwards comes to pass, by reason of the
motion of this Orb carrying the Dragons head and tail, contrary to the course
and order of the Signs.

This Orb continues always right under, The situation of the Orb carrying
the Dragons head and tail.
and even with the Orbs of the Sphaere of the Sun which abide always in all
parts just under the ecliptic line, and has his center agreeing, and all one
with the center of the world, and of the ecliptic: And therefore the poles and
axtree, about which this Orb is turned, agree justly with the axtree of the
Ecliptic.

The rest of the Orbs of the Moon, The situation of the rest of the Orbs.
that are contained within this, have all their playnes agreeing in one, and
lying even one with another. But the one half of all their playnes, arises
above the plain of the former Orb, and of the Ecliptic, toward the North
pole of the Zodiac: and the other half descends beneath the plain of the
ecliptic, toward the South pole: even as the one half of the Zodiac arises
above the Equinoctial circle toward the North: and the other half descends
toward the South. And as the angle of intersection, or obliquitie of the
ecliptic with the Equinoctial circle, is 23. degr. and an half or little
more: so the angle of intersection, or obliquity of the playnes of these Orbs
of the Moon, from the plain of the Ecliptic, and of the former Orb carrying
the Dragons head and tail, is 5. degrees, or (according to Tig^^ Brahe his
observation) 5. degr. and a quarter almost sometimes, and sometimes less then
5. degr.

That point or intersection of these Orbs with the former, from which they
begin to arise about the plain of the ecliptic toward the North, proceeding
East-wards, is called the Dragons head; and is signified by this character: and
the other point or intersection diametrally opposite unto this, is called the
Dragons tail, which is also signified by the former character turned up side
down after this manner,.

The two points of these Orbs that are furthest distant from the plain of the
(...), are called the bounds or limits of the Moons latitude, and they are
90. degrees. from the Dragons head and tail, and 5. degrees. and a quarter almost from
the plain of the Ecliptic, according to the obliquity, or greatest
declination of the playnes of these Orbs, from the plain of the ecliptic: Of
these two points, that which is in the north side of the ecliptic, is called
the North limit, or bound of the Moons latitude; and contrariwise, the other
point opposite to this on the south side of the Ecliptic, is called the South
limite of the Moons latitude. And when the Moon comes to either of these
two points, she has her greatest latitude.

CHAP. X. Of the Orbs carrying the Moons Apogaeum and Perigaeum.
NExt within the Orb carrying the Dragons head and tail, is contained the Orb
called Deferens Apogaeum lunae which is the point wherein the Moon is furthest
distant from the earth.

And under this Orb is placed the Moons Eccentrick, which is also called
Deferens Epiculum Lunae; that is the Orb carrying the Moons Epicycle.

Again within this eccentrick of the Moon, is contained the least and lowest
Orb, of all that are in this Sphaere, Which they call Diferens Perigaeum
Lunae; that is, the Orb carrying the Moons Perigaeum, which is the point
wherein the Moon comes nearest to the earth.

The uppermost and nethermost of these three Orbs, that is to say, the Orbs
carrying the Moons Apogaeum and Perigaeum (both which Orbs in this Sphaere are
colored with blew) are always placed in such sort, that the nar^^west part of
the one, is continually answerable to the broadest part of the other; whereby
it comes to pass, that the Sphaere of the Moon is made concentricall, that
is to say, to have the same center with the world: which also is one especial
use, why these Orbs were divided.

Another use of these Orbs, is to show the reason of the motion of the Moons
Apogaeum and Perigaeum: Therefore both these Orbs are moved together with one
motion equally, about the center of the world, in the same time from the East
Westwards, in the space of 32. days 3. hours and 5. minutes almost: So moving
in one day 11. degrees. 12. min. and 1. third part almost. The axtree, about which
these Orbs are moved equally, passes through the center of the world and of
the ecliptic: but the poles of these Orbs differ from the poles of the
Ecliptic and of the Orb carrying the Dragons head and tail, by the space of
5. degr. and a quarter, or thereabouts, which poles are carried about the poles
of the Orb carrying the Dragons head and tail, with the motion of the same
Orb, in the space of 19. years almost. Whereby it comes to pass, that the
poles of the Orb carrying the Apogaeum and Perigaeum of the Moon, describe
certain little circles about the poles of the Orb that carries the Dragons
head and tail, even as the Arctick, and Antarctick circle in the ordinary
Sphaere, are described by the motion of the poles of the Ecliptic, carried
about daily with the motion of the first and highest moveable Sphaere, in the
space of 24. hours almost.

CHAP. XI. Of the eccentricke of the Moon.
THe Eccentrick of the Moon contained between the two former Orbs and
colored with a sad yealow color in this Sphaere, is moved equally about the
center of the same Orbs, from the West toward the East, finishing his motion
under the Zodiac, in the space of 27. days, and 8. hours almost: and with
this motion, it caryeth about the Moons Epicycle equally, under the Zodiac.

Therefore the motion of this Orb, about his own center, must needs be
unequal, that is to say, swifter in those parts that are about the Apogaeum,
and slower in the lower parts about the Perigaeum: Because that greater arches
of the Eccentrick, do answer to equal arches of the Zodiac about the
Apogaeum, then about the Perigaeum of the Eccentrick.

The axtree about which this Orb is moved, is always in all places
equidistant from the axtree of the Orb carrying the Apogaeum of the Moon: and
the poles of the axtree of the Moons eccentrick, are fastened in the Orb
carrying the Moons Apogaeum, equidistantly from the poles of the same Orb:
therefore these poles together with the whole axtree of the eccentrick, are
carried and equally moved about the poles and axtree of the Orb carrying the
Apogaeum from the East, toward the West. With this motion therefore, the poles
and center of the eccentrick, describe certain little circles of equal bigness,
about the poles, and center of the Orb carrying the Apogaeum, from the East
West-wards. And therefore also the Apogaeum of the eccentrick, is moved about
equally, under the ecliptic, contrary to the order of Signs from the East
West-wards. Whereby it comes to pass, that both the Apogaeum and center of
the eccentricke, are sometimes under the Ecliptic, that is, when they are under
the Dragons head or tail: but for the most part they are beside the plain of
the ecliptic, either toward the North, or else toward the South.

Hereby also it appears, that the plain of the Ecliptic does not always
divide the plain of the eccentricke into epqall parts or halfes; but then
only, when the Center and Apogaeum of the Eccentrick, is right under the
Dragons head or tail; for then only the plain of the Ecliptic deuideth the
plain of the Eccentrick, by the center thereof; and consequently deuideth it
precisely into two halfes. Otherwise, if the Apogaeum of the eccentrick, be not
under the Dragons head or tail, look on which side of the plain of the
ecliptic the Apogaeum is, for on the same side of the ecliptic is the greater
part of the eccentrick.

CHAP. XII. In what proportion the Moons eccentrick, and Orb, carrying her
Apogaeum are moved.
NOw the Eccentrick of the Moon, and the Orb carrying her Apogaeum, are moved
in such sort, that the middle place of the Sun, is always right in the midst
between the center of the Epicycle carried in the eccentrick, and the Apogaeum
of the Eccentrick; except it be when the center of the epicycle is in
conjunction, or opposition to the middle place of of the Sun. For in every
middle conjunction and opposition of the Sun and Moon, the center of the
Epicycle, and the Apogaeum of the eccentrick are united together; But in the
conjunction they are both conjoined with the middle place of the Sun; and in
the opposition they are both together opposite to the same. Whereof it
follows, that in the first and last quarters of the Moon, the center of her
epicycle is diametrally opposite to the Apogaeum of her eccentrick.

Hereof it comes to pass, that although the Moon have the same position in
her epicycle at the time of the new and full Moon, and of the first and last
quarters; yet the equation, or prosthaphaeresis of the Moons Argument (as they
call it) that is the difference between the true, and middle places of the
Moon, is always greater in the first and last quarter, then in the full and
new Moon. Hereby likewise it appears that in the time contained between new
Moon and new Moon (which they call Mensem synodicum, that is the month
coniunctional, or the time from conjunction to conjunction) the center of the
epicycle makes two complete reuolutions, under the Orb carrying the Apogaeum
of the Moons eccentrick.

And therefore in every month, the center of the epicycle comes twice to the
Apogaeum and twice to the Perigaeum of the eccentrick; and so the monthly
motion of the center of the epicycle, describes an oual figure: the ends
whereof are always toward the place of the full and new Moon, and the ^ides
toward the places of the first and last quarter.

By this that has been spoken, it is also manifest, that if the middle motion
of the Sun, be subtracted out of the middle motion of the Moon, there
remains the middle motion of the Moons longitude from the sun, and that if
this longitude again be doubled, you shall have the motion of the center of
the Moons Epicycle from the Apogaeum of her eccentrick, which motion they call
the center of the Moon,

CHAP. XIII. Of the Epicycle of the Moon, and how it is moved.
THe little Orb placed in the Eccentrick, is called the Epicycle of the Moon;
in the circumference whereof is also placed the body of the Moon, represented
by the round Beade, set into the Moons Epicycle in this Sphaere.

The plain superficies of this epicycle agrees even with the plain of the
eccentrick: and the axtree about which it is moved, is perpendicular to the
plain of the eccentrick. This Epicycle is moved equally from his middle
Apogaeum, about his own center and axtree from the East Westwards, contrary to
the motion of the eccentrick, carrying forwards the body of the Moon with this
motion 13. degrees and almost 4. min. every day, and finishing his revolution
in 27. days 13. hours and 19. minutes almost.

The middle Apogaeum of the Epicycle is showed by a right line, imagined to be
drawn, from that point of the little circle (described by the motion of the
center of the Moons eccentrick) which is opposite to the center of the
Eccentrick, by the center of the Epicycle unto the upper part of the Epicycle.

But the true Apogaeum of the Epicycle, is showed by a right line, understood
to be drawn from the Center of the earth by the center of the Epicycle, unto
the upper part of the circumference thereof.

By the motion of this Epicycle it may easily be conceived why the Moon
seems to move sometimes swifter and somteimes slower: Why the Moon seems
sometimes to move swifter, sometimes slower.
For seeing that the upper part of the Epicycle, moves contrary to the motion
of the Eccentrick from the East Westwards, when the Moon comes in that part,
she must needs seem to move more slowly, to them that are at the center of
the world.

But when the Moon comes in the nether part of the Epicycle, the Eccentrick
caryeth the Epicycle and the Epicycle caryeth the body of the Moon both one
way: that is, from the West East-wards, and therefore at that time the Moon
seems to move more swiftly. According as you may see in Ephemerides, the
d^^^ne motion of the Moon to be sometimes little more then 11. degrees and
sometimes again little less then 15. degrees. The true motion of the Moon
seems then to be swifter, when the Moon is in the Perigaeum of her Epicycle,
and the Epicycle in the Perigaeum of the Eccentrick; because then she is not
only carried forwards the same way both by her Epicycle and Eccentrick, but she
is also at that time nearest unto us for which cause her motion shall seem
swifter, then when the Epicycle is in other parts of the Eccentrick. (...)

CHAP. XIIII. The definitions of certain Astronomicall words of Art, for the
better understanding of the Theoricke of the Moon.
1. THe line of the Moons middle motion, is a line understood to be drawn
from the center of the earth, by the center of the Moons Epicycle, unto the
Zodiac.

2. This line shows the middle place of the Moon in the Zodiac.

3. And the middle motion of the Moon, is the arch of the Zodiac, from the
beginning of Aries, unto the same line.

4. So likewise the line of the true motion, or of the true place of the Moon,
is drawn from the center of the world, by the center of the Moon, to the
Zodiac.

5. This line therefore shows the true place of the Moon in the Zodiac.

6. And the true motion of the Moon, is the arch of the Zodiac, from the
beginning of Aries, unto the true place of the Moon.

7. The middle longitude of the Moon from the Sun, is the arch of the
Zodiac, from the middle place of the Sun Eastwards unto the middle place of
the Moon.

8. And this arch doubled, is called the doubled longitude of the Moon from
the Sun, or the center of the Moon (as the Alphonsines call it) which is
nothing else but the arch of the Zodiac, between the place of the Apogaeum of
the Eccentrick and the middle place of the Moon. It is called the doubled
longitude of the Moon from the Sun, because it is always twice so much, as
is the middle longitude of the Moon from the Sun.

9. And it is called the center of the Moon, because it shows the distance
of the center of the Moons Epicycle from the Apogaeum.

10. The equation, or Prosthaphaeresis of the center, is the arch of the
Epicycle, between the middle and true Apogaeum of the Epicycle.

This equation or Prosthaphaeresis is nothing at all, when the center of the
Epicycle is in the Apogaeum, or Perigaeum of the Eccentrick. But the Epicycle
being in any other part of the Eccentricke there is always some equation of
the center; yea in some parts thereof, where it grows greatest, it is 13.
degr. 9. minutes: and so long as the center of the Epicycle, is in the half of
the Eccentrick descending from the Apogaeum to the Perigaeum, that equation is
to be added to the motion of the Epicycle; but in the other halle of the
Eccentricke ascending;, it must be subtracted; that so the true Argument (...)
the Epicycle may be had.

11. The Argument, or Anamalie of the Moon is nothing else, but the motion of
the Moons Epicycle.

12. The true or middle argument, (...) is the arch of the Epicycle from the
true or middle Apogaeum of the Epicycle, unto the center of the body of the
Moon, reckoned that way, which the epicycle moves.

13. The equation of the argument, or Prosthaphaeresis of the epicycle, is the
arch of the Zodiac, (...) the middle, and (...) place of the Moon. This
equation is (...), when the Moon is in the true Apogaeum, or Perigaeum of her
epicycle. But it is greatest, when the center of the Moon comes (...) of the
world, and touching the epicycle, when it is in the Perigaeum of the eccentrick.

And the Moon being in the first, that is in the (...) of the Epicycle, (...)
from the true Apogaeum thereof, the middle place of the Moon go (...) before
the true place, and the equation of the argument must therefore be subtracted:
but when the Moon is (...) semicircle of the epicycle, (...) before the middle
place, and to that equation must be added to the Moons (...) middle motion,
that the true motion and place of the (...) may be found.

CHAP. XV. The reason of the variety of the Moons equation, etc.
THis equation becomes lesser or greater, according as the epicycle (...) or
nearer to the center of the world. The least equations are, when the epicycle
is in the Apogaeum of the eccentrick, and contrariwise, the greatest must
happen, the epicycle being in the Perigaeum of the eccentrick.

The difference between these greatest, and least Equations, Ptolemee and
Copernicus call the excess: but (...), and the Alphonsines call it the
diversity of the Diameter; because that difference of the equations arises by
reason of the diverse apparent highness of the diameter of the Epicycle,
according as it is nearer to us, or further from us.

Therefore in the Astronomicall tables, they use to set down those equations
only, which happen when the Epicycle is in the Apogaeum of the eccentrick,
which are the least equations, whereto they also adioyne the excess, or
diversity of diameter, showing how much those equations, which happen when the
Epicycle is in the Perigaeum of the Eccentrick, exceed those which happen, the
epicycle being in the Apogaeum of the eccentrick. Moreover, there are annexed
certain min. which they call Scrupula, or minuta proportion^alia: that is,
proportional minutes: whereby is found, how much of the said excess, is to be
added to the foresaid equations, when the epicycle is in any other part of the
eccentrick, then in the Apogaeum: that so the true equation of the argument,
for the same part of the eccentrick might at any time be found. For then only
is that whole excess to be added, when the epicycle is in the Perigaeum of the
eccentrick. But if the epicycle be in any other part of the eccentrick; then
look what proportion 60. has to the whole excess, the same proportion have
the proportional minutes, answerable to that part of the eccentrick, wherein
the epicycle is, unto the part proportional of the excess, which (part
proportional) being added to the equation before found, shall give you the
true equation.

CHAP. XVI. The reason (...) Moons proportional minutes, etc.
THe reason of those proportional minutes, may in some sort be showed, by
those concentricall arches of circles, which you see drawn upon the Moons
eccentricall Orb, in this Sphaere: but indeed all those arches must be
understood, to have always the same center with the world, and not to be moved
about together with the Eccentrick. The uppermost of them is to be drawn by
the center of the Epicycle being in the Apogaeum of the Eccentrick, and the
nethermost is drawn by the same center when it is in the Perigaeum of the
Eccentrick: so as the distance of these two arches, or Peripheryes, is just
twice so much as the eccentricitie; that is the distance of the center of the
Eccentrick, from the center of the world, showed by the distance of the short
lines NO, or FF, upon the Orb carrying the Apogaeum; or of PQ, or GH, upon the
caryer of the Perigaeum of the Moon.

The whole distance, between these two peripheries, from the uttermost to the
innermost, is understood to be divided into 60. equal parts, imagining every
one of these to contain 10. as may appear by the figures set to every one of
them, from the uppermost to the nethermost, in this order: 10. 20. 30. 40. 50.
60.

Now the intersections of these Peripheries with the Eccentrick (that is) with
the uppermost of the two divided Peripheries, which are drawn round about
through the midst of the Moons eccentricall Orb) do show what proportionable
min. answer to any part of the eccentrick, To find the Moons proportional
minutes.
after this manner: In the uppermost of the two foresaid graduated Peripheries,
look that distance of the center of the moons Epicycle from the Apogaeum of
the Eccentrick, (that is to say) that doubled longitude of the Moon as the
Alphonsines call it) which you desire: Then look which of the consentricall
arches before mentioned passes by the the term, or end of that distance or
doubled longitude: And thirdly, look about in the same arch, what number is
set thereuppon, for that shows you the number of the proportional minut.
answerable to the situation of the Epicycle, at that distance from the
Apogaeum of the Eccentrick.

These proportional min. therefore may be defined to be nothing else, What the
proportional minutes of the Moon are.
but the sixtieth parts of the diversity of diameter, or of the excess
wherewith the equations of the argument, or Prostaphaeresis, of the Epicycle are
to be augmented when the Epicycle is any other part of the Eccentrick, then in
the Apogaeum.

Otherwise also, these proportional min. may be defined, to be sixtieth parts
of the excess, wherewith the line drawn from the center of the earth, to the
Apogaeum of the Moons Eccentrick, exceeds the line drawn from the same
center to the Perigaeum of the Eccentrick: For these sixtieth parts also may
not unfitly be called proportional min. because that always look how many of
these parts there are left without the circumference of the Eccentrick, or
beyond the center of the Epicycle; so many of the former sixtieth parts of the
diversity of diameter, or of the excess of the Prostaphaerses of the Epicycle,
must be added to the Equation of the argument, that the true equation of the
argument may be had, for that position, or situation of the Epicycle, in the
Eccentrick.

CHAP. XVII. The reason of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, etc.
NOw by this Sphere, it may easily be conceived, why there is not an Eclipse,
in every conjunction or opposition of the Sun and Moon. For seeing that the
Moon has for the most part a greater apparent latitude, then the visible or
apparent conjoined semediameters of the Sun and Moon in the conjunction: and
because the true latitude of the Moon, is also for the most part greater then
the apparent semediameters of the Moon and shadow of the earth (at that place
where the Moon should pass through that shadow) in the oppossition, to make
an Eclipse: it comes to pass, that in most conjunctions and oppositions of
the Sun and Moon, there is no Eclipse. And the reason hereof is this,
because that the Moon comes under the way of the Sun (which we call the
Ecliptic line) only twice in a month, and those 2. points (wherein the ways
of the Sun and Moon cross each other) only twice in a synodicall month,
which two points we called the Dragons head and tail; whereof we have also
spoken before,) Wherefore, seeing the Sun (going but once only through the
compass of the Ecliptic in a year) can come but once in a year to either of
those points; the Moon for the most part, when she comes to be in
opposition, or conjunction with the Sun, must needs be fo far wide from the
Ecliptic line, or way of the Sun, either toward the North or South: that
she can neither come betwixt us and the Sun in the conjunction, nor yet within
the compass of the shadow of the earth in the opposition.

But when the Sun comes near either of those points (which happens once in
six months (there must needs for the most part be some Eclipse, either of the
Sun or Moon, or both.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the diversity of the bounds or spaces, within which an Eclipse
may happen: and the reason of that diversity.
THe bounds or distances from the Dragons head or tail, within which there may
happen an Eclipse of the Moon, are sometimes greater and sometimes less, by
reason of the diverse distances of the Sun, or Moon, or both of them, from
the earth. For seeing the body of the Sun is greater then the globe of the
whole earth (as it is manifestly demonstrated by Ptolemee and Copernicus) it
must needs be, that the greater distance the Sun has from the earth, the
greater shadow must the earth have; and the nearer the Sun is to the earth,
the less shadow shall the earth have, at the place of the Moons passage
through the shadow, at equal distances from the earth.

Contrariwise, the further that the Moon is from the earth, the less shall
the shadow of the earth be, and the nearer the Moon is to the earth, the
greater shall the shadow be, at the place where the Moon is to pass through
the shadow.

The greatest distance therefore from the Dragons head or tail, wherein there
can at any time happen any Eclipse of the Moon, is about 13. degrees. And the
least distance at which it is possible for the Moon to avoid an Eclipse, is
about 10. degr. and one third part of a degree; which happens when the Moon is
in the Apogaeum of her Epicycle, in her greatest distance from the earth, and
the Sun in his Perigaeum, in the time of his greatest eccentricity, for then
the Sun comes nearest to the earth and makes the least shadow: as
contrariwise at the same time of his greatest eccentricity, being in his
Apogaeum, he has his greatest distance from the earth, and so makes the earth
cast forth her greatest shadow. At which time, if the Moon also chance to be
in the Perigaeum of her Epicycle, and so in her nearest distance from the
earth, she may be something Eclipsed, although she be full 13. degrees or
something more from the Dragons head or tail.

CHAP. XIX. How to find the place of the Dragons head and tail for any time.
NOw the place, and time of the full Moon, being easily known by some
Almanac, or Prognostication; it shall not be hard, to give a reasonable near
estimate, and to foretell both the time, and quantity of the Eclipse of the
Moon, the place of the Dragons head and tail, being first known after this
manner.

The place of the Dragans head, being first given for any time, for every year
before the same time, add to the same place: and for every year after the
same time subtract 19. degrees and one third part of a degree and for every
month a degree and an half and a tenth part of a degree and for every day 3.
minutes and the remainder shall show you the place of the Dragons head after
the same time: or the sum before that time without any great error.

As for example, The 30. of June this present year 1600. suppose you would
know the place of the Dragons head: The place therefore of the Dragons head
being first given, for the beginning of the same year, in 0. degree 45.
minutes, of Aquarius: and six months only of that year being passed, I take
for those six months 6. degrees and 6. half degrees that is 9. degrees and
sixteenth parts of a degree that is 36. min. the sum of all which is 9.
degrees and 36. minutes.

Which being subtracted out of 0. degree, 45. minutes of Aquarius, there
remain 21. degrees 9. min. of Capricorn, for the place of the Dragons head at
that time.

CHAP. XX. A table for finding the place of the Dragons head and tail more
exactly and the declaration thereof.
But if you would have the place of the Dragons head more exactly, you may find
the same most easily, by means of the table following, for any time within the
space of these 20. years, yet to come.

This table conteyneth three principal parts or columns, the first part
shows you in what sign, degr. and min. the Dragons head is, at the beginning
of any year; from this present year 1600. till the year 1620. The second part
shows how much the Dragons head moves, in any number of months of the
year: the third part gives you the motion of the Dragons head, in any number
of days of the month.

The place of the Dragons head. Year Sign. Degrees. Mt. Months Complete. De. Mi.
Da. De. Mi. 1600 Aquarius 0 45 January 1 38 1 0 3 1601 Capricorn 11 21 February
3 8 2 0 6 1602 Sagittar. 22 2 March 4 46 3 0 10 1603 Sagittar. 2 42 April 6 22
4 0 13 1604 Scorpio 13 22 May 8 0 5 0 16 1605 Libra 23 59 June 9 36 6 0 19 1606
Libra 4 39 July 11 14 7 0 22 1607 Virgo 15 19 August 12 53 8 0 25 1608 Leo 25
59 September. 14 28 9 0 29 1609 Leo 6 35 October 16 7 10 0 32 1610 Cancer 17 15
Nouemb. 17 42 11 0 35 ^t the beginning of the (...) of our ^^rd.
1611 Gemini 27 55 December. 19 21 12 0 38 1612 Gemini 8 35 13 0 41 1613 Taurus
19 12 14 0 44 1614 Aries 29 52 15 0 48 1615 Aries 10 32 16 0 51 1616 Pisces 21
12 17 0 54 1617 Pisces 1 49 18 0 57 1618 Aquarius 12 29 19 1 0 1619 Capricorn
23 9 20 1 4 1620 Capricorn 3 49 21 1 7 22 1 10 23 1 13 24 1 16 25 1 19 26 1 13
27 1 26 28 1 29 29 1 32 30 1 35

CHAP. XXI. To find the place of the Dragons head or tail, by the former
table.
Find out in the former table, the month next going before the month given;
find out also the day of the month, Add together the numbers of degrees and
minutes answerable to that month and day of the month, and subtract the same
out of the place of the Dragons head at the beginning of the year, adding
thereto 30. degr. (^^at is the whole sign next going before resolved in to
degr.) if the Sun aforesaid be greater then the number of degr. showing the
place of the Dragons head at the beginning of the year: so shall you have the
place of the Dragons head for the time given. And the point of the Zodiac
opposite to this, is the place of the Dragons tail.

Take for example, The 29. of November 1601. I find therefore against October
(the month going next before November) 16. degrees 7. minutes and against the
29. day 1. degree 32. minutes, the sum of both these added together is 17.
degrees 39. min. the place of the Dragons head for the beginning of the year
1601. is 11. degrees. 21. min. of Capricorn, which because they be less then 17.
degrees. 39. min. I add unto them 30. degrees. that is the whole sign of Sagittarie,
and the sum of both is 41. degrees. 12. min. out of which subtract 17. degrees. 39.
min. and there shall remain 23. degrees. 42. minutes of Sagittarie; the place of
the Dragons head at that time. And the point of the Zodiac which is opposite
hereto (that is the 2^ (...) 42. minutes of Gemini) is the place of the (...)
tail.

CHAP. XXII. To know at what time there shall be an Eclipse of the Moon.
THe place of the Dragons head being thus known, find out the same place upon
the horizon of the Sphaere, and see what day and month answers thereto find
out also the place of the full Moon, which happens next before or after that
day, which place if it chance to be within 11. or 12. degrees. either before or
after that point of the Zodiac which is opposite to the Dragons head, there
must needs be for the most part in Eclipse of the Moon.

Likewise if you find what day and month is answerable to the place of the
Dragons tail upon the horizon of the Sphaere if the place of the full Moon
which happens next before or after that day chance to be within 11. or 12.
degrees of the Dragons head, for the most part there shall be an Eclipse of
the Moon.

As for example, The 20. of January last this present year 1600. the place of
the Dragons head was found (by the former Chapter) to have been in 29. degrees.
41. min. of Capricorn; whereto there answers in the horizon the 10. day of
January the place of the full Moon happening next after, upon the 20. of the
same month in the morning must needs be in the place opposite to the place of
the Sun the same 20. (...) Therefore because (...) Sun that day is in 9. degrees.
(...) one half of Aquarius, therefore the place


