WHITE DYED BLACK.

OR A Discovery of many most foul blemishes, impostures, and deceiptes, which
D. White haith practysed in his book entitled The way to the true Church.

Divided into 3 sorts
Corruptions, or deprauations. Lies. Impertinencies, or absurd reasoninges.
Written by T. W. P.

And dedicated to the University of Cambridge.

Hareticum hominem, post vnam and alieram correptionem, deuita: sciens, quia
subuersus est, qui eiusmodi est and delinquit, cum sit proprio iudicio
condemnatus. Tit.3,

Cathedra tibi quid fecit Ecclesiae Romanae, in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua
nunc Anastatius (sieve Paulus quintus) sedet? Cur appelas Cathedram
pestilentiae, Cathedram Apostolicam? August. lib. 2. con. lit. Petil.

Cum priuilegio. 1615.

TO THE MOST CELEBRIOVS and famous University of Cambridge.
Ingenious and learned Academians, I do not present this my small about unto
you, entreating hereby your patronage thereof. For how can I expect so great a
favor since most of you dissent from me in that Religion which is here
mantayned: neither as houlding this poor work, for any art therein, worthy
your iudiceons view. For I am not only conscious to my self of mine own
weakness: but do also grearly admyre your pearcing and clear eyed indgmentes.

To you then I exhibit it, as appealing to the Mother (such is my confidence
in your impartial and even censures) as Judge between her son and my self.
For wheareas my designed adversary at this present M. White, (to whom your
university haith first given his education for literature, and since has
graced him with the inuesture of Doctorship) in answer to a Catholic Treatise
(first pe^ned by one of my fellow laborers in the vineyard of Christ) haith
written a most virulent and scandalous book, entituling it, The way to the
true Church. The which book was fownde so full of corruptions, untruths, and
other such baisse matter, that it was houlden in the opinion of many great and
learned Preistes, rather worthy of contempt then answer.

Nevertheless M. White, not only in the Preface of this said book, but also
in diverse places of his second work, vaunteth much of his sincere dealing in
the first, as particulerly page 129. where saying that it is the profession of
Jesuits in their writing, to rayde books, counterfeat, forge, and lie: he
then thus ambitiously concludes. My adversary can not present the Reader with
one conclusion (meaning of his first book) one doctrine, one quotation, one
lyn^ on letter, to make him really see wherein I have failed.

Now this idle venditation of ingenuity and upright dealing, haith awakened my
sleeping pen, and indeed haith given birth to this short Treatise, whearin I
do undertake to make good our former censures, that is, to demonstrate, that
the very ground and burden of his first book, is mere corruptions, untruths,
and other such impostures, in the euicting of which point I am so secure, that
I willingly make your selves Judges both of him and me, being assured, that in
a true and serious perusal of this my accusation, you shall synde no ca^dor in
White, nor any of Gods spirit in him who styleth him self Gods minister, but
rather in reguard of your frustrated hope, you shall have just reason to say of
this child (who seming Jacob, proves Esau) Expectauimus lucem, ecce tenebra.
Es. 59. which deformities of his, I am not of so rigide a Judgment, as to
ascribe to your famous university, for at this present, I do not wholly approve
that common position of the Ciuilians, partus sequitur ventrem: And we all
observe, that those fair heavenly bodies, sometimes bring forth monsters.

It is certainly reported, that desire of praise (a windy M^teor engendered in
the Region of self conceate) first inuyted M. White, to support forsooth, with
his learned hand, the threatening and falling pillar of his new Church: and
thereupon he instantly stepped into the number of writers, having thereby already
gained great applause and approbation from the wavering uncertain multitude,
in whose weak opinion, he seems to have ouerpassed most of his time and
rank: but I doubt not, but by the assistance of him, who In veritate educet
iudicium, Es. 42. and by the ensuing discovery of his calumnious forgeries, so
to pick the swollen bladder of his pride, as that all his frothy ostentation,
shall resolve to nothing: and that his wrytinges (like unto new found wells,
being commonly of acompt only for a year or two) which heretofore his
favorites have so highly esteemed: shall for ever after remain contemned and
neglected: which event may well be expected since it often happens, that he who
ryseth suddenly, faleth precipitatly.

But as in this following Treatise you shall be fully satisfied of the want of
his sincerity, so here I hold it not inconvenient, to give some touch of that
opprobrious tongue of his, which casts most foul and undeserved aspersions
of contumely and reproach upon all Preistes and Catholics. For even in his
Epistles of this his book impugned by me, he writes, that the, Jesuits are
the Popes Ianisaryes, that Priests are cunning seducers possessing men's wives,
etc. using their goods to swager, and serve their own luxurious use, and that
since the Harpies were chaced away, and Bet was overthrown, never was such a
greedy and ravenous Idol as the seminary, and that friars, seminaryes, and
Mass Priests, are so many bears and bloody, the Tigars, the fatal enemies of
Princes, etc. that the Papists laity, does live in extreme ignorance, and
finally that their religion teaches to pay no depts, murder Kings, and
tends chiefly to all bloody conspiracies, and. Our innocence in all which
points, one day will discover, when the valye of each man's actions shall be
drawn away, and when all deeds and thoughts shall be plainly laid open, at
what time M. White, for these and other his most false, injurious, and
unchristian reproaches must render a severe account; only at this present our
retaliation to him shall be to say with the Apostle 1 Cor. 4.
maledicimur sed benedicimus, blasphemamur sed obsecramus and telling him, that
by these his Phil^ppickes and declamatory inuectiues, he haith worthily gotten
the reputation of being counted a good rayler, and has been careful (as it
should seem) to warrant in him self those words of the Scripture: Iac. 3.
the touge is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.

And now illustrious Academians (whom God has endued with transcendent
spiritts, and understandings far above the vulgar) suffer me, before I remit
you to this following discourse to present unto you touching our Catholic
faith, these few admonitions, the which you are not to contemn, as proceeding
from me how mean soever, but rather herein to remember, that from the earth
(the lowest element of all) we best observe the motions of the heavens.

Make then particular trial of the chief grounds of our Catholic religion,
and look back unto the Continual practice of Christ's Church since it first
being, and assure your self, that we shall not be found superstitious and
blind (as it pleases M. Whyre and others to term us) for how can they be
blind, who behold the articles of there faith with the eyes of all antiquity.

Examine it by the rules of Gods sacred word, and for the true sense of his
written word (as following even the iugments of the most dispassionat and sobe^
Protestants) (...) us (...) n^l (...) par. 1 (...) 74.
recur to the joint expositions of the primitive fathers, who lived, when the
church was most flourishing, and in her full orb^; and know, that the leaves of
scripture, without the intended sense of the holy Ghost, ^^^eil in his ^ sense
of the Adology.
are but leaves without fruit. and as touching his unwritten word, call to mind
that saying of Tertulian: Id uerius, quod prius, id prius, quod ab initio; id
ab initio, quod ab Apostolis.

Remember, that the most markable Protestants Luth. tom. 2. wittenb. anno. 1551
lib. de se^u. ar bitr. page 454
for learning, do confess, that those doctors are patrons of our Catholic
faith, who lived when the Spouse of Christ was most spotles, chaste, and
intemerat: Apoynt indeed so evident, as that from their learned monuments we
are able to delineat, Beza in his preface upon the new Testament, dedicated to
the Prince of Condy anno. 1587.
and draw the very Image and face of the present Roman religion; and as for
the more obscure passages occurring in them, your ingenuityes may suppose them
to be the sad colors or dark grounds, serving only to give greater luster
and life to the whole portrayture. Be never persuaded (since it is granted,
that the Roman Church was once the true church, Doctor Humfrey li. de vita
Iewelli.
and the time of her supposed revolt cannot be known) that the daughter of
Sion, could ever so vnespiedly become a Babilonian strumpet.

Divide not your selves from that most conspicuous church of Christ, which
haith been promised, Esa. 2.60. Micheas. 4. psalm. 19. Math. 18.
that in all ages it should gloriously appear to the eye of the world, lest so
in sew thereof, as for the last refuge, you be forced to forge a Mathematical
and aerie Church, consisting of certain^ imaginary inuisibilites, impugned by
the fathers, Hiero. Epist. ad Pammach.
and your more judicious writers: Do^t^r Humfrey in Iesui^. part. 2. rat. 3
page 240.
since it being, Athanatius. li. de decret. nicen. Sinod.
mearly consists in a not being.

Suffer not a Heteroclyte sectary, August. lib. 3 de baptismo contra Donatum.
ca. 2.
who rejects (though contrary to gods word Hebru. 4. Roman. 10. John. 10.
and his own brethren Doctor Couell in his defense of Hooker page 86.
) all regular, ordinary, and mediate vocation (like an other Melchisadech,
borne without father or mother) to plant in your souls a new kind of religion
never heard of before, till a libidenous Monk by mutual breach of vows, had
yoked him self with a lapsed Nunn: and be a certained, that such a nouelist
must needs be one of those, who say they are Apostles, and are not, but are
found liars.

Finally relinquishe, and abandon that supreme sovereignty of the private
reauealing spirit (condemned even by Christ's own 1 Cor. 12.
Apostles) it being first chiefly erected, thereby to decline the weighty
authorityes of the ancient fathers in the exposition of Gods sacred wryt,
Doctor Sarauia contra resp. Bez. page 360.
and to reduce all things to the most grave (for-sooth) and inappealable
tribunal of each illiteterate man's empty scull and brains. Thus do the
gospellers of these days, Cartwright in his second reply part. see. page 142.
hold the fanaticall revealing Spirit, as their mount Sinay from whence they
receue their new evangelical law, it being in deed shadowed with a cloud,
Apoc. c. 2
not wherewith to cover it own over glorious infallibility, but with a cloud
or mist of pride, ignorance, and uncertainty.

And thus worthy Academians, leaving you to the censure of your unworthy son,
Petr. 2. c. 1
I take my leave, expecting, that my good meaning herein, shall ouer-ballance
with you, John. 1. c. 4
my bouldnes, and wishing even in the bowels of Christian charity, that every
one of you wear strong armed with our most ancient Catholic Roman faith;
for then you would easily learn to contemn those poor and weak assaults,
which every first appearance of new doctrine does threaten: it being an
acknowledged, and experienced truth that Hareses Tertul. li. de prescript.
apud cos multum valent, qui in fide non valent.

Your well willer in Christ Jesus T. W. P.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER
Good Reader, before I remit thee to the perusal of this ensuing discourse, I
here think it good to acquaint thee with the occasion inducing me to write it,
and with my method houlden therein. And as touching the first, thou art to
conceive, that the worthles esteem, which we have had of M. White his book
(how soever his own followers do magnify it) as seeing it fraught with such
impurity of stuff, haith for these years past prevailed with most of us so
far, that we wear determined to forbear the answearing thereof, houlding it
altogether unworthy of such labor; yet seeing in diverse passages of his late
second work, he vaunteth in great exultation, and iolity of words, that this
his first book does not stand chargeable with any wilful corruption,
falsification, or other such imposture, and that he confidently provoke his
adversary (if any such be) to set them down: Therefore to control this man's
most shameless asseueration (as being one of an obdurat conscience, not caring
how falsely he writes, or how impudently he justifies it being written) I do
here charge his said first treatise with most foul abuses, falsifications, and
other such fraudulent dealing, and will in these few sheets following
particularize to thee diverse of them, whereby thou shall have reason to assure
thy self that M. White, in reguarde of his calling in his new Ministry, and
his exercise therein, may truly be numbered amongst them Roman. 1,
Qui Commutauerunt veritatem Dei in mendacium, who changed the truth of God
onto a lie. Now concerning my method taken, in displaying of his falsehood, and
deceate, thou art to be advertised, that my chief project in this treatise
being to prove M. White in his wrytings a most dishonest, conscionles, and
faithles man: therefore forbearing to confute the whole course of his book in
respect of doctrine (which is already learnedly performed by my fellow A. D.
in his reply to M. W. said work) I do here restrain my self to three heads,
redu^ing all these impostures, in which hereafter I intend to insist, to some
of them. The heads are these Corruptions, Lies, and Impertine^cyes. By
Corruptions, I mean those depraved authorityes of the ancient Fathers, and
our own modern Catholic authors, which this our Minister (thereby to make
the^ to speak in his protestant language and dialect) haith most shamelesly
altered, either by inserting, or adding some words of his own, as part of
their sentences; or by concealing of some part of their words, which do expound
the rest of the testimonies, in a far different sense from that, in which M.
White does urge them, or lastly (though setting down their words truly) by
strangely detorting and wresting them from the intended sense of the authors.

By Lies, I understand false assertions and vast untruths mantained by M.
White, whom the more fully, and irrepliably, and for the greater
compendiousnes, to convince therein, I have made choice of those untruths, as
are acknowledged for such by the most learned Protestants, thus making his
mother (to wit the University) the judge, and his own Brethren the plaintifs,
between himself and me herein.

By Impertine^ces, I conceive his idle and fruteles aledging either of
scripture, fathers, or Catholic writers, to disprove thereby some point of our
religion; where my meaning is, that allowing the sense and constructions to
those authorityes, which the words necessarily and truly importe, yet they do
in no sort disable and weaken the catholic point, for the impugning whereof
they are there by our Minister produced, so that it follows, that his
illations drawn from those testimonies, to the question intended, are most
absurd, incongruous, and inconsequent. These three now are the several
particular deliueries of our minister, in his so much applauded work, himself
in this his scene, sometimes acting one part, sometimes an other, agreeable to
the former heads, but we less marvel, since eich man knows that white is
successively capable of several tinctures. Now touching the number of these
his impostures, thou art (good reader) further to understand that my meaning is
not to displaye all those with which his book is stored, for this would
require too painful a labor, and rising to an over great volume, would be
less fitting to be printed and diuulged. Besides, seeing my maine proiecte
here is to decipher the dishonest dealing of our minister, every clear
judgment will acknowledge, that the true charging him even with a few wilful
and unjustifiable corruptions, does condemn and prove him for such a man: and
every one knows, that who is found out of malice to corrupt some few places,
would in like sort deprave as many authorities as opportunity might license
him. Therefore touching his Corruptions or deprauations, I have contented my
self only with forty, which forty, are taken out of about some twenty
different writers, having in truth no more books alleged by him, wherewith to
examine it: from which circumstance thou may thus conclude, that if,
restraining my self only to twenty authors more or less, I can find forty
most notorious corruptions of their testimonies, how many scores in all
liklihood of such like deprauations might be found in all the rest of the
authors alleged by him, which amount nere-hand to a hundred, if diligent
search wear made of them: and the rather considering, that many books
produced by him, but omitted by me, are most to be gotten, and therefore he
might corrupt their sayings more securely, and with greater bouldnes, as
presuming beforehand, that such his corruptions through want of the books them
selves, could not easily be espied.

In like sort concerning his lies, I have made choice only of such as are all
of the^ acknowledged for untruths by his own learned brethren. From which
point thou may also thus infer; if M. White his book, does minister sundry
such gross lies against our catholic faith, as that the most learned
protestants, that ever writ, are forced (though to their own disadvantage) to
confess them for such: How many other untruths might be found therein, which
through some show, or culour of answer, and evasion, are such, (as though
being lies indeed) will not yet be so acknowledged by our adversaries, who are
loath to confess more in favor of our catholic religion, then the
unavoidable evidence and clearenes of the truth it self constrayneth them.

Lastly all his impertinencies, or weak absurd reasons hereafter set down,
are taken out of less then twenty leaves of his book, from which thou may
in like manner thus collect, that if twenty leaves, and these in the first part
of his book (dividing the whole into three parts) do afford such a boundance
of impertinent allegations, and authorityes, how many hundreds then in all
probability of like nature, are dispersed throughout his whole treatise, it
containing above two hundred leaves. And the rather, seeing that diverse
authors do commonly fortify and strengthen the first part of their wrytings,
with more forcible proofs and authorities then the latter part, both thereby
the sooner, and with greater speed to invade the judgment of the reader, as
also knowing, that many do peruse the beginninges of books, who through a
werisome carelesnes do never read the latter part of them.

And thus much of my method in this my treatise. Here now thou see (courteous
reader) what I undertake to perform, that is to make evident, that M. White
his first book is stored with most shameless falsifications, lies, and other
such collusions: the which if I do not effect, I am content to become a
reproach, and shame, not only to my particular profession (the sacred function
whereof I hold my cheifest honor) but also to the Catholic cause in
general; for here I protest in the sight of god, and as I shall answer the
truth or falsehood of this my protestation at the most dreadful day, that I
never perused book of this quantity, wherein I did find more vnanswereable
corruptions, lies, and impertinencies, then in this work of M. Whytes. And if
so eminent a man (as he is presumed by many to be) does stand cha^geable with
such profane, and wicked deportments: what shall we then censure of other
inferior writers of his side, Since Math. c 6.
if the light be darkness, how great is the darkness: or what may we judge of the
iustnes of their cause seeing the faith of Christ is of that force, as it
scorneth to be vphoulden with the weak supporters of such deceatfull means,
it being no better, then an impious devotion, or irreligious godliness, to
deferd truth with falsehood, or to blaze forth the light of the gospel, by the
works of darkness? And as touching his second book, which is fraughted with
all base scurrility of words, and railing, I will only say, that seeing there
has not been as yet sufficient opportunity for the particular examining of it,
yet I am assured, that who shall impose that labor to himself, shall find the
same to stand chargeable with no lose store of impostures, then this his other:
for if this his book impugned by me (being the strength and first borne of his
cause) be found so corrupt, how can we probably conjecture that this other
second feminine, and less perfect labor of his, should not partake of the
former blemishes and deficiences.

But now good reader, I will detain thee no longer from perusing this my
accusation, earnestly entreating thee (even for the good of thy soul) that if
thou understand latin, thou would see the testimonies them selves, as they
lie in the authors, the which I do avouch to be here corrupted, which if thou
do, doubtlesly thou shall be forced to confess, that M. white is a most
egregious falsary, and howsoever he enameleth his cause, with the phrazes of
the way to the true Church, of the enlarging of the Gospel of Christ, of
rooting out superstition and blindness, and the like, nevertheless thou shall
find that he is most conscious, and guilty both of his own weak cause, as
also of his perfidious, and profane mantaining and defending of the same, so
as in reguard of his hipocrisy, and dissimulation herein, thou shall see the
words of the apostle justified in him Romans 9.
all they are not Israel, which are of Israel, himself being one of those
Act. 13.
which will not cease to pervert the way of our Lord.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
The first Part.
Chapter 1. Containing Corruptions, concerning works and Justification.
The First Paragraph. Premenitions given to M. white if he entend to reply upon
this present Treatise. 2 The Rhemistes Corrupted, concerning merit of works.
3 Cardinal Bellarmine Corrupted concerning justification. 4 Bellarmine again
abused, against merit of works. 5 S. Thomas Corrupted, against justification
by works. 6 S. Augustine Corrupted, against justification.
Chapter.2. Concerning the reading of the Scriptures.
The first Paragraph. S. Jerome Corrupted, concerning the reading of the
Scriptures by the vulgar people. 2 S. Cirill of Alexandria abused, for the
same purpose.
Chapter.3. Concerning the Church, and the Pope.
The first Paragraph. Vincentius Lirinensis Corrupted, in proof that the
Church may err. 2 The Rhemistes Corrupted, for the Churches inuisibility. 3 S.
Augustine Corrupted, concerning the same subject. 4 Doctor Stapleton abused, in
behalf of the protestants marks of the Church. 5 S. Gregory de valentia
Corrupted, concerning the same. 6 Bellarmine egregiously Corrupted, for the
same. 7 S. Thomas foully corrupted, concerning the Popes authority. 8 Doctor
Sapleton corrupted, concerning the same subject. 9 S. Ciprian corrupted,
against appeals to Rome. 10 The Rhemistes abused, concerning the authority of
the Church. 11 Cardinal Cusanus corrupted concerning the same. 12 The canon
law corrupted, concerning the Pope. 13 Bellarmine corrupted, against the Popes
authority.
Chapter 4. wherein are discovered sundry corruptions, concerning the sacred
Scriptures and Traditions.
The first Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted, in behalf of the Scripture proving
it self to be the word of god. 2 Bellarmine corrupted, in proof that the
Scriptures are the only rule of faith. 3 Eckius abused, concerning the
Authority of the Church, and Traditions. 4 Canus corrupted concerning
Traditions.
Chapter.5. Concerning Faith and Heresy.
The 1 Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted against the necessity of true Faith. 2
Bellarmine again corrupted, against the knowledge of the mysteries of our
faith, and in preferring of ignorance. 3 Nauar corrupted, concerning the sin
committed by the Laity in disputing of matters of faith.
Chapter 6. Concerning marriage of Preistes: Fasting: and Miracles.
The 1 Paragraph. Sinesius impudently abused, concerning his own marriage. 2
Paphnutius abused concerning the marriage of preistes. 3 S. Angustine corrupted
against fasting. Baronius notoriously corrupted, in proof that heritikes can
work true miracles.
Chapter.7. Concerning the Sacraments of the Eucharist, and P^nance.
The 1. Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted against Transubstantiation. 2 The. M.
of the Sentences corrupted, against confession to a Priest. 3 Bellarmine
corrupted against Satisfaction. 4 S. Thomas corrupted, concerning the remission
of venial sins.
Chapter 8. Concerning the Author of sin: and Reprobation,
The 1. Paragraph. Bellarmine egregiously falsified, in proof, that god is the
Author of sin. 2 S. Augustine abused, concerning reprobation.
Chapter 9. Concerning the honor to be given to Saints, and their Images.
The 1 Paragraph. S. Epiphanius corrupted, in dishonor of the B. Virgin Mary.
2 S. Gregory notoriously corrupted, against the worshipping of Images. 3 The
Council of Eliberis corrupted against Images.

The second part. Containing sundry notorious untruths or lies, proved to be
such by the confession of learned protestants.
And first is prevented a weak evasion, which may be used by M. White against
this second part. The 1. untruth. That protestants embrace that kind of trial
which is by antiquity, 2 Against Traditions. 3 In proof of the protestants
Church, to have continued in all ages. 4 In proof of the unity of faith, and
doctrine amongst protestants. 5 In proof of the immutability of the present
English Religion. 6 In proof of the Roman Churches mutability in matters of
faith. 7 In proof of the protestants concord, in matters of Religion. 8
Against the unity of Catholics, in matters of faith. 9 Against the Popes
primacy. 10 That Gregory the great, detested the Popes primacy. 11 In proof
that Catholics are more viceous then protestants. 12 Against auriculer
confession. 13 Against Fasting. 14 In proof that Montanus the herityke, was
the first that brought in the laws of Fasting. 15 In proof that they make not
God the Author of sin. 16 In proof that S. Bernard was noe papist. 17
Against the miracles wrought by S. Bernarde, and S. Francis. 18 In proof of
the protestants Churches ever visibility. 19 In defense of Preistes marriage.
20 Against Images. 21 Against Transubstantiation. 22 Against the conversion of
England, by S. Augustine the Monk. 23 Concerning the Conversion of Countries.
24 Against the Popes Authority in calling of Councels. 25 Against merit of
works. 26 Against the Sacrifice of the Mass. 27 Concerning wafer cakes. 28
Against the Adoration of the B. Sacrament. 29 Against the succession of
Catholic Pastors. 30 In defense of Martin Luthers life, and manners.
The Third Part. Containing diverse impertinences, or absurd Illations, or
reasoninges.
The 1. Paragraph. Wherein are discovered, strange Illations or arguinges, in
proof that the Scriptures are the sole rule of faith: and against Traditions.
2 Wherein are discussed certain arguments drawn from Scriptures and Fathers,
in proof that the sacred Scriptures and the true sense thereof, are made
sufficiently known unto us, without any probation, or explication of the
Church. 3 Wherein are examined some of M. Whites profes, against the visibility
of the Church. 4 Wherein are discussed, certain proofs of M. Whytes, in
behalf of the protestants marks of the Church. 5 Wherein are examined strange
kinds of Argunges, against the Authority of the Church.
Faults escaped in the printing.
In the preface to the University of Cambridge.
Page 1 lin. 10. for iudiceous read judicious. Ibid. lin 11. for grearly, read
greatly. Ibid. page 4. lin 27. for Iugements, read Judgments. Ibid. page 5.
lin. 22. for inuisibilites, Inuisibilistes.
Preface to the Reader.
Page 2. lin. 4. leave out (said work.) Page 4. lin. 15. for ^nlour, read
color.
Chapter 1.
Page 4. lin. 25. for Justifies, read, insisteth in. Page 5. lin. 25. for
preadmonish, read, premonish. Page 18. lin. 21 for great, read, greatest. Page
27. lin. 9. for Quod, read, Quid. Page 31. lin. 23. for Anologie, read,
Analogy. Page 47. lin. 4. betwixt druncke, and should, insorte, one. Page 52.
lin. 16. and 17. leave out these words, All which your omissions, are impaled
and marked, in the said english authority. Page 52. lin. 20. for Emprour, read,
Emperor Page 53 lin. 14. for disopting, read, dissorting. Page 53. lin. 23.
for perusing, read, pursuing. Page 64. lin. 14. leave out the word, is. Page
77. lin. 10. for Chapter, read Chapter. Page 87. lin. 24. for maliuolent, read
maleuolent. Page 138. lin. 27. next after the word (Mass) insert affirms.
Page 159. lin. 10. betwixt, authority, and the, insert, in. Page 73. lin. 30.
for fully, read foully. Page 87. lin. 33. for paralayes, read, parallels. Page
92. lin. 4. for differences, read discoueries. Page 97. lin. 28. for musk, read
music. Page 114. lin. 24. for proh dolor, read proh pudor. Ibid. lin. 27. for
clausure, read closure. Page 118. lin. 33. for entertain, read enteruaine.
Page 125. lin. 12. for concur, read recurre. For ingenious, read in sundry
places ingenuous.
WHITE DYED BLACK.
THE FIRST PART. WHEAREIN are discovered Forty most foul and unjustifiable
corruptions and deprauations of Authors used by Doctor White, in his Treatise
of the way to the true Church.
Chapter. 1. Containing Corruptions concerning works and Justification.
Paragr. I. Premonitions given to M. W. if he intend to reply upon this
present Treatise.
WE read ( Exodus 13) that the first borne of the people of Israel, was ever
consecrated unto god in regard of a grateful acknowledgment of his innumerable
benefits showed unto them: and by reason of such his title thereto, god (who
had a supreme interest in all their issue) peculierly pronounced, This is
mine. I fear that M. White (who vaunteth him self for a true Israelite) haith
not sanctified unto his divine Majesty, this his child, the first borne of the
womb of his brain, for books are faetus ingenii, carrying in them selves an
inward resemblance to their parents, and withal as perpetuating their
remembrance, do extend their lines beyond their lives: Nay I am rather
persuaded that he haith particulerly devoted it to Gods and man's ghostly enemy.
For to whom rather are lies and impostures (the very burden of his Treatise) to
be ascribed, then to him who is the father of lies? And sure I am that God who
is the truth it self can not be found herein since no man uses to gather
grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles. ( Mat. 7.) And M. White him self
confesses that we can not learn truth in the school of lies.

Now to discover that this work of his is even loaded with many most foul
untruths, corruptions, and deceiptes, is my task voluntarily imposed by my
self and I hope with thy good patience (gentle reader) to perform the same.

And first according to my former prescribed Method, his perfidious
corruptions of fathers and Catholic Authoures, thereby to force them to
speak in a language and dialect of which they were merely ignorant, shall
begin the Scene.

But because as M. White is pregnant in deprauing of men's writings, so also he
will no doubt show him self ingenious in fynding some sleighty euasions and
answeares, under the tecture whereof to shrewde him self. Therefore I think
good now in the front and beginning of this my labor, to set down by way of
prevention, all what may be imagined that he can pretend for his defense and
Apology, and to discover the weakness thereof, that so his impostures may be
observed and perused with greater benefit to the reader, and more shameful
guiltiness to him self.

First then M. White can not transferr the fault upon the printer for hear he
stands for the most part chargeable either with adding too, or detracting from
the authority alleged (so abastarding it by this mean that the true father
thereof would not acknowledge it for his own) whereas the printers error
commonly rests in quotations made by figures, or (by mistaking of some letter)
in placing one word for another, ouer-sightes hear forborne, and indeed
unworthy to be insisted upon by any iuditious pen.

Secondly he can not say that his intention in alleging such authorities, was
only to alledg the sense of the Author not tying him self to the authoures
particular words. Of this evasion he preuenteth him self in that he ever
undertakes to alledg the particular sayings of the Author, and for that
reason does distinguish them in a different letter from that wherein his own
words are printed (a course amongst writers most certain and usual to know
when a man delivers the precise words or sentences of an other) and which is
more for the most part he thus vshereth his testimonies, Bellarmine says,
Thomas Aquinas says, Austine says, etc. or puts their names in the
mergent: whereby it is not to be doubted but that he would have his reader
think, that the Authorities set down, are the very words of the Authoures
them selves, without any variation or chang whatsoever.

Now if he will justify them to be the precise words of the Authoures without
any chang either of adding or detracting: then is he to name the particular
Editions of such books which he follows, and wherein the testimonies (as they
are alleged by him) are to be found.

Thirdly where he is charged to corrupt any Authority by concealing for his
own advantage any part thereof, he can not justify it by replyinge, that he is
not tied to set down all which his Author says of that point, since so his
Authorities would grow over long and tedious: this is no sufficient answer.
For although a writer is not bound to set down all that his alleged Author
says of such a point: yet is he bound not purposly to omit any part of the
beginning of the midst, or of the ending of the said sentences which he
produces, especially when the words concealed make for his adversary, and
against the drifte and scope of that meaning wherein the rest of the sentence
is by him delivered. And this kind of omission (whereunto M. White stands
extremely obnoxious, and is in this part following so by me charged) is in the
judgment of all writers, a wilful, unpardonable, and unjustifiable corrupting
of men's books.

Fourthly it is no excuse to say, touching such authorities as M. White truly
alleges without adding or detracting (of which kind there are very few if
any) that his meaning is only to set down the words of Catholic Authoures
without restrayning them to any particular sense which he leaves to that
dangerous and inconvenient exposition which the words in the readers eye may
best seem to afford. This is most false, for there is no Catholic which he
iustifyeth, but he perticularly restrains the sense of his testimony either
to the supporting of some point of protesta^cy, or else to the manteyning of
some absurd and scandalous opinion which he obtrudeth upon us. And thus much,
besides the often answearable entituling of the pages, his own precedent or
subsequent words, do, for the most part, imply.

Fyftly, if his pride would suffer him to descend so low, he can not plaster
the marter in acknowledginge that the testimonies hear corrupted, are not of
his own reading, but that he relied therein upon the annotations and
note-bokes of others of the ministry (a refuge whereunto some of his profession
have been heretofore driven) and so as being over credulous and confident of
his friends supposed allegations, he was by them mistaken. Of this sily and
poor evasion, he haith already precluded him self. For in his first Edition
(which I here follow) after his Alphabeticall Table in the end of his book, he
haith made an ambitious note to the reader, that he will (to use his own
words) mantaine the quotations for substance to be true etc. And again, it is
one thing if I have wilfully falsified or forged a place, and an other thing if
the printer only haith mistaken the quotation: the latter may be, but the
former is not, as I will be ready to satisfy any that will charge me with it.
Thus he. But how mantaineth he the point, or what satisfaction gives he, if in
answer to the corruptions and deprauations wherewith he is hear charged, he
reply, that in good sooth so it is that he did not read the testimonies of the
Authoures them selves, but only took them upon the credit and affiance of
such of his own brotherhood as he thought would not have deceived him? A
grave and sufficient answer.

And hear I am to preadmonishe M. White, that I do expect in his answer (if
he do intend sincerely and truly to free him self from these imputations) to
answer all the corruptions and deprauations by them selves as hear they are
gathered, and so the lies and falshoodes severally by them selves; as as also
the impertinences in like sort, and not promiscuously to iumble and shuffle
them together, now seeking to salve a corruption, next a lie, and so by
affecting an obscurity, in method, to bleare the eye of the reader that he
shall not discern what corruptions in his reply he omitteth, and what he
makes show to justify; wherefore I say if he make choice of this obscure
course after this premonition, he but bewrayes his own guiltiness. And though
I can not by the laws of writing impose a method upon my adversaries pen: yet
seeing the reason why M. White should affect an other course then I hear wish
him, is seen aforehand, and so him self hereby advertised thereof, to be only
(by answearing so confusedly) to delude and wrong his reader: therefore even
for his own honor and credit sake, he can not refuse this desired method
which hear I require, especially seeing it is wished only for manifestation of
the truth, as being in it self most obuious, facile, and perspicuous.

Thus much I have thought good (for his greater caution) to instruct the reader
with aforehand; and therefore now I will remitt him to the ensuing
deprauations, still wishing him to have his eye (whenever M. White shall
vouchsaife to make answer hereto) intent and fixed upon the corruption
objected: neither suffer him to turn the question (as before I touched) from
the corruption, to the sense and meaning of the Author (a slight upon the
like occasion used by Plessis against the Bishop of Fureux) and so to
entertain the reader with long discourses thereby to divert his myud from the
point in question: but let the reader always remember, that the question hear
for the most part immediately is, whether such a sentence or testimony is truly
and faithfully alleged as it is to be found in the Author him self, without
any addition or concealment of words in M. White his behalf, and so breefely
whether M. White corrupts the place or not, still observing that whatsoever
M. White says, if it do not conclude that the testimony is in noe sort altered
and changed from the words of the Author him self, is (in respect of the
point here handled) but idly, extrauagantly, and impertinently spoken.

Paragr. 2. The Rhemistes corrupted concerning merit of works.
BUT now at the last to come to M. Whytes deprauations the which (for more
perspicuity) I will range to certain heads: the first whereof shall be such
as concern the doctrine of works and justification And to begin with one
which as it conteyneth in it self many foul and strange corruptions: so the
injury thereby offered is not to one but to many and those men for their
learning and virtue, of worthiest memory, to wit, the english Doctors of Rhemes
who (if we may believe M. White page 238.) fear not to affirm that our works
of their very nature, deserve eternal life, the reward whereof is a thing
equally and justly answearing to the time and weight of the work rather then a
free gift, so that God should be unjust if he gave it not. And for this he
quoteth in his mergent. Rhem. Annot. upon 1. Cor. 3. 8. and Hebr. 6. 10. But
for the plainest and most certain discovery of this brazen faced minister, I
will set down the true words of the Rhemistes, who commenting upon those of
S. Paul (1. Cor. 3. 8) And every one shall receive his own reward according
to his own labor, write as follows. A most plain text to prove that men by
their labors and by the diversities thereof shall be diversely rewarded in
heaven: and therefore that by their works proceeding of GRACE, they deserve or
merit heaven. Here before I proceed any further, I must charge M. Doctor with a
dooble corruption, first for omitting the word Grace, the true words being
works proceeding of Grace, do deserve or merit heaven: secondly, which makes
it more inexcusable and damnable, for inserting in steed of the word Grace, the
word Nature, the which was not so much as dreamed of by the Rhemistes, or by
any Catholic Author, yea to defend that works of their own nature do merit,
were to renew the heresy long since condemned in the Pelagians by the Roman
Church.

But to go forward, the Rhemistes in this ministers mouth affirm, that the
reward is a thing equally and justly answearing to the time and weight of the
work, rather then a free guifte. But in their own words they avouch the
contrary. And indeed (say they) this word Reward which in our english tongue
may signify a voluntary or bountiful gift, does not so well express the
nature of the latin word, or the greek, which are rather the very stipend that
the hired workman or iournay man couenanteth to have of him whose work he
does, and is a thing equally and justly answearing to the time and weight of
his travels and works (in which sense the Scripture says The worke-man is
worthy of his hyre) rather then a free gift: though because faithful men must
acknowledge that their merits be the guiftes and graces of god, they rather use
the word Reward, then hyre, stipend, or repayment. etc. Now all that from hence
can be gathered are two things, first that the Rhemists affirm that the word
Reward, in latin and greek, does rather signify a stipend or hyre then a free
gift. Secondly that because faithful men must acknowledge that their merits
be the guiftes and graces of god, they rather use the word Reward then hyre.
But now all this while I can not find this sentence cyted by M. Wh. that the
reward of works is a thing equally and justly answearing to the time and
weight of the work rather then a free gift. Indeed I find most of the
words, but many of them in several lines, and uttered upon several
occasions, all which to join and chain together in one continued line or
sentence, and thereby to make the Author speak contrary to him self, is a
thing easy to perform, but the performance is wicked, shameless, and
execrable.

And give but this liberty of omitting, inserting, and coopling to the Atheist
(which your self M. Wait have hear assumed and practiced) and you shall find
strange positions well manteined by him. For example, the Psalmi^t speaking of
your self and other such like says, T^s fool haith said in his heart, there
is no god. Now kindly allow him to blott out the word fool, (as you more the^
folishly did the word Grace) and to insert in steed thereof, the words wise
man (as you according to the wisdom of the world inserted the word Nature) and
then observe how easily he will defend from the scriptures that there is no
god, seeing according to your scriptures The wise man said in his heart there is
no god. But to conclude this knowingly and deliberately to corrupt to the
dishonor of your own and Catholic Religion, and to the ruin of your own
and other ignorant souls, is to me an argument most conuincing, that you are
one of those fools who said in his heart there is noe god.

Paragr. 3. Cardinal Bellarmine corrupted concerning Justification.
IN the very first page of his preface to the Reader (so loath it seemed he was
to loose any time) he shows us an other trick somewhat like unto the former.
Where by the way I must advertise him that I hold him a man herein impolitick
and incautelous, that would not suffer the very face or front of his Treatise
to pass unblemished, since the first he rather should have coueted to win
the ear of credulity with pleasing insinuations of truth: and then (the
judgment of his Reader being once possessed) after to have vented forth his
more impure d^egs: for we are taught (Io. 2.) that omnis homo primum bonum
vinum apponit, and cum inebriati sunt, tum id quod est deterius. But to the
deprauation page 1. of his preface, M. White falsely to intimate to his reader
how much the Catholics do disualew the passion of Christ, thus writes. The
Church of Rome teaches that iust^fication is wrought by the habit of our own
righteousness and not by Christ's. Thus you see how peremptorily he affirms
without any reservation, that we reject the righteousness of Christ to concur
to our Justification. Now this he labors to prove from a testimony of
Bellarmine de iustificat. li. 2. ca. 2. which he thus sets down. Our own
inherent justice is the formal cause of absolute justification, not the
justice of Christ imputed unto us. That we may conceive the true meaning of
that learned Cardinal in this place, I will set down his own words in
latin, who there discoursinge of the causes of our Justification thus says.
Ad quaestionem, an vid. iustificamur propter meritum Filii dei, an propter in
ch^atam renouatio^em nostram? Respondemus. Si illud propter significet causam
formalem, nos iustificari propter noui tatem nobis inhaerentem, non propter
meritum Christi quod iuhae^e^e non potest: si vero significet causam
meritoriam, nos iustificari dicemus propter meritum Filii des non propter
nouitatem in nobis haerentem. That is. In this question whether we be justified
propter meritum, for the merit of the Son of God, or for our own renouation
of life? I answer. If the word propter, do signify the formal cause, then
are we justified through our own newness of life inherent in us and not
through the merits of Christ, because they can not inhere in us: (and these
are the words alleged by M. White) but if the word propter, do here signify
the meritorious cause, then are we justified propter meritum Filii de^, through
the merits of the Son of God, and not through any inherent newnes or justice
in us: And then presently concludes, ita iustificamur propter v^rumque etc. So
we are justified by reason or through them both, to wit, through the merits of
the Son of God, meritorie, meritoriously, and through an inherent justice in
us formaliter, formally. Thus Bellarmine. Where you see the question is not, as
M. White suggesteth, whether Christ's justice does concur to man's
justification (which were a horrible blasphemy to deny) but only in what kind
of cause it concurreth: the Catholics teaching that it concurres as the
meritorious cause, not as the formal cause, since if it did as the formal
cause, then, even according to philosophy, it should really inhere in us, but
so it does not.

But now to observe M. Whytes calumny and fraud in alleging this testimony.
First he purposly concealeth the latter part of the sentence which shows how
we ascribe our justification to Christ, as unwilling that the reader should
hear that in any sense we rely thereon. Secondly that whereas this testimony
of the Cardinales, even as it is set down by M. White him self, excludes
only Christ's merits as the formal cause of our justification and in none
other sense: yet our minister alleges it to prove that it is no cause thereof
at all, and in this respect it is impertinently urged, for in his own words
immediately before, without any limitation of the cause, he says, The Church of
Rome teaches that justification of a sinner is done by the habit of our own
righteousness and not by Christ's. And then as I said, alleges for proof
thereof such words of Bellarmine as excludes only the formal cause thereof.
But his slight here was, that persuading him self that the ignorant reader not
knowing what the word formal cause is, or how it is distinguished from other
kind of causes, but thinking that it did signify any cause in general, should
no sooner see the words of Bellarmine, but then should instantly conclude with
him self, here Bellarmine and the Church of Rome teaches that man's
justification is in no sort or manner wrought by the justice of Christ. And thus
much of our Doctors deportement herein, who through his subtle feaninge (at
his pleasure) what we are supposed to mantaine, does in the mean time endanger
and wrong the honor of the worthy and illustrious Cardinal till more full
search and disquisition of the truth be made. And thus our poetizing minister
(I mean our lyinge M. White) does interest him self in the censure of the poet
( Ovid. li. 2. fast.) fraud perit virtus. Hear now I end this deprauation,
assuring my reader that Bellarmine is so far of from teaching that Christ's
justice does not necessarily concur to our justification, that in the former
alleged Chapter he thus writes. Iustitia homini a deo per Christi mer^ta
donata est. etc. That is. Justice is given by god to man through the merits of
Christ. And then presently thus repi^hendeth Kemnitius for his deceipte used in
this question. Kemnitius fraudulenter egit. etc. kemnitius deals fraudulently
herein, in that to precure malice against us, he opposes on the contrary side
our late begone renouation, or newnes of life, to the merits of the Son of
God, as if we prized more our own change or newnes of life, though imperfect
and late begone, then the most perfect and the most absolute merits of the
Son of God.

The 4. Paragraph. Bellarmine again abused against Merit of works.
A Gain to take away the doctrine of the merit of works, M White page 236,
thus writes. Howsoever our adversaries contend for their merits, yet the
learnedest and most judicious men disalow them etc. houlding that which I have
said to be the sounder doctrine; and so answearably entitleth that page, merit
of works rejected by papists them selves. Now in proof that the Catholic
Doctors condemn all merit of works, he alleges among others the foresaid
Cardinal thus writing. By reason of the uncertainty of man's own rightousnes,
and for fear of vain glory, it is the saifest way to repose our whole
confidence in the sole mercy and goodness of god. But why think you stays the
man in that place and passes no further? You shall know, for the immediate
words following in Bellarmine are these. Explico propositionem. Non enim ita
accipienda est etc. I explain this proposition (meaning his former sentence)
which is not so to be taken as that a man should not labor with all his
endeavor to do good works, and that there were no trust to be put in them, or
as if they were not to be accounted as true justice, or could not endure the
judgment of god: but only this we say, that it is more saife to forgeate after
a sort our good works, and to cast our eye upon the sole mercy of god. Thus we
see how greedily our minister takes hold of the text and yet concealeth the
comment though given by the Author him self. And therefore I appeal to the
censure of the judicious if the whole contexture of this testimony, which is
urged for the overthrowing of me rites, does not even depose the contrary, in
positiuely confirming and mantaininge the doctrine of merits. Again what
impudency is it in M. White to produce Bellarmine as denying the doctrine of
works, when as the subject of this very book (from whence the former words
are taken as also of diverse other books in that tome) is only to prove that
works do merit^. Therefore I will only say that this our Doctor in all dging
his proofs and Authorities, carries him self perfectly minister-like: I need
not further to express my meaning, since among some things there is such an
inward and inseparable association and nearenes, as that but naminge the one,
we are supposed withal implicitly to understand the other.

The 5 Paragraph. S. Thomas notoriously corrupted against justification by work.
TO the like effect he depraueth a saying of S. Thomas Aquinas. For page 26^.
we thus find. Works he not the cause why a man is just before god, but rather
the execution and manif^station of his Iust^ce, for no man is justified by
works, but by the habi^e of faith infused, yea Justification is done by faith
only. ( Aquin. To. 3. lect. 4. and Gal. 2. Lect. 4.) Wheare the reader is to
know that the place to the Romans is only spent by S. Thomas against the
Jews, in coufuting that Justification is wrought by performinge the
ceremonial works of the law, or moral precepts: and therefore he there
immediately before the words alleged thus says (which M. White thought good
to conceal) Apostolus loquitur etc. The Apostle does speak in this Chapter
both of all ce^emoniall and moral works, for works be not the cause etc. to
neither of which the Catholics ascribe any justification, but only to work^s
done in state of grace, and receiving their virtue from the passion of our
Savior. In like sort in his second reference of S. Thomas which is Gal. 3.
Lect. 4., we find the like words in sense which our doctor here alleges:
for there S. Thomas co^mentinge upon that of the Apostle, I do think that a
man is justified by faith without the works of the law, thus writes, Non
au^em solum sine operibus caerimonialibus etc Man is justified not only
without the ceremonial works which did not confer grace, but only signified
it: but also he is justified without the works of moral precep^es, according
to that to Titus, etc, and then presently follows in S. Thomas, ita tamen qnod
hoc intelligat etc. yet so that the Apostle here means, sine operibus
praecedentibus iustitiam, non autem sine operibus consequentibus, without
works which go before justice, and not without works following justice, which
is the doctrine of all Catholics, who teach that works done out of the state
of grace (which are those that do praecedere iustitiam) can not justify, but
only such as are consequentia, to wit performed after our first
justification, and so in state of grace. Thus if M. White had vouchsaifed to
hau set down this last part of S. Thomas his sentence (which he most
calumniously concealed), the reader would have easily discerned how
impertinently these tes^imonies are alleged against the Catholic doctrine of
Justification.

The 6. Paragraph. S. Augustine corrupted against Justification.
The doctor not content to deprave and corrupt modern and more late writers,
exercises his faculty even in the monumentes of the auntiente fathers. For
page 245. the more to depresse man's justice, he produces S. Augustine de
Ciuitate dei le. 19. ^. 27. thus writing. All our righteousness stands rather
in the remission of our sins, then in any perfection of Justice.

The Fathers words are these, which I will relate at large in latin for the
more full discovery of M. Whites demeanor therein. Ista nostra iustitia
(quamnis vera sit propter very boni finem ad quem refertur) tamen tauta est in
hac vita vt potius peccatorum remissione constet, quam perfectione virtutum.
This our justice (though it be true by reason of the end of the true good to
which it is referred) yet it is such in this life as that it rather consists
of the remission of our sins the^ of the perfection of virtues. Here first
our minister adds the word, all, for greater swelling and fulness of speech
against our doctrine, which is not in S. Augustine: but this we let pass as a
smaller fault. Secondly he leaves out a parcel of the same sentence, to wit (
although our Justice be true by reason of the end of the true good whereunto it
is referred) in which words S. Augustine acknowledges the very Catholic
doctrine of justification, to wit, that our Justice is true Justice, against
which this very place is urged. Thirdly he falsely translateth (for his own
advantage) those words, quam perfectione virtutum, then in any perfection of
Justice, where it shoud be, then in any perfection of virtues. This he did to
make S. Augustines words sound in an ignorant ear more clearly against
Justice and Justification mantayned by Catholics. For he can not but know
that a man may be truly just, and yet not exercise all virtues in their
highest perfection.

Now that the reader may learn what is the true meaning of S. Augustine in
this place: he is to conceive that the drift of that father here is, to show
that a man can not live in this life in that perfect and true peace of mind as
to exercise virtue and flee vice without all sudden reluctatio^ of our
sensuality though we give no assent thereunto: and therefore the title of that
Chapter is. De pace seruientium deo etc. Of the peace of such as serve God,
whose perfect tranquillity can not be enjoyed in this temporal life. And
according to this his title, some few lines after the sentence alleged by M.
White, he thus writes. Nam profecto quanquam imperetur etc. For although
reason does ouerule vice: yet it does not ouerrule without some conflict of
vice. And therefore as long as it is exercysed in commanding and ouerruling
vice, man haith not perfect peace. But to end this subject of Justification,
here you see how dexterously our minister haith borne him self, who for the
impugning of the same, haith several ways abused the sentences of his
Authors, sometimes by insertions of his own as if they were the Authors words:
sometimes by taking away and concealing what is there plainly set down:
othertimes, though the Authority be truly alleged, yet by violent detortinge
and wresting the place from the true intended sense, yea often when the very
place strongly fortifyeth that Catholic point or doctrime against which it is
theare brought. Thus though M. White in his deprauations uses several shows
and colors: yet they all retain in them one general countenance and look
of deceit and falshoode, so as the Poets sentence here houldeth Facies non
omnibus vna, nec diuersa tamen.

Chapter 2. Concerning the reading of the Scriptures.
The 1 Paragraph. S. Jerome corrupted for the reading of the scriptures by the
vulgar people: where also upon occasion given by M. White, it is examined
whether S. Jerome was a papiste.
IT being a certain truth that from Scriptures evil understood proceed most
heresies, M. White (a faithful friend thereof) well knowing by daily experience
that no one thing in truth is more available either for the first beginning
or propagation of heresy then general liberty granted to the vulgar people
of reading, and expounding the sacred Scriptures, does thereupon much labor in
sundry places in proof of his supposed commodity and necessity thereof:
amongst which he grossly abuses the authority and person of that great and most
Catholic Doctor S. Hierome in these words. page 22. Hierome writes of Paula a
gentlewoman how she set her maids to learn the Scripture, and many of his
wrytinges (says White) are directed to women, commending their labor in the
Scripture, and encouraging them thereunto etc. which he would not have done if
he had been a papist.

Hear Christian reader I must confess I rest very doubtful whether the
malice of this minister is more to be detested, or his great folly to be
admyred and pityed: for not contenting him self to corrupt S. Hieromes words
and meaning, he will needs infer hereof that S. Hierome was noe papiste,
which how true it is, I will only for this present appeal unto this Epitaph
of S. Paula written by this holy Doctor to the Virgin Eustochium and here cyted
by our protestant minister: whereby if it do not plainly appear by sundry
points of religion there mentioned and practiced that S. Hierome, S. Paula,
and the Bishops, Preistes, and people of those times were of the same Religion
or belief which Catholics now profess, and protestants impugn: that then
let me be enrolled in the black bill of lying ministers, or coopled in
brotherhood with White, as a legitimate son of the father of lies.

First then S. Hierome undertaking to set down the blessed life and death of
the holy woman S. Paula, in proof of his sincere proceeding therein, makes
this protestation. I call Jesus to witness and his Saints, yea that very
Angel who was keeper and companion of this admirable woman, that I will speak
nothing in her favor, or after the manner of flaterers, but for a testimony,
and that which is less then her merits, whom the whole world does praise,
preistes admyre, quiers of virgins desire, and troops of Monks and poor
people bewail. Is the invocation of Saints and Angels which of necessity
supposes their knowledge? is the belief of every man's proper Angel to guard
him? and quiers or companies of Virgins and Monks, plain proofs of Catholic
or protestant religiou?

To proceed, S. Hierome describing in particular her pilgrimage to the holy
land whereunto he affirms that men of all Nations did come; shows how that
prostrating her self before the Cross, she adored at though she had seen our
Lord harging thereupon. Entering the Sepulcher, she kissed the stone of the
Resurrection etc. and at one thirsting desires waters, she licked with her
faithful mouth the very place of the body wheare our Lord had laid. Then
having visited the pillour at the which our Lord was bound and whipped, and
the place where the holy Ghost did descend upon the faithful: she went to
Bethelem, where entering our Saviors cave, and looking at the holy June of the
Virgin, and the stable, after many other devout speeches she uttered these
words. And I wretch and sinner am thought worthy to kiss the manger in which
our Lord a little babe cried, and to pray in the cave in which the Virgin
brought forth our Lord an infant. After this amongst sundry other holy places,
she went unto the Sepulchers of the 12 Patriarchs where she trembled being
affrighted with many wonders, for she saw the devils roar being dyuersly
tormented: and before the sepulchers of the Saints she saw men howling like
wolves, barking like dogs, roaringe like lions, hissing like serpents, and
belowing like bulls etc. And is not all this with a protestant papisticall
superstition? Will our White allow of pilgrimage to holy places? or will he
with S. Paula prostrate him self before the Cross and worshipe? will he kiss
sacred Relics? or will he attribute such sanctity to the Sepulchers of
Saints that in presence thereof devils are tormented? I persuade my self he
will not. And yet S. Hierome (with him noe papist) relates the promises to
the commendation of Paula.

But to come nearer the manner of life which S. Paula led, her daily practice
being best witness of her belief, having visited with great devotion all the
places of the holy land, intending to spend her life in holy Bethelem she
stayed there in a strait lodging for the space of three years until she had
built Cells, and Monasteries, and Mansions for diverse pilgrims: where she
lived in such humility as, being attended with many virgins, in her apparel,
speech, habit, and going, she was the least or basest^ of all. After her
husbands death, until her own, slenever with any man though she knew him to
be holy and a Bishope. Bathes she went not to but in danger. In her greatest
agues she used not soft beds, but reposed on the hard ground covered with
hair clothes etc. Thou would have thought fountains of tears to have
proceeded from her: yea she so bewailed little sins as that thou would have
judged her guilty of greatest crimes etc. Soft linnens and precious silks she
changed with a sharp hair cloth etc. Her love of poverty was such, as that
she desired she might dye a beggar, and not to leave one penny to her daughter,
yea her self at her death to be wrapped in an others sheet. And as for her
diet, her abstinence was such, as that ( festival days excepted) she scarce
took oil in her meat, by which may be judged (says S. Jerome) what she
thought of wine, of any things molted, of fish, milk, honey, eggs, and the rest
which are pleasant to taste. If I should now ask Master White whether his wife
for example being no doubt an Evangelical sister of highest perfection, him
self being often absent about preaching of the word, whether, I say, in his
conscience he thinks her modesty such, as that at such times (to speak
sparingly) she does not often both eat and drink with his Clarcke and other
neighbors: as also whether for the mortifying of the flesh and the quickening
of the spirit, she changes a soft bed into the hard ground, or fine linnens
into hayre-cloth: and in breife whether without all exceptions of days, not
fish, milk, or eggs, but the daintiest flesh and most delicate wine, be meats
most welcome to him and her? I doubt not but he will answer me that none of
these agrees with the fashion of these times. But thereto then must I needs
reply, that therefore neither must he be much grieved if his foresaid yokefelow
grow wanton in the lord, hard bed, hair cloth, and fasting (the best external
preservatives against such impurities) being utterly abandoned. And yet if the
like question should be proposed unto me in regard of Catholics, all
Christian Countries would answer with me, that the said austerities of B.
Paula are not only imitated and practiced by Religious persons, but even by
wives, widows, and Virgins which live in the world.

But to touch yet one point further, wherein I suppose all protestants will
disclaim as being incompatible with their new gospels liberty, which was S.
Paula her Monastical life, whereof S. Hierome says, I will speak of the
order of her Monastery etc. Besides the Monastery of men which she had given to
men to be governed, she divided the Virgins etc. as well noble, as of the
meanest and lowest degree, into three companies and Monasteries etc. After
Alleluia song or sounded, (by which sign they were called to Collect or
prayer) it was not lawful for any of them to stay etc. In the morning, at the
Third hour, at the Sixth, the Ninth, Even song, and Midnight, they song the
Psalter by order or course.

And now follows Whytes proof of their protestancy, neither was it lawful
for any of the Sisters to be ignorant of the Psalms, or not to learn something
daily out of the sacred Scriptures. But what is this against us, who allow not
only Religious women such as these wear, (Whom M. White most fraudulently
calls Paul's maids) but even the laity to read the Scriptures, supposing
they be known to be humble, discreet, and virtuous. And yet in what manner S.
Paula her self, and her daughter Eustochium being both well learned, did it, S.
Hierome a little after expresses in these words. She forced me that together
with her Daughter, she might read the old and new Testament, I declaring it:
(me disserente) which in modesty denying, yet through her importunities and
often entreaties, I performed, that so I might teach what I had learned, not of
my self, that is presumption the worste master, but of the famous men of the
Church. And when in any point I doubted and ingeniously confessed my self to be
ignorant, yet she would not rest but with daily entreaty enforced me out of
many and diverse senses, to show that which to me seemed most probable.

Would not any man think this minister distracted, thus producing against us
that which confounds him self? Do not these Religious women in reading of the
Scriptures require S. Hierome a Priest for their master? Does not he profess
to teach them, not what he had learned himself, or from many imaginary spirit,
but from the famous men or Doctors of the Church? Yea does not he plainly and
humbly acknowledge his doubting and ignorance in his explication thereof; none
of which I am sure is orthodoxall with protestants.

But to return to S. Paula and her Virgins in the monastery. They had all one
habit alyke; Lynnens they used only for wyping of their hands. Their
separation from men was such, as she severed them even from Eunuchs. Besides
sustenance and apparel, she suffered them not to possess any thing. Such as
were talkatyue and unquiet, she caused (in penance) to pray at the doare of the
refectory and to eat alone.

I might recyte many other like, but these abundantly prove that M. Whytes
maids were indeed Nonnes or Religious women, whereof good store to gods
greater glory even our Counrtie does as yet daily afforde.

Now for a conclusion I will breefely note what S. Hierome relates of her
death. As first having offered up many devout prayers unto god almighty, being
almost speachlesse, she signed her lips with the sign of the Cross, a
devotion also used in her life time, as imputing much virtue thereunto, which
S. Hierome before, mentioned in these words. When she had signed her mouth and
her stomach, endeavoring by the impression of of the Cross to mitigate her
grief. etc. At her death were present the Bishopes of Jerusalem, and of
other Cities, and an innumerable multitude of Preistes and Leuits, yea all the
Monastery was filled with Virgins and Monks, Some of the Bishops carried the
Coffin, and the rest goinge before carried Lamps and CANDLES, and Led the
Singers. etc. In the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Syrian Language Psalms were
song, not only for three days, but even for a whole week. And in the end of
all, this blessed Doctor as supposing her in heaven, inuocateth saying. a
Farewell o Paula, Vale o Paula and Cultoris tui vltima^ se nectutem ora tionibus
iuua fides and opera ^ ^ate Christo sociant: praesens facilius quod pos tulas
impe^rabis.
and help with thy prayers the old age of him who worshippeth thee: thy faith
and works do join thee with Christ, being present thou shall obtain more
easily what thou ask.

Out of these premises I may easily infer that not only S. Jerome, but even
th Bishopes, Preistes, and people of his time, did wholly agree with us
Catholics in the points following. viz, (1) Worshipping and Invocation of
Saints. (2) That every one haith an Angel guardian or keeper. (3) Pilgrimage
to holy places. (4) Adoration of the Cross: (5) and signing the body with the
sign thereof. (6) Kissing and reuerencing of Relickes. (7) Tormenting of
devils at the Sepulchers of Saints (8) Building of Monasteries and profession
of Monastical life. (9) Voluntary poverty. (10) Wearing of haircloth and no
linnens at all: and lying upon the ground in steed of a bed. (11) Abstinence
from flesh, wine, and other dainty meats upon devotion. (12) Keeping set hours
of prayer, as in the morning, at the Third, the Sixth, the Ninth, Evensong, and
a Midnight. (13) The difference of little and great sins. (14) The unlearned
reading the Scriptures having a learned man for their Master. (15) The
learned confessing their doubtinge and ignorance in their explication of the
Scriptures. (16) Bishopes and Preist^ a singing and carrying of Candles in the
day time at the burials of the dead. (17) Church service song and used in the
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Syrian language^. And for the Conclusion as
including many things in one, remember S. Ieromes prayer made to S. Paula
after her death. Vale o Paula, and Cultoris tui vlt^^am senectu^^^ orationibus
iuua: fides and opera tua Christo te sociant, praesens facilius quod postulas
imp^trabis.

And now let any man judge whether S. Jerome was a papist; as also what
wisdom, learning, or honesty M. White shows in objecting that which but
truly seen and considered, does manifestly confound and condemn himself.

The 2. Paragraph. S. Cyrill of Alexandria abused for the same purpose.
It was the reproach (says White page 22) that Julian the Tpostatalaide on
Christians, that their women were medlers with the Scriptures: and from him the
papists have borrowed it: for which he cyteth Cyril. Alex. Iul. l.6. If our
Minister had cyted Julian reprehending the ancient Christians of his time for
not Adoring Iubiter, and adoring the Cross, and making the sign thereof in
their forheades, and upon houses (the lawfulnes and profit whereof S. Cyrill
defends) he might have truly showed what him self and other heritikes had
borrowed from Julian in impugning the worship of the Cross, and signing
therewith: but in that which he obiecteth in the behalf of women meddling with
Scriptures, him self borrows from Julian the liberty of lyinge, for Julian
only reprehendeth Christ and his Apostles, for that for that they propounded
the heavenly preaching unto all calling unto their doctrine men and women of
baifer sort, which S Cyrill defends, showing thereby the benignity of our
Savior, but as for mention of the Scriptures or women meddling therewith, he
haith no word at all: our black-whyte haith only invented it to prove him self
a true Apostata.

Chapter. 3. Concerning the Church and the Pope.
The 1. Paragraph. Vincentius Li^inensis wilfully corrupted in proof that the
true Church may err.
WE will now take into our consideration his corrupt proceeding concerning the
supposed general erring of the whole Church, not remembering that in regard of
Christ's solicitude, care, and affection to his Spouse, it is said Cant. 1. My
well-beloved is a cluster of Cypre unto me in the vyneyardes of Engaddi. That the
universal Church may err he laboreth to euict from the testimony of old
Vincentius Lirinensis whom our minister page 83. makes thus to speak Aduers.
proph. nouit. ca. 4. Not only some portion of the Church, but the whole Church
it self is blotted with some new contagion. Observe the true words of this
Father, and then you can not but admyre to find such Blacknes in White, and
such perfidiousnes in him who styleth him self a minister of Gods word, for
thus the words do lie in latin. (Quod si) nouella aliqua contagio non iam
portiunculam tantum sed toram pariter ecclesiam commaculare (conetur.) What is
to be done if, some contagion (shall endeavor) to blot not any one part, but
the whole Church? then (says he further) must a man be careful to cleeue to
antiquity. Now here our D. abuses his reader in two sorts: one way in
concealing the word Conetur, and so commaculare conetur he translateth is
blotted, and consequently making Vincentius to confess (for our minister most
impudently says) that the whole Church is actually blotted with some contagion
of heresy, whereas at the most he says that heresy may endeavor to blott the
whole Church. But who knows not that every thing which is endeavored to be
effected, is not actually effected? Another way in delivering these words in a
Categoricall and absolute Ennuntiation which are Hypotheticall or spoken merely
of a supposal as appears by the first words Quid si, which M. White thought
good not to translate. The difference of which two kind of propositions, is
very markable as every young Sophister knows: as for example if a man do say,
what if diverse of Suffolk do report that M. White is extremely given to his
belly and to Epicurisme, and to say. Diverse of Suffolk report that M. White is
extremely given to his belly and to Eicurisme: where we see the first is merely
of a doubtful surmise and supposition, the second is a peremptory and absolute
proposition that they do so reporte^ the truth or falshode whereof
(notwithstanding any intelligence whatsoever) I here quietly pass over.

The 2. Paragraph. The Rhemistes corrupted for the Churches inuisibility.
Now to the next point which consists in the mantayning of a Mathematical,
aety, and invisible Church: for the vphoulding whereof among others he
strengthens his cause with the supposed confession of the Rhemistes, thus
bringing the whole College of Rhemes upon the stage to speak in the dialect of
protestants: and so sorteably thereto he styleth that page 88. and some other
pages in this manner. The Papists also say the Church it invisible. The words
wherewith he charge the^ in this point are these, upon the 2. These. ca. 2. It
is very like (be it spoken under the correction of Gods Church and all learned
Catholics) that this great defection or revolt, shall not be only from the
Roman Empire, but especially from the Roman Church, and withal from most
points of Christian Religion: for that near to the time of Antichrist and the
consummation of the world, there is like to be a great revolt of Kingdoms,
People, and Provinces from the external open obedience and communion thereof.
For the few days of Antichrists reign, the external state of the Roman
Church, and the public intercourse of the faithful with the same may cease.

Here good Reader let me entreat thee to arest and stay thine eye and judgment
a while, to observe what strange corruptions he is forced to practice before he
(...) make an Israelite to speak a Babilonians language. This place as you
find it here urged, bears a fair show to prove by the Rhemistes confession,
that the Church may somtymes be invisible: and yet in this very place being
truly set down in their own words, they do affirm that the Church shall at
no time be invisible. Their true words are these. It is very like (be it
spoken under correction of Gods Church and all learned Catholics) that this
great defection and revolt, shall not be only from the Roman Empire, but
especially from the Roman Church, and withal from most points of Christian
religion (not that the Catholic Christians either in the time of Antichrist or
before, shall refuse to obey the same, but) for that near to the time of
Antichrist and consummation of the world, there is like to be a great revolt
of Kingdoms, people, and Provinces, from the open external obedience and
communion thereof. etc. when for the few days of Antichrists reign, the
external state of the Roman Church, and public intercourse of the faithful
with the same way cease (yet the due honor and obedience of Christians
toward it, and Communion in heart with it, and practice thereof in secret and
open confession thereof (if occasion require) shall not cease, no more then it
does now in the Christians of Cyprus and other places where open intercourse is
forbidden.

Here now the parcels of this testimony which are purposly omitted, do show
that the Rhemistes do even peremptorily affirm that gods Church shall never
(no not in the time of Antichrists greatest persecutions) be latent and
invisible. Thus does our M. you see upon a sudaine break of with the Rhemistes
in alleging their words: yet after some line or two courteously joins with
them again, and then after that once more unkindly leaves them to them selves:
and all this in one poor testimony. And here good reader thou art to take
notice of an other sleight of our minister touching this particular place. For
whereas he in the first Edition of his book, which I here follow, sets down
the Rhemistes words, as thou see above, in no sort intimating that any one
word of their said testimony is pretermitted: he in some other of his Editions
(as it should seem being advertised that this his egregious corruption was
espied by his adversaries, and thought therefore in some sort to salve the
matter) haith at the last words where he breaks of from the rest of the
whole sentence, added a virgula, or line as this, -- ingeniously forsooth to
acknowledge that he omitteth some part of the sentence. But this I say avails
him nothing: for first it does not warrant his sincerity in his first Edition.
Again, though in alleging of a testimony we are not bound to set down every
word thereof, yet (as I have before premonished) that which is omitted ought to
be impertinent to the main point for which the testimony is produced. But
subtily to pretermit with an etc. or some such like marck, that which
punctually does touch or explicate the true sense of the sentence alleged, and
that directly contrary to that construction there pretended (as here it falls
out: it is no less then most impious corrupting and corrading of other men's
writings. And therefore I say M. White is nothing aduantaged hereby, but does
for the time plaster one evil with an other evil: but no meruell, for it is a
high mystery amongst heritikes to support deceit with deceit, till at the
length all do tumble down with it own weight, and so erit nouissimus error
petor priori. Mat. 7.

Thr 3 Paragraph. S. Augustine corrupted concerning the same subject of the
Churches inuisibility.
In like sort page 103. he alleges S. Augustine de bap. con. Don. li. 6. ca.
4. thus to say. The Church may be so obscured, that the members thereof shall
not know one an other. S. Augustines words are these and none other: Idem
spiritus Sanctus ea dimitit qui datus est omnibus sanctis sibi Charitate
cohaerentibus sieve se nouerint corporaliter sieve non nouerint. The same holy
Ghost which it given to all the Saints (or holy men) agreing together in
Charity, whether they know one an other or not, remitteth the sins. But what
is this to the inuisibility of the Church? or by what Sintax or Grammar can M.
W. translate thus the former latin lines? Finally by what sublimation or art
can he extract such a refyned sense from the bare minerals of the former
words. Neither can he slubber the matter over in saying that he here gathers
only some necessary Illation, proving the Churches latency: for the sentence
alleged by him is set down in a different letter of caracter from his own,
and he there perticularly gives them as the very words. Now S. Augustine in
that place, does not so much as glance at the Churches visibility or
inuisibility, but there showing how sins are remitted as effectually by the
bad preistes as the virtuous, proves it by Anology of reason, to wit, that the
power of the holy Ghost may as well be given to a wicked Priest, as to a good
and virtuous, as it is given alyke to all the godly though they know not one an
other. But M. White fynding that parcel of the sentence, sine nouerint se
corporaliter sieve non nouerint, to be meant of the faithful and virtuous,
thought presently that he lighted upon a booty, and so hoping thereby to
entrappe the incautelous reader, was the more easily induced to create the
world of this his deprauation out of a mere nothing of a sound of words. And
thus far of his corruptions touching the Churches inuisibility: from the
mantayning whereof we Catholics do so far disclame as that even in the most
tempesteous and raging times of persecution that either have or shall happen,
we acknowledge innumerable members thereof to be ever visible, and in faith
permanent and immovable: for we read that the beams of the house of Christ
his Spouse are Cedars, the rafiens are of fur. Can. ^.

The 4. Paragraph. Doctor Stapleton abused in behalf of the Protestants
marks of the Church.
The next corruption which I here will show shall be concerning the marks of
the Church, whear^ he to prove that we absolutely embrace the marks thereof
delivered by the Protestants, to wit, the proaching of the word, as
acknowledging it to be a more infallible mark to every Christian, then our
Catholic marks are, Antiquity, Succession, Universality, etc. all which
notes he after endeuoreth to confute. To this end (I say) page 105. he
produces Doctor Stapleton thus writing. princip. doctrinal. li 1. ca. 22. The
preaching of the Gospel is the proper and a very clear note of the Catholic
Church, so it be done by lawful Ministers.

Mark hear how he declares this authors meaning by concealing the words in
him that there are immediately subioyned, for thus that Catholic Doctor.
Praedicationem Euangelii. We grant that the preaching of the Gospel by
lawful Ministers, is a very clear and proper note of the Catholic Church
(H^c est enim ordinaria etc for by this is that ordinary and perpetual
Succession of Bishops, Preistes, and Pastors d^ryued in a continued order even
from the Apostles them selves to us.) From which latter part of the sentence
purposly omitted by M. W. it is evident that D. Stapleton does allow the
preaching of the Gospel by lawful pastors, so far forth only to be a note of
the Church, as it is included in the Catholic note of Succession and in no
other sense: which point is made more clear (besides his main drift in that
Chapter and diverse others of the said book being to confute the Protestants
notes) by the said Doctors words also concealed by M. White, which do
immediately precede the sentence urged by him. For there speaking of the
preaching of the Gospel, and of the ministration of the Sacraments, he says.
Ad^menta and ornamenta. These are furthere ^^^es and ornaments of the true
Church, non ipsius nota and insignia, but not marks or signs thereof. Here you
see how Ieweshsly M. White haith circumcysed this poor Authority in paring
away both the first and latter part thereof. But seeing his inexcusable
faultines not only in this place but in most of his deprauationes, is to set
down one part of a testimony and fraudulently to hyde an other part: let him
remember the greouous punishment inflicted by the Apostle upon Ananias for
bringing half, and concealing the other half. Act.5.

The 5. Paragraph. Gregory Valentia corrupted in behalf of the Protestants
marks of the Church.
In proof of the Protestants marks of the Church, to wit. Truth of doctrine
and administration of the Sacraments, M. White page 137. alleges Valentia
Com. Theol. Tom. 3. disp. 1.9.1. punct. 7. parag. 18. saying. Among whomsoever
the truth of Doctrine and Sacraments are houlden: thereby it is known the
Church is there. But for the true displaying of this baise iugling minister, I
will set down the words at large as that learned Author delivered them him
self. Nos autem fatemur (says he) neque veritate d^ctrinae neque legitimo
sacramentorum vsu Ecclesiam Christi carere posse: and apud quos haec omnino
sint salua, exiis constare veram Ecclesia^. Sed negamus tamen veritatem
doctrinae, and legitimum sacramentorum vsum, idoneas notas esse discernendae
Ecclesiae'. But we confess that the Church of Christ can neither want truth
of doctrine, nor lawful use of Sacraments, and amongst whom these are
altogether saife (or sincere) of them to consist the true Church. But yet we
deny the truth of doctrine and lawful use of Sacraments, to be fit marks of
discerning the Church.

Here M. Doctor first I must admire the profundity of your indgment, producing,
by an unknown kind of policy, a most famous learned man contradicting him self
in one and the same sentence, yea not only contradictinge the title of his
disputation which is the Marckes of the Church which the sectaries assign are
evidently confuted, but even the many and different profes which for six pages
he continues against the said marks assigned by protestants. But because
this so great an oversight is more then probable, let us examine brefely your
demeanor toward him. You alledg in a different letter as though they were
the Authors express words, these following. Among whomsoever the truth of
doctrine and Sacraments are houlden: thereby it is known the Church is there.
Him self says Apud quos haec omuino sint salna: ex iis constare veram
Ecclesiam. Amongst whom these are altogether sincere: of them to consist the
true Church. That which Valentia speaks of the persons of whom the Church
consists: your worship pleases to apply to the marks by which it is to be
known, as though there wear no difference betwixt the members of the Church,
and the external badges and tokens whereby the said church is discerned. But
peradu^nture you will pretend for your excuse, the alleging in the merge^t of
your book these latin words, ex us constare veram Ecclesi^m. But the truth is
this does rather plead you guilty of gross ignorance in not knowing how to
translate aright, or as I rather think, of labored and affected malice, who
having seen and perused the place, would so desperately produce it against the
manifest sense of the words and the direct intention of the Author. And
though the word constare, does not only signify to consist or stand, but
som-tymes likewise to be manifest or known, yet in the place cyted neither the
words precedent nor subsequent, nor the scope or ^rift of the Author will
permit it, yea they all convince and conclude the contrary. But if it were
lawful for me M. White in words Amphibologicall which have a double sense,
without all respect either to the subject or matter treated, the intention of
the speaker, or other circumstance, to translate or apply the word only for
mine own advantage: I would easily defend against your learne^st Doctor-ship,
sund^y of the celestial signs to be living and sensible creatures, and so
much more to be estee^ed t^en your self: for I would likewise, upon the same
^round, defend your self to be no substance, but a mere accident: Into such
gross absurdities does your beggarly heres^e ever plunge you.

The 6 Paragraph. Bellarmine egregiously corrupted against the Marks of the
Church.
M. White desiring to extenuate the worth, and to obscure the splendour of those
glorious marks which the Catholic Church as so many clear rays most
plentifully affords, produces page 137. Cardinal Bellarmine as saying. They
make it not evidently true, that is the Church, but evidently probable. Here M.
D. as it semes wanted lantorne and candle light: but most certainly he wanted
either honesty, or knowledge, or both: in best confirmation whereof, I will
only set down the words of Bellarmine him self de notes eccl. lib. 4. ca.
3. Est autem initio obseruandum, Ecclesiam Catholicam esse etc. It is in the
beginning to be observed that the Catholic Church is a Soon which on every
side powers out the clearest beams of light, so that by them she may most
easily be known. For she haith many Marks or testimonies, and signs which
discerns her from all false religions of Paganes, Jews, Heritykes. And they
do not make it evidently true that she is the true Church of God, but yea they
make it evidently `credible: for that is said evidently true that is seen
either in it self or in it principles: that is said evidently credible which is
not seen either in it self or in it principles, yet (which) haith so many,
and so grave Testimonies, as that every wise man deservedly ought to believe it.

Here the minister, all excuses set apart, must needs confess that he haith
falsely corrupted the text of Bellarmine, changing this parcel evidently
credible, into evidently probable, between which two there is no less
difference, then betwixt him self and an honest man, which is not small. For
example, if but one hundredth of learned and sincere writers, should confess
that D. White had corrupted th^^ books in sundry places, this confession would
make it evidently credible that D. White were an impostor, or deceauer, a
mercionary minister and the like: but if only two or three should avouch it
and as many of equal authority deny it, then it were but evidently probable:
If the matter were brought to this issue, him self would plainly see the
greateste difference betwixt these two. And I dare bouldly say that with lesser
labor I will ^^panell an hundredth, who will all give their verdictes against
his soulest forgeries, then him self a coople to answer in his behalf.

But speak M. White (once) in good sincerity, why did you translate it
evidently probable? was it to make the Cardinal for his learning and sanctity
most Illustrious, to speak as ignorantly as a protestant minister? Do not your
so foul and frequent corrupting of his writings, make it more then probable,
yea evidently credible, that no other means is left you to euade the force of
his Arguments? Well my wholesome advise is this, if you presume to read
Bellarmine, be less conversant with Bacchus.

The 7. paragraph. S. Thomas foully corrupted concerning the popes authority.
M. White is not ashamed to affirm that we take all authority and sufficiency
from the Scripture, and give it to the Church, and finally the Churches
authority to the Pope. and thereupon insinuates that we houlde that the Pope
at his pleasure is able even to stamp or create a new faith or Creed never
before heard of. To this end he alleges page 68. this saying out of S. Thomas.
2. ^^. quest 1. ar. 10. The making of a new Creed belongs to the Pope as all
other things do which belong to the whole Church, thus insimulating all
Catholics within this error as houlding that the chang of the articles of
our Creed, rests upon the change of the Popes mind therein.

For the fuller discovery of this diabolical deprauation (for I can term it
no better) I will here set down at large the words of S. Thomas. Thus then he
says. Ad solam authoritatem Summi Pontificis pertinet noua Editio Symbols etc.
A new Edition of the Creed, belongs to the Pope, as all other things do
which concern the whole Church. And then some few lines after follows (which
belyke the Doctors hand would have aked to have written down. Haec noua Editio
Symboli, non quidem aliam fidem continet, sed eandem magis expositam. This new
Edition of the Creed conteyneth not an other faith but the former more fully
explicated. Here our minister haith practiced his profession of corrupting two
ways, first in translating noua Editio Symboli, The making of a new Creed,
whereas it should be The new Edition of the Creed thus causing the newnes to
consist in the newnes of our belief or Creed, and yet as you see in S. Thomas
the word new, is joined only with the Edition or explication of the Creed.
Secondly in retayning from the Reader those other latter words which do
express S. Thomas his meaning therein, to wit, that no new faith or Creed
contrary to the first is decreed thereby, but the former only is more fully
explicated, the reason whereof he thus delivers even in the same paragraph.
In doctrina Christi and Apostoloris etc. The truth of faith is sufficiently
explicated in the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles: but because wilful men
do pervert, to their own destruction, the doctrine of the Apostles and
Scriptures: therefore it was necessary that there should be in process of
time, an explication of faith against all ensuing erroures. Here you have
manifested the true reason of S. Thomas his former words: and consequently
here is discovered che uncharitable impudency of our minister, to divorce the
said words from their legitimate and maine sense: but it seems that he
professing him self a public adversary to the catholic Religion, thinks it
justifiable to impugn the same by any deceitful or indir^ct stratagems
whatsoever. Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat. Virg.

The 8 Paragraph. Doctor Stapleton corrupted concerning the same subject.
In like sort to show to his Reader what s^pposed transcendency of sovereignty
and power the Catholics give to the Pope: he, page 68. thus writes.
Stapleton Praefat. princip. fidei doctrinal. says. The foundation of our
Religion is of necessity placed upon the authority of this man's teaching
(meaning of the Pope) in which we hear god him self speaking. In all that
Preface I assure thee good Reader, there is no such saying at al; and therefore
it is merely forged by our calumnious minister, thereby first to suggest that
we make the Pope the foundation of our faith which we asscribe to Christ Jesus
only. Secondly that we bear the ignorant in hand that we account the Pope as
an other God: the nearest words in that Preface that can bear any resemblance
at all to these, I will here set down. Quae prima sunt fidei nostrae elementa
etc. Such points as are the first elements or principles of our faith, and yet
the baises or foundation thereof as the true Catholic and Apostolic Church of
God, the necessary and infallible power of the Church to teach and Judge matters
of faith, the persons in whom this power remains, the means which the said
persons, ought and are accustomed to use in judging and teaching, the chief
heads or branches about which this power is exercysed, as to determine some
certain and authentical Canon of Scripture, to give the undoubted and
au^henticall interpreta^ion thereof, and finally (besides the decreeing of the
Canon of the Scripture) to deliver and command the unwritten. Articles of faith:
all these I say, which are principia doctrinalia, doctrinall principles of our
faith, and which do teach, confirm, and explain, the same, the heritikes of
our unfortunate time, have most fowly denied, contaminated, and depraved.

How many wheels and deductions of inferences here need we before we can draw
out M. Whytes alleged sense, and yet he delivers it in a different letter
with the vshering words of, Stapleton says, as though they were the very
precise words of the said Author; or what is given more to the Pope then to
the rest hear specifyed? Yet our minister blushed not to particularyze, what
here is spoken in respect of the principles of faith in general, only to the
pope. Again, his slight further appears in taking the word foundation, in
an equivocal and dooble sense, for he will needs accept it (to make the
saying more odious) for that which is an essential and primative foundation of
faith, (which is Christ Jesus) whereas D. Stapleton here means (according to
the title of his book) Principia fidei doctrinalia, only Doctrinall
principles or Secondary foundations, which as him self says fidem docent,
confirmant, explicant, do teach, confirm, and explain our faith. Thus the
further we dog him in his allegations, the more we shall be assured that
deprauing and strangely detorting the wrytinges of Catholic Doctors, and the
Fathers, is (among the rest) those feeble supportes whereupon his cause leans.

The 9 paragraph. S. Ciprian strangely handled against Appeals to Rome.
It haith ever been the course of former heritikes not only with contumelies
to disgrace the deserved renown of the Popes and Church of Rome, but also with
their subtilty and corruption falsely to detracte from their just authority
and prerogatives. In which kind our minister (to show him self lawfully
descended) in proof of his dislyke of Appeals from other Bishopes to the
Bishopes of Rome: produces page 188 S. Ciprian in these words, Nay Ciprian
says. The unity of Bishopes is broken, when even run from their own, to
the Bishope of Rome. which words (if they had been true) being much material,
caused me diligently to peruse the Epistle quoted: but indede agreeable to my
expectation, I found none such, and therefore truly deemed them to be framed in
the fournace of M. Whytes forgeries.

And though in the Epistle cyted, S. Ciprian reprehe^deth certain heritikes,
who being iudicially co^uicted in Africa, sailed to Rome with the merchandise
of their lyes^ endeavoring by their subtle and cunning rashness, to break the
concord of Bishopes, yet was he so far from disprouing of any lawful Appeal
to Rome, as that in the same place he avouches Rome to be the Chair of Peter,
and principal Church from whence preistly unity aryseth: yea he scorned the
said heritykes as not knowing^ the Romans to be those unto whom untruth could
have no access: and withal further affirming that the truth should sail
after them to Rome, which with proof of the thing certain should convince
their lying tongues. All which does plainly make known S. Ciprianes true
conceit of Romes superiority: and indeed does strongly confirm our Catholic
doctrine concerning Appeals. For if those heritykes censured by the Bishopes
of Africa to avoid their present punishment appealed to Rome: no doubt this
argues that Appeals to Rome were in use as then, and though the Appellantes
were heritykes, yet in that otherwise their Appeal had been plainly, vain,
foolish, and fruitless: it manifestly supposes the foresaid Authority of
admitting Appeals to reside in the Bishope of Rome. Further though S. Ciprian
reprehended them being lawfully convicted for their further Appealing and not
submitting them selves to their immediate Pastors: yet does he nowhere so much
as insinuate upon just occasions the unlawfulness of Appeals, but even in this
very place does imply the contrary by his sending after the foresaid heritikes
to the Roman Church to inform her of the truth: which, if it had not been in
regard of her foresaid Superiority or Primacy, had been altogether neede-les,
and peradventure inconvenient.

And whereas M. White a little before cyteth these words of S. Ciprian, unless
peradventure a few desperate and graceless persons think the Authority of the
Bishopes in Africa that judged them to be less: it is plain by the text that
he makes not this comparison with the Bishop of Rome, but with those
heretical Bishopes which were censured and condemned by the Bishopes of
Africa. To conclude when M. White shows me in the Epistle cyted of S. Ciprian
these words objected, the unity of Bishopes is broken, when men run from
their own to the Bishope of Rome: I will publicly declaime him the cuningest
Optician, or rather Magician, that the whole ministry of England affords.

The 10 Paragraph. The Rhemists abused concerning the Authority of the Church
Again page 119. our fraudulent Doctor labors much to induce his credulous
Readers to believe; that we hold that the Church can at her pleasure make that
Scripture which is not, and unmake that which once is scripture, thereupon
saying, that the papists have a principle among them, that the Scripres receive
all their authority from the Church. he seeks to prove it in the next lines
from a testimony of the Rhemistes gal. 6. thus alleging them. The Scriptures
are not known to be true, neither are Christians bound to receive them,
without the attestation of the Church. Here again he curtayleth their
sentence, concealing such their words as do lymite the Churches authority
therein, and wherein they do acknowledge an infallible truth of the Scriptures
before any approbation of the Church: therefore you shall have their words
alleged at large. The Scriptures (say they) which are indeed of the Holy
Ghosts indyting, being put into the Churches trial, are found proved and
testified unto the world to be such (and not made true, altered, or amended by
the same) without which attestation of the Church (the holy Scriptures in them
selves were always true before) but not so known to be to all Christians, nor
they so bound to take them.

Here the Rhemistes only say that the truth of the Scriptures can not be made
known to us without the attestation of the Church: And that this is all which
M. White can collect from this testimony which we willingly grant. Yet where
the Rhemistes in this very place do use words of reverence to the Scriptures
and embrace their infallibility, as these, The Scriptures are not made true,
altered, or amended by the Church. And again, without the attestation of the
Church, the holy Scriptures in themselves were always true: As also wheare it
is set down by them in the mergent even in that place. The Church makes not
canonical Scripture, but declares that it is so. These I say, though parcels
of the former sentence or merginall explications thereof, the D. haith after
his accustomed manner most calumniously ouerskipped. Thus it will still be found
that the sphere of this his learned Treatise (what glorious motion soever it
seems hitherto to have in the sight of his ignorant favorites) turns upon
the poles of shame full corruptions, and lying deceiptes.

The 11. Paragraph. Cardinal Cusanus corrupted concerning the same subject.
Again continuing his former project. page 51. he brings in the Cardinal
Cusanus saying Epist. 3. pa. 3. When the Church changes her Judgment; God also
changes his. This he urges to make us mantayne that God does so subject his
judgment to the church, that supposing (for it is a mere supposall) the church
should alter or change any essential or fundamental point of faith
whatsoever, by interpreting the Scripture otherwise then before it did (for M.
White sets this sentence down without any restraint, and so conformably
thereto styleth the page, The sense of Scripture changed with the time) that
then god also does cha^g his mind therein so warrantiug the truth of this new
stamped article. But let us see how the words do lie in Cusanus, thus they
are. Sicut quondam coniugium praeferebatur Castitati etc. As in former times
(meaning in the firster ages of the world) matrimony was preferred by the
Church before Chastity: so was it preferred even by God. But after the Judgment
of the Church being changed therein (meaning after the world was fully peopled)
gods Judgment it changed also. (If therefore the Church does Judge any act to be
of great merit in reguard of the present circumstances, and in an other time
after shall Judge an other act to be of greater value, etc. it is evident that
the greatness of the merit does much depend upon the Judgment of the Church.
Thus what is here spoken only of the diversity of merit of one and the same
action according to the different circumstances of time or place: M. White will
needs extend (besides the intention of the Author) to the chang of any
dogmaticall point how great soever of Religion^ and this he does by nakedly
setting down one line which is the midst of the periode, but subtily
according to his manner omitting both the words precedent (wherein the instance
is given, and whereunto the sense of the former sentence is peculierly tied) as
also the words subseque^t containing the reason thereof. But it seems he
haith vowed with him self never to alledg any one testimony ingeniously and
plainly, seeing his true quotations (i^ any such be) may, for their quantity,
be engraven within a ring, whereas his wilful deprauations do stretch beyond
all reasonable dimension.

The 12 Paragraph. The Canon Law corrupted concerning the Pope.
In nothing more does M. White manifest or continue his implacable hatred or
his dexterity in falsification, then against the Church and Pope of Rome:
amongst many take this example following. page 433. I am affrayd (saih he) I
have been to bold in meddling with these matters: for the Church of Rome haith a
Law within her self, that it is (and then follows in a different letter as
though they were the words of the Canon law) sacriledg to reason about the
Popes doings whose murders are excused like Sampsons, and theftes like the
Hebrews, and Adultries like Jacobs. But here I must charg you with much foul
demeanor: for first you affirm that the words cyted are a Law of the Roman
Church, whereas they are only taken out of the gloss or comment, which is a
thing much different, and of incomparable less authority then the Law it self.
Secondly whereas in the Law it is disputed what censure is to be given when the
case is doubtful whether the Pope haith sinned or not, as by committing
adultry or murder: to which it is answered, that in that case it is to be
presumed in the Popes behalf, yea (says the glosser in this case) sacrilegii
instar esset disputare de facto suo. Vel dic quod facta Papae accusantur vt
homicidia Samsonis, and surta Hehraeorum, and adulterium Jacob. It were like
Sacriledg (in that doubtful case) to dispute of his fact. Or say that the
deeds of the Pope are accused as the murders of Samson, the thefts of the
Hehrues, and the Adultery of Jacob. What is here spoken in defense of the pope
which every Christian ought not to perform in defense of his neighbor, to
wit, in a case doubtful, to think and speak the best? Are not those factes of
Samson, the Hebrews, and Jacob, piously censured by the learned Doctors? But
with what front do you avouch so absolutely and in general, that according to
the law of the Roman Church it is sacriledg to reason about the Popes doings,
whereas the glosser says only In dubiis etc. when the case is doubtful of
the Popes fact, instar sacrilegii etc. It were like Sacriledg to dispute of his
fact. Will you of doubtful premises infer an absolute conclusion? Would you
take it kindly if in a case (admitting it but doubtful) whether a certain
minister had been drunk, should absolutely affirm that the protestants
Church haith a Law within her self, that it is Sacriledg to reason about
ministers doings, whose drunkenes is excused as Noes etc.

The 13. Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted against the^ Popes Authority.
As the former deprauations were practiced in overmuch aduauncing and extolling
the Authority of the Church and Pope: so here on the contrary part he falsely
alleges Bellarmine extenuating and lesning the said power: For thus entytling
the page 167. The papists them selves refuse the Popes Judgment, he labors
to make good this assertion from the confession of Bellarmine, who de Romans Pon.
lib. 4. ca. 7. speaking of S. Ciprian withstanding Pope Stephen touching
rebaptisation; writes (as M. White says) that after the Popes definition, it
was free for Ciprian to think otherwise: our minister intimating hereby to the
Reader, that Bellarmine mantayneth, that it is lawful to believe contrary to
that which is once defyned as a matter of faith by the Pope. Here again he
bestows on his Reader a broken sentence leaving of in the midst thereby to
avoid the setting down of what is most material, for Bellarmines words are
these. Fuit enimpost Pontificis definitionem. etc. It was lawful after the
definition of the Pope to think otherwise as Augustine affirms beoause the
Pope, noluit rem ipsam de fide facere sine generaliconcilio, would not make it
as a matter of Faith without a general Council, but only in the mean time
willed the ancient custom to be observed) And then after, Stephanus no^
defiuiuis rem illam tanquam de fide. P. Stephen did not defyne the matter as a
point of Faith, yet he commanded earnestly that heritykes should not be
rebaptysed.

See here now the integrity of our minister, who purpo^ly concealeth that part
of the sentence which isexpresly contrary to that sense in the which he
alleges the former words thereof. For Bellarmine understands by the words
post definitionem, after it was commanded that rebaptisation should not be
used, and not after it was sententially defined as an article of faith (as M.
Wait seems to force.) Now Catholics do grant that it is lawful to hold
or believe contrary to the practice of what the Pope commands, so that we do^
according to his commandment, and as long as the matter it self is not
definitiuely decreed by the Pope for a dogmaticall point of our belief; and
thus much thereof, from whence we may discern the Ministers inueterate hatred
against the head of Gods Church, who a^swerably thereto speaking of the words
of our Savior Pasce oues meas, thus styleth some of his pages in his Lucian
and scornful phraze, Feed my sheep is not poping. But howsoever to feed in
this place be to pope it: I am sure most egregiously and impudently to corrupt
Authors is to White it.

Chapter. 4. Wherein are discovered sundry corruptions concerning the sacred
Scriptures and Traditions.
The 1. Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted, in behalf of the Scripture proving it
self to be the word of God.
THE next point we are to come to are such his corruptions wherein he
pretends that the Catholics do acknowledge all sufficiency of Scripture
both for the interpreting of it self without any needful explication of the
Church thereof, as also for it fullness in containing expressly all things
necessary to man's salvation, excluding thereby all Apostolical Traditions
whatsoever.

And first page 59. showing that the Scripture is known to be the word of God
without the attestation of the Church which as he houldeth may be deceatfull,
he alleges Bellarmine de verb. des li. 2. ca. 2. thus confessing, (other
means may deceive me) but nothing is more known, nothing more certain then
the Scriptures, that it were the greatest madness in the world not to believe
them etc. See how loath our minister is to cease to be him self, I mean to
cease his notorious corrupting, for the words of Bellarmine are these. Sacris
Scripturis quae Prophetieis and Apostolicis literis continentur, nihil est
notins, nihil certius, vt stultissimum esse necesse sit, qui illis fidem esse
habendam neget. There is nothing more known, nothing more certain, then the
holy Scriptures which are contained in the wryti^ges of the Prophets and
Apostles, in so much that it were a most foolish thing for any man to deny
them.

Here first to make Bellarmine insinuate that he houldeth the authority of the
Church in any thing to be doubtful and uncertain: our minister of his own
brain haith added these words, other means may deceane me, whereas there is
not a fillable thereof in Bellarmine. Secondly this place, as we see, is
produced by him against the authority of the Church, whereas indeed it is
directed against the Swink feldians, who denying the Scriptures, relied upon
their private illuminations, as hereafter shall appear by displaying a strange
corruption, and wresting of Bellarmines saying practiced by M. White in page
17. at the letter q. of which place of Bellarmine, this here alleged is a
parcel. Thus our minister extremely strayneth every Authority that he sets
down, till at the length it burst out into an open and inexcusable corruption.

The 2 Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted in proof that the Scriptures are the
only rule of Faith.
Again page 17. to prove that all points in controversy must definitiuely be
determined by the written word alone without any respect to the Churches
Authority in the explication thereof, he marches owte once again making
Bellarmine his buckler, and thereupon alleges these words of his. The rule
of Faith must be certain and known, for if it be not certain, it is no rule
at all: If it be not known, it is no rule to us, but but nothing is more
certain, nothing better known then the sacred Scriptures contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: wherefore the sacred Scripture is the
rule of Faith most certain and most saife, and God haith taught by corporal
letters which we might see and read, what he would have us believe concerning
him. Observe here the refractory and incorrigible frowardnes of our minister,
and how artificial and exact he shows him self in his art of corrupting: For
Bellarmine in this Chapter (as is above touched) writes against the
Swinkfeldians, who denied the Scripture to be the word of God, and rested
only upon their private and hidden revelations, and answearably hereto the
Title of this Chapter is, Libris qui Canonic^ appella^tur, verbum dei
contineri, That the word of God is contained in those books which are called
Canonical. Now the words at large are thus in Bellarmine. Regula fides, certa
notaque etc. The Rule of faith ought to be certain and known, for if it be
not known, it can be no Rule to us, and if it be not certain, it can be no
Rule at all. But the revelation of the private spirit although in it self it
might be certain, yet to us it can no way be certain, except happily it be
warra^ted with divine testimonies, to wit true miracles. And then some six
lines after. At sacris Scripturis etc. But nothing is more known, nothing more
certain then the sacred Scriptures which are contained in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles. And some forty or fifty lines after. Quare cum sacra
Scriptura Regula crodendi etc. Wherefore seeing the holy Scripture is a most
certain and a most secure rule of belief: doubtless he can not be wise who
neglecting the same commits him self to the judgment of the private spirit
which is often deceiptfull but ever uncertain. And again some twenty lines
after. Non igitur omnes vulgo etc. Teerefore God teaches not all men by
internal inspirations, what he wonld have the faithful to believe of him, or
what they are to do: but it is his pleasure to instruct us by corporal
letters which we might see and read.

Here now I refer this point to the most earneste protestant in England (if
he be Candid and ingenious) with what face M. White could alledg Bellarmine in
this place, to prove from him that the Scripture only is the Judge and Rule of
Faith (for so does the minister entytle that page) thereby to make Bellarmine
to reject all Authority of the Church in exposition thereof, and all
Apostolical Traditions, where we see upon what different occasion from that he
writes in this Chapter against the Swinkfeldians.

Now here let us note the particular sleightes used in this corruption. First
M. White you tie together without any etc. or other word, or note, signifying
the contrary) several sentences of Bellarmine for your greater advantage, as
though one did immediately follow the other, though they lie in Bellarmine
distinct by interposition of many lines. Secondly you have concealed three
several parcels of different sentences expressing Bell. true mind herein: and
all these parcels are even parts (and therefore the fowler fault) of the
sentences alleged by you. Your concealeme^ts are these. Porro priuati Spiritus
reuelatio et si in se certa sit, nobis tamen nota nullo modo potest nisi forte
diuinis testimoniis, id est veris miraculis, confirmetur. And again, Sanus
profecto non erit, qui ea neglecta (vz. the Scripture) spiritus interui saepe
fallacis and semper incerti iudicio se co^miserit. And finally: Non igitur
omnes vulgoo per internum afflatum Deus docet; All which your omissions, are
impaled and marked in the said english authority. O how happy M. White were
you, if you never had been scholar, since the time will come that you shall
say with the Roman Emprour (after he had subscribed to an unjust cause) Vtinam
literas nescirem: For good things, as learning, are most perniceous to him who
declyneth the true use of them as you do. And in this respect you are to
remember that the Arcke which was a blessing to the Israelites, was yet a curse
and hurt to the Philistians that abused it.

The 3. Paragraph. Eckius foully abused concerning the Authority of the Church
and Traditions.
As heretofore he labored to overthrow the doctrine of traditions from the
corrupted testimonies of Catholics and ancient Fathers: so hear he
endeuoreth (from their like abused testimonies) to intimate that we ascribe to
them a greater perfection then we do. And to this end page 145. thereby the
rather to cast upon us an unworthy aspersion of vnderualewing the Scriptures,
he brings in Eckius in Enchirid. ca. 1. saying. The Scripture receaueth all
the authority it haith from the Church, and from Tradition. The words of this
Author are these. Scriptura non est authentica sine authoritate Ecclesiae.
whereby we see the words and from Tradition, are falsely inserted by our
deprauing minister, making us thereby to give (with we do not) a greater
prerogative to Tradition, then to Scripture. And though perhaps he could light
upon those words and from Tradition in some other place or Chapter in Ecckius
though in a different sense (which hitherto I can not find) yet it is no small
dishonesty in M. White thus unkindly to match and join together such disopting
sentences without the parents consent. Again what a strange construction or
translation is this? Scriptura non est authentica sine authoritate Ecclesiae.
The Scripture receaueth all the authority it haith from the Church, and from
Tradition. If this liberty be Justifiable, what error so gross may not easily
be justified against all Scripture, thongh never so plentiful, though never so
manifest.

The 4. Paragraph. Canus corrupted concerning Traditions.
Again perusing his former project, he (page 2.) fortifyeth him self with a
wrest d authority of Canus, whom li. 3. ca. 3. he brings in thus teaching.
There is more strength to confute heritykes in Traditions, then in the
Scripture, yea all disputations with them, must be determined by Traditions.
Here again the proteruity of our Doctor more and more discovers it self: For
thus Canus speaks. Non modo aduersum haereticos etc. Not only against
heritykes Tradition is of more force then Scripture, but also omnis (ferme)
disputatio (almost) all disputation with them is to be reduced to Traditions
received from our Ancestors. (For seeing both Catholics and heritikes do
alledg Scripture for them selves, the difference between them is in the sense
and interpretation thereof. Now which is the true and lawful sense of it can
not otherwise certainly be known, then by the tradition of the Church)

Here now our ministers slight is three-fould; for first Canus borrows this
saying from Tertulian of whom twenty lines before this place Canus thus us
writes. Tertulianus monet vt aduersus hareticos, magis Traditionibus quam
Scripturis disseramus: Scripturae enim varios sensus tr^huntur, Traditiones non
item. Tertulia^ counseleth us that we hold dispute against heritikes rather
with Tradition then with Scripture, since the Scriptures are drawn into
several constructions, whereas Traditions are not so. Thus it appears that
the opinion is Tertulians, and borrowed only from him by Canus: yet M. White
thought it more convenient to deliver it, as proceeding only from Canus, so
concealing Tertulian as unwilling to have it graced and countenanced with the
Authority of so ancient a Doctor.

The second deceit here, lies in not translating, but concealing the reason
of Canus his Judgment therein though it be expressed by Canus in the words
immediately following the place alleged, which show that the cause why we are to
dispute with heritykes with Traditions rather then with Scriptures, is not (as
our minister falsely pretends) our distrust in the Scripture or want thereof
to prove our Catholic Faith, but (as Canus says) because the true sense of it
is cheifely to be taken from Tradition warranted by the Church.

Thirdly and lastly he abuses his Reader in concealing the aduerbe ferme, in
those words above, om^is ferme disputatio, almost all disputation, whereas he
translateth all disputations. Thus Canus by using the word ferme, exempteth
some points from being decyded only by traditions, whereas by our ministers
translation, not any one is excepted. Thus have we seen how our Doctor by his
foul collusions haith labored several ways, to depresse and obscure the
worthiness of gods Catholic Church, as by making her become sometimes invisible,
by falsely ascribing to her and her head (in the catholics name) an usurping
sovereignty, thereby to make her due Authority the more contemned, and to
conclude by depryuing her of all Apostolical Traditions and of all
preheminency in explayning and expounding the Scriptures, whereas she
(especially now in the time of the Gospel) ever sends from her self most
glorious beams and splendour of truth and perpetuity, according to that of the
princely psalmist, In sole pos uit Tabernaculum suum: for indeed she is that
Soon which (contrary to our inuisibilistes) for these sixteen hundredth years,
did never once set under the horizon of an universal latency, that Soon which
never expatiates beyond the tropickes of Gods Traditionary or written word, that
Soon which with it defyning and infallible authority in explicating the true
sense of Gods word, dissipates and dissolues all clouds of error exhaled
through the weak influence of the revealing spirit, finally that Soon whose
concentrous uniformity could yet never broke any Phaniomena, or apparances of
innovation and nouelty, whereas all other sects professing the name of
Christians, are (in regard of it) but as Planetary and wandering stars,
producing many Anomalous irregularities of uncertainty, dissension, and
confusion.

Chapter. 5. Concerning Faith and heresy.
The 1. Paragraph. Bellarmine verrupted against the necessity of true Faith.
BUT to return to our Doctor, from Traditions we will descend to such other
his deprauations, as concern Faith in general, as page 212. suggesting that
we exact not (besides other virtues) any true or inward Faith to denominate or
make one a perfect member of Gods Church, but only an outward show hereof, he
introduces Bellarmine thus speaking. de Eccl. mil. lib. 3. ca. 2. Noe inward
virtue is required to make one a part of the true Church, but only the
external profession of Faith. And then M. White ryoteth in great profusion of
words, that upon this ground in the papists Judgment, all holiness of life
and conversation is superfluous and needelesse. But let us recurre to
Bellarmines words them selves. Not credimus in Ecclesia inueniri etc. (We do
believe, that in the Church are found all virtues, at Faith, Hope, Charity, and
the rest) ver, vr aliquis (aliquo modo) dic^ possi^ pars verae Ecclesiae etc.
That any one may be called (in some sort or manner) a part of that true Church
whereof the Scripture speaks: we do not think any inward virtue to be
required, but only an external profession of faith etc. And in the following
paragraph he says, that those who (wanting all virtue) have only an external
profession of Faith etc^ are as it were de corpore, but not de anima Ecclesiae,
of the body, not of the soul of the Church, etc. He but sicut capilli, ant
mali humores in corpore humano. So wrongfully here we see is Bellarmine
traduced by our Doctor: First in concealing the beginning of the sentence,
wherein he acknowledges all theological virtues ever to be found in Gods
Church. Secondly in suggesting to the Reader, that Bellarmine requires no true
inward virtues as necessary for a Christian soul, but only an external
faith: this is a false and selanderous contumely, for pulchra es and decora
^^lia Jerusalem. Ca^. 6. And Bellarmine is so far from teaching that such
do take any benefit by this their outward profession, that he says (as we
see) they are but only of the body of the Church, and not of the soul (to
which kind of members internal virtues at least are necessary) and that they
are to be resembled to the less profitable and but excrementall parts of man's
body, as the hayres of the head, the nails, and other such bad humors. Thirdly
he wrongeth the Cardinal who says, that a man only of outward profession, is
but aliquo modo pars Ecclesia, meani^g only in a^ imperfect and equivocal
manner of being, whereas our minister concealing the words aliquo modo, makes
Bellarmine to asscribe to such a one, as perfect a being a member of the
Church, as to any other man endewed with all the Theological virtues. But M.
White (as we have seen in others of his corruptions, so also in this) haith a
great facility, in passing over and concealing diuters such words, as si
ferme, aliquo modo, and the like, in any Author that he alleges, though they
mightily alter the meaning of the sentence. It may be perhaps he haith framed
to him self a new Accidence, and houlding such poor particles, but as
imperfect parts of speech, be accomptes them as unworthy to be translated or
set down by his learned pen.

The 2. Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted against the kuowledg of mysteries of
our Faith, and in preferring of ignorance.
Again, to our more depressing of faith, and our supposed advancing of
ignorance: the Doctor tells his Reader how among us the lay people are not
bound to know, what the matters of their faith be, but that ignorance is
better: and thereupon in his mergent he fortifyeth him self with a sentence of
Bellarmine de Inst. l. 1. ca. 7. in these words. Fides melins per ignorantia^,
quam per notitiam, definitur. Faith is better defyned by ignorance, then by
knowledge. I think the minister even for fear of breach of his oath taken (as
it should seem) to the contrary, is loath to alledg any one sentence entyrely,
ingeniously, and truly. For mark here how untruly he diuorceth Bellarmines
words from his own drift and mind. For the Cardinal entytuling that
Chapter, Fidem iustificantem non tam esse notitiam, qua^ assensum. Justifying
Faith, rather to be assent then knowledge, there proves, that faith (even
according to the Apostles definition thereof) can not be demo^strated, and that
the assent which we give thereunto (says he) follows not rationem and
euidentiam rei, a clear evidence of the point believed, which is property
called notitia^, but it follows authoritatem proponentia, the authority of
the proposer, and therefore it is more properly called fides. And then some
three lines after he thus says. (Igitur misteria fides quae rationem
superant, credivius, non intelligimus, ac per hoc fides distinguitur contra
scientiam) and melius per ignorantiam quam per notitiam definitur. Therefore we
believe the mysteries of faith, which are above reason, we understand them not,
and in this respect, (Faith it distinguished against science of knowledge) and
i^ better defyned by ignorance then by euidency of knowledge. Now here I do
demand even in sincerity, whether these words (with any tecture of color of
possibility) can be wrasted to the supporting of a supine and an affected
ignorance of the articles of our Faith, as here our minister seeks to strain
them? Wherefore I say that M. White deals vnchristianlyke, and most
irreligiously with Bellarmine herein. For first he inuesteth his words (which
are spoken only of the nature of faith) with a new construction never dreamed
of: and therefore you see the minister (besides his passing over the ground and
reason of his sentence) purposly omitteth in his translation, the beginning of
the sentence alleged, though it does expound the words following, to wit,
Therefore we believe the mysteries of Faith (which are above reason) we
understand them not, and in this respect Faith is distinguished against science.

Secondly he takes advantage in translating the word notitia, which though it
signifies in large construction knowledge in general (in which sense he forsaw
the ignorant reader would take it) yet with the schoolmen it is restrained, as
Bellarmine here expressly notes, to that kind of knowledge which is properly
Scientia, which proceeds out of a demonstrable euidency of the thing known,
and consequently it is incompatible with Faith.

For shame of your own credit M. White, and for the fear that you owe to God,
forbear to seduce any longer the ignorant by these deceauable means: and
making your benesyte of these my trendly admonitions, which indeed proceed
from Christian Charity, remember that meliora sunt vulnera diligentis, qua^
fraudulente oscula. prou. 27.

The 3 Paragraph. Nauar corrupted concerning the sin committed by the Laity
in disputing of matters of Faith.
Now next let us come to one or two deprauations consisting of the word heresy,
where page 6. to intimate that we hold it no lesser offense then heresy, for a
Lay man to argue of matters of Religion, as though the Church barred them in
any sort whatsoever, not to speak thereof, he alleges Nauar, Manual. ea. 11.
nu. 26. It is heresy for a Lay man to dispute in a point of Faith. Nauars
words are these. Quinto, qui disputat de fide cum sit Laicus, sciens Laicis
esse prohibitum sub excommunicationis paena, de tlla disputare. Fifthly, who
being a Lay man, disputes of Faith, knowing that Lay men are forbidden under
pain of excommunication to dispute thereof. Here you see there is no mention
of heresy, and indeed without reference to some other words, the sense is
here imperfect; therefore the Reader is to understand, that the Title of this
Chapter in Nauar, is this. Modivsitatiores peccandi mortaliter, contra
praeceptum de recte colendo and honorando Deo etc. The several more accustomed
kinds of sinning mortally against the precept of worshipping and honoring God
aright etc. and so answearably to this title, he sets down diverse ways of
sinninge mortally in that sort, keeping the method of primo secundo etc. and so
coming to quinto, he shows in what manner a man sins therein^ therefore
the offense here committed is not heresy (as our minister falsely says) but it
is a mortal sin, which yet is so to be understood, as when a Lay person
pertinaceously without subiecting his Judgment to the Church, wauereth in
disputation in any point of the Catholic faith: and thus much of M. Whytes
fynding the word heresy, in Nauar. But I may well say he is a man of a very
strange, and (as I may term it) imperfect perfect eyesight, since he can not
see words in testimonies which every other man does see: and yet sees other
words in them which no man else can see.

Chapter 6. Concerning marriage of Pre^stes: Fasting: and Miracles.
The 1 Paragraph. Sinesius impudently abused concerning his own marriage.
The next corruption shall be touching marriage of Preistes, the lawfulnes
whereof this our yoked minister is more willing to justify, in that such as
profess voluntary Chastity, are (according to the principles of his faith)
accounted noe better then superstitious, and wilful Eunuchs. Now then for the
warranting thereof page 343. he produces a testimony from Sinesitus Bishop of
Ptolemais, who in his Epistle to a friend called Euopius, thus writes of him
self. The sacred hand of Theophilus haith given me a wise, and hereupon I
testify to all men, that I will neither for sake her, nor yet privily as an
adulterer keep her company, but I will pray to God to send me by her many and
good children. This Authority, as you see, makes a speceous show, but examine
it truly, and you shall confess, that it is M. Whytes proper scene to act the
falsary and corrupter, so notoriously haith he behaved him self herein. For the
better understanding therefore of this soul imposture, thou art to conceive
(good Reader) that this Epistle of Sinesius, out of which our M. takes this
Authority, is set down at large by Nicephorus Eccl. his. lib. 14. ca. 55. And
that at the time when it was written, Sinesius was but a Lay man, yet very
eminent for diverse kinds of good literature, and in reguard of such his
parts, he was much solicited by many to undertake the function of Preisthood:
he a long time yielded not to their persuasions, and did write this very
Epistle to Euopius, (who was one that wished him to that course) to justify
hereby his resolution not to make him self Priest. And in this Epistle among
other of his reasons, as his love to humane studies, and his temporal
pleasures diuerting him from that course, he alleges the words here set
down by M. White, to wit, that in reguard he was a married man, and intending
to continue and live in a wedlock state with his wife, he was not to enter into
that sacred function. Thus does Sinesius acknowledge even in this Epistle (which
by our minister is wrested to the mantaining of the contrary) that marriage
(with a determination not to leave the company of his wife) is a sufficient
bar or let to Preisthood.

Now it happened that some reasonable time after the writing of his former
Epistle, he was ouer-perswaded, and so assenting to his friends importunity,
was made Priest, and then after created Bishop of Ptolemais, and lived for all
the time after, ever separated from the company of his wife. Here then our
ministers incredible deceit (of which he is to him self most conscious) lies
in applying the words spoken by Sinesius when he was a lay man, to him as he
was after Proist and Bishop, and so by the wilful confusion of these two
several times, doubted not but to bleare the weak judgment of his ignorant
reader. Good Reader, if thou understand latin, I could wish thee to see the
Epistle of Sinesius, in the above noted place of Nicephorus, wherein thou shall
find it most evident, that at that time, Sinesius was not Priest, for even
there (besides many other passages) he says of him self. Ego sane qui meipsu^
noui, ineptiorem comperio, quam vt sacerdotali dignitati gerende idoneus sin^.
I who am privy to mine own weakness, do find that I am not fit to undertake
the dignity of Preisthood. In like sort even at the end of this Epistle,
Nicephorus him self thus concludes. Sinesius haec scribens, aperte
sacerdotalem dignitatem auersatus est etc. Sinesius writing these things, was
clearly unwilling of the dignity of Preisthood: So as it is most undoubted and
perspicuous, that at the writing of this Epistle (out of which M. White did
take the former words) he was not then Priest, much less Bishop of Ptolemais,
as our. M. subtlly styleth him.

Now what do you say to this M. White, do you not think that this your
persidious dealing being once made known, will become odious, not only to
Catholics, but even to all ingenious and welmeaninge protestants, though
hitherto with extraordinary applause and allowance, they have much admyred you?
no doubt it will: and therefore seeing you can not otherwise warrant (for your
own interest) the marriage of the Clergy, but only by such dishonest means:
I hope that the fortune of Acteon, before your death, will happen unto you,
(fear not man, I press not the word in any disloyal sense) in being
maligned, afflicted, and bayted, even by your own friends and followers.

The 2. Paragraph. Paphnutius acused concerning the marriage of Preistes.
For his further patronizing of Preistes marriage, he page 343. urges that
often obtruded place of Saint Paul Heb. 13. Marriage is honorable among all
men. and at these words cyteth in the mergent Sozomen. li. 1. ca. 22. as
writing that Paphnutius mantayned the protestants construction of that place,
so as that Preistes might absolutely at any time mary. In the discovery of his
deprauation here used, I will not much insist in displaying his corruption of
this text of Scripture, by adding the words, is, and, men, (the which he
borrows from the english false translation) for neither in the Geeke text can
we find the verb, is, of the Indicative mood, neither the word, men, that
place being thus according to the greek, marriage is honorable in all: which
word, all, may as well have reference to all respects or ends of marriage, as
to all men. But I will cheifely rely, in showing how small reason he haith to
alledg Sozomen or Paphnutius in this point, and how little their true meaning
does sort to our ministers drift: for M. White undertakes in this place to
prove, that Preistes may take wives at any time, (meaning as well after their
consecration as before), and so answearably in general styleth the former page
Preistes marriage, and like wise thus begins that very Paragraph, wherein the
former words of S. Paul are alleged, Fourthly touching the marriage of
ministers, etc. Now if we look into the former quotation of Sozomene touching
Paphnutius, we shall find that he records, how the Council of Nyce, did
only tolerate and permit the marriage of Preistes, before their entrance into
preisthood, but not after their consecration: which does absolutely cross the
scope of M. W. intention in this place. For first this is the title of the
quoted Chapter of Sozomen. De Canonibus quas Concilium posuit: and quod cum
Ca^onem statuere voluerat, vt quicunque ad sacerdori^ dignitatem euecti essent,
^um ^xori^us, quas antequam sacris in^tiati eram, duxarant, non dor ^^irent: in
medium preferens Paphnutius quidem Confessor intercede^at. Of the Carrons of
the Council (meaning of Nyce) and their whereas the Council determined to
decree, that even those who were called to the dignity of preisthood, should
not live with those their wives, whom they had married before they were ordained
Preistes: one Paphnutius a Confessor being among the Council, began to plead
the contrary. But if the Council thought it once convenient to decree, that
such Preistes as were married before their entrance into Preisthood, should not
live together with their wives in state of matrimony, then a fortiori, it did
utterly condemn the marriage of Preistes after they be made Preistes, which is
the contrary whereunto is here che^fe^y defended by M. White. This point is
further confinned out of the words of Sozomen, even in the foresaid quoted
Chapter, for there Sozomen does thus write. Veterem Ec^lesiu ^^aeditionem
esse, vt qu? Cas^ties gradum sacerdo ^^em cons^euti fuisseur, postea minime
vxores duderen^ qui autem post nuptias, adteum or dinem vocati essent, hit ab
vxoribus quas habeba^^ minime separarentur, and ^ta quidem lice^ Coniuglie
p^rs, f^ant Paphnutius. It is an ancient Tradition of the Church, what such as
be unmarried when they enter the degree of preisthood, should not after ta^^e to
them selves any wives: But those who being before married, and after arcealled to
that order, should not be therefore separated from their wives, and this
Paphnutius though him self unmarried) persuaded the Council unto: and thus far
Sozomen of this point. Now I refer to the iudtecous reader how worthily and
sincerely M. White halth quoted Paphnutius out of Sozomen, for interpreting of
S. Paul's words in defense of Preistes marriage in general, without any
distinction of times, whereas in deed Sozomen Paphnutius, and the Council of
Nyce; did absolutely forbid marriage of the Clergy after their ordination of
preisthood, directly opposite against the most general, practice of our
english ministers, who for the most part first seek after a steeple, and then
a woman: and thus with them, a fat benefyce, and a sister in the Lord (for
heresy ever lies groueling in sensuality) are become in our new evangelical
philosophy, the terminus ad quem, whereunto all other their motions, do
finally propend and are directed.

The 3. Paragraph. S. Augustine corrupted against fasting.
The Doctor (through his great auersion which he haith of fasting, and of
forbidden meats for certain days (page 307. writes, that the ancient
Monks made no distinction of meats, and alleges in the margent for proof
thereof, S. Augustine de mor. Eccl. li. 1. ca. 33. Now you shall see how truly
he avouches the Father herein; for in that very Chapter (not to insist of his
speaking of the Monks fasting in those words, Ieiunia prorsut incredibilia,
mult^s exercere did^ci. I have learned that many Monks did practice eue^
incredible fastes) he thus writes touching forbeara^ce of the eating of flesh
multi non vescuntur carnibus etc. Many Monks do not feed upon flesh, though
they are not persuaded superstitiously, that flesh is an unclean meat. and
after again. Continent se illi, qui possunt (qu^^tamen sunt innumerabiles) and
a carnibus, and a vino etc. Such Monks as in body are hable (who yet are
innumerable) do abstain from flesh, and from wine. Here it is evident what the
custom of the ancient Monks was in those times, and how different from the
practice of the new gospellers, since infinite of them eating fish, never
tasted of flesh, whereas to the contrary, I dare avouch in the behalf of this
my sanctified minister, that even out of conscience, he forbeares to feed of
superstitious fish. But indeed M. White does well to show himself so resolute
an advocate, as before of venety in the marriage of Preisles, so now of
Epicurisme, since he well knows that there is a secret reference, and mutual
dependency, between these two most spiritual and ghostly Characters of our
late stamped gospel: a point so clear, that even the Poets do tell us, that
Venus was ever much befrended by Ceres and Bacchus.

The 4. Paragraph. Baronius notoriously corrupted, in proof that heritykes can
work true miracles.
To depryue the Catholic Church of her glory, of most certain and undoubted
miracles, wherewith god haith several times sealed up the truth of the faith
professed by her Doctors: our minister labors to prove from the confession
of Catholics, that woorking of true miracles, are also common to heritikes,
and therefore no peculiar note of the true Church or Faith.

Now to this end, page 301. he alleges Baronius Annal. An. 68. nu. 22.
touching the miracles of Simon Magus. Simon made Images to walk, and would lie
in the fire without hurt, and fly in the air, and make bread of stones: he
could open doares fast shut, and unloose bounds of Iron etc. But does out M.
here leave his accustomed trade of corrupting think you? No, for he paireth the
testimony round about, for even both immediately before and immediately after
the Authority alleged, he concealeth Baronius his own words wherein he
acknowledges, that these were no miracles, by impostures, and sleightes only:
For thus he writes before. Quaenam autem hat fuer^t, ^^m reue^ a non essent,
tament ab hominibus videri videbantur, referam etc. (I will relate what
prestigies or steightes those of Simons were, seeing indeed they were not true,
yet seemed to be in the sight of men) and the mentions those reckned by M.
White. And after Baro. haith nu^bred the said supposed miracles, he thus
instantly concludes. Hueusque de Simonis imposturis, quibus haec per imaginem
oste^debat, and visum, cum nulla verita^e consisterent. Thus far of the
impostures of Simon, which appeared but in show and in the eye, seeing indeed
they were not truly performed. Now I appeal to the iudiceous Reader, with what
^andor and sincerity M. White could produce part of the sentence of Baronius
(omitting both the beginning and endinge) ^^ euict, that true and undoubted
miracles, are incident also to heritykes, and consequently are no competent
mark of the true Faith or Church.

Chapter 7. Concerning the Sacraments of the Eucha^l^ and Penance.
The 1. Paragraph ^^^armine corrupted against Transubstantiation.
OUR Doctor page 24. haith a soul deprauation touching the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, alleging Bellarmine saving, de Euch. lib 2. ca. 2.3 That
it may justly be doubted, whether the text be clea^e enough ^o infe^
Transubsta^tiatio^, seeing men sharp and learned, such as Scotus was, have
thought the contrary. The Reader shall see the whole periode of Bellarmine at
large, and so may discern how strongly both he and Scotus impugn
transubstantiation, as they are here by our M. traduced to do. Thus then.
Scotus dicit ^on ex^are etc. Scotus says, that there is no place of Scripture
so express, which (fi^e Ecclesiae declaratiore) without the ^^claration or
interpretation of the Church, can evidently force transubstantiation. And this
is not altogether in probable: (for although the text of Scripture; which above
we have alleged, some so clear (...), that it is able to convince hominem ^on
pro^eru^^, a man not obstinate) nevertheless whether it do so or no, i^ may i^
^l^ be doubted of, seeing that learned and sharp men (such as Scotus was) have,
thought the contrary. But Scotus ^dd^^h, that s^^g the Catholic Church haith
expounded the said text of Scripture in a general Council, therefore says
he, from the said Scripture so declared by the Church, transu^st^^tiation is
manifestly proved. Thus far^ Bellarmine. Now I do a^ke, that if we consider
the whole co^texture of this passage together, whether according to the mynds
of Bellarmine and Scotus, it makes against transubstantiation or no? I say it
even fortifyeth the Doctrine thereof: For Bellarmine first teaches, that the
text is e^ident enough to conu^nce any man that is not froward or obstinate:
and Scotus (as we find here, grauntes, that transubstantiation is manifestly
proved from the Scripture, being so already expounded by a general Council:
wherefore our ministers slight rests, in nakedly settinge down the former
parcel of Bellarmine, and in concealing the words before, sine declaratione
Ecclesia, and again, hominem non proteruum, to both which, the sentence
alleged haith a necessary reference: So as if M. White would have delivered
Bellarmines true meaning here, he must have delivered it in this sort: It may
be justly doubted, whether the Text without the declaration of the Church, be
clear enough to convince an obstinate man in the point of transubstantiation,
seeing men sharp and learned, such at Scotus etc. But this deportment had been
over candid and sincere, and in no manner sortinge to the calumnious project of
our deprauing minister, who by his perfidious dealinge throughout his whole
book, seems to have made shipwreck of all moral honesty, reputation,
religion, and shame. periere mores, ius, decus, pietas, fides: and quiredire
nescit, cum perit pudor. Seneca. in Agam.

The 2. Paragraph. The Master of sentences corrupted against confession to a
Priest.
In this next place we will descend to the Sacrament of Penance, profaned by
this our Doctors deprauations: and first to bear the reader in hand, that by
the acknowledgment of Catholics, auricular Confession, and other parts of
this Sacrament, are not necessary, he, page 254. produces the M. of Sentences
li 4. d. 17. saying. By contrition only without Confession, or payment of
outward punishment (or liberality of the prelate, or pains in purgatory) I may
go straight to heaven. The words of this Author are these. Sane dici potest,
quod sine confessione oris, and solutione paenae exterioris, peccata delentur
per contritionem and humilitatem. Verily it may be said, that sins are
remitted by contrition and humility, without confession of the mouth, or
payment of exterior punishment. Where we find, first these words, or
liberality of the prelate, or pains in purgatory, to be added by M. White,
though set down in a peculiar character, and letter of the Author: but this
our minister did, to make the confession of this Author, more full and
swellinge: nevertheless to pass over this, I affirm that the sentence is
fraudulently alleged, to take away auriculer confession. And therefore the
reader ought to conceive, that though all Catholics teach, that perfect
contrition is of force to blot out a man's sinnes^ yet they houlde, that this
contrition can not be without confession, at least in voto, as the schoolmen
speak, that is, that the party haith a desire to coufesse his sins to a
priest, when opportunity shall serve. And that this is the very meaning of the
Master of the sentences in this place, appears, first out of his own
words, even in the said paragraph or distinction where he says. Non est vere
pe^^tens, qui confessionis v^tums non habes: he is not truly penitent, who
haith not a desire to confess his sins. Which point is also further made
clear by the title of the next paragraph sauinge one of this Author, which is
this, quod non sufficit soli Deo coufiteri, si tempu^ ad^it, si tamen homini
possit. That it is not sufficient only to confess our sin to God, if so we
have time or opportunity, to confess to man. Thus it appears what reason our
Doctor had, to alledg the Authority of the Master of the sentences, for the
absolute abolishing of the Sacrament of Confession: whereas he means that
only in time of necessity, and when opportunity is not to confess them to
man, then with a true contrition, the sins may be remitted without
Confession. Such you see is the proceeding of our minister throughout his book,
ever inuesting his doctrine and assertions, with most foul and stained
deprauations, well discovering the spotted guiltines of his own soul where
fore for the time hereafter, I could wish M. White (that so his mind might be
appareled answearably to his name) to follow the admonition of the Evangelist,
Get thee a white garment (to wit, of repentance and future integrity) that thou
may be clothed, and that thy thy filthy nakedness do not (further) app^^^^.
Apo^ 3.

The 3 Paragraph. Bellarmine corrupted against Satisfaction.
Lastly touching the Sacrament of Penance, whereof Satisfaction is on part, to
make the Catholic doctrine thereof become ^ame ^ngracefull, he, page 249.
produces Bellarmine, li. 1. depur. ca. 14. thus writing. Christer satisfaction
it self, takes not away the punishment due (...) us, but it removes it so
far forth, as we have grace from thence, to make our own satisfaction of
power. For the better apprehending of Bellarmines due meaning in this places,
the Reader is to conceive that the Cardinal here handles a school point
which being no meter of Faith, but a point of ^adi^ferency, is severally defen
led by Catholic writers. The point is this: the seeing all the force of our
satisfaction, is originally ^i y^^d, and recoa^teth it fore, (as all
Catholics do ground) from the passion and satisfaction of Christ: whether
therefore this satisfaction of Christ's and ours, may be termed but one
satisfaction or two satisfactions: Bellarmine houldeth that it is but one
satisfaction, and that farmaliter, ours, and thereupo^ writes ^^the alleged
place. Vna tantum est ^^tual is satisfactio etc. There is here but one actual
satisfaction, and the same ours: neither by this it excluded Christ or his
satisfaction: for by his satisfaction, we have grace from whence we do s^tisfy
and in this sense the satisfaction (...) Christ is (...) be appledr^ us, non
quod (...) ipsa ti is satisfactio, tollan penam temp malem nobis (...) sed quod
mediat eam tollat, quate ius videlice^ (...) g^atiam^ themes, sine qua, nihil
valeret nostrae satisfactio. Not th^^ his satisfaction immedeatly takes away
the punishment due unto us: but that it takes it away mediatly, in so much as
from his satisfaction, we receive Grace, without the which our satisfaction
would be of noe force.

Here all men may see, that Bellarmine does in noe sort detract from the
passion or satisfaction of Christ, for he says, that Christ's satisfaction is
not excluded by our satisfaction: that by his satisfaction, we have grace to
satisfy: that our satisfaction applies Christ's satisfaction to us: Finally,
that without Christ's satisfaction, ours can be of no force. But before I end,
I will be the Readers remembrancer of two or three sleightes used by you M.
White, in this one testimony. First in these words, Not that Christ's
satisfaction (immediately) takes away the punishment due unto us, you conceal
in your translation, the word, immediately, and so makes us to say, that
Christ's satisfaction does not at all take away the punishment due unto us,
which to affirm, is no less then a monstrous blasphemy. Secondly in those
words, sed quod mediate eam tollat, which you translate not in that natural
sense which the words import, but only thus, but that Christ's satisfaction
remoueth the punishment: so by your feeble translation, making us in an
ignorant ear, to ascribe less to Christ's satisfaction then we do. Thirdly
in that last parcel of the sentence, sine qua nihil valeret nostra
satisfactio. Without which grace of Christ, our satisf. were of noe force.
Which words as soundinge fully in our acknowledgment of the value of Christ's
passion, you also have fully translated in a more remiss phraze and tenor of
speech, to wit, from which grace, our satisfaction is made of power. Thus well
knowinge that (according to the rules of Rhetoric) different phrases bearing
one and the same sense, do make a different (and so more or less) impression
in the hearers ears. But you do well, and in one sense we will not much
complain of you, since this persideous deportment in your wrytinges (as
necessarily discoueringe that you are conscious and guilty of your own bad
cause) does much advantage your adversaries.

The 5. Paragraph. S. Thomas corrupted concerning the remission of venial
sins.
Touching venial sins, page 246. and how they are remitted, our minister
extremely corrupts a saying in S. Thomas par. 3. q. 87 ar. 3. making him
thus, without any further illustration of the point, to speak, Venial sins
may be forgeuen by knocking of the breast, going into the Church, receiving of
holy water, or the Bishopes blessing, or crossing our self, or by any such work
of Charity, though we do not think actually of them.

Tell me M. Wh. when must we expect at your hands one pertinent allegation
without any deprauation or imposture? I do think even then (and not before)
when, as the poet wrytes.

Terra feret stellas, calum scindetur ara^ro. Ovid. l.
Vnda dabit slammas, and dabit ignis aquas. 1 de tree.
For, according to your accustomed vain, you have most fowly wronged S.
Thomas, and so your self here (by wilfully satisfying the doctrine of venial
sins) haith committed a mortal sin. For he in the place alleged showing
how venial sins are remitted, either by an act of detestation of sin, or
an act of reverence toward god, thus concludes. Manifestum est generali
confessione etc. It is manifest, that venial sins are remitted by a general
confession, knocking of the breast, and saying of our Lords prayer (quatenus
cum detestatione peccati siunt, as these actions are done with a detestation of
sin) as also by the Bishopes blessing, by sprincling of holy water, and other
such actions (quatent^s cum dei reuerentia exercentur, as they are performed
with a reverence toward god.) Here you see first, how you have most
fraudulently discarded these two parcels of the sentence, to wit, quate^us cu^
detestatione (...) fius, and quatenus cum dei reuerentia exercentur, as they
are done with a detestatio^ of sin, and as they are performed with reverence
to god, which parcels do enleuen and season the whole. For we do not hold that
these actions, except they be accompanied either with a detestation of sin,
or reverence toward god, do remitt venial sins. But your intended calumny
and deceit here, was to make your credulous reader think, that the
superstitious papists (as you term them in your railing and calumnious
language) do believe that these external actions of them selves alone, are as
it were certain spells or charms to extinguish and drive away all venial
sins whatsoever. Secondly touching the last part of the sentence as it is set
down by you, vz, or by any work of Charity, though we do not think actually
of them, is not in this third article, but before in the first article of 87.
question, and is only an objection of S. Thomas, urged for form sake,
(according to his Method) and then afterward answered by him self.

Chapter 8. Concerning the author of sin, and reprobation.
The 1 Paragraph. Bellarmine egregiously falsified, in proof that god is the
Author of sin.
TO the justifying that Catholics are as far engaged in defendinge that
blasphemous and horrible doctrine, that god is the Author of sin, as the
protestants are, page 271. he alleges Bellarmine de amiss. gra. l. 2. ca. 13.
thus writing. God by a figure commends sin, and excyteth men unto it, as a
huntsman sets a dog upon a hare, by letting go the slip that held the
dog. God therefore does not only permit the wicked to do many evils, neither
does he only forsake the godly, that they may be constrained to suffer the
things done against them by the wicked, but he also ouerseeth their evil
wills, and rules and governs them, and boweth and bends them, by working
inuisibly in them. And not only inclyneth evil wills to one evil rather
then to an other, by permitting them to be carried into one evil, and not
permitting them to be carried into an other: but also positiuely he bends
them, by inclyning to one evil, and turning them from an other, occasionally
and morally etc.

Thus our minister alleges Bellarmine, and then triumphantly thus concludes.
Let our adversaries look well into these speeches, and they shall find that
we say in effect no more. Your adversaries, M. White, have looked well into these
speeches, and they do find and say in effect, that you are a most faith-lesse,
dishonest, and corrupt writer, and indeed one of those whom the spanish phraze
calls vnhombre de salmad^, a fellow without a soul, for if you either feared
god, had a true co^ceate of any Religion, or thought that the soul were
immortal, to answer for what it performs in this life: you would never
deprave this Author as you do, making the Catholics to be patrones of that
blasphemy which in their souls they damn to the pit of hell. Wherefore good
Reader, I am to entreat thy patience, if I insist somewhat long in the full
discovering of this corruption. Well then Bellarmine in the Chapter alleged,
shows how that God may be said several ways to inclyne a man to evil: And
there upon says. Primus modus esset, si Dens per se and proprie etc. The first
way should be, if god by him self and properly either physice, phisically and
naturally by moving the will immediately, or moraliter, to wit, by truly and
properly commanding the will, should impell it to evil: but this kind is
manifestly false, impious and blasphemous against God. Therefore this kind as
wicked being omitted, a second way as that we may understand god to be said in
the Scriptures, to excyte and provoke some unto evil, or to command that
they work wickedly, and to use them as instruments because he permits them
to do evil, although every one that permits any thing, can not be rightly
said to command it, that it may be done, neither to excite or provoke an other
thereto. Notwithstanding god (without whose permission nothing can be done)
when as he suffers any thing to be done, to the obtaining of some certain
end of hit: may rightly be said by a certain figure, to command that, and to
incite one thereto: even as usually we say, the dog was set upon the hare by
the hunter, when as he only loosed the slip wherewith he was tied. And then
some three paragraphes after, deus non so^um permittit etc. god does not only
permit the wicked to do much wickedness, neither does only leave the godly
that they may be forced to suffer wrongs of the wicked, but ouerseeth the
evil wills, and does govern and rule them, and bend them, working in them
inuisibly: So as though their wills be evil through their own default, yet
they are inclyned by divine providence, rather to one evil then to an other
(non positive, sed permissiue, not positiuely, but by permission.) And then in
an other paragraph after. Deum no^i solum inclinare etc. god does not only
inclyne wicked wills to one evil rather then to an other, by suffering them
that they shall be carried into one evil, and not suffering them that they
shall be carried into an other (as Hugo rightly teaches) but also by positiuely
inclyning them to one evil, and auerting them from an other (non quidem per se
et physice mouendo voluntatem ad vuum et remouendo ab alto, quod libertati
arbitrii preiudicare videretur, not by him self and physically or naturally in
moving the will to one evil and removing it from an other, which may seem to
be against the liberty of the will) sed occasionaliter, et moraliter, but
occasionally and morally, as S.. Thomas speaks (to wit, in sending some one
good thought, from the which the wicked man (though his own fault may take
occasion, that it is better to hurt this man, then that man, to yield to this
sin rather then to that sin.

Thus far does Bellarmine literally write. Now we will see what amount of
imposlures and deceiptes our minister haith heaped up in producing of this one
Authority. First he omitteth altogether (without the least intimation of it, or
Bellarmines dislyke thereof) the first kind or manner how god may be said to
impell man to sin, to wit, properly and immediately, which Bellarmine calls
impious and blasphemous, and yet M. White endeuoreth throughout all the passage
here urged, to charge him therewith. Secondly for the more engaging of
Bellarmine herein, he immediately applies that example of a hunter letting^ go
the slip, to gods commaundinge and excyting men to sin, which Bellarmine only
by illation, applies thereto. Thirdly where Bellarmine says that wicked men
by divine providence, are inclyned to one evil rather then to an other, non
positive, sed permissiue, not positiuely, but by permissio^: the minister haith
left out these words, non positive, sed permissiue, though in them lies all
the solution of the doubt here controuerted. Fourthly when Bellarmine after
says, that god inclynes also the will of the wicked to one evil rather then
to an other, positive, non quidem per se et phisice mouendo voluntatem ad vnum,
et remouendo ab alio, quod libertati arbitru praeiudicare videtur: sed
occasionaliter et moraliter, positiuely, yet not by him self and phisically,
moving the will of the wicked to one sin, and withdrawing it from an other,
which may seem to be against the freedom of the will, but occasionally and
morally etc. Our minister subtily taking hold of the word positive, does leave
out all the rest, wherein is expressed how the word positive, is to be
understood, and joins it immediately with the words occasionaliter, et
moraliter. Fifthly he purposly forbeareth the example where in Bellarmine
immediately does interpret the words occasionaliter and moraliter, to wit, in
sending a good thought, but not an evil thought, as M. White by his wilful
omission thereof, would seem to pretend.

And thus far of this testimony, where you see I have as it were dissected, all
the particular veins and sinews wherein lies the very life and strength of
the ministers fraud and collusion herein: only good Reader I would wish thee
for thy fuller satisfaction, to view the place in Bellarmine him self, and then
give up thy true judgment, whether M. White or I deal sincerely herein.

The 2. Paragraph. S. Augustine abused concerning reprobation.
Our minister to prove his blasphemous doctrine of reprobation or damnation
page 9. does shroud him self under an abused testimony of S. Augustine Epist.
107. ad. Vital. med. whom he thus cyteth. It is a manifest truth, that many can
not be saved, not because them selves will not, but because god will not. The
words of S. Augustine are these. Multi salui non fiant, non quia ip fi, sed
quia dens non vult, (quod sine vlla caligine manifestatur in parnulis. Many are
not saved, not because they will not, but because god will not: Which without
all obscurity is manifested in infantes. These latter words, which without all
obscurity is manifested in infantes, are fraudulently left out by the minister,
because they express S. Augustines mind herein: for S. Augustine here only
speaks of the damnation of infantes, who dye before they receive baptism,
which M. White well knowing, thought good to omit the latter Part of this
sentence, and therefore this testimony is wrongfully stretched to such as be of
capacity and type years. That this Place of S. Augustine is only intended of
infants not baptized before their death, is also manifested (besides the proof
taken from the former words) by that which this Father writes some two or
three lines before this place, where he makes the question concerning
reprobation and perticulerly restrains this speech to infantes in these
words, Quomod^ deus vuls etc. How faleth it out, that god would have all men
saved, seeing that infantes who have no will contrary or repugning to their
salvation, do not partake of gods will in this point, in that diverse of them do
dye without the grace given in baptism? Thus our Doctor after his usual
manner abuses this ancient father, by concealing a part of the sentence
alleged, wherein his mind is manifested. Neither can M. White salve the
matter in answearing, that in an other place after upon the like occasion, he
haith alleged this sentence without concealment: this I say aduauntageth him
nothing. For though perhaps not in the other cytation, yet in this it is clear
that his intention was to deceive the reader: but it is expected from the pen
of a man of integrity, to deal sincerely not in one only, but in all the
passages of his wrytinges, since a writers case herein, may seem, in some sort,
to bear a resemblance to an act morally virtuous, which is vitiated by any
one bad circumstance, but perfected by the concurrency of all due circumstances.

Chapter 9. Concerning the honor to be given to Saints and their Images.
The 1. Paragraph. S. Epiphanius corrupted in dishonor of the blessed Virgin
Mary.
WHereas, according to Catholic doctrine, different degrees of honor are to
be exhibited to god and his blessed Angels and Saints: as to the first
Adoration, and to the other in a far lower degree: not only damned spirits,
but damnable beritykes (their painful scholars) as envious emulators of
glorious Saints, do ever labor by many subtiltyes, to rob them quyte of all
deserved veneration. In which kind M. White willing to act his part, even
against the B. Virgin the Mother of God, and modele of all piety, for better
shadowing of his envy, page 344, he alleges Epiphanius. c. her. l. 3. haer,
79. c. Collyridianos. saying. The Virgin Mary was a virgin and honorable, but
not given for us to worship, but her self worshipped him that took flesh of
her: But for the cleares revealing of this illusion, it is to be observed, that
Epiphanius writes here purposly against certain women who adoring a Chariot,
or four squared seat, and covering the same with linen cloth, did at one
solemn time of the year, bring forth bread, and offer the same up in the name
of Mary, which he proves at large to be unlawful, in that it was never
permitted to women, to offer up sacrifice, as also in that sacrfice is an
honor only peculiar to god, yea he makes an express difference between
adoration and honor or woorship, attributing the first only to god, and the
second with us Catholics, to the blessed Virgin, and Saints, which is
further manifest even by the words objected being truly translated, which are
these. Verily the body of Mary was holy, but yet not God, Verily the Virgin was
a Virgin and honorable, but not given unto us for adoration, but her self
adored him, who was borne of her flesh. As also, Let Mary be honored, and the
Father and Son and the holy Ghost adored. Let no man adore Mary etc. This
mystery is due to God And again, Though Mary be must excellent, and holy, and
honorable, yet not for adoration: And sundry other such like, all which do
evidently convince, that S. Epiphanius allows woorship, and honor to be
given to the B. Virgin, but not adoration, to wit with sacrifice, which is an
honor Peculiar only to God.

The 2. Paragraph S. Gregory notoriously corrupted against the woorshiping of
Images.
Speaking against Images page 152. he affirms that the Church of Rome forbade
the woorship of them, us appears (says he) by the Epistle of Gregory to
Serenus, which he notes in the margent to be Epist, 109. li. 7. It is this
ministers evil hap, by most of his citatations, to manifest to the world, his
folly and falsehood. For who not distracted, would urge that against his
adversary which impugneth him self, and that in such a manner, as will easily
convince him of fraud and wilful malice. For fiirst S. Gregory in the place
cyted, reproves Serenus for breaking and casting down of Images which were
set up in Churches, though the said Serenus did the same through zeal, by
reason of some who committed Idolatry thereby, affirming further, that
therefore Pictures are used in Churches, that those which know not letters, at
least should read by seeing in the wales, those things which they could not
read in books. And then he concludes. Thy brotherhood therefore ought to
have preserved the pictures, and to have hindered the people from their
adoration, that so the ignorant might have from whence to gather knowledge of
the history, and the people not sin in adoration of the picture:

Here S. Gregory allows the use of pictures in Churches, showing the
commodity arrisinge thereby, and withal reprehendeth Serenus, though through
zeal, for breaking and casting them down: what may we think then he would
have said against White and other his brethren, who through heresy and malice,
prohibit all use or place thereof in Churches, if they had been then extant
and made known unto him. But though with Catholics he allow the placing of
them in Churches, yet M. White will urge, that he forbids their woorship.
The woorship which he forbids according to his own words is adoration,
which word the Fathers frequently use for that honor which is only proper to
God. And that S. Gregory meant no other, is manifest by an other Epistle written
to the said Serenus, Ep. 9. l. 9. upon the self same occasion, where having
repeated the forsaid vtility of pictures, and adding that not without cause
antiquity admitted Histories to be painted in the venerable places, or
Churches, of Saints, he directethe Serenus and in him all pastors how to
instruct the people in their lawful use, as showing them by testimonies of
sacred scriptures, that nothing made with hand, ought to be adored, seeing it is
written, Luc. 4. The Lord thy god thou shall adore etc. As also, By sight of the
thing done, or the history, let them conceive the fervor of compunction, and
let them be humbly prostrated in the adoration of the only omnipotent holy
Trinity. By which it is most manifest, that the woorship here forbidden by S.
Gregory to Images, is only that adoration which is proper to god.

And that otherwise he thought Images duly to be worshipped, appears by his
7. book and 5. Epistle, wheare writing to Bishop Ianuarius concerning one
Peter lately converted from Iudaisine to Christianity, who violently had taken
a Sinagoug from the Jews, and placed therein the Image of the Mother of God
and our Lord, and the venerable Cross etc. In redress whereof he exhortethe
the said Bishope, that the Image and the Cross taken away again from thence,
with that veneration (or reverence) which it meet, to restore that which was
violently taken away, to wit the Sinagouge. So that in steed of impugning due
worship to Images, these points following may all heritikes learn of S.
Gregory. First, that he proves the use thereof from antiquity. Secondly, that
he allows the placing thereof in Churches, and impugneth the breakers or
pullers of them down, though their excuse or pretense, be fear of Idolatry in
the People. Thirdly that the same, in steed of hurt, do much profit the
ignorant that can not read. And lastly that in plain terms he calls the
Cross, Crucem veneran dam, Venerable. And directs, that both the Image of
our B. Lady, and the Cross, should be removed, cum ea qua dignum est
veneratione, with that worship which is meet, or they deserve. So that I could
wish our needy minister, to be better aduysed hereafter in his citinge of S.
Gregory against Catholic religion.

The 5 Paragraph. The Council of Eliberis corrupted against Images.
Here now I am come to the last corruption, which I intend to display, the
which I have purposly reserved, therewith to close up the taist of my Reader:
so notorious it is for the Authors depraved, and so pregnant and dextrous in
the conueyance.

As touching the first, whearas every one of the former deprauations (those of
the Rhemistes only excepted) rests in abusing the authority of some one
particular man, this stryketh at a whole Council consisting of many scores of
Fathers, so happy a progress M. White haith made in his profession of
corrupting. Now for the conueyance, though it be not to be paralleled with
diverse of the former, extensiue (as the schoolmen speak) in multitude and
stoare of words corrupted, it lying only in slye transposition of one or two
words, yet intensiue, for the art thereof, it may be equalled with any.

This then it is. Our minister there, page 344. to overthrow the religious use
of Images, produces the 36. Canon of the Council of Eliberis, to wit: No
picture is to be made in the Church, lest that be adored which is painted on
wales. The words of the Canon are these. Placuit picturas in Ecclesia non
debere, ne quod colitur and adoratur, in partetibus depingatur. It pleased the
Council, that pictures should not be in the Church, lest that which is
worshipped and adored, be painted on the wales.

Be obseruant here Reader, and mark the difference which is made of the same
words, by a witty interchange of their place in their translation: and thou
shall see that my delicate minister here even transcends him self. The Council
says, Images are not to be in the Church, lest that be painted on the wales
which is worshipped. M. White translateth, lest that be worshipped which is
painted on the wales. Thus the difference breefely rests in this, lest that
which is worshipped be painted, And lest that which is painted be worshipped. A
small difference in show of words, but great in sense: For the words of the
Council acknowledging the worship of Images, makes the worship due to them,
to be the cause why they are not to be painted on wales: But M. White says
that they are not to be painted on wales because they are not to be worshipped,
and so makes the Council to speak like good protestants.

Now the reason why the Council would not have the wales of Churches to be
painted with Images, was in reguard of the due respect they bare to them, and
not as M. White falsely suggesteth: For being so painted, they were subject to
be defaced, either by the inuasio^ of the enemies in those times, or else by the
rain and bad wether: whereas Images drawn in Tables (of which the former
Council makes no restraint) in that they are portable and remoueable, do not
lie open to the same danger. Therefore the intention of the Counsel herein,
was the same with the intention of that decree by the which it was ordained,
that in reverence to the Crucifix, no Cross should be made upon the plain
ground, because it being so made, must needs be often irreuerently be tramped
with the feet of me^. Thus is M. White in seking to disprove the lawful use
of an Image, become him self a perfect Image of deceate, fraud, and collusion.

But here now I make an end of his corruptions and deprauations (hasting my
self to the second Part of his scene which is his lies and falsehoods.) Only I
must say, that in reguard of the impurity and conse unless deportment of him
in his whole Treatise: I can not but commiserate all such poor credulous
souls, as do highly Preiudge of his book, as beiug written in all sincerity
and plainness, and free from the least touch or aspersion of any wilful
deprauation.

And therefore I hold it most strange, that M. Purchase (a scholar and
ingenious, though extremely maliuolent) should in his own book, page 100.
entytle M. White Via Lactea, alludinge perhaps both to his name, and his
supposed candor in wrytinge.

But since his mistakinge is not justifiable: I will allow to M. White the same
title, though through a differeut reason. For as the Via Lactea appears to a
vulgar sight to be a part of heaven, and yet indeed is not, being (if we
follow the judgment of the ancient Philosophers) far lower then the heavens,
as it is necessarily euicted from the different parallayes and variations
thereof, taken from several places: So is M. White reputed in the common eye
and censure of unlearned protestants, as a man which in all truth haith much
labored in that heavenly course of dilating the Gospel and faith of Christ:
whereas we find that the contrary is most true, as haith fully appeared from
his several exorbitant deprauations of so many Catholic Authors and others.
Wherefore to be short, I greatly fear that except hereafter there follow a
feeling remorse of this foul and unchristianlike dealing, the words of S.
John the Evangelist, may be more truly applied to our Sir John the minister,
Nomen habes, quo viuis, mortuus es. Apoc. 3.

The end of the first part.
WHITE DYED BLACK.
THE SECOND PART. Containing sundry notorious untruths or Lies, proved to be
such, even by the confession of the most learned Protestants.
And first is prevented a weak euation, which may be used by M. White against
this second part
FROM Corruptions good Reader we are next to descend to untruths, for lying
indeed, is the second pillar which supporteth the whole weight and frame of M.
Whytes work.

This passage I here make distinct from the former: For although all the
precedent deprauations of the first part do potentially include vutruthes and
falshoodes: yet our Doctors proteruity therein does chiefly rest, either in
corrupting other men's words, or in alleging them directly against the known
intention of the Authors: whereas here, the reduplicatiue formality (as I may
term it) of his heretical deportment, consists in plain lying, to wit, in
setting down and instifying certain most false assertions, and positions, a
course little sorting to one who styleth him self a minister of gods word, in
that his sacred word, is altogether incompatible with falsehood.

The floate of these his untruths is so great, as that our Doctor assordeth
unto us many scoares of this nature: yet because he would make show to mantaine
diverse of them under some pr^text, either of much reading, or in wrasting the
sense of such produced authorities, if I should fortify the contrary truth from
their particular testimonies, of Scripture, Fathers, Histories etc. (being a
kind of proof, in reguard of the often suggested doubtfulnes of the true sense
directed by many wheels of inferences and deductions.

Therefore to the end that I may eu^n chokingly, and irreplyably convince him
of such notorious miscariage: I have thought good to supererogate with him in
disprouing his said falshoodes, I mean in restrayning my self precysely to
such his lies, as the contrary thereto is acknowledged for true even by his own
brethren: and these not m^n obscure or vulgar, but the most eminent and learned
protestants of Christendom, and such as have ever been accounted stars of
the greatest magnitude in their evangelical Sphere: Neither will I allege so
many of them as I could, but for the greater expedition, I will content my self
for the most part, with the testimonies of two or three of our learned
adversaries.

Now here I would have the iudiceous reader to observe that M. White can not
reply in answer hereto, that because there are some other protestants that do
mantaine the said positions with him against his former learned brethren, that
therefore such his positions, are freed from all imputation of untruth, and
consequently him self of lying.

This his answer is most insufficient: First because some of his untruths do
rest, in affirming that not any one Father, or any one protestant, taught such
or such a point or doctrine: against which general assertion (including all
Fathers and prot^stantes) if I can produce but any one Father or protestant (as
indeed I can for the most part, produce many) it is enough to convince him of
lying. Secondly in that all Master W. untruths, do make head against the
Catholic Faith, and strengthen the protestants religion (in which respect
they may be presumed to be the more wilful) it can not therefore with any show
of reason be otherwise conceived, that such learned protestants (for the most
part mantaining against the Catholics the point or conclusion of faith, out of
which such assertions do rise, and therefore are not become parties against M.
White therein) would ever defend against the Doctor the contrary assertions,
much weakening their own cause thereby, were it not that the euidency of the
truth on the Catholic side, does force them thereunto. And therefore it
follows even in reason, that the voluntary acknowledgment of any such one
learned protestant, ought to over balance and weigh down even scoares of
others not confessing so much: so true is the saying of Irenen; li. 4. ca. 14.
Illa est vera and sine contradiction probatio, quae etiam ab aduersariis ipsis,
signa ^^sti^i^atioA^^s pros^rt.

But to make this point more perspicuous to the reader by example, our minister
in one place (which hereafter shall be alleged) anouch^th, that the doctrine
of Transubstantiation, was never heard of before the Council of Lateran. (for
here he speaks not of the definition of that Article, but of the doctrine
only) To convince this as a most notorious untruth, I produce not Catholic
authorities (for they would seem to the readers eye over partial) but because
all perfect differences are made upon unequal standinges, I insist in diverse
learned protestants (otherwise our professed enemies) who do not believe our
Catholic doctrine herein as true: nevertheless do confess, that such and
such Fathers, living in the primitive Church (and therefore many ages before
the foresaid Council) did teach the said doctrine of Transubstantiation. Now
here I say M. White is not excused from lying, in that he is able to bring
forth other particular protestants teaching with him the said innovation of
Transubstantiation even at the same time (and not before) in reguard of his
former learned brethren confessing the further antiquity thereof, to the much
disabling of their own cause.

Now what can our Doctor object herein? not their ignorance, for they are the
most accomplished protestants for their literature, that ever lived: not their
partiality in the cause, for they here speak against them selves, and do
conspyre in the fnndamentall and primitive point of faith therein, with M.
White him self: Only therefore it is to be said, that these protestants th^s
confessing to their own prejudice, are more ingenious, upright, and less
impudent in their wrytinges, and M. White and his compartners, are of a
canterized and se^red conscience, not caring (even against their own knowledge,
by their shameless mantayning of lies) to suppress Gods truth and Religion.

Now this Basis and groundwork being immoueaable, and this firmly, laid: let us
proceed to these his untruths.

The 1. Untruth. The first untruth: that Protestants embrace that kind of
trial which is by antiquity.
Therefore first in his preface to the Reader, page penul. (thus you see the
very front of his book is no less subject to lying, then before, as I have
showed, it was to corrupting) our minister (still forgeating, that a great sore
in the body, is more tolerable, then a moale in the face) there speaking of
the Fathers of the primitive times, and of their Judgments in matters of Faith,
between the protestants and us, thus writes. We are so well assured (meaning
of the resolution of the Fathers) that we embrace that kind of trial which is
by antiquity, and daily find our adversaries to be gauled thereby. A most vast
untruth, and acknowledged to be such even by the most iudiceous protestants.
For we find, that wheareas M. Jewel with the like hipocrisy. did appeal to
the ancient Fathers at Paul's Cross, even his own brethren did rebuke him
greatly for those his inconsiderate speeches: in so much that D. Humfrey (the
half-arch of the English Church in his days) affirms, In vita Iuelli.
printed at London. page 212.
that (to use his own words) M. Jewel gave the papists therein too large a
scope: that he was injurious to him self: and after a manner spoiled him self,
and his Church.

To the like end D. Whitaker (but with extraordinary scurrility) writes that,
The popish Religion, is but a patched couerlet of the Fathers errors sowed
together. Cont. Dur. Lib. 6. page 423.
From whence it follows that D. Whytaker would be loath inappealably to stand
to their determinations. Finally Luther him self (the first mouer of our new
Gospels Sphere) so far disclaymeth from the Fathers Judgments, as that he
thus insolently traduceth them. Tom. 2. Wittenberg.
The Fathers of so many ages (speaking of primitive times) have been blind and
most ignorant in the Scriptures: they have erred all their life time, and
unless they were amended before their deaths, they were neither Saints nor
perteyning to the Church. Anno 1551. Lib. de seruo a^bitrio. page 434.
Thus Luther. Here now is evident the untruth of M. White appealing to the
Fathers, since we find that the most learned members of his own Church, do
reject them with all contempt, charging them with slat papistry, which they
would never have done, if they could have used any other convenient evasion.

Be affrayd M. White of Gods just revenge, for this your mantayning of evil by
evil (for thus you here do, first by impugning the true faith of Christ: and
then for your better warranting thereof, in traducing the ancient and holy
Fathers, as enemies to the said Faith.

And remember the sentence, Seneca, in Agam.
Metum auget, qui scelere scelus obruit.

The second untruth: Against Traditions.
But to proceed to other untruths, page 2. our M. White labors to prove,
that the protestants Church receaueth not n^cessarily any one Tradition, and
answearably thereto in his first Table before his book, he thus writes. No
part of our faith stands upon Tradition.

Now here his own brethren will charge him with falsehood. For seeing M. White
must and does acknowledge, that to believe, that such books (as the wrytinges of
the four Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistles of S. Paul
etc.) are the sacred word of god, is a main article of both his and our Faith:
The falsehood of his former Assertion is evidently euicted from the words of
learned protestants, who teach, that not from our pryuate spirit, or scripture
it self, or conference thereof: but from the tradition and Authority of the
Church, such wrytinges are certainly known to be the undoubted word of God,
most contrary to M. White, page 47. who says, that The Scripture proves it
self to be the very word of god, and receaueth not authority from the Church.

To this end we find D. Whitakar first reiccting the testimony of the pryuate
spirit, to say thus. Aduers. Stapl. page 298.
Non nego Traditionem ecclesiasticam esse argumentum, quo argui et conuinci
possit, qui libri Canonic^ sunt, qui Canonic^ non sunt. I do not deny, but that
Ecclesiastical tradition is an Argument from the which it may be proved which
are the Canonical books, and which are not.

In like sort M. Hooker assenteth hereto saying, Eccl. Pol. lib. 3. page 146.
In things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what books we are bound
to esteem holy: which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self
to teach. But what the Scripture teaches not, is by our adversaries
confession, a mere Tradition. Hookers judgment in this point, is justified by
Doctor In his def. of Hookers 5. book. pa. 31.
Couell.

Now if these eminent protestants do ascrybe only to the Church, the Indgment
of discerning which is Scripture, and which is not Scripture: then we know from
the Authority and Tradition of the Church, and not from the Scripture it self,
which is the true and undoubted word of God, and what books are but spurious
and adulterated, and consequently M. White lied most grossly in affirming that
no part of their faith stands upon Tradition, Hefler. ca. 16.
thus ranging him self among those who (according to the Scripture)
mendaciorum funiculis conantur subuertere. By the means of lies, endeavor to
overthrow.

The third untruth. The Third untruth in proof of the continuance of the
protestants faith in all ages.
Our minister laboring to enamell and beautify his deformed faith with the
speceous title of antiquity and succession, page 86. uses these swelling
speeches.

Against all papists whatsoever we make it good, that the very faith we now
profess, haith successively continued in all ages since Christ, and was never
interrupted so much as one year, month, or day, and to confess the contrary
were sufficient to prove us no part of the Church of god.

Words of brass, but (if he be put to the proof) no doubt leaden
performance. To set down the Judgments of the learned protestants touching
the interruption of their faith for many several ages since Christ's time,
were laboursom, and withal needeles, since to convince this bold assertion of
falsehood, it is sufficient to insist in any one age or time. Therefore I will
content my self with the authorities of two learned protestants touchi^g the
very time of Luthers first Apostasy and departing from our Church; they
granting that their faith before Luthers revolt, was not to be found in any
man living: which they never would have done, if the euidency of the matter did
not force them thereto, considering how much such a confession does enaruate
and weaken their cause.

First the^ we find even Luther himself to acknowledge this point, who thus
writes hereof. Epist. ad Arguitinenses.
Ego principio causae meae etc. In the beginning of this my cause (speaking of
his change of religion) I had this gift granted me even from heaven: that I
alone should undertake so great a matter, and I did conceive that it should be
made good only by me, neither did I put any confidence in the trust of others.
Here we see that he grants him self to have been alone in this his supposed
restoration of the Gospel. And hereupon it is, that Luther in an other place
thus vaunteth. Loc. com. class. 4. p. 51.
Christum a nobis primo vulgatum andemus gloriari. We dare glory, that Christ
was first made known by us.

In like sort M. Jewel (no mean Rabbi in our English Sinagoge) says, In the
Apology of the Church of England. par. 4. ca. 4.
that the truth was unknown at that time and unheard of, when Martin Luther,
and Vldrick Zuinglius, first came unto the knowledge and preaching of the
Gospel.

The 4. Untruth. In proof of the unity of faith and doctrine amongst
protestants.
Page 138. For the more justifying of the protestants doctrine, he thus says
of the book entitled The Harmony of confessions. The Harmony of confessions
wherein the particular Churches set down and name the articles of their faith,
if the Jesuit can show to ^arr in Dogmaticall points of faith: I am content
you believe him in all the rest. Here the reader haith a bold assertion, which
as you see the more easily to win a credulous ear, is steeped in musk: but
I fear M. Doctor the note Diapason, which implies an absolute and general
concord, and which is so much commended by all the most skillful in that
science, will here be wanting. And therefore for the more exact disquisition of
that point, we will refer our selves to that very book called the Harmony of
confessions, englished and printed at Cambridg by Thomas Thomas. 1586. where
(for the greater expedition) I will touch but some few stringes thereof only,
to hear how they sound.

First then we find this harmony to teach, that sins are ef^ sons punished
even in this life, at David's, Manasses, and the punishments may be mitigated by
good works, page 229. See here how fully it acknowledges the abstensiue
nature of penance and satisfaction? Again, this obedience toward the Law, is
a kind of Justice (mark you this discord) and deserves reward. page 266.
Like at the preaching of penance is general, even so the promise of grace is
general etc. Here needs no disputation of Predestination, or such like, for
the promise is general. page 268. and 269.

As touching private Confession etc. we affirm, that the ceremony of pryuate
absolution is to be retained in the Church, and we do constantly retain it.
page 231.

In like sort it says, that the Bishops have inrisdiction to forgive sins.
page 366.

Finally not to rest upon every particular stop thereof, we thus find there,
We do not speak of the Church as if we should speak of Platoes Idea, but of
such a Church as may be seen and heard etc. The eternal Father will have his
Son to be heard among all mankind. page 326. A note which must needs sound
most harshe with our inuisibilistes. Now I referr the matter to M. White him
self, whether there be in these points any concordance between the harmony of
Confessions, and the doctrine of our English protestants, of the Hugonots in
France, and the Caluenistes in Germany: so assured I was that a diligent ear
would easily observe many iarring stringes in the Consort.

The 5. Untruth. In proof of the immutability of the present English Religion.
Page 138. He particulerly insisteth in his supposed constancy of religion here
in England, and thus writes. If the Jesuit can show the Church of England
since papistry was first abolished, to have altered one article of the present
faith now professed, I am content etc,

For the disproofe of this falsehood, we will convince the same by discovering
the manifould and weightiest alterations of our public English Lyturgy, since
the first entrance of protestancy into England.

And first it is evident that the Lyturgy of the Church of England in King
Edwardes time, (at which time there was an evident bringing in of protestancy)
published by Crammer, Peter Martyr, and Bucer: and approved by the authority of
the Parleament, kept almost all the prayers and ceremonies of the Mass (the
real presence only rejected) with crossing of both their Sacraments, and the
accustomed rites of Baptism, as a formal consecration of the water of
Baptism with the sign of the Cross, the using of Chrisme and the annoynting
of the child.

Again, it retained prayer for the dead, and the offering of our prayers by
the intercession of Angels.

But when Quen Elizabeth came to reign, the said Lyturgy was so altered, as
that it is needles to rest long in the discovery thereof: for it took away
prayer for the dead, and prayer to Angels, besides most of the former
Ceremonies used in King Edwards time. In like sort in the Communion book of K.
Edward we find confirmed, baptism by lay persons in time of necessity, and
grace given in that Sacrament, the Confirmation of children, and strength given
thereby, the Priest blessing the Bryde grome and the bryde even with the sign
of the Cross. The Preistes absolution of the sick penitent by these words. By
the authority committed to me, I absolve thee of all thy sins. The special
confession of the sick penitent, and finally the annoynting of the sick. Of all
which particulers, see the Communion book of K. Edward printed in fol. by
Edward whitchurch cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. An. 1549. All which
(diverse of them including points of faith and doctrine) are now utterly left
out in the Communion book published in Q. Elizabeth's time: In so much as
Parker an english protestant, thus writes thereof. Against Simbolizing. par.
2. ca. 5.
The day starr was not risen so high in their days, when as yet Q. Elizabeth
reformed the defects of K. Edwardes Communion book. Answearably hereto writes
Cartwright saying. Jesuit. par. 2. rat. 5. p. 5. and 627.
The Church of England changed the book of Common prayer twyce or thryce,
after it had received the knowledge of the Gospel. Thus Cartwright in his 2.
Reply, par. 1. pa. 41. who in that very book labors yet for a fourth
change. And thus is M. White not affrayd to suggest to the world even in printe
(fond man that could not be idle enough in pryuate talk) such unwarrantable
untruths: which course of his, if it proceeded from his own inaduertency and
oversight as not having seen the Common prayer book of K. Edward declaring
the contrary, then were it more pardonable, but this I think him self, out of
his pride and show of much reading, will not acknowledge, and therefore we may
probably ascribe it to his mere wilful forgery, who to defend his own
heterogeneous and mongerell faith (which mantayneth at different times
different doctrines) dare adventure to broach falshoodes though never so
eminent. But let him remember that by so doing, he (with disauantage to his
cause) vainly spends his labor, for Qui nititur mendaci^^ hic pascit ventos.
Who trusts to lies, feeds the wyndes.

The 6. Untruth. In proof of the Roman Churches mutability in matters of
Faith.
Page 150, he confidently auerreth, that The Church of Rome is varied from her
self in matters of Faith, since she began to be the seat of Antichrist: Thus
charging our Church with great mutability of belief, as before he labored to
grace and adorn his own Sinagouge with all speceous constancy in the same.

Now for the better overthrowing of this untruth, it is necessary to recurr to
those first supposed times of Antichrists being, perusing the doctrine then
taught, to see if the Church of Rome haith made at this day any change thereof
in any matters of Faith, for even so far does the minister stretch out his lie.

First then the most received opinion of the protestants touching Antichrist
his coming (for they are most various among them selves therein) is, that S.
Gregory the great, was the first Antichrist. Now to observe what his Religion
was, will be made evident by taking view of the Religion which S. Augustine
(being a Monk of the Church of Rome, and sent by this S. Gregory) did here
plant in England.

For the trial of which point, I will first produce D. Humfrey, who thus
writes hereof. Jesuit. par. 2. rat. 5. p. 5. and 627.
In Ecclesiam vero etc. What did Gregory and Augustine bring into the Church?
etc. A burden of Ceremonies etc. They brought in the Pall for the Archbishop in
celebrating of Mass, and purgatory etc. They brought in the oblation of the
healthful Host, and prayer for the dead etc. Relickes etc.
Transubstantiation etc. A new consecration of Churches etc. From all the which,
what other thing is gathered, then that Indulgences, Monachisme, the Papacy,
and all the rest, confusion of the Popes superstition, was then erected: all
which things, Augustine the great Monk, and taught by Gregory a Monk, brought
to us English men. Thus far D. Humfrey.

In like sort the Triumuiri of Magdeburg (whose censuring pens have
controuled more ages, then ever the Romans Triumuiri governed Provinces) I
mean the 3 Century writers in the Index, or Alphabeticall Table of the 6.
Century, after the first Edition thereof at the word Gregory, do relate the
particular doctrine of S. Gregory, as popish and erroneous: For thus they here
note with particular references to the places of S. Gregory's writings proving
the same Eiusdem error etc. The same (Gregory's) error of good works, of
Confession, of Wedlock, of the Invocation of Saints, of hell, of
Justification, of Free will, of purgatory, of Penance, of Satisfaction.

Now this former doctrine containing the chief points wherein we differ from
the sectaries of this time, being acknowledged to be the Faith of Gregory, who
is supposed to be the first Antichrist, and most articulatly at this day
believed of all Roman Catholics: I would ask M. White with what forhead he
can avouch his former words, to wit, that the Church of Rome is vari^d from
her self in matters of faith, since she began to be the seat of Antichrist.
But all this ryseth from an inward repugning of the Min. against our Church, in
reguard of the unchangeable certainty and constancy of faith professed by her:
whereas the want thereof in our adversaries religion is most notorious, as
appears not only from their several confessions, one ever impugning an
other; but also from their different translations of their Bybles, still made
to sort to the faith of their last Edition; so as in respect of their
wonderful mutability, and variance among them selves, whereby indeed they
indignify and wrong the nature of true faith; we have reason to demand of any
of the professors, of what thinking he is, rather then of what faith.

The 7. Untruth. In proof of the protestants concord in matters of Religion.
Page. 139. To prove that protestants have true unity, he shows, that the
divisions among them, are either falsely laid to their charge through ignorance
and fury of their enemies etc. or else they are not iars of the Church, but the
defectes of some few therein, whereof the Church is not guilty, or lastly, not
dissertions in things of faith, but strife about Ceremonies etc. Thus does the
D. Apologize for his discording brethren. Now to convince this, the Reader
shall hear what some of their own brethren do acknowledge therein.

First then Doctor Willet, rehearsing several opinions of Hooker and D.
Couell, of which Willet presuming that they can not stand with true protestancy
thus writes. Willet in his medit. upon the.122. ps.
From this fountain have sprung forth these and such other whirle-pointes, and
bubles of new doctrine, as that Christ is not originally God. That Scriptures
are not means concerning God, of all that profitably we know etc. That man's
will is apt naturally without Grace, to take any particular object whatsoever
presented unto it, and so consequently believe, that men's naeturall works, or
to do that Which nature tells us (without grace) must needs be acceptable to
God etc. Thus have some been bold to teach and write, as some Scismatikes
(meaning the puritanes) have disturbed the peace of the Church, one way, in
external matters concerning discipline: these have troubled the Church an
other way, in opposing them selves by new quirkes and deuyces to the soundnes
of doctrine amongst protestants. But if the position here meant be against the
foundnes of doctrine, then can it not be restrained only to ceremonies.

Doctor Whitaker speaking of the contentions among the protestants, says. de
Eccl. con. Bellar. contr. 2. q. 5. pa. 327.
Nostrae contentiones (si quae sint) sunt piae, et modestae, et propter fidem
and religionem etc. Our contentions (if there be any) are pious, and modest,
and for religion. From which words if follows, that they are not personal,
or only about ceremonies, as M. White pretends.

Now if we further take a view of the intemperate speeches given by Luther
against the Zuinglians, it may satisfy any one, that the differences were not
in small points of government or ceremonies. Thus the^ Luther speaks. Con.
Loua. These. 27. to. 2. Wittemb. fol 503.
We censure in earnest the Zninglians, and all the Sacramentaries, for
heritykes, and alienated from the Church of God, And in an other place. To. 7.
Wittemb. fo. 381 and 382.
Cursed be the Charity and concord of Sacramentaries for ever and ever, to all
eternity. As also in the 3. place. de Caenado. To n. 2. Ger. fol. 174.
I having now one of my feet in the grave, will carry this testimony and glory
to the tribunal of God, that I will with all my heart condemn and eschew
Carolostadius, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and their scholars, nor will have
with any of them familiarity, either by letters or writings. etc. And thus
far of this point. From all which may be inferred, that dissentions among the
protestants are not merely personal, or but points adiaphorous, indifferent,
being as it were but peccant humors, and not true or formed diseases in their
church, but they do concern most profound doubts of their religion, since
otherways they would never anathematize, or condemn one an other with such
acerbity of words. Which irreuocable contentions among the protestants, (being
most preiudiceous to them selves) is aduantageous to us, for bellum
haereticorum, est pax Ecclesiae. The war of heritykes, is the peace of Gods
Church, none otherwise then the reciprocal strife and reluctation of the 4.
humors, kepes the whole body in a peaceable and healthful state.

The 8. Untruth. Against the unity of Catholics in matters of Faith.
Page. 153. The Doctor seeing his own sinagogue torn in sonder with divisions
and contentions (howsoever he slubered the matter over before with his fair
pretense of concord) and well knowing how prejudicial the want of unity is to
the true Religion of Christ. 1. Cor. 15.
For God is not a God of dissension, but of peace; does maliceously endeavor,
to cast the like aspersion upon our Catholic Church in these words. These
which know Rome and papistry, are sufficiently satisfied in this matter, to
wit, that the papists live not in that unity which is pretended. and the^ p.
156. he tells of what kind these disagreementes are saying. The contentions
of our adversaries touch the faith. And page 159, he concludes in these
words. Thus are the papists divided about the principal articles of their
faith. Upon which subject, he then after with much earnestnes, vainly and idly
spends diverse leaves, bringing therein even obtorto cullo, whatsoever he
haith read or heard touching the least disagreement among the Catholics,
which labor of his, will serve no doubt, to a iudiceous eye, like to the
spyders web, painfully wrought, but to no purpose.

Wherefore I will breefly make plain how free we are from all breach of faith
even by the acknowledgment of the protestants them selves. First then D.
Whitaker wounding him self and his cause by his confession, says. de Eccl.
cont. Bell. contro. 2. q. 5. p 227.
Nostrae contentiones (si quae sint) sunt piae, et modestae, propter fidem, and
propter religionem etc. Contentiones papistarum sunt friuolae and futiles, de
figmentis et commentis sui cerebri. Our contentions (if there be any) are godly
and modest, touching faith and religion: whereas the contentions of the
papists, are but tryflinge, concerning the fictions of their own brain. Thus
granting the dissentions of the protestants more nearly to concerue faith and
religion, then the dissentions among the Catholics do.

Doctor Fulke says of our unity in this sort. Against (...). Sand. etc. 295.
As for the consent of the popish Church, it proves nothing but that the
devil then had all things at his will and might sleep; So acknowledging our
unity truly; but falsely and absurdly ascrybing it to the devil who is the
designed enemy to unity.

To be short Duditius a famous protestant and highly respected by Beza, does no
less acknowledge the unity of our Catholic Church, for thus does Beza Beza in
Ep. theol. ad Andraeam Dudit. Fp. 1. pa. 13
relate Duditius his words. Etsi (inquis) multa eaque horrenda propugnantur
in Romana Ecclesia etc. Although many dreadful things are defended in the
Roman Church, which are builded upon a weak and rotten foundation,
notwithstanding that Church is not divided with many dissentions: for it haith
the plausible show of reverent Antiquity, ordinary s^ccession, and perpetual
consent etc.

Thus Duditius related by Beza, and not impugned herein by him.

Now here we are to note, that the testimonies of these and other protestants
(here omitted) acknowledging our unity and consent, must necessarily be
understood touching unity in the mysteries, and other fundamental points of
our Religion, which is the thing only that we are here to mantaine, since if
unity alone about points of indifferency, or of things not defyned should be
meant by them, then in reguard of many such disputable questions yet among the
schole men; the former judgments of our adversaries should be false and not
justifiable. And thus much for this point; from whence the Doctor may learn
that among those which are true Catholics, unity of doctrine is most
religiously observed, since such not over partially resting in their own
native judgments, to what way soever they be inclyning, do most diligently
follow, the supreme resolution and current of the Church: in part resembling
herein the inferior orbs which with greater speed, sedulity, and expedition,
perform the reuolutions of the highest Sphere whereunto they are subject: then
they do accomplish their own natural and particular motions.

The 9. Untruth. Against the Popes Primacy.
Page 185. The Doctor writes in his digression thus. The Primitive Church did
not acknowledge the Popes Primacy. Here I see that M: White will ever be M.
White, I mean that he will ever be like to him self, first in coining, and
after mantayning most impudent untruths.

Now as touching the discovery of this his false position, since to go through
all the centuries of the primitive Church, would be needlessly laboursome: I
think it good to restrain my self only to the fourth century or age after
Christ, an age wherein Constantine the first Christian Emprour lived, and which
for that respect not undeservedly seems to be most entertained and approved by
the grave judgment of the Kings Majesty. As appears out of his Majesty's
words touching the same, in the sum of the conference before his Majesty.
page 97


Now for the greater clearing of this point, it will be needful to observe,
what authority the Popes did exercise, by the acknowledgment of our learned
adversaries, since the authority and sovereignty over all other Churches, and
Prelates, is that which does, as it were, organize and perfect the Popes
Primacy.

Now then answearable hereto Cartwright writes, that Reply 2. part. 1 p. 501
Julius Bishop of Rome at the Council of Antioch, ouerreached, in clayming the
hearing of causes that did not appertain unto him. Now this Julius lived in
the sourth age. Again the said Cartwright says of S. Damasus who was Pope in
this age. Reply part. 1. p. 502.
that he spoke in the dragons voice, when he shameth not to write, that the
Bishop of Romes sentence, Was above all other, to be attended for in a Synod.
So far was this sectaries censure different from the judgment of S. Jerome,
delivered of the same Pope in these words Ep. 57. ad Damasum. P
Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens beatitudini tuae, id est Cathedrae
Petri communione consocior: super illam Petram Ecclesiam edificatam scio,
quicunque extra hanc domum Aguxm commederit, prophanus est etc. quicunque tecum
non colligit, spargit,

In like sort touching appeals to Rome, (an essential point of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy) we find that the Centurists Cent. 5. Col. 1013.
do acknowledge, that Theodoret a Greek Father, and one of this fourth age,
being deposed by the Council of Ephesus, did accordingly make his appeal to
Pope Leo, and thereupon was by him restored to his Bishopric. And to conclude,
the Centuristes do no less acknowledge, that Chrisostom Cent. 5. Col. 663.
did appeal to Innocentius, who decreed Theophilus Chrisostomes enemy, to be
deposed and excommunicated.

Thus we find how dissonant this our ministers assertion touching the Primacy
is, to the practice of the Primitive Church, even in the judgment of those who
are designed enemies to the said Primacy, as might well be exemplifyed,
throughout all the Centuristes, and ages of those times, seeing all reverent
antiquity, (no less then the Catholics of these days) was fully persuaded,
that S. Peter and his successors, were ever to be accounted the visible Baseis,
or foundations of gods Church: and all other Bishops but Column^s: And as this
foundation immediately supportes these pillars, so these pillars the rest of
this spiritual edifice and structure.

The 10. Untruth. That Gregory the great, detested the Popes Primacy.
Page 193. M. White descends to the example of S. Gregory the great, and
first Pope of that name, in whose writing he hops to find great sttrength,
for the impugning of the Popes sovereignty: and among other things the D.
says. Gregory had no such jurisdiction as now the Pope usurps, but detested
it not only in John of Constantinople, but also in him self. etc. Where now the
Reader may be instructed, that the reason why this Gregory is by some supposed
to disauow the doctrine of the primacy, is in that he rejects in John of
Constantinople, the title of universal Bishop as sacrilegious, which his
saying was grounded only in taking the name of universal Bishop, to exclude
the true being of all other Bishops, as it is confessed by Andreas Brictius. de
Eccl. lib 2. ca. 10.


But now that S. Gregory did both claim and practice the Primacy, is
acknowledged by our adversaries, for the Centuristes write Cent. 6. Col. 425.
of him that he said. The Roman Sea appoynteth her watch over the whole world,
and that he taught that the Apostolic Sea, is the head of all Churches: that
Constantinople it self is subject to the Apostolic Sea. Furthermore S. Gregory
is charged by the Centuristes, Ibidem.
that he challenged to him self power to command Archbishops: To ordain or
depose Bishops at his pleasure: that Col. 427.
he took upon him right to cite Archbishops to declare their cause before him
when they were accused: That actually Gregory did undertake to excommunicate
Col. 427
such and such Bishops: That in their Provinces Col. 428.
he placed his Legates, to know and determine the causes of such as appealed to
Rome.

Finally, to omit many other points recorded by them, that Ibidem.
he usurped power of appointing Synodes in their provinces.

Here now I referr this point to the indifferent Reader, whether he will believe
M. White denying to the benefyte of his cause, the Primacy of S. Gregory, of
the Centuristes being diverse learned protestants, all confessing the same,
though to their own prejudice.

The 11. Untruth. In proof that Catholics are more viceous then protestants.
Page 209. For the extenuating and lesning of the sinful lives of the
protestants, the Doctor much extolleth their imputative, and supposed virtues,
and as much depresseth the lives of all Catholics in general, and thus he
entitleth that leaf, The protestants people as holy as the papists. In like
sort, from page 213. to 218. he spends him self in gathering together
whatsoever Catholic writers have spoken touching the lives of some loose
livers, thus scornfully entytling the leaves, The holiness of the Church of Rome
deciphered: most of which sayings being found in sermons, or exhortations, and
in heat of amplification, delivered generally as the custom is, and this
without any reference or comparison to the lives of the protestants, can not
justly be extended to all Catholics, no more then the reprehensions of the
Prophets in the old testament spoken without any restraint, could be truly
applied to all the Jews.

Wherefore for the further vpbrayding of this our ministers lie which is wouen
upon the threede of malice, and for the more punctual conuincing him of
falsehood, I will prove from the Protestants own confessions, that the lives
of Catholics, are generally more virtuous, then those of the protestants (in
which kind of proof, from the like acknowledgment of us Catholics in favor
of the protestants, the D. haith not brought so much as one line.

To this purpose then is not Luther forced thus to write, to the eternal shame
of his own religion? Dom. 26. post Trin.
Before when we were seduced by the Pope, every man did willingly follow good
works: and now every man neither says nor knows any thing, but how to get
all to him self by exactions, pillage: theft, and usury, etc.

In like sort he confesses more saying thus. In Postilla super Euang. Domin.
1. Aduen.
The world grows daily worse, men are more reuengfull, contentious,
licenceous, then ever they were before in the papacy. And yet Luther. In
sermon. coniuialibus. Ger. fol. 55.
It is a wonderful thing, and full of scandal, that from the time in which
the pure doctrine of the Gospel was first recalled to light: the world should
daily grow worse. See here the acknowledged fruits of his own Gospel. In
like manner Iacobus And^^as a very learned protestaut, thus confesses of his
own religion. Conc. 4. in c. 21. L^c.
Mandat serio Deus in verbo su^, etc. God earnestly commands in his word,
and exacteth of Christians, seriam et Christianam disciplinam, a serious and
Christian discipline: but these things are accounted by us, nouns papatus,
nouusque Monachismus, a new papacy, and a new Monachisme: for thus they
dispute. Didicimus modo per solam fi^^em in Christum saluari etc. We have now
learned to be saved in Christ only by faith, etc. Wherefore suffer us to omit
all such works of disciplyne, seeing that by other means we may be saved by
Christ. And that the whole world may not acknowledge these to be papists nor to
trust in their good works: they do not exercise any one of the said good
works, for in steed of fasting, they spend both day and night in drinking etc.
their praying is turned into swearing etc.

So this learned protestant, who also terms this kind of life the
Evangelical instruction, thus making protestancy a good disposition to draw on
all wickedness: Where you see that the gospellers (even in this man's judgment
being a gospeller him self) are so given over to licenceousnes of manners, as
they may be said to hold it only a sin not to sin, and a virtue, to
abandon all virtue; since they make their faith and Religion (contrary to which
they be bound not to do) to be the foundation or sanctuary of their profane
and heathnish comportment.

But now seeing that by laying contraries together, the one often receaueth
much force from the other in the apprehension of our judgment; let us a little
enter more perticulerly into the courses of such our ministers as from whom we
are to expect the greatest satisfaction in this point, that so in an even
libration of the matter, the Reader may rest more fully satisfied, and M. White
more clearly and irrepliably convinced of his former untruth.

Forbearing therefore at this time all other testimonies, I will content my
self only with the example of Zuinglius and other ministers confederated with
him in Heluetia, who preaching our new evangelical doctrine to that common
wealth: exhibited certain petitions to the state, the tenor whereof, is here
even literally taken from Zuinglius, and the other ministers own writings,
bearing this title. Tom. 1. fol. 115
Pietate and prudentiae insigni Heluetiorum Reipub. Huldericus Zuinglius,
ali^que Euangelicae doctrinae ministri, gratiam and pacem a Deo. Now we find in
this former book, that they thus first petitioned. Hoc vero summis praecibus
contendimns etc. We earnestly request that the use of marriage be not denied
unto us, who feeling the infirmity of the flesh, perceive that the love of
chastity is not given to us by god: For if We consider the words of the
Apostle, we shall find with him none other cause of marriage, (mark what a
spiritual scholia these illuminated brethren do give) then to satisfy the
lustful desires of the flesh, which to burn in us, we may not deny, seeing
that by means thereof, we are made infamous before the Congregations.

Would any man believe this, were it not that their own certain wrytings are
yet extant to vpbraide them withal? And in an other place they thus renew
their petition. Ib. fo. 119
Non carnis libidine, for the love, not of lust, but of chastity, lest that the
souls committed to our charg by example of our sensuality, should be any
longer offended. Thus they even confess, that till this time, their former
licenceous life, had much scandalized their folowers, And further yet. Ibidem
Quare cum carnis nostrae infirmitatem nobis non semel (proh dolor) etc.
Wherefore seeing we have made trial, that the infirmity and weakness of our
flesh, haith been (o the grief) the cause of our often falling etc. The same
Zuinglius with other 8 ministers, in their Epistle to the Bishop of Constance,
subscrybed with their own hands to the like purpose, thus writes. Zuinglius.
Tom 1. fol 121.
Hitherto we have tried, that the gift of chastity haith been denied us. And
yet further, Ibid. fol. 122.
Arsimus (proh dolor) tantopere, vt muha ind^core gesserimus. We have hurned (o
the shame) so greatly, that many things we have committed very unseemly.

And for the clausure of all, they thus salve the matter. Ib. fol. 123
Non vsque adco inciuilibus moribus sumus etc. To speak truly. we are not
otherwise of such uncivil conversation, that we should be evil spoken of
among the people committed to our charge, for any wickedness, Hoc vno excepto,
this one point excepted.

Here you have the words of our holy and spiritualized s^ctmaisters, who you
may well perceive insisted further touching the same point, with the Heluetians
and the former Bishop, in or the like dialect and phrase of expostulation.

Since according to the doctrine of our reverend father Luther, Lutherus in
Proverb. 31^
(which we are bound both to teach and practice) Nothing is more sweet and
loving upon the earth, then is the love of a woman: Alas why should we, who
have of late revealed the gospel of Christ heretofore so long eclipsed, be
recompensed therefore with the want of that most delightful and natural
comfort of a woman. being forced to imitate the superstitious papist in
embracing a votary and barren life. Or why should the Heluetian state so
severely exact at our hands, that we who only preach vncorruptedly the
Christian faith, should only be depryued herein of our Christian liberty. Heu
quanta patimur. Libidenous and goatish ministers, whose very penn ^ spumant
venerem, and with whom even to meditate of a woman, is the center of your most
serious thoughts: well may you use your int^riections of proh dolor, proh
pudor. o grief, o shame, as the burden to your sensual and lascivious
wrytinges. For what can be a greater shame and grief unto you (if you be
sensible of either) then you who venditate your selves, for the restorers of
the gospel so long hidden, to be (to the disedifying of your own followers)
thus wholly absorpt in such lustful and fleshly cogitations. But we pardon
you, for we know Io. ca. 3.
quod natumest ex carne caro est: So great, each man sees, is the disparity
between our evangelical ministers (who enjoying the primitias of the spirit,
were in reason obliged to warrant it, with greater effects and fruits of
virtue) and the confessed better lives, even of seculer Catholics. And so
lewdly and lowdly did M. White lie in who^ there is much Zuinglius) when he
affirmed that the protestants were as holy as the papists. But I fear that
through my earnestnes in displaying of the ministers vanity, I have been over
long in this point, therefore I will descend to the next untruth.

The 12. Untruth. Against auriculer Confession.
Page 227. discoursing of auriculer Confession, he says, that the Primitive
Church knew it not.

For the discovery of this falsehood, we find, that the Centuristes do
confessse, Cen. 3. c. 6. Col. 27.
that in the times of Ciprian and Tertulian, private Confession was used, even
of thoughts, and lesser sins: And which is more, they acknowledge, Ibid.
that it was then Commanded, and thought necessary, And D. Whytaker writes
con. Camp. rat. 5. page 78.
that not only Ciprian, but almost all of the most holy Fathers of that time,
were in error touching Confession, and Satisfaction.

Thus we see how little blood was in M. White his cheeks, when he was not
ashamed to set down this former bold assertion, touching the doctrine of
Confession. But indeed it seems that our minister accompteth it only a
shame, to feel in him self any touch of shame, so far is he of (in likelihood)
from all hope of future amendment, seeing on the contrary side, that saying
(for the most part) is true, Terent. in Adelh.
Erubuit, salua res est.

The 13. Untruth. Against Fasting.
Page. 224. Our delicate minister as a professed enemy to all austerity of
life, writes thus against fasting. All antiquity can witness, that in the
primitive Church, Fasting was held an indifferent thing, and every man was left
to his own mind therein. This falsehood is made discouerable by these
acknowledgmentes following.

And first it is so certain that AErius was condemned by Epiphanius, haer. 76.
and by S. Augustine, haer. 53. for taking away all set days of fasting, as
that D. Fulke thus writes of this point. In his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic p. 45.
I will not dissemble that which you think the greatest matter: Aerius taught
that fasting days are not to be observed.

The same condemnation of Aerius by the former Fathers, is acknowledged by
doctor Whytaker, Con. Dur. lib. 9. p. 830
By Pantaleon, In Chronographia. p. 28.
and Osiander. Epitom. Cent. 4. page 424.
But if Aerius was condemned by the former ancient Fathers for an heritike,
for denying certain prescribed times of fasting; it inauoydably follows,
that fasting was not houlden as a thing indifferent in the primitive Church.

This lie will appear more evident, if we instance it in the fast of Lent,
which fast was so far from being accounted arbitrary, or a thing indifferent,
in the primitive Church, as that Cartwright reproves S.-Ambrose for saying.
Cartwright in Whitgiftes defense.
It is sin, not to fast in Lent.

Thus you see how familierly this ministers pen drops lie after lie, and such
as the contrary assertion is mantayned for true, even by the most eminent
protestants.

The 14. Untruth. In proof that Montanus the herityke, was the first that
brought in the laws of Fasting.
Page 224. Our Doctor in further disgrace of fasting thus writes. Montanus a
condemned herityke, was the first that ever brought in the laws of Fasting,
from whom the Papists have borrowed them. The (...) misapplication of which, is
so forced and racked, that no inferior a protestant then Hooker him self,
confesses ingeniously in these words, that Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 72. p 29.
the Montaristes were condemned for bringing in sundry vnac^stomed days of
fasting, continued their fastes a great deal l^^ger, and made them more
rigorous etc. Whereupon Tertulian mantayning Montanus, wrote a book of the new
fast. But what is this to us Catholics, for we see that the error of
Montanus consisted formally, not in absolutely bringing in of fasting, but in
varying from the former practiced fastes of the whole Church.

Answearably hereunto the protestant writer of Quaerimonia Ecclesiae, reiect^th
the former idle assertion in these words. page 110.
Eusebium (inquiunt) Montanum primas de iciuniis tulisse leges etc. They say
that Eusebius did undoubtedly teach, that Montanus first brougt in the laws of
fasting, but they are sowly deceived in this as in some other points: for
Montanus abrogating the fasts of the Church, brought in a new kind of fasting.

Thus we see by the former assertions, that M. White like a good fellow, and one
that means to enjoy his Christian liberty, can not well relish the unsavory
doctrine of fasting, as in some pages hereafter we shall synd that in like sort
he rejects all voluntary chastity: which two points (as before I noted) do
entertain the one the other: for who knows not that Epicurisme is the oil
which norisheth the flame of lust.

The 15 Untruth. In proof that they make not god the author of sin.
Page 263. M. White being desireous that his religion should decline all
contumelious reproach, and stain, touching the author of sin, thus writes.
The doctrine of the protestants, does not make God the author of sin, nor
infers any absolute necessity, constrayning us that we can not do otherwise
then we do.

That the indifferent Reader may the better discover whether these his words
be false or true, I will only set down the sentences of the chiefest
protestants, and withal will deliver the judgments of other protestants,
against the former defending of the said sentences.

Zuinglius says, that Tom. 1. de prouid. dei. fol. 366.
God moves the thief to kill. And that the thief kills god procuring him.
And that the thief is enforced to sin. Thus in the heritykes judgment, God
(who in every leaf of his sacred word denounces his comminations against
sinners) does incyte, procure, and force man to sin.

Beza in like sort teaches, that In his display of popish practices.
God exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill an other, guides his hand,
and weapons, justly enforcing the will of the thief. Finally Calvin writes,
that Lib. 2. Inst. ca. 4.
In sinning, the devil is not author, but rather an instrument thereof: thus
referring the author of sin, to God him self.

Now that these sayings of the former protestants do, if not actually,
immediately, and primariously, yet at least potentially, and necessarily,
include in the^ selves, that god is the author of sin: is granted by other
more modest protestant writers, who do altogether condemn the foresaid
doctrine of Calvin, Zuinglius, and Beza.

Thus is the said doctrine condemned by Castalio who wrote a special treatise
hereof against Calvin. By Hooker, in his Ecclesiast. Policy lib 5. page 104.
By D. Couell in his defense of M. Hooker page 62. Yea in farther conuincing of
M. Whytes former untruth, we find that Iacobus Andreas a Protestant in Epitom.
Coloq. Montisbelgar. page 47. thus plainly writes. Deus est Author peccati
secundum Bezam.

Here now I referr the matter to the iudiceous Reader, whether he will believe
M. Whytes former assertion as true, politikly only delivered by him to salve
the honor of his Church, or the plain contrary meaning of Calvin, Zuinglius,
and Beza, set down in their own sayings, and so acknowledged by others of
their own Religion: where we find that the protestant, does charge and
condemn the protestant, for teaching that God is the author of sin. But as
in the former untruths, so particulerly in this, we see how Antipodes-lyke,
and oppositly, our Doctor treads to the feet of his own brethren.

The 16. Untruth. In proof that S. Bernard was no papist.
Page. 298. He is not affrayd to publish by his pen, that Bernard was a papist
in none of the principal points of their religion. And then he adds. He
stood against the pride of the Pope. etc. Good Reader, here is no lying: for
whosoever will but observe what is confessed by the protestants, must
acknowledge that impudency it self would be ashamed to have mantained such a
groundless untruth.

For first it is granted by Symond de Voyon a protestant, Upon the Cataloge.
that he was Abbot of Clareiuaux. And Osiander says of Bernard in Epitom.
cent. 12. page 309.
that Centum et quadraginta Monasteriorum author fuisse creditur. He was
thought to be the Author of a hundredth and 40 Monasteries.

In like sort S. Bernard was so great a Patron of the Popes Primacy, that the
Centuristes write of him Cen. 12. 10.
Coluit deum Maozim etc. Bernard did worshipp even to the last end of his life,
the god Maozim, he was a most eager defender of the seat of Antichrist. Apoint
so clear, that he is charged by D. Fulke, Against the Rhem. Test. in Luc. 22.
fol. 133.
and D. Whytaker lib. cont. Dur. page 154.
for defending the Popes Ecclesiastical Authority, and yet if we believe M.
White he stood against the pride of the Pope, so evident you see is this made
by the free acknowledgment of the protestants, whose censures are passed upon
S. Bernardes Religion and faith in general. And therefore we may well infer,
that if they had thought S. Bernard to have been but in part a catholic (or as
the term is a papist) and in other points a protestant, they would have been
glad to have challenged him to them selves in the supposed points of his
protestancy.

Thus M. White we still observe, that the Reader is ever entertained by you
with naught but falsehoods, but no meruell, for it is your own position, In M.
W. his book. page 1.
that a man can not hope to learn truth in the school of lies.

The 17. Untruth. Against the miracles wrought by S. Bernard and S. Francis.
Page 299 Talking of the miracles of the former S. Bernard, of S. Francis, and
others: he thus concludes. What is reported of Bernard, and Francis etc. are
lies and deuyses. This is spoken to dishonor the Roman Faith, diverse of whose
professors through Gods omnipotency, and for the manifestation, and
strengthening of his truth, have in all times been able to exhibit diverse great
miracles, the remembrance of which prerogative resting only in our Church, is
most displeasing to our minister, in whose nyce nosethrilles, nothing well
sauoreth, that tastes of the praise of our Catholic Religion.

But now let us see, whether the miracles record^d of the former Saints, be
lies or no, as the D. fondly suggesteth. One most remarkable miracle of S.
Bernard, is recorded by Godfridus in the life of S. Bernard. It was wrought in
proof of certain Catholic Articles denied in those days by the heritykes
Apostolici or Henriciani, as at this instant they are denied by the
protestants. The miracle was done in the Country of Tolousa in France, and
consisted in S. Bernardes blessing of certain loaves of bread, of which loaves
(for proof of the truth of our Catholic doctrine then preached by S. Bernard)
whosoever, being in any sort diseased of body, should eat, should be healed of
their sickness: whereupon infinite people eating of the same, were cured most
miraculously of all kind of diseases. This miracle was so illustrious and
markable, that Osiander, one of the Century writers, Epitom. Cent. 12. lib. ca.
6. page 310.
does not say it is a lie and forged, as M. White does, but granting the thing
as true, does ascribe it to the power and working of the devil, as the wicked
Jews did the miracles of our blessed Savior, unto Belzabub.

In like sort Matthew Paris in his history which is printed by the protestants
at Tigur. 1589. whose book is by the said protestants highly commended in
their Preface annexed thereunto, and who him self is reckoned for his defense
of certain points of protestancy, in the number of protestants by Illiricus.
In his Catalogue of the witnesses of truth.


This man now most seriously records, that before S. Francis death, there
appeared certain^ wounds in his hands and feet, and his side, freshly
bleeding, such as were seen in our Savior when he suffered on the Cross. The
reason of which appearance was (as S. Francis said) to show that he did truly
preach the mystery of the Cross: and that in further demonstration of the
same, he told them before, that presently after death, the former wounds
should be healed and coherent like to the rest of his flesh: the which
accordingly did fall forth. And thus much but of these for breuity sake
instanced in these two Saints, from whence we may confidently affirm, that
it is a lie to say with M. White, that these Saints Mirakles are but lies.

The 18. Untruth. In proof of the protestants Churches ever visibility.
Page 225. and 226. In defense of the continuance of his own Church, he thus
says. The learned among us confess and prove against all that contradict it,
that ever since Christ's time (...) there haith been a company of men visibly
professing the same faith that we do, though the Church of Rome a generating
into the seat of Antichrist, pers^cut^d them, and so many times drove them ^wt
of the sight of the world, that to it they were not visible. Thus he.

But before we convince this, I would demand where our ministers head piece
was, when he thus wrote, since these few lines do inuolue an irreconciliable
contradiction: A company of men visibly professing etc. yet to the world not
visible. O strange and never before heard of Inuisible-uisible: as well he might
mantaine white, remaining white, to be black, or the moon in her greatest
eclipse, to shine, as the Church ever to be visible, and yet latent: and latent
to who^? to the world: still good, as if it were to be seen only by some who
are out of the world.

But now to the falsehood, the like whereof he ventilated before, and haith
accordingly been before refelled. Yet because for the honor of his Church he
insisteth much in the visibility and want of all interruption of his faith, it
will not be amiss to repel such an idle suggestion with the testimonies and
acknowledgmentes of several learned protestants.

And first Napper writes upon the Reuelat. prop. 37. page 68.
that between the year of Christ 300, and 1316. the Antichristian and
Papisticall reign began, reigning universally, and without any debateable
contradiction 1260 years, gods true Church most certainly abiding latent and
invisible.

Sebastianus Francus a famous protestant in like sort says. In Ep. de
abrogandis in vniuersum om nibus statut. Ecclesiast.
For certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together
with the faith and Sacraments, uanished away presently after the Apostles
departure: and that for these thousand four hundredth years, the Church haith
been no where external and visible.

Now during all these ages, when was M. W. company of men visibly professing
the same faith that he does? Finally D. Fulke (though not acknowledging so
great an inuisibility yet) writes, In his answ. to a counterf. Catholic. page
16.
that in the time of Boniface the third, which was Anno 607. the Church was
invisible, and fled into wilderness, there to remain a long season.

To these testimonies we may add the former heretofore alleged, touching
their Churches not being upon the first revolt of Luther. From all which it is
ineuitably concluded against this our Architect of lies, that the protestants
imaginary Church, consisting of aerie supposales of certain inuisibilistes: had
no subsisting or being in the world for these last thousand years at the
least, before the Apostasy of that unfortunate and wicked Monk.

The 19 Untruth. In defense of Preistes marriage.
Page 343. The Doctor much Apologizing and defending the marriage of the
Clergy, affirms that the Church of Rome houldeth contrary herein, to that
which was taught in the Primitive Church.

Now for the trial of this falsehood, let us concur to that which is confessed
by our learned aduersaties concerning the same. First then Cartwright
confesses In his 2. Reply part. 1. p. 485.
of the first Council of Nyce, which was celebrated in the 3. Century or age
after Christ, that it taught, that unto those which were chosen into the
ministry, it was not lawful to take a wife afterward, only being married
before entrance into the ministry, it was lawful for them to use the benefyte
of the precedent marriage. In like sort M. Jewel, in the defense of the
Apology, page 195. after the editio^ of Anno 1571. speaking of preistes
marriages, thus acknowledges. Here I grant M. Harding it like to find some
good advantage as having undoubtedly a great number of holy Fathers on his
side. Exam. part. 3 p. 50.
Lastly Chemni^ius grants, that this doctrine that preistes can not mary, is
taught by Origin, Jerome, Ambrose, Innocentius, Ciritius, and Epiphanius.

Now here I referr to the judgment of any indifferent reader, whether we are to
believe these former learned protestants ingeniously confessing the practice of
this our Catholic doctrine in the primitive Church, to the prejudice and
endangering of their own cause: or M. White denying the same for the better
tecture and pretext of his own sociable life, and his ministerial copulation.

The 20 Untruth. Against Images.
page 344. Inueighing much against the religious use of Images, among other
things he says (according to the title of that his digression) that touching
Images, the Church of Rome houldeth contrary to that formerly was houlden. And
after alleges, that the ancient Christians of the Primitive Church, had no
Images. But the contrary hereto is most true. For first we find that the
Centuristes do write, Cent. ca. 10. 108.
that Lactantius (who lived in the fourth Century or age) affirms many
superstitious things concerning the efficacy of Christ's Image. Doctor Fulke
affirms, Against H^lk^ns. etc. p. 672. 675.
that Paulinus a very ancient Author, caused Images to be painted on Church
wales. In like sort touching the sign of the Cross, of which there is the
same reason and ground, the Centuristes teach Cent. 4. col. 302.
that Ambrosius multa comm^morat superstitios^ de cruce inu^nta. The said
Centuristes also affirm Cent. 3. Col. 121.
of the third age after Christ that Crucis Imaginem etc. Tertulian is thought
to affirm, that Christians had the Image of the Cross in the places of their
public meetinges, as also privately in their own houses. So far^ did M. W.
err from the truth in affirming, that touching Images, The Church of Rome
bouldeth contrary to that which was formerly houlden. But I see if it be proof
enough for M. White only to condemn: the Church of Rome must not be innocent.

The 21. Untruth. Against Transubstantiation.
Page 346. The D. thus writes. Lastly I name Transubstantiation etc. wherein
it is plain, that they (meaning the Catholics) have altered the Faith of the
ancient Fathers.

Here for the trial hereof, we are to appeal to the sayings and confessions
of his own side, where we shall find that M. Whytes credit and estimation, is
particulerly in this (as in the former) most daungerously wonnded, even by the
hands of his own breethren. For we find it confessed by the Centuristes, Cent
4. Col. 496.
that Chrisostomus transubstantiatiorem vid tur confirmare. Chrisostem is
thought to confirm transubstantiation. In like sort by the Judgment of other
protestants Visinus in his commone factio cuirsd^m Theologi. page 211.
Theophilactus, and Dama ce^us, plane inclinant ad transubstantiatiorem.
Theophilact and D. mascen, do evidently incl^ne to Transubstantiation.

Answearable hereto Occolampadius lib Epist. O^c^lamp. and Zu^ng. lib. 3.
does charge Damascen with the said doctrine. Finally D. H^mfrey writes,
Humfr. Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 5.
that Gregory the great brought in Trans^bstantiation. In Ecclsiam vero (says
he speaking of our conversion) quid inuexerunt Gregorius et Augustinus?
Int^l^runt etc. Transubstantiationem.

Now I would demand of our minister with what countenance he can au^rre, that
in the doctrine of Tra^substantiation, we have altered the faith of the
ancient fathers, if he observe what is taught to the contrary by his own
brethren, who not believing the doctrine it self, yet do confess the great
antiquity thereof.

May we think that M. W. was ignorant of these Fathers minds therein? If so,
then are his followers much deceived, in ouerual^ing his good parts and
literature, and withal the obscurity of his own judgment touching the said
fathers in this point, haith thus far prevailed, that it haith ministered fit^
opportunity to the Reader, to take notice, how clear, perspicuous, and
shyning, our Catholic faith of Transubstantiation was, even in those primitive
times: So the Opacity and darkness of the earth, is occasionally the cause of
the days light.

The 22. Untruth. Against the conversion of England by S. Augustine the Monk.
Page 354. and 355. to deprive S. Augustine the Monk, of the honor and
reverence due unto him by us English for our conversion, the M. thus writes.
Touching the conversion of England by Augustine the Monk (in which our
adversaries make so much a do) I answer two things, first that supposing he
d^d convert it, it was not to the present Roman faith etc. Secondly I say, he
converted not our Country at all, excepting the planning of some tryfling
Ceremonies.

Here you see that the first point of this passag^, to wit touching Augustines
conn^rsion and his faith, is Hipotheticall, and delivered with some hesitation
and doubting: the other recalling the first, Categoricall, absolute, and
peremptory. Now in my reprouall of this his falsehood, I will unity together,
the two former disioynted parcels, and directly prove from our adversaries
penaes, that S. Augustine did convert our Country to the present Catholic
Roman faith: in the euicting whereof, I will content my self with the
confessions of the Centuristes, and of D. Humfrey: For if we peruse the history
of those Censorions Magdeburgians, who reprove and control at their pleasure,
all the Fathers of all ages: we shall find that these Centuristes acknowledging
S. Augustines conversion of us in their Alphabeticall Table of the 6. Century
at the word Gregory, do set down certain erroures (in their judgments) of S.
Gregory in these words following. Eiusdem error de bonit operibus, de
Confessione, de Coniugio, de Ecclesia, de Sanctorum inuocatione, de Inferno, de
Iustificatione, de Libero arbitrio, de Purgatorio, de Paenitentia, de
Satisfactione. And further in the said Century they charge him with Celebration
of Mass. Col. 369. with claim and practice of supreme Jurisdiction over all
Churches. col. 425. 426. etc. with Relickes and sprinkling of holy water. col.
364. with Pilgrimage. col. 384. with Monachisme col. 343. Finally (to omit many
other points) with Chrisme and oil col. 367.

Now this being the confessed Faith of S. Gregory, I think no reasonable man
will deny, but that S. Augustine who was sent by him to convert our Country,
was of the same Faith with S. Gregory.

In like sort D. Humfrey is most full in this point, who thus writes. Iesu^t.
part. 2. ^at. 5.
In Ecclesiam vero quid inuexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus? etc. What brought
Gregory and Augustine into the Church? They brought in the Archbishops vestmont
for the solemn celebration of Mass, they brought in Purgatory, and oblation
of the healthful houst, and Prayers for the dead etc. they brought in Relickes
Transubstantiation etc. New consecration of Churches etc. From all which
points, what other conclusion is gathered, then that Indulgences, Monachisme,
the Papacy, and all the other chaos and heap of superstition was erected
thereby. And thus fa^r of this testimony though heretofore upon other occasion
alleged.

Now here it being confessed both by the Centuristes, and by this learned
Doctor, that S. Augustine did not only convert us, but also did teach us all
the former doctrines: I would be resolved of M. white, by what extenuation or
figure in Rethorick, he can style our instruction in the said maine articles of
Catholic Religion, the planting of certain tryfling Ceremonies. But I see he
is most willing for his own behalf to alleuiate and lessen the weight and
consequence of our former conversion.

The 23. Untruth. Concerning the Conversion of Countries.
Page 357. Touching the conversion of other heathen Countries to the Faith of
Christ, fore-tould so long since by the Prophets Esa. 60. 62. and 49. pf. 2.
and 102.
of God to be accomplished only in the true Church of Christ: the D. as being
emulous of the Roman Catholic Church her honor therein: flatly affirms of
certain Countries, by him mentioned, that they were converted by that Church
which was of his own faith and profession, and not by the Church of us
Catholics, for thus he writes. Allowing all these Countries to have been
converted by such as were members of the Church of Rome, yet this was a
thousand years ago, when that Church was the same that ours is, and so the
conuersions wear wrought by persons adhering to the protestants faith.

This point is discovered to be false, first by refuting the reason delivered
by the Doctor, why the said Countries should be converted by the professors of
the protestants faith. Secondly by the testimonies of the said protestants
flatly confessing, that their Church, as yet never converted any Country to
Christianity.

As concerning the first point, I say, that the Church of Rome more then a
thousand years ago, haith seaced (supposing that before it was) to be
protestant, and therefore her self professing the contrary faith, as then,
could not convert the said Countries to protestancy.

That the Church of Rome acknowledged not in these times the protestants
religion, is most abundantly confessed by the protestants them selves, who do
frequently teach that the true Church of God (and consequently in their
supposales, their own Church) haith been latent and invisible more then these
last thousand years, during all which time, the Antichristian and popish
Religion (as they term it) haith possessed all Christian Countries whatsoever.

The protestants abundant confessions, have been already made so evident in
this point, incidently in the discovery of some of M. W. untruths, as that I
presume an iteration of the same, would be over fastidious and wearisom to the
Reader, and therefore I will pass on to the other point, cons^sting in the
confessions of the protestants, that their Church never yet converted any one
Country to Christianity.

And first for confirmation hereof, we find that Sebastian Castalie (a learned
Caluenist, and highly praisep by D, Humfray) De rat. inte^pr. li. 1. q. 62.
writing of the accomplishment of the prophesies of converting of kingdoms,
says thus. Equidem a^t haec futura fatendum est etc.

In his Preface of (...) great la^^ Bible dedicated to K^^g Edward the 6.
Truly we must confess, that these things shall be performed here after, or
have been heretofore, or God is to be accused of lying. If any man answer that
they have been performed, I will demand when? If he say, in the Apostles time,
I will ask, how it falls out, that neither then the knowledge of God was
altogether perfect, and after in so short a time vanished away, which was
promised to be eternal, and more abundant then the floods of the sea.

And then there somewhat after, the said protestant thus acknowledges. The more
I do examine the Scriptures, the less I obser^e it the same performed,
howsoever the said Prophets be vnde^stoode.

To conclude this point, the prophecies delivered by Esaias and others the
Prophets, for the spreading of Gods Church, are so fart from being yet
acomplished in the protestants Church, that diverse protestants have not only
acknowledged so much, but by reason of the not performance thereof, have in the
end become most wicked Apostataes: mantaining that if the faith and Religion
preached by Christ and his Apostles had been true, and his Church, that Church
which was figured out by the ancient Prophets: that then should the said
Prophesies, touching the enlargment of the Church, and the conversion of
nations, have had their successiue event, and infallible performance in the
said Church, which they affirm hitherto ha^th not been effected.

And vearably hereunto we find, that the want of the performance to the said
prophesies in the protestants Church, wrought so forcibly with David George a
Holla^der, See the History of David Georg painted at ^ntwerpe 1563. and first
published by the Dinynes of Basil.
and once professor of the protestants faith and religion in Basil (to omit
the like examples of diverse others) that in the end he taught most fearful and
horrible blasphemy, affirming Christ to have been a seducer: his chiefest
reason being, in that the true Religion (our Catholic Religion being by him
supposed to be false, and therefore the conuersions of Countries made to it,
not admitted to be intended by the Prophets) according to the predictions,
should have spread and disseminated it self before this time, through the most
Nations and Countries of the world, which point (says he) hitherto is not
accomplished.

Here now the iudiceous Reader may collect, both from what haith been
acknowledged above, as also from the present confession of the former Apostata
(being accompanied with such a dreadful event) how untrue the D. words were,
when he affirmed diverse Countries some thousand years since, to have been
converted from paganism, unto Christianity by that Church which in doctrine
and faith conspired with the protestants Church.

Thus you see M. W. that not I, but such as in other points of Nouelisme, do
interleague with you, give you the lie therein: and thus is falsehood truly
controuled, even by the Patrones of falsehood.

The 24. Untruth. Against the Popes authority in calling of Counsels.
Page 375. He (in charging the Pope with innovation of his jurisdiction) thus
says.

The beginning of the Popes Supremacy over Counsels, was of late, since the
Counsels of Constance and Basil, decreed within this hundredth years in the
Council of Lateran, by a few Italian Bishops, whereas in the ancient Church it
was otherwise. In this point, for the more compendiousnes thereof, I will
insist only in the fourth and fifth Century after Christ, both being within
the circuit of the primitive Church.

First then we find, that D: Whitaker confesses de Con^l. 9. 2. p. 42.
an Ecclesiastical Canon to be in the fourth Century, that Noe Council should
be celebrated, without the Bishop of Rome. He also further acknowledges, Ibid.
p. 4.
that Pope Julius made challenge thereby (meaning by the benefit of the said
Canon) to assemble a Council.

And where Bellarmine insisting in the president of Julius and other Bishops
urging this Canon, Danaeus a learned protestant, thus only replyeth. Resp. ad
Bell. par. 1. p. 595.
Nullius est moments etc. The example is of noe force, since it is proved from
the Testimony of the Bishop of Rome who is a party in his own cause. Thus
confessing the point it self (outfaced by the minister) but denying only the
lawfulnes thereof.

Now in the fyfth age we find, that the Magdeburgians do thus plainly Censure
the Popes of that time. Cent. 5. Col. 781.
Generalia Concilia etc. The bishops of Rome have challenged to them selves,
power of celebrating Counsels, as appears out of the 93. Epistle, and 7.
chapter of Leo. And yet further the said Centuristes do say Ibidem
Ac Synodos etc. They have rejected such Counsels as unlawful, which were not
called together by their Authority.

And thus far of this point: where you see, that our minister saying, that no
Bishop of Rome challenged authority of assembling of Counsels, or being above
them, but within this hundredth years last, is contradicted by the former
learned protestants, who confess that the Bishop of Rome practiced it, eleven
or twelve hundredth ages. I pray you whether of these is more likly to lie?

The 25. Untruth: Against merit of works.
Page 378. For the more disauthorising of the doctrine of merit of works: our
minister thus outlasheth. The doctrine touching the merit of works, was bego^
lately by the schoolmen.

For the trial of this point, some of the Fathers of the primitive Church
confessed even by the protestants to teach this our Catholic Faith, shall become
the witnesses bewene the D. and me.

First then the Magdeburgians do thus write of one Father. Cent. 5. Col. 1178.
Chrisastome handles impurely the doctrine of Justification, and attributes
merit to works.

Luther In Galat. c. 4.
calls Jerome, Ambrose, and Augvstine, Iusticiarios Iustice-workers of the
old Papacy.

Finally D. Humfrey Jesuit. part. 2. p. 530.
ascends even to Ireneus, Clemens, and others pronouncing of them, that then
hauy in their writings, the merit of works.

And thus far of this point. Wherefore our ministers oversight was most
gross, in diuulging such a notorious untruth, contrary to the express
Judgment of his own most learned brethren.

The 26. Untruth. Against the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Page 378. The minister endeavoring calumniously to dishonor the most
healthful and incruent Sacrifice of the Mass, writes, that the Mass began
not all at once, but by degrees.

Now here to instruct the Doctors ignorance, or at least to detect his malice:
I am to lay down the Iudgmente of the Catholic Church, teaching what is
ma^tayned to be essential to the Sacrifice of the Mass, and what but
accidental. The true nature then and essence of this Sacrifice, we hold to
consist, in the oblation of the most sacred body and blood of Christ and
consummation thereof: what prayers or ceremonies do either precede or follow
the words of the institution, are no essential part of the Mass, and if they
were all omitted in the celebration thereof, yet were the Sacrifice of it true
and perfect. And therefore we willingly confess without any prejudice to our
cause, that most of the said prayers or Ceremonies, were added by several
Popes, at different times: yet from our acknowledgment thereof, it in no sort
follows, that the Mass came in by degrees, since we all teach, that they are
neither the Mass, nor any essential part of it.

Now wheareas the minister by subtilty, and by falsely suggesting to the Reader,
that the Mass came in at several times, would have it to be understood for
our greater disaduauntage, of the essence and nature of the Mass it self: I
will lay down the Judgment of the Primitive Church herein, unanimously
teaching, (even by the confession of the most iudiceous protestants) the true
and vnbloudly Sacrifice, and oblation of Christ's body and blood, to be
performed in the celebration of the Eucharist: so shall the Reader be
instructed in the antiqnity of that which is essentially the mass: and withal
(in reguard of the ministers calumnious dealing herein) he shall have just
reason to say. Ierem. 5.
Astonishment and marvelous things are done in the land: the prophets
prophesied a lie.

And here for greater compendiousnes, I will forbear to set down the
Protestants confessions of particular Fathers teaching the doctrine of the
Mass, and will restrain my self only to such their sayings, whereof some do
belong to the primitive Church in general, and others to the first age or
Century thereof.

And first we f^nd Calvin to write of them in general lib. de vera Ecclesiae
reform. extant. in Tract. The ol. Calvin. p. 389.
Veteres excusandi non sunt etc: The ancient Fathers are not to be excused,
seeing it is evident that they turned from the true and genuine Institution of
Christ. For whereas the lords supper it celebrated to this end, that we should
communicate with the Sacrifice of Christ, the Fathers not being content
therewith, have added thereunto an oblation. And to the like purpose he says
in his Institutions. inst. l. 4. ca. 18. Sect. 11.
Veteres quoque illos video etc I do see that those Ancient Fathers, did
detort the memory thereof (meaning of the Eucharist) otherwise then was
agreeing to the Institution of Christ: for their Lords Supper, does make show
and representation of I can not tell what reiterated and renewed Sacrifice.
They have more nearely imitated the Judicial manner of Sacrificing, then
either Christ did ordain, or the nature of the Gospel did suffer. Tnus Calvin.

Add hereunto for the greater Antiquity of the doctrine of the Sacrifice of the
Mass, that the protestants them selves do confess the faith thereof to be
universal, even in the first age or Century after Christ.

For we find, that Hospmian a famous protestant does thus write. In his
Sacram. l. 1. Ca. 6. p. 20
I am tum primo etc. Even in the first age the Apostles being yet living, the
devil did deceive men more about this Sacrament, then about Baptism, and did
withdraw men from the first form thereof.

In like sort Sebastianus Francus an other learned protestant, thus plainly
writes, Epist. de abrog. in vniuersum omnibus stat., Eccl.
Statimpost Apostolos etc. Presently after the Apostles, all things were
turned upside down, cana domini in sacrificium transformata etc. The Lords
supper is turned into a Sacrifice.

To conclude, M. Bacon a great prot^stant here in England, thus confesses. In
his Treatise entitled, The relickes of Rome, p. 344
The Mass was conceived, begoten, and borne, anon after the Apostles times,
if all be true that Historiographers do write.

Thus much of the antiquity of the Mass: which point thus acknowledged, who
sees not that the testimonies of the former protestants, do utterly overthrow
the supposed truth of the D. Words, affirming that the Mass came in by
degrees, and intimating to the credulous Reader, that it was brought in by
little and little in these latter ages. But M. White, if in the defending of your
former untruths, you can not blush for shame; yet here grow pale through
fear, for your sin is not ordinary, seeing your mendaceous assertion does
obtrude an innovation upon no lesser Article, then the immolation and offering
up of the most sacred body and blood of our Savior and Redeemer, to his
heavenly Father for the expiation of our sins, first instituted (out of the
bowels of his mercy) even by Christ: so as him self being the Priest, did the
sacrifice him self. Aug. li. 4. de T^n. ca. 14.
Quid g^atius offerri (faith one Fa. aut daripotest, quam caro sacrifici^
nostri, corpus effectu^ sacerdotis nostri.

The 27. Untruth. Concerning wafer Cakes.
Page 389. the Doctor inueighing further against the Mass, that wafer-cakes
were first brought into the Sacrament, in the eleventh age or Century after
Christ, and answearably thereunto he haith made a reference to this place in
his Alphabeticall Table, at the latter end of his book at the word wafer, thus
setting down, wafers, when brought in. Sect. 5. n^m. 31.

Now that this proceeds from the same sirayne, to wit, a spiritu mendacit,
from whence all his former assertions had their origin, is proved in that it
is confessed by D. Bilson, In his true defense. part. 4. p. 566.
that in the days of Epiphanius, it was rownd in figure. Cartwright though he
will needs find a beginning thereof after the Apostles, yet thus writes of
the bread of the Sacrament. Whyteg. def. p. 593.
It was a wafer-cake brought in by Pope Alexander: which Pope even by the
testimony of Osia^der, Cent. 2 p. 10^
lived fifteen hundredth years since: And yet contrary to all these
authorities, we mightily wrong our minister if we will not believe him affirming
that wafers were brought in, about a thousand years after Christ.

The 28. Untruth. Against the adoration of the B. Sacrament.
Page 399. The minister pers^sting in his serpentyne and v^nemous disposition
against the most B. Sacrament touching the Adoration thereof, thus lyingly
forgeth. The Adoration of the Sacrament, is a late invention, following upon the
conceit of the Real presence, and prescribed 1220 years, f^^^ Christ, by
Honorius the third. etc,

That Adoration follows upon the belief of the real presence, it is gra^
^ied, but that it is a late invention begone in the time of Honorius, is false.
Thus the Doctor for the letter countenancing of this lie, does calumniously
coople with it a truth, that the one might be shrouded under the wings of the
other.

Now that there was no innovation touching the Adoration of the Sacrament at
that time, is euinced from two reasons. First because no Historiographer does
give the least intimation of any such institution as then but newly brought
into the Church: only Honorius decreed, that the priest should more diligently
admonish the people thereof, in reguarde of some former negligence crept in
concerning the same: And this is all which can be truly collected from the
Decree of the said Honorius.

Secondly the former point is proved, from the abundant testimonies of our
adversaries, charging the times precedent to Honorius, with the said doctrine
of Adoration. For first we read, that Auerroes a hea then Philosopher (who
lived above 80. years before the prescribed time of Honorius his former
supposed innovation) did perticulerly deride the Christians of his days, for
the Adoring of the Sacrament.

This is acknowledged by D. Fulke, Against Heskins. etc. p. 235.
and D. Sa^liffe. In his Survey of popery. p. 295.
But to ascend to higher times, the Centuristes speaking of the prayers of S.
Ambrose, Cent. 4. Col. 43.
in his book entitled, Orat. praeparat. ad Massam. do thus write, Continent
adorationem panis in Sacramento. Those prayers do conte^ne the Adoration of the
bread in the sacrament. Chem^^tius produces diverse sentences of Augustine,
Ambrose, and Naz^anzen, which sentences in Chem^^tius his Judgment, do affirm
the Adoration of the Sacrament. Exam. part. 2. p. 92.


Now all these authorities, do demonstratiuely convince, that the Adoration of
the Sacrament, was not introduced in the Church, as an innovation in the time
of Honorius. From all which it is manifest, that as in any other point of
Catholic Religion, so also in this of Adoration, we altogether do conspire and
agree with the venerable Fathers of Gods Church. And therefore as Aristotle and
other ancient Philosophers did teach, that this our inferior world, was
joined to the Superior and Celestial world, that by the help of this
conjunction, we might more perfectly participate of the influences and virtues
of those heavenly bodies: So we may say, that these our latter times through a
continual and uninterrupted current of believing God, and practicing the same
points of Faith with the Ancient Doctors, are indissolubly and nearely tied
to those primitive days, so as nothing is found in those reverent days
instituted either by Christ or his Apostles, which by this means is not
securely deryued to the Catholic Church of these modern times.

The 29. Untruth. Against the Succession of Catholic Pastors.
Page 412. After the D. haith Trasonically boasted of the succession of the
protestants in his own Church, he proceeds further, affirming that
Succession of the pastors and Bishops in the Church of Rome, haith been
interrupted: And answearably hereto, in the Table in the end of his book, at
the word Succession, with reference to this place, he thus says. The Roman
Church haith no true outward Succession. Where you see by his own words, that
the question here intended by this minister, is not of succession of doctrine
(by which slight and evasion, diverse of our adversaries use to decline the
testimonies of the ancient Fathers alleged by us for strengthening the
argument drawn from Succession) but only of external succession of Bishops
and Pastors, which the minister falsely challenging heretofore to his own
church, does now as falsely take away from ours.

How maliceous a lie this is, shall appear from the mouths of his own
brethren.

And ^i^st we find that the Centuristes do very diligently and elaboratly set
down, the succession particulerly of the Bishops of Rome in the 10. Chapter
of every Century: And this Method, they precisely observe in all ages of the
Church even from S. Peter, to their own time, entituling the said Chapter, de
Episcopis and Doctoribus.

Doctor Fulke does in like manner ingeniously acknowledge the same in these
words. You can name the notable persons in all ages, in their government and
ministry, and especially the Succession of the Popes, you can rehearse in
order upon your fingers. Thus writes he in his answer to A counterfeit
Catholic, p. 27. And the like does he write in his Reioynder to Bristoes reply
p. 343.

Thus do our adversaries acknowledge in our behalf touching Succession, which
Calvin flatly denies to be found in his own Church, who plainly teaches
Institut. li. 4. ca. 3. Sect. 4.
that with them, the true succession of ordination, was broke of: so
daungerously wounding him self with that sentence of S. Augustine. tom. 7.
cont. Epist. Manich. c. 4.
In Ecclesia gremio me iustiss me tenet ab ipsa sede Petri etc. vsque ad
presentem Ep scopatum: successio Sacerdotum.

To conclude, the uninterrupted descent and current of Succession in the
Catholic Church, is infallibly euicted from our adversaries acknowledgment, of
the continual visiblenes thereof, since the one does reciprocally imply the
other. For if our Church was ever visible, and the doctrine thereof never
suffered any disparition or vanishing away: then were the Bishops and Pastors
in like sort ever visible, since without Pastors to minister the word and
Sacraments, and to govern the flock: the Church like a maistlesse ship, can
not for any time subs^st or be.

And thus far of this point. Wherein our minister by denying Succession to be
in our Church, and falsely ascribing it to his own new congregation, does thus
in advancing the one above the other, make innovation, to take the wall of true
Antiquity, and heresy of true Religion.

The 30 Untruth. In defense of Martyn Luthers life and manners.
From page 425. to 433. The D. becomes Luthers Encomiast, and much labors
to free his life, and death, from all obloquy, and infamy, often affirming,
that what soever touching his life may seem worthy of reprehension, is only
forged by his adversaries, meaning the Catholics: and therefore in his table
in the end of his book, at the word Luther, he thus says. Luthers life
justified, against the maliceous reports of the papists.

Now to convince this shameless untruth, I will (forbearing herein the
credible reports of Catholics) alledg only the confession of Luther him
self delivered in his own words, or else the testimonies of learned
protestants; so shall we see that our minister here perfectly acted his part,
in bouldly mantayning against such evident testimonies, that what may seem to
detract from Luthers honesty, and integrity, are but the fictions of his
enemies. And here for greater compendiousnes, I will insiste only in two
points, first in displaying in part his Sensuality: Secondly his Pride.

And first touching his sayings of lust and incontinency, he thus admonishes.
Sermo de Matrimonio.
Si non vult vxor, aut non possit, veniat ancilla. If the wife will not or can
not, let the maid come. Again he thus writes. Tom. 5. wittem. ser. de Matrim.
fol. 119.
As it is not in my power that I should be no man: so it is not in my power
that I should be without a woman. And there after. It is not in our power
either that it should be stayed or omitted, but it is as necessary, as that I
should be a man, and more necessary then to eat, drink, purge, make clean the
nose etc. And yet more fully he speaks of his own incontinency in these
words. De colloq. men's. fol. 526.
I am almost mad through the rage of lust and desire of women. As also he thus
further confesses. To. 1. Ep. fol. 334. Ep. ad Philippa.
I am burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh: I who ought to be
fervent in spirit, am fervent in the flesh, in lust, sloth, etc. Eight days
are now past, wherein I neither write, pray, nor study, being uexed partly with
temptation of the flesh, partly with other trouble.

This point is so evident, that Benedict Morgenstern a protestant writer says
of the Caluenistes, when they intend at any time to give assent or provocation
to nature: Non verentur inter se dicere, hodie Lutheranice vinemus. They were
not afraid to say among them selves, to day we will live after the manner of
Luther. Tract. de Eccl. p. 221.
Thus using the name of Luther, the more fully to express the libidenous life
and custom of Luther.

Now to all these confessions of his own and other protestants, it can not be
replied that him self did write thus when he was a papist, and before his
revolt: for of his life during his stay in the papacy, you shall hear his own
report, that Upon the Epistle to the Galathians in engl. in ca. 1. fol. 35.
he honored the Pope of mere conscience, kept chastity, poverty, and
obedience, and whatsoever (says he) I did, I did it with a single heart, of
good zeal, and for the glory of god, fearing greauously the last day, and
desireous to be saved from the bothom of my heart. Thus he confesses of the
integrity of his mind and intention, during the time of his continuing a
catholic. And thus much of his inclination to lust and wantonness.

Now touching Luthers pride (forbearing his own sayings delivered most
insolently, in contempt of the ancient Fathers, and of King Henry the eight) I
will content my self with the testimonies only of protestants, who
particulerly inueighed against him for his pride. Zuinglius, in reguard of his
insupportable pride, thus says of him. To 2. Res. ad confess. Luth. fol. 478
En vt totum etc. Behold how Satan labors wholly to possess this man. And
OEcolampadius admonishes Luther, In resp. ad confess. Luth.
to beware, lest being puffed up by arogancy and pride, he be seduced by
Satan. Answearably hereto Conradus Regius a learned and famous protestant,
thus writes of him. In libro German. con. Io. Hos. de caena Domini.
Deus propter peccatum superbiae etc. God, by reason of the sin of pride
wherewith Luther was puffed up (as many of his own writings do witness) haith
taken away his true spirit from him, as he did from the Prophets 3. Reg. 22.
and in place thereof, haith given him a proud, angry, and lying spirit.

To conclude, omitting diverse other learned protestants testimonies, the
Divines of Tigur being Caluenistes, thus censure Luthers book written against
the Sacramentaries, and Zuinglians, that it was In confess. Germanice im pressa,
Tigur^. An 1544. in 8. fol. 3.
Liber plenus demoniis, plenus impudici^ dicteriis: scatet tracundia et furore.
And thus we find in what height of spirit, and elation of mind, he did write
against his own brethren, and how for the same he was rebuked by them.

Now having displaid in part Luthers deportment, and this, either from his own
mouth, or from the confessions of his own brethren: I refer two things to the
Readers consideration, one, whether our D. did aver an untruth or no, in
iustifiing, that whatsoever could be produced against Luthers life and
conversation, was malignantly forged only by us his enemies.

The second (and that much more importing) whether it stands with probability
of reason, or the accustomed course of Gods proceeding (who ever electeth means
suitable and proportionable to their e^des) to make choice, for the restoring
and replanting the truth of his Gospel and Religion (supposing it was then
decayed) of a man whose course of life, writings, and doctrine, do even breath
only pride, contumacy, sensuality, Sardanapalisme, and luxury.

Here now M. White I have thought good in the enumeration of your lies, to end
with Luther, as originally from him, you first did suck your lyinge doctrine.
Only I will conclude with this, that since you are entered with our vulgar
multitude (who chiefly rest upon the outward grain and appearance of things)
into the number and catologue of our new Evangelical Prophets: I would wish
such your folowers, to entertain an impartial view and consideration of this
and other your forgeries and sleightes, which if they do, doubtless they shall
in the end find and acknowledge, that you are guided therein even by that
ghostly enemy of man's soul, who once said: 3. Reg. 22.
Egrediar, and ero spiritus mendaex in ore omnium Prophetarum eiu^. I will go
forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets.

WHITE DYED BLACK
THE THIRD PART. Containing diverse impertinences or absurd Illations, or
reasoninges, drawn from Master White his alleged Authorities.
The 1. Paragraph. Werein are discovered strange Illations or arguinges, in
proof that the Scriptures are the sole rule of Faith, and against Traditions.
Having in the two precedent parts set down many corruptions and lies
practiced by M. White: it now follows according to my former intended
Method, that I also display diverse of his impertinent and absurd inferences
and arguments (for these three points, to wit, corrupting, lying, and idly or
absurdly disputing, are the three several threedes whereof the whole work of
his Treatise is wouen. In all which (though different in them selves) he still
retayneth one and the same intention of deceit, like the loade-stone, which
though often changes his place, yet never changes it center.

Now touching those his impertinences and loose illations, the Reader is to
conceive, that they consist in his alleging of such testimonies both of
Scriptures, Fathers, and Catholic writers, as being truly set down, do not
neuerth^l^sse impugn that point of our Catholic doctrine, against which they
were by him so urged. Which course of writing, whether it may be ascrybed to
our Doctors ignorance and want of learning, or rather (which is more probable)
to his malice against the Catholic Faith, and desire to deceive the simple and
unlearned, or lastly to the beggary of his cause, being deuoide of better
arguments, I leave to him self to decide. But howsoever it is, here I am to
advertise the Reader, that in perusing of such authorities produced by M.
White, he would ever recurr to the true state of the question, and particulerly
that he would apply the said sentences, to that very point or touch wherein
the life of the question consists, and then he shall find how rouingly, and
wandringly they are directed, still glauncing by, upon some ignorant or wilful
mistaking or other, never reaching the mark intended. And so he may apply the
words of Tertulian, though in a different sense, to the loose writings of M.
White and such others Quemcunque conceperint ventum argumentationis scorpii
isti, quocunque se acumine impegerint, vna tam linea ista: Tertull. aduers.
Gnost.
to wit the line drawn from our understanding to the main point in
controversy.

And here M. White can not say, in excuse of him self, that such testimonies of
this nature are produced by him only to prove so much and no more, as the
words in their litterall and acknowledged sense, do immediately import: Which
evasion is insufficient for two respects.

First because the proof^ of that which literally and plainly they signify,
is not in controversy between the protestants and us, and therefore the
iustifiing of so much being not denied by any learned Catholic, is needelesly
undertaken.

Secondly in that M. White does most labouriously, painefully, and purposly,
alledg the said testimonies, to convince, and impugn, some one Catholic point
or other, taught by us, and denied by the protestants, and this his drift and
scope is manifested, either by his answearable entituling of the leaves wherein
such authorities are found, or else by his own words precedent or subsequent
to the said sentences.

But to detayne the Reader no longer from these his allegations: The first
point of this kind which presents it self, is as touching the Rule of Faith,
and rejecting of all Apostolical Traditions: For page 13. we thus read,
digres. 3. Wherein by the Scriptures, Fathers, Reasons, and papists own
confessions, it is showed, that the Scripture is the rule of Faith: As likewise
he entituleth that leaf and some others following, in this manner. The
Scripture only, is tho judge and rule of Faith. And so answearably hereto, page
17. beating the former title, he thus says. Shall the Libertynes be recalled
from their blind revelations, to their written text: and shall not the papists
be revoked from their uncertain Traditions to the same rule?

But that we may the better behold how valiantly our minister impugneth all
Traditions, by erectinge the Scripture as sole rule of Faith: we are here to
call unto mind what the Catholic Church teaches in this point.

It then teaches, that the word of God is to limit and confine our Faith, and
that nothing is to be accounted as matter of faith, which receaueth not it
proof from thence. Hereupon it teaches further, that this word is either
written, which is commonly called the Scripture, or else delivered by Christ and
his Church, and this comprehends Traditions. Both these we believe to be of
infallible authority, since the true and inward reason why the word of God is
the word of God, is not because it is written, rather then delivered by speech,
(for this is merely extrinsicall to the point) but because the said word
proceeded from them, who were infallibly and immediately directed therein by the
assistance of the holy Ghost.

This supposed, let us see how M. White proves that the written word is only
the rule of Faith, and consequently that there are no Traditions of the Church
which may also in part be a rule thereof,

First then our Doctor urges to this end several places of Scripture, as
(among others) that of Solomon. prou. 2. 1.
The scripture will make a man understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity, and every good path. Again that of Esaias. Esa. 8.
We must repair to the Law, to the testimony: if any speak not according to
that word, there is no light in him. Also out of Malachy. Malach. 4.
Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all
Israel, with the statutes and Judgments. In like sort he alleges, that
Abraham answearing the rich glutton, said, that Luc. 16.
his brethren had Moses and the Prophets.

Now that the Reader may see, how well these texts are to the point
controuerted, I will set some of them down in form of Argument, and so apply
them to M. Whytes purpose. As first thus. Solomon said of the Scriptures of the
old Testament. The Scripture will make a man understand righteousness, and
Judgment, and equity, and every good path: Ergo now in the time of
Christianity, there are no Traditions, but the Scripture of the old Testament,
it the only rule of Faith. Again, Remember the Law of Moses my servant,
which I commanded him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the statutes and
judgments; Therefore no Traditions. Lastly. The brethren of the rich glutton
had Moses and the Prophets: Therefore no points of Christian Faith, are to be
proved from any Traditions of the Church. Strangly, wildly, and most
exorbitantly concluded: for what reference have these textes with the rule of
Faith, the which is not so much as glaunced at in any one of them? or granting
that they had, why should the old Testament, be a pattern for the Faith
professed in the new Testament, since all Christians do grant, that the time
of Grace, is enriched with many privileges and immunities, whereof the old Law
was altogether deprived?

After these and such like textes of Scripture, he descends, to prove the
soresaid point, from the testimonies of the ancient Fathers: as, to omit
diverse others, he alleges Tertulian saying. cont. Hermog.
The Scripture is the rule of Faith, which we grant, for we teach that it is
Regula partialis fidei, a Rule of our faith in part, yet hence it follows not
(which is the point here only to be proved) that it is Regula totalis, an
entyre and sole rule of Faith, without the help of any Traditions, and as large
in extent as our faith is.

Also S. Augustine thus writing De nupr. and concup. ad Valor. l. 2. ca. 33.
This controversy depending between us, requyres a Judge, let Christ therefore
judge, and let the Apostle Paul judge with him, because Christ also speaks in
his Apostle. As if Christ and his Apostles could not as well speak in
Traditions, as in writings, or because granting that that particular
controversy there meant by S. Augustine, was proved from the wrytinges of S.
Paul: therefore all other Articles of Christian Religion, should thence also
receive their sole proof. Again Gregory Nyssen tearming the Scripture, Orat.
de iis qui adeunt Hietos.
a strait and inflexible Rule, as in that the Scriptute is inflexible and
inchangeable for those points which it proves, therefore it alone and no
Apostolical traditions, is to prove any article of our Faith. Lastly he
introdu^eth S. Austine again saying. De doct. chris. li. 2. ca. 42.
Whatsoever thing it be that a man learnes out of the Scripture, if it be
hurtful, there it is condemned, if it be profitable, there it is found. Which
place particulerly concerning conversation of life, as virtue and vice, of both
which, the Scripture most fully discourses, how it may condemn Apostolical
traditions, which may deliver supernatural and high mysteries of Christian
faith, I leave to the censure of any iudceous man.

This done, he next falls to the sentences of more late Catholic writers, as
first of S. Thomas Aquinas saying. Lect. 1. in 1. Tim. 6.
The doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, is Canonical, because it is the
Rule of our understanding,

But what do these words force, only in the behalf of Scripture, and against
Apostolical Traditions, since in leede they do not peculierly concern the
Scripture, but (as the words literally import) that the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets in general, whether it be written or unwritten, is
Canonical. Again he urges S. Thomas the second time 1. q. Art. 8.
Our Faith reste^h and st^eth it self, upon the revelation given to the
Apostles and Prophets, which write the Canonical books, and not upon
revelation (if any such have been made) to any other Doctors. But who denies
that the prophets and Apostles did write the canonical books? Or who reaches
that our Faith ought to rest upon the revelation of any other Doctors then the
Prophets and the Apostles? Or show any reason (which is the chief point in this
sentence to be showed) why the revelations of the Prophets, and especially the
Apostles, may not as well comprehend traditions, as the written word.

In like sort he brings in Gerson saying. de com. sub vtr. spec.
Scripture is the Rule of our faith, which being well understood, noe
authority of men is to be admitted against it. As I have said before, we do
teach that the Scripture is the Rule of Faith, but not the sole Rule, which M.
White ought to prove. Again we willingly acknowledge, that no authority of man
is to stand against the Scripture: but what does this impeach Apostolical
traditions, which are no more the bare authority of man, then the Scripture it
self, both equally proceeding from God, by the assistance of the holy Ghost?

Finally he comes in with Perisius, writing that de ration. Co^. l. 2. ca. 19.
The Authority of no Saint, is of infallible truth: for S. Augustine geues
that honor only to the sacred Scriptures.

But here the question is not touching the tradition of any other Saints,
then only of our Savior and his Apostles, and the whole Church: yet we see
Peresius here speaking of Saints, must needs mean only of Particular
Saints, or holy men since the times of the Apostles, seeing otherwise he
should teach (which were most wicked) that the authority of the Apostles and
the Evangelists, are not of infallible truth.

Besides S. Augustine in that place restrayneth, without any reference at all
to Traditions, his meaning only to the writings of private Doctors, in
respect of the sacred Scripture: and in this reguard (still speaking of books
written) we all grant that the Scripture is of an infallible truth.

Such unprofitable and wast testimonies M. White is accustomed to heap
together in his book, the which, that they shall not so easily be espied, he
subtly (for the most part) mingleth them with other Authorities more
pertinent, at least in outward for the etc show of words: like a good
Captain, who rangeth his worst and weakest soldiers, in the midst and
th^ong of the more experienced, so making those forms to serve only to
increase (in the enemies eye) the number, though not their force.

The 2. Paragraph. Wherein are discussed certain Arguments drawn from
Scriptures and Fathers, in proof that the sacred Scriptures, and the true
sense there of, are made sufficiently known unto us without any approbation or
explication of the Church.
The next subject of his loose kind of Inferences, wherein I will insist,
partly conspireth with the former, and is touching the absolute and supreme
soueraig^ty of the Scriptures in determining of controversies, without any
needful explication of gods Church, this assertion being indeed a head
Theoreme or principle with the sectaries of this age. For page 4^. M. White
thus writes. Digressio. 11. proving, that The Scripture it self, haith that
outward authority whereupon our faith is built, and not the Church.

Now here for the better vindicating and freeing us from all contumelious
calumnies touching our supposed contempt of the Scriptures, as also for the
more manifest discovery of M. Whytes weak arguing herein: the Reader is to
take notice, that the Catholics do ascribe all due reverence, estimation, and
respect to the Scripture whatsoever, acknowledging it to be gods ambassador,
which vnfouldeth unto man upon earth, the sacred will and pleasure of our
heavenly King: as also that it is the spiritual Tenure by the which we make
claim to our eternal and celestial enheritance. In like sort they willingly
confess, that Scripture is Scripture, and the word of God, before it receive
any approbation from the Church: as also that this or that is the true sense of
any particular text of the Scripture, before the Church do confirm the same.
Notwithstanding, seeing the true sense of the Scripture, is as it were the very
Soul which informs the body of the letter, and that the Scripture is to be
understood by the Reader, with that spirit with the which it was written, to
wit, with the spirit of the holy Ghost: Therefore we do hold, that (so far as
concerns our taking of notice, that this or that is the Scripture of Gods
word, or that this is the true sense of such a passage thereof, intended by the
holy Ghost) we are to recurre to the authority of the Church, which we believe
to be directed and guided therein by the same holy Ghost, according as the
Scripture it self in several places 1. Tim. 3. Mat. 18.
assures us.

But now let us come to the proves and testimonies produced by M. White, to
convince, that the Scripture, so far forth as we are to take acknowledgment
thereof (for this only is here the point of the doubt as I showed above)
needs not (for warranting to us that it is the word of God, or for
explicating the true sense thereof) and Authority or approbation of the Church.
And first he brings to this end diverse texts of Scripture containing the
worth and dignity of it self, as when it is termed an 1. Pet. 1.
Immor. all seed. The 1. Cor. ^.
demonstration of the Spirit and power. that it is Heb. 4.
Lively and powerful: that Luc. 24.
it makes our bear^^^ to burn within us. that Io. 6.
It gives a greater testimony to Christ, then John Baptist could give. that 2.
Pet. 1.
A voice from heaven is not so sure as it. that 1. Io. 5.
It is the spirit which bears witness to the truth thereof. that Ibid.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, Lastly he
alleges those words of Christ. Io 5.
They which will not believe Moses wrytinges, will not believe him.

Now let us see how towardly our Minister can conclude from these textes,
against our former doctrine. The scripture is an immortal seed, and it is
lively and powerful: Therefore it ought to receive no authority touching the
manifesting of it true sense to us, from Gods Church which is guided with the
holy Ghost. Again. It is the demonstration of the Spirit and power, and it
makes our hearts to burn within us: Therefore it ought to receive no authority
etc. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of god is greater, and he that
believes not Moses writings, will not believe Christ: Therefore the Scripture
ought to receive no authority etc: What inferences are these? Or who would
think, that a learned minister of gods word, the via lactea, For so is M. Wh.
cyted by Purchase in his late book.
a Doctor made only for desert, before his due ordinary time: Finally that M.
White (since this very name is supposed to comprehend worth enough) should
thus exorbitantly, and extrauagantly infer and conclude, contrary to all
precepts of art and Logical rules?

But to pass on, the more in his judgment to depresse the Authority of the
Church, he brings in D. Stapleton, though most impertinently alleged,
saying. Lib. ^ de p^ncip. sid. doct. cap. 20.
The Authority of the Church, is but a thing created, distinct from the first
verity. which position we willingly admit, who acknowledge the Church to be a
thing different from god who is the first truth though guided by his Spirit.
Again he produces to the like effect S. Ambrose, who thus writes. l. 5. Ep.
11.
Let God him self teach me them steries of heaven, not man who knows not him
self: Whom may I believe in the things of god, better then god him self? which
sentence also we embrace, yet do affirm that god teaches us more securely by
the authority of the Church directed by his assistance (and consequently not by
the authority of man) then by the mediation of each man's private and
uncertain spirit.

Also Salutanus is brought by him saying. l. 3. da Prouid.
All that men say needs reasons and witnesses, but Gods word is witness to it
self, because it follows necessarily, that whatsoever the incorrupt truth
speaks, must needs be an incorrupt witness of it self: As if what the Church,
assisted by the holy Ghost, said, were the saying only of man, or as if the
question were here, whether Gods word be Gods word before it be defined by the
Church (which no man denies) and not whether the members of the Church (which
indeed is the point here issuable) is to accept of Gods word as his word, by
the Authority of his said Church.

In like sort page 53. to the former scope he produces S. Augustine thus
writing to the Manaches. Contra Faust. l. 32. ca. 19.
You see this is your endevour^ to take away from us the Authorityes of the
Scriptures, and that every ones mind might be his Author what to allow, and
what to disalow in every text, and so he is not for his faith made subject to
the Scripture, but makes the Scripture subject to him self etc.

Which words how they can touch the Catholics, I see not, seeing they seek
not to take away the Authority of the Scriptures, which they willingly
reverence, neither teach they, that every ones mind ought to be an author what
to allow, or what to disalow in the exposition of any text, for they rely
herein upon the judgment of Gods universal Church, the former being indeed
rather peculiar to the sectaries of this age, in reguard of their private
interpreting spirit. And presently after, he also cyteth S. Augustine again in
the former book. Why do thou not rather submits thy self to Evangelical
Authority, so steedfast, so stable, so renowned, and by certain succession
commended from the Apostles to our times: that thou may believe, that thou
may behold, that thou may learn, all those things which hinder thee from
doing it through thine own vain and perverse opinion. How can these words be
tentred and shamed to us Catholics? Or how can it be termed a man's own
vain and perverse opinion by receiving Evangelical Authority as it is
manifested to us, not by our own imaginations, but by the censure of the
Church of God, which is styled by the Apostle, Columna and firmamentum
veritatis.

Thus we see how wandringly M. White discourses, matching and coopling
together through his malice and ignorance in arguing, adulterate and bastard
conclusions, with legitimate premises. And after the like manner even in the
first leaf here alleged, though somewhat before these last testimonies, he
urges certain textes of Scripture intended of Christ, as Io. 20.
The Scriptures are written that we may believe in him. Again. 1. Io. 5.
He that believes in him, haith a witness in him self. Thirdly Ephe^. 2.
We are all built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. Christ him
self being the head corner stone, in whom all the building is coopled together
by the spirit.

Now to what end he mustereth all these sentences of Scripture god him self
knows: for neither do they derogate any thing from the Churches Authority,
since indeed they do not concern it, neither do they ascribe any more to
Christ, then all Catholics do acknowledge and believe. But it seems M. White
thought it good policy thus to lead serth in triumph, whole squadrons of
textes, and other human testimonies, that so they might seem powerful and
terrible (how weak soever otherwise through his misapplications they were)
against the Churches Authority, the eye of the unlearned. But to end this
Paragraph, here the Reader may see, in how many impertinent allegatio^s M.
White haith insisted, even within the reading of two leaves together, and all
implicitly directed to charg the Catholics with their disualuing the
Scriptures, through their acknowledging the Churches lawful authority, as if
to contemn the church of God, were an argument with him, the more to admire
the word of god. Thus he seems to partake (though in a different example ^
with a certain man recorded by Sulpitius, Sulpitius Seuerus Epist. Hist. Eccl.
so writes of Ithacius.
with whom every one studious of virtue or abstinence, was suspected with the
heresy of the Priscilianistes.

The 3. Paragraph. Wherein are examined some of M. Whytes preofes against the
Churches visibility.
An other passage whereupon our minister spends his frothy and immateriall
proofs, is touching the inuisiblenes of the Church: first bearing the Reader
in hand that by inuisibility he means not an utter extinction or disparition
of the true Church, and faith: yet after in effect he recalleth the same and
thus writes. page 87. When we say the Church is invisible, we mean that all
the external government thereof, may come to decay, in that the local and
personal succession of pastors may be interrupted, the discipline hindered, the
preachers scattered, and all the outward exercise and government of religion
suspended, whereby it shall come to pass, that in all the world you can not
see any one particular Church professing the true faith whereunto you may
sa^fly join your self, by reason persecution and heresies, shall have
ouerflowed all Churches, as Noes flood did the world etc. Thus you see how
liberally and fully he here delivers (though in the beginning of that Chapter
he speaks more mincingly thereof.) Now if the discipline may be hindered, the
preachers scattered etc. then shall not the word be preached, nor the
Sacraments ministered, which are (at least by our adversaries principles)
inseparable marks of the true Church, and consequently, they being taken away,
the Church for the time, must be utterly extinct.

This being the true meaning of M. White, he undertakes to prove that the
Catholics do generally teach, the like inuisibility of Gods Church, and
therefore he thus styleth those leaves, The papists say the Church is
invisible, which inuisibility to be taught by the Catholics, that he may
prove, he haileth in all sayings of any one Catholic Doctor or other, which
show only that the Church of God, is more co^spicuous at one time then an
other, which we all grant, yet from thence it can not be enforced, that
therefore by the Catholic doctrine, it may be sometimes so latent, as that it
can not be known where it is.

But to fortify this his false assertion, he alleges Pererius in these
words. In Daniel. page 714.
In the ryme of Antiehrist there shall be no Sacrament in public places,
neither shall ^ay public honor be given it, but privately and privily shall it
be kept and honored. In the same manner he urges Ouandus, Breuiloq. in 4.
sent. d 18. p. 602.
that the mass in the time of Antichrist shall be celebrated but in very few
places, so that it shall seem to be ceased. Now (to omit that if the mass
shall be celebrated in few places, then must it be in some places, and if in
some places, then is the Church visible even in those places) what illation is
this?

The Eucharist or the mass, shall not be publicly honored or celebrated in
Antichrists time, but only in private or in secret: therefore then the Church
shall be invisible and unknown. The silynes of which argument is controuled
even by the woeful experience of our own country at this present, where the
world sees that the Mass and other Catholic Sacraments, are exercysed only
in private howses, and not in public Churches; and yet who will from hence
conclude, that the Catholic Church here in England, is latent and invisible,
since the immovable constancy and perseverance of English Catholics, haith
made them known and remarkable to all the parts of Christendom.

He next alleges diverse Catholics, jointly teaching, Bosius de sig. Eccl.
l. 24. ca. 9. Dom. a Soro 2. d. 46. q. 1. art. 1.
that in the time of Antichrist, The Sacrifice of the Eucharist shall be taken
away, which point being granted, yet proves not that the true faith of Christ
shall so fall away, that none can then be named who shall profess the same.
For seeing that the celebrating of the Eucharist, is an external worship of
god, which though it be suspended for the time, yet it is not necessarily
accompanied with an inuisibility of the Church, and a vanishing away of the
true Faith of Christ, even in reguard of the persons who should perform the
same. For this point is likewise made manifest by the impriso^ed Preistes here
in England, whose public exercise of their Religion, though it be prohibited
and restrained, yet are they well known to the state, by professing them
selves in these times of pressures (through a true heroical and spiritual
fortitude) members of the Catholic Church.

Next to the former testimonies, he marshalleth Gregory De Valentia thus
writing. Anal. fid. l. 6. ca. 4.
When we say, the Church is always conspicuous, this must not be taken, as if
we thought it might at every season be discerned alike easily. For we know that
it is som-times tossed with the waves of erroures, schisms, and persecutions,
that to such as are unskillful, and do not discreetly euough weygh the
circumstances of times and things, it shall be very hard to be known etc.
Therefore we deny not, but that it will be harder to discern the Church at
some times, then at other some: yet this we avouch, that it always migt be
discerned, by such as could wisly esteem things. Thus this Catholic Author
wirh whom D. Stapleton is alleged Relect. contr. 1. q. 3. p. 30.
by M. White, to conspire herein. Now what does this testimony make against us,
since it chiefly proves, that the splendor of Gods Church, is more radiant
and shyning, at one time, then at an other (which we willingly grant) but it
is impertinently urged to prove that it should be absolutely eclipsed, (the
point that ought to be euicted) nay it clearly conuinceth the contrary. For
first the former words say that the Church is always conspicuous. Secondly,
that the Church is always discerned by those who wisely esteem of things,
therefore to such it is always visible: And thus does M. Whytes own
testimony, recoyle with great force upon him self.

After our Doctor haith ended with Catholic modern wrvters, he begins to
prove the inuisibility of the Church, from the authority of the ancient
Fathers, and among others (whom for breuity I pretermit) he alleges S.
Chrysostom, and vshereth his authority with this preface. And that Chrysostom
thought, the Church might be sometimes invisible, appears by the 49. homily
upon Matthew where he says. Since the time that heresy haith invaded the
Church: it can no way be known which is the true Church of Christ, but by the
Scriptures only, in this confusion, it can no ways else be known. From which
words, I do collect a continual visiblenes of the Church: for if the
Scriptures be ever able to make the Church known, then by them it is ever made
visible, and consequently, (since the scriptures have ever hitherto been
preserved, and through Gods good providence no doubt shall be even to the end
of the world) the Church haith been, and shall be at all times made known and
visible through the means of the Scripture. And thus disputing only ad
hominem, do I turn the point of M. Whytes reason upon himself.

And this may suffice touching M. Whytes weak proving of the latency of
Christ's Church: where the Reader may behold a long teame (as it were) of his
lame, feeble, and impotent authorities, one still following an other, taken
from the writings of Catholic Doctors and the Fathers, whereof some do
neither fortify, nor hurt his cause, and others do prove even contrary to that,
for which he alleges them. In reguard of which his dull, gross, and absurd
kind of reasoning and arguing, if it be true in Philosophy, that the
understanding does work better, or worse, as the spirits are more or less
pure, and that the spirits are become more or less pure, according to the
quality of the nutriment that the body takes: I must then conclude, that when
M. White penned this his Treatise particulerly for his dear Countrymen of
Lancashyre (as himself says) it seems he then remaining there, did use to
feed much on his Lancashire dish, the Goose.

The 4. Paragraph. Wherein are discussed certain proofs of M. W. in behalf of
the protestants marks of the Church.
M. White, in page 104. and some few leaves after, discoursing of the notes of
the Church, undertakes to prove, that The true doctrine of faith, and lawful
use of the Sacraments, are the proper and infallible marks, whereby it must be
judged which is the true Church.

In proof hereof, he produces diverse passages of Scripture, where our Savior
said, Io. 10.
My sheep here my voice. And again. Mat. 18.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name: there am I in the midst
of them. In like sort those words of S. Matthew. Mat. 7.
You shall know the false prophets by their fruits. And finally that saying of
S. Paul, Gal. 6.
As many as walk, according to this rule (meaning according to the rule of a
true Faith) peace upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Again
those words of the Apostle touching the Church. Ephe. 2.
that It is the howshold of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. As also where it is said, that the Scripture is a 2. Pet. 1.
shyning light.

Now what Alcumist in the world can abstract out of any of these textes, that
sense or meaning which shall prove, that true doctrine is a sufficient mark to
us, whereby we may infallibly discern, which is the true Church of God? He may
as easily draw fire out of water, or earth out of air, between which, there
are no symbolizing qualities. For let us see how probably we can infer, what
is intended out of the said Scriptures: as thus. Christ says, My sheep here my
voice: Therefore true doctrine is to us a sign of the true Church. Again,
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them: Therefore we are to learn the true Church from the true doctrine.
Strangely inferred: for how shall we know (ever abstracting the Authority of
the Church) who are Christ's sheep? or who are they which are gathered
together in his name? If it be replied, they are those who have true doctrine:
then I demand, how can we be assured who have true doctrine? If it be
answered, they have true doctrine, who hear the word truly preached, and
enjoy a perfect ministration of the Sacraments: then I ask, how shall I be
acertained, that such do hear the word truly preached, and enjoy a perfect
ministration of the Sacraments? But here my answer is at a stand, and flies
for sanctuary, to his Apocalypticall and revealing spirit. Thus it is clear in
what circles and mazes M. White, or any other walks, through the vain
suggestions and imaginations, of a light, vaperous, and giddy brain.

The like connection with the former conclusion, have the other places of
Scripture above cyted: The which after he haith set down, then page 107. he
descends to the Authorities of Fathers, and Catholic Authors, laboring
(though most weakly) to hayle from their words, his former Illation. To this
end he brings in S. Epiphanius saying of an heritike li. 2. haer. ca. 48.
This man is found altogether different from the holy Scriptures etc. If then
he be dissenting from them, he is altogether an alyen from the holy Catholic
Church.

Here we grant, that in the true nature of faith, who dissenteth from the
Scriptures, dissenteth from the Church, but yet this proves not, that the
doctrine of faith, or administration of the Sacraments, may serve to us, as
marks, to demonstrate out the Church. Again he produces M. Raynouldes
affirming that 13 The true Church, and the true faith, are so knitt together,
that the one infers and concludes the other, for from the true Church, is
concluded the true faith, and from the true faith, the true Church. All this is
true, yet it follows not from hence, that faith is more known to us then the
Church, and couseqnently that it ought to serve to us, as a clear and evident
mark, to point out as well to the unlearned, as learned, which is the true
Church.

Add hereto, that these words even in M. Whytes sense, as much impugn him as
us: for if they imply faith to be a mark of the Church: they also reciprocally
imply the Church to be a mark of the true Faith.

Finally, to omit many other testimonies of Catholics produced to the like
end (whose particular answeares do rise from the circumstances of the places,
and therefore here omitted) he laboring to show, that Faith is known before
the Church, and consequently that it is a note thereof: brings in Picus
Mirandula thus speaking of the Scriptures. Resert. Possen.
They do not move, they do not persuade, but they enforce us, they dry^e us
forward, they violently constrain us. Thou read words rudely and homely,
but such as are quick, lively, flaming, shyning, pearcing to the bottom of the
spirit, and by their admirable power, transforming the whole man.

Now who can infer out of these words, that the Scripture is known to us
before the Church, seeing indeed the priority of the one or the other, is not
so much as intimated here at all? And what praises are here ascribed to the
Scriptures, may truly belong unto them after we are assured of their being,
and expositions by the warrant of Gods Church.

Thus we find, that the further we enter into our ministers book, the greater
ouercharge of bootelesse and unnecessary testimonies, do ever present them
selves to us, manifesting unto the iudiceous and obseruant Reader, that this
work (though the first borne of his brain) is abortiue, imperfect, and weak,
from all which stoare of impertinent proofs thus vauntingly by him alleged,
demonstratiuely (forsooth) to confirm, what he still pretends to prove: We
may euict one irrefragable demonstration ex posteriori, to wit, that M. White
is absolutely ignorant in the doctrine of demonstrations.

The 5. Paragraph Wherein are examined strange kinds of arguinges, against the
authority of the Church.
M. White laboring to depresse the Churches auuhority, and ever more and more
venting out his venom and poysen against her, in the some of that good spirit
wherein he speaks, undertakes page 126. and some others following, to prove,
that the teaching of the Church is to be examined (for so he entituleth those
leaves) As also he says, It is necessary for every particular man, to examine
and judge of the things the Church teaches him; thus giving the raynes to
every private and ignorant fellow, under the tecture and pretext of gods secret
illuminations, to judge his own judge, and so to call in question, the
reputation and honor of her from whose chaste loins even him self is (at least
originally) descended. But that we may better see how little conducing his
testimonies alleged are to the purpose: let us first set down what the
Catholics do freely grant and teach in this point.

They jointly teach, that the bound of subiecting ones self to the Churches
Authority, is properly incumbent upon Christians, who are made members of the
Church by baptism, and consequently do owe their obedience thereunto, and not
upon infidels or Jews, who are not obliged to embrace Christian Religion,
except they see it confirmed by miracles, or some other enforcing reasons of
credibility: Nevertheless, though an heritike do sin, in doubting of the
Churches Authority, yet supposing that his doubt and sin, he does not evil
to examine the doctrine of the Church, according to the Scriptures, if so be he
proceeds herein, only with a desire of fynding the truth.

Now let us see what Authorities M. White alleges to prove his former
positions. First he urges those words of the Apostle, 1. These. 5.
Try all things, and hold that which is good. As also those of our Sau. Io. 7.
If any man will do the will of God, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self. And again that of S. John. 1. Io. 4.
Derely beloved believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of
God. In like sort those words of Christ. Mat. 7.
Beware of false prophets, by their fruits you shall know them. And finally
(besides the example of the men of Beraea searching the Scriptures, Act. 17.
) he urges that where the Apostle counseleth the Hebrews, that Hebr. 5.
Through long custom, they should have their wits exercised both to
discern good and evil. But for greater perspicuity, let us shape one or two
of these textes, to the true point here of the question. Thus then. Try all
things, and hold what is good: therefore every private man may undertake to
censure the whole Church of God. Which words indeed do not press the doubt,
seeing both those words, and that place of S. John, c. 4. are directed
properly to such only, to whom it belongs to try and examine, both
doctrine, and spirits, to wit, not to every particular member of the Church,
but only to the Bishops and Pastors thereof, who are Ezech. 33.
Speculatores domus Israel. Again if by this text every private man, may try,
reject, or allow, all things at his pleasure: then may he reject or allow (as
him self thinks good) the holy Scriptures: for in the former words of the
Apostle there is no limitation at all. But to proceed to an other text.

Beware of false prophets, by their fruits you shall know them: therefore
every private man is to examine the doctrine of all the Prophets and Pastors of
the Church assembled together in a lawful general Council. Again the men of
Berea (who were no Christians) were allowed to try the doctrine of S. Paul:
therefore every Christian (who by force of his second birth or regeneration, is
made a member and son of the Church) may examine, control, and reject, the
public faith of the said Church.

Doctor-lyke inferred, as if there were no disparity herein, between him who is
not a Christian (and consequently acknowledges not any submission or reverence
to gods Church) and an other who is a Christian, and therefore in his baptism
does implicitly resign him self, and his Judgment, to the Authority of the
Church.

With the like want of connection or true refere^ce, M. White presses to the
same purpose, the testimonies of certain ancient Fathers, whose drift in such
their writings, was to wish men to examine by the Scriptures, the doctrine of
private and particular men, lest, as the Apostle says, Circumferantur omni
vento doctrinae. Ephesians. 4.
all which he will needs extend, to the discussing of the doctrine of the
whole Church. And thus particulerly he alleges that saying of S. Chrysostom.
Chrisost. in Act. ho. 33.
Seeing we take the Scriptures which are so true and plain, it will be an easy
matter for you to judge. And tell me, have thou any wit or judgment? For it is
not a man's part, barely to receive whatsoever he hears. Say not, I am no
scholar, and can be no Judge, I can condemn no opinion, for this is but a
shift etc. The scope only of which place, is (as is said) to refute the
doctrine of every new sectary even from the Scriptures, a course which we
willingly admit and allow.

Thus you see how our minister is not ashamed to pervert and detort, the grave
Authotitie of this ancient Father.

But here the Reader is to understand, that M. W. his chief project in this
first part of his book, is to depresse with all contempt and scorn, the
venerable authority of the Church. For the more facilitating whereof, he
masketh this his intent, under the shadow of ascribing all reverence and honor
to the Scriptures, both for their sufficiency, as containing expressly all
things necessary to salvation, as also for their absolute Sovereignty and
Prerogative, in determininge inappealeably, all controversies of faith and
religion whatsoever. The which course is not embraced by him (or any other
sectary) so much for any peculier honor they bear to the Scriptures: But that
by this slight and evasion, they may declyne the weight and force of all
proofs and authorities, deduced either from the unanimous consent of Fathers,
from Oecumenicall and general Councels, or vnintermitted practice of the
Church: And so all doubts of Faith, being for their proofs reduced only to
the written word, their own private spirit only, must finally decree, how the
said word is to be understood, either for the impugning or defending, of any
such points controuerted.

The 6. Paragraph Wherein are examined sundry arguments framed by M. W.
against the unity of Catholics, in matters of Religion.
Not many leafes after, M. White, as well knowing the force of unity in Faith,
since it is true, that God Cor. 14.
Non est dissensionis Deus, sed pacis, goes about to show, that the
Catholics enjoy not any unity and concord in their doctrine, and therefore he
thus styles those leafes. The p^pistes have no unity in doctrine. And
page.156. he further says. The papists agree in nothing wherein they dissent
from us. If either M. W. or any other can prove so much, I must grant that he
greatly aduauntageth his cause, seeing those words of the Prophet Isay. 19.
Concurrere faciam Aegiptios contra Aegiptios, are tipically understood of the
intestine wars and dissentions mantained by the professors of false doctrine.
This his vaunt he begins to exemplify in diverse particulers, in the proof
whereof, the iudiceous Reader shall find, that this our impartinent minister
(for so he may well be termed, since he altogether insisteth in such
unnecessary and immateriall stuff) endeuoreth most calumniously to bleare the
judgments of the ignorant, they not being able at the first sight, to perceive
the very tuch of any doubt or question between the protestants and us. Many
authorities of Catholics he produces to this end, the sense and meaning of
which, he most strangely peruerteth from the true intention of the writer,
which receive their full satisfaction, from the circumstances of the place.

But now here I am (according to my former prescribed method) to display the
weakness of such testimonies, which being acknowledged in their true and native
sense and construction, do nothing at all contradict the Catholic doctrine
against which they are urged, and consequently do not convince any want of
unity in doctrine among the Catholics. First the^ he alleges against
prayer in an unknown tongue, Co^tarenus. Christ. Instruct. p. 212
The prayers which men understand not, want the fruit which they should reap
if they understood them: for they might both specially intend their minds to
god, for the obtaining even in special of that, which with their mouths they
beg: and also through their pyous sense of their prayer then uttered, they
should be more edefyed. They want therefore this fruit. Thus far Contarenus.

Now here M. W. is to know, that Contarenus does not here absolutely condemn
prayer in a strange tongue (which is the life of this controversy between the
protestants and us, since they say it is merely unlawful, and we hold it
lawful) but only seems to prefer prayer in a vulgar and known tongue
before it, which in reguard only of the particular fruit above specifyed, is
in the judgment of most (if not all Catholics) more profitable then the
other, though the other have certain peculier helps and advantages to it
self: But what is this to the lawfulnes or unlawfulness of praying in a strange
tongue? or what kind of logic is this: Prayer for some particular reasons, is
better in a vulgar tongue then in a strange tongue: therefore it is absolutely
unlawful in a strange tongue? In like sort, touching latin service, he
brings in S. Thomas of Aquine, and Caietaine, affirming that it were better
for the edification of the Church, if such Prayer were in a vulgar tongue. In
^. Cor. 14.
What Catholic denies this, if he have only respect to the edification and
instruction of the hearers, and of nothing else? But seeing the public Liturgies
and prayers of the Church, are principally directed to other ends, then to the
instruction of the standers by, what does this testimony force against the
contrary practice of the Church therein?

Again for the euacuating of the force and operation of confession of sins,
he brings in Caietane teaching that 3. Tho. q. 8. art. 4.
A man by contrition without any confession, is made clean, and a formal
member of the Church. which indeed is the general doctrine of all
Catholics: and therefore the received position with them in the schools is,
that Attrition (being a greeuing for our sins in a lower degree) with
Confession, is answearable to Contrition, without actual Confession.

Yet here is to be noted, that true Contrition (which is a repenting for our
sins in the highest degree, only for the love of God) can not be without
Confession, at least in voto, and desire, seeing he can not be truly and
perfectly penitent, who neglects the ordinary means (if opportunity serve
for the obtaining of them) appointed by God for the expiation of sin. Now who
sees not the independency of this inference, Sin is remitted by Contrition
without Confession: therefore Confession is absolutely to be taken away. Most
demonstratiuely concluded, as if every man had true and perfect Contrition, or
having it, were infallibly assured thereof: and yet this is M. Whytes trysting
kind of arguing.

In like sort touching Justification by works, which (according to our
Catholic doctrine) are to be done in state of grace, and not by force of
nature, and derive their worth, not from the worker, but both from the promise
of God, as also from the passion of our Savior, (in the blood whereof they
receive a new tincture) the Doctor idly introduces S. Thomas Aquinas thus
teaching. In Galat. 3. Lect. 4.
No works, either Ceremonial, or Moral, are the cause why any man is just
before God etc. And in an other place the same S. Thomas, In Romans 3. Lect. 4.
The Apostle shows Justification to be wrought by faith only: there is in
the woork of the Law, no hope of justification, but by faith only. As if the
question were, whether Ceremonial, Judicial, and Legal works, did justify
(which all Catholics deny) and not works now in the new Testament, as is
above explaned.

Finally as unwilling to be over laboursome and painful, in setting dowe more
of M. Whytes trifling and childish stuff of this nature, seeing in this sense,
that saying houldeth. Absurdum est res fu^^les, nimis serio redarguere: I will
therefore (forbearing diverse others) conclude with the testimony which, against
the merit of works he urges out of C. Bellarmine (a place before alleged,
being a wilful corruption, in concealing the words immediately following
explayning the sense, but here urged as a mere impertinency, though taking the
words in that very sense wherein M. W. pretends) his words are these. de
Iustif. l. 5. ca. 7.
In reguarde of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and because of the
danger of vainglory: The saifest way is to put our confidence in the sole
mercy of God. Now wherein does he impugn the Catholic doctrine of merit, who
teaches (for the greater humbling of our selves, and by reason of our
manifould sins committed against god, and of our uncertainty of knowing
whether the works done by us, be performed in such sort, as they are truly
pleasing to God) that we should for greater security, ascribe nothing to our
selves, but only like the Centurion, should sly to the boundless and
infinite mercy of his divine Majesty. Wherefore M. W. can not dispute thus from
the Cardinals words. In reguard of the uncertainty of our own righteousness,
and because of the danger of vain glory, the saifest way is to put our sole
confidence in the sole mercy of God: Therefore works in general do not
merit, or therefore works done in true humility, and proceeding from one that
is righteous, donot merit. For the doubt here which Bellarmine intimates,
rests not in the doctrine of merit, but in the uncertainty of our doing of
them, to wit, whether they are performed by us in that state, and with all
those due circumstances, as are requisite for them that they may merit. But it
seems that M. W. can not fall upon any obscure sentences of Catholics, but
instantly he strives to turn them as if they were the sayings of his own
brethren, like the fire which coueteth to convert every thing it touches into
it self.

This done M. White page 159. descends to show the different opinions of
Catholics touching some points of the real presence, as first whether
(after the bread and wine being changed by the words of Consecration into the
body and blood of Christ) the accidences do remain without a subject, or that
they have their inherence in the quantity, or that the body of Christ
sustaineth them, or the like.

Secondly, how the accidents remaining after consecration, have power to
nourish, to wit, whether the thing nourished therewith, proceed from the
quantity, or that the substance of bread and wine returns again, and so it
causes the nutrition, or that the accidences by Gods power, are changed into
the thing nourished, or some such like manner.

Thus our minister goes on discoursing very soberly, how it appears from
these and the like examples, that the papists agree not in their doctrine; and
further thus says. You may see by these few examples, how the papists are
divided about the principal articles of their faith etc. But here the
iudiceous Reader may see, that touching the fust sort of Catholic testimonies
above explayned, we find no difference of judgment at all, between the
Catholics by him alleged, and other Catholics. And as concerning their
several opinions about those secondary questions of the blessed Sacrament,
they are only points of indifferency, and do not at all imply any disunion in
matter of faith. For touching the B. Sacrament, that which is principally an
Article of our faith is, whether bread and wine, be really, and truly changed
by the words of consecration, into the Body and blood of Christ, the which all
Catholics whatsoever do jointly and constantly believe. And as concerning
those other doubts resulting out of the former confessed Article. and urged
here by M. White, they are only indifferences, and philosophical questions
disputed in the schools, and by several men, severally mantained, without any
breach of faith. But here I should make bold (on the contrary part) to put M.
M. White in mind touching the division in doctrine among the protestants (a
point heretofore touched in this Treatise) that they are such, even by the
acknowledgment of them selves, as do wound the soundnes of Christian faith: I
think the displaying thereof would be little pleasing unto him, grateful to his
cause. But for this present I will forbear, and will only add hereto (for
the greater disadvantage of our adversaries, that when a Catholic obstinatly,
and pertinaceously, mantaineth any heresy (for such accounted by the Church)
he, ipso facto, deuideth him self from the Church, and so seaceth to be a
member there of, as several times we grant it happens: But the case is
otherwise among the protestants. For albeit each of them does defend his
several opinions in the weightiest points of faith: yet they nevertheless
account one an other, as members of one and the same Church, as we see by
experience it faleth out, not only between the Lutherans and the Caluenistes,
but also between our English protestants, and the puritanes, who
(notwithstanding the great disparity of faith and doctrine among them) do in
their own opinions, make up one and the same protestants Church: and do still
repute each other, as faithful brethren of the said Church, and zealous
professoures of the gospel.

Here now I will close up this third and last part of this small Treatise,
wherein I trust I have discovered M. Whytes disioynted and loose kind of
writing, all which his reasoninges and authorities (serving only as a taist to
the Reader, what more he may expect in this kind, if the ministers whole book
should be iudicially perused) are taken out (dividing his book into three
parts) only of the first part, and fewer then twenty leafes of the said part,
affords them all. Many other scores there are, which are scattered here and
there, by one or two, as incidentally he takes occasion to write, but all such
I have omitted, and purposly made choice of such passages, within the former
small compass of his book, as do minister several and diverse testimonies of
this nature, of one and the same subject. It were over laboursome to examine
his whole book in this sort, since indede it is throughout even loaded with an
o^ercharg of the like bootelesse testimonies, he still filling up many blankes
and spaces thereof, with such idle impertine^cies, the which (...), may seem
to cross our Catholic doctrine, yet indeed the transparency of them is such,
as they cause not so much as any reflection in the eye and understanding of the
iudiceons, but in reguard of their emptines and want of force, they may be
resembled (to speak in S. Peter's words 2. Pet. 2.) to wells without water,
and clouds carried about with tempests.

THE Conclusion.
WOrthy and iudiceous Academians, here now I am to give a f^ll stop unto my
pen, since I hope (according to my undertaken task) I have discovered such
stoare of impostures in this my adversaries book, as that they may in reason
be sufficient to disopinion you of his supposed worth and estimation. He is I
grant your son, in respect whereof I know you can not but with a motherly
and compassionate eye, behold his blemishes, and inwardly lament to see your
White thus soyled. Notwithstanding it rests on your part (even for the
saluing of your own honors) to withdraw hereafter your favors from so
undeserving a branch; since pity it is, that learning, ingenuity, and
integrity (whereunto your selves deservedly pretend) should become a sanctuary
to collusion, falsehood, and impurity.

And now seeing here I have untwisted the chief threedes whereupon the whole
loome of his Treatise is wouen: I doubt not but out of your own cleare-eyd
Judgments, you will immediately look upon the same, as it is in it self
fraughted with such unworthy stuff, and not as it haith received light and
grace from the weak opinion of the ignorant, and seduced multitude: which I
rather expect peculiarly at your hands, since your selnes know, that in a true
view of any thing, refracted beams never afford a perfect sight. And thus to
your own censure and chastisment I remitt M. White, whom not without just
cause, I may well range in the Catalogue of those, of whom God by his Prophet
says Non misi eos, and ipsi prophetabant in nomine meo mandaciter. Ier. 27.

And next to come to thee (good reader) here thou see what scarres do remain
upon the face of this our ministers reputation, him self first playing the
corrupter, then a liar, and then a tryfling writer. But seeing thou art now
partly instructed of the ministers foul deportment herein, I appeal even to
thine own conscience, whether thou art inwardly persuaded, that he haith any
honesty, any faith, any Religion, finally, any fear of God, who is not afraid
thus shamelesly, profanely, and heathnishly, to handle the highest mysteries
of Christianity. And if thou see reason to be induced so to think, what
stupor and dulnes of understanding, yea what madness then is it in thy self, to
adventure thy souls everlasting salvation, or damnation upon the bare affiance
and credit of so persideous and corrupt a writer. Therefore let this man's want
of sincerity and true dealing, awaken thy judgment in the disquisition of gods
infallible truth. Make trial by thine own particular search, whether these
deceiptes, wherewith I charge the Doctor, be true or no: and if thou find
that he stands guilty thereof, then retire back, and instantly cast of both
him and his doctrine, assuring thy self, that the cause which he justifies is
wrong, in that God (who ones said psalm. 100.
Ambulans in via immaculata, hi^ mihi ministrabat) will not suffer his sacred
will to be revealed by such impostors and deceivers. Let not the already
conceived opinion of his learning, ouer-sway thy Judgment, but rather say with
thy self, that faith must needs be erroneous, which can not sufficiently be
ma^tained by learning, except withal it be mantained with lying, seeing truth
needs not the support of falsehood. Be assured that though for the time M. W.
or any other of our adversaries, see^e to make good their cause by their much
writing, whereby in a vulgar eye, they vent out good stoare of litterature and
reading, yet after such their works are diligently perused and answered, by
laying open their falshoodes, corruptions, and such other collusions: the
Catholic cause (as experience haith taught) is greatly aduauntaged thereby,
them selves by this means running into greater dis^stimation and contempt even
of their own followers: Such is the sweetness of gods providence, that the
Israelites of the Catholic Church are ever in the end delivered from the
hands of the Egiptians, and see their enemies drowned in the red sea of shame
and confusion ps. 121.
Non commouebitur in a^ernum qui habitat in Jerusalem.

But now lastly M. White to come more nearly to your self, with whom I must in
a word or two take leave: Tell me even between god and your own conscience (if
as yet you retain any touch of conscience) did you not write this your book
with a fearful trembling hand, in remembering, that as god (according to his
Justice) does ever punish all kind of sins: so particulerly he pours out
his vyols of wrath and indignation in greater abundance, upon those who seduce
the ignorant by such deceauable means? How many poor souls shall rise
against you at the most dreadful day, who shall continue in eternal torments,
for being misled by this your most poysenous, corrupt, and lying writings? Are
not your own personal sins sufficient to draw on your perdition, but you
must be loaded with the everlasting overthrow of diverse others souls to
further the same? If severe punishments be to be inflicted upon them, who will
expunge or deface, any one public record of civil and temporal matters: what
confusion then are they to undergo, who not once, not twice, but many scoares
of times, have wickedly corraded, corrupted, and belyed (of which your self is
found most guilty) the ancient monumentes of the primitive Fathers, and the
writings of other most learned Doctors, wherein (next to the holy Scriptures)
is contained the spiritual tenure of our Christian faith, and by the producing
whereof, we make good our title, to the rich inheritance of man's salvation.
Reflect upon your own case (you, even you) who remains in Act. 8.
the gaull of bi^ternes, and in the bond of iniquity. Your state yet is
remediable, since so long as you have time of repentance, so long Io. 11.
your sickness is not unto death. Wherefore make use of that short remnant, and
suffer not earthly considerations of preferment, ambition, and the like, any
longer to interpose them selves, between your sight and the truth. I shall be
glad (as the light appeared to Adam to bewray his sin and shame) if this my
discovery, may be of force to dispell that spiritual darkness of your malice
against the Catholic Church, so repentingly acknowledging your inexcusable
faultines in your former work. Be not agreued at these my sharp admonitions
(since the more severe, the more medicinable) but remember that the sight of
Toby was restored, by the bitter gaul of the fish. I can not but bewail your
incorrigiblenes, if this my council, proceeding only from Charity shall be so
far from winning you to a better course, that (as in some natures it happens)
it may be found to raise your malice hereafter against Gods Church, to a highe^
strain, like unto some medicines, which (as the Physicians say) if they do not
purge the humor intended: them selves do turn into the said humor.

But to conclude, M. White (howsoever you entertain my words) fare well,
fear hell, fear damnation, and do not thus precipitately and desperately run
upon the dinte of gods most dreadful comminations and threats, him self
thundering, Ezech. 13.
Eritmanus mea super P^ophetas etc M^handes shall be upon the Prophets that see
v^ne things, and divine a lie: in the Council of my people they shall not be,
and in the Scripture of the house of Israel, they shall not be written,
neither shall they enter into the Land of Israel: And you shall know that I
am the Lord God, for that they have deceived my people saying, Peace, and there
is no peace.

Laus Deo, and B. Virgini Mariae.

