A SHORT TREATISE OF DIALLING: SHOWING, THE MAKING OF ALL sorts of Sun-dials,
Horizontal, Erect, Direct, Declining, Jnclining, Reclining; upon any flat or
plain superficies, how soever placed, with ruler and compass only, without
any Arithmaticall calculation. By EDWARD WRIGHT.

LONDON, Printed by John Beale for WILLIAM WELEY. 1614.

The Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1. The making of the Clinatory. Chap. 2. The first division of dials
into Horizontall, erect inclining, and reclining. Chap. 3. The second division
of Dials into direct and declining. Chap. 4. The third division of Dials,
either agreeing with the plain of the Meridian, or disagreeing from the same.
Chap. 5. To find the elevation of the meridian line above the Horizon. Chap. 6.
The describing of the figure of the dial first on paper, pasteboard. Chap. 7.
The making of Aequinoctial Dials. Chap. 8. The finding of the substilar line,
and style, in grounds not Equinoctial direct, and Polar. Chap. 9. The finding
of the distance of the style from the Meridian line in dials, that be neither
equinoctial nor polar. Chap. 10. The finding of the substilar line and the
distance of the style from it, when the style makes a right angle with the
merid* line. Chap. 11. From which end of the Meridian line the elevation of the
style is to be counted. Chap. 12. The finding of the substilar line and style
in dials that be not Polar nor Equinoctial the style making oblique angles with
the Meridian line. Chap. 13. The drawing of the line of contingence, and of the
Equinoctial circle, and how it must be divided. Chap. 14. The drawing of the
hour lines in all dials that be not Aequinoctiall. Chap. 15. What number must
be set to the hour lines. Chap. 16. What hour lines are to be expressed in
all sorts of dials. Chap. 17. How to translate the dial drawn on paper, or
pasteboard unto the dial ground.
line. Errat. Correct. B2 b 28 neither nether B3 b 2 cliniatorie clinatory B3 b
2 live line B3 b 10 made make B4 a 12 alother all other Also in the Diagramme
placed there, and in the leaf following, let K and ^ be changed each into
others place.
B4 b 14 horozontal horizontal C1 b 21 l^aueth leans C3 a 25 ground grounds
C3 a 29 draw drew D1 a 25 nether nether D3 a 20 contingency contingence D4 b
2 gen^y gence E1 a 8 u^ust must E1 b 23 night from thence: night: from thence
E2 a 17 zersection tersection E2 b 4 continue contain E3 a 8 as the in the E3
a 9 in the as the E3 a 15 nto into E3 b 12 on the one on the E3 b 14 bastbord
pastborde.

IT is also to be remembered that there should have been numbers set to every
one of the figures, or pictures of the dials, adioined to the end of this
treatise, beginning at E4 b, as there is to the three last, viz. the 16. 17.
and 18. figure. As in the 7. Chap. where I show the making of Aequinoctial
dials sect 4. when I refer you to the first and second figure, I mean the
figues or pictures of the Aequinoctial dials in E4 b. To the first of these
therefore there should be set [1. Figure, to the next [2. Figure, and to the
first of the polar dials in F1 b, there should be set [3. Figure, and to the
next in F2 a [4 Figure etc.

Also in the 18. figure the line F. E. should have been continued upwards so
much longer, and it is between R. and E, and at the end thereof being so
continued the letter* should be set.

A TREATISE OF DIALLING
CAP. I. The making of the Clinatory.
1 DIals are diversely made according as they are diversely placed. Therefore
their situation must first be known: which may be done by an instrument not
unfitly called a Clinatory.

2 Let this instrument be made just four square, and let the thickness be
about half a quarter of the breadth of it, upon one side thereof describe a
quadrant, whose two semidiameters or sides must be parallel to the side of the
quadrate.

3 The quadrant must be divided into 90. degrees, with figures set to every
fifth or tenth degree (as the manner is) both forward and backward, and without
the peripherie thereof, a groofe or furrowe must be made so deep that a
plummet hanging by a third from the Center of the quadrant may fall into it, in
such sort that the third may come close to the degrees of the quadiant.

4 Close within the limb of this quadrant make a great round hole or box, for
the placing of a magneticall needle within the same, whose true Meridian line
must be perpendicular to one of the sides of the quadrant, which shall be
called the North side, and the other side of the quadrant shall be called the
Eastside, to the which the Westside of the Clinatory is opposite, as the South
side of the Clinatorie is opposite to the Northside of the quadrant: and the
magneticall Meridian, must be drawn in the bottom of the box according to
the variation of the place where you are.

The figure of the Clinatory.


CAP. II. The first division of Dials into Horizontall, erect inclining, and
reclining.
EVery flat whereupon a Dial is to be The Dial ground.
made (which is also called the Dial ground) either lies leuel with the
horizon, or else is elevated the one side higher then the other.

2 The first kind is thus known: Take the Horizontal flats: and how they are
known.
Clinatorie and hold it so that the plummet fall upon on of the Semidiameters,
or sides of the Quadrant: then if the nether side of the Clinatory, which way
so ever you turn the instrument, will touch the flat, it lies leuel with the
Horizon, and Dials made upon such flats, are called Horizontal Dials.

3 Those flats which are elevated the one Elevated flats; Erect, Inclining
Reclining: and how they are to be known
side higher then the other, stand either upright (which are called erect) or
else, they stand leaning: if they lean to you ward, when you stand right
against them, they are called inclining: otherwise reclining, if they lean
from you ward.

4 All these flats are thus known: Holding the Clinatory as before; if either
the right, or the left side thereof (whereto the plumbline is aequidistant)
will touch and lie close to the flat, it is erect: but if either of the neither
corners only touch it, it is reclining: if either of the upper corners only
touch it, it is inclining.

5 And how much the reclination or inclination is, you shall know after this
manner.

6 Set one of the sides of the Clinatory to the To know how much the
reclination or inclination is.
flat, in such sort, that the plumbline hanging at liberty, may fall upon the
circumference of the quadrant: for then the arc of the quadrant, betwixt the
plumbline and that side of the quadrant that is parallel, or aequidistant to
the slatte, is the reclination thereof, if the center of the quadrant be from
the flat, or else the inclination, if it be toward the same.

CAP. III. The second division of Dials into direct and declining.
ALl flats are either direct, or declining.

2 All flats lying leuel with the Horizon are direct.

3 But if the flat lie not leuel with the Horizon: you shall thus know whether
it be direct or declining. First, draw therein a line parallel to the Horizon,
after this manner: hold the Clinatory to the flat in such sort, that the
plumbline may fall upon one of the sides of the quadrant; then draw a line by
the nether side of the Clinatory in recliners; or by the upper side in
incliners, or by either of those sides in erect flats, for that line shall be
parallel or aequidistant to the Horizon, and may be called the Horizontall
line. Set the North side of the Cliniatorie to this live, if the North end of
the needle look toward the flat: then if the Magnetical Meridian be right
under the needle, it is a direct flat: but if it differ from it, it is
declining, and that so much as that difference is, and that way which the North
end of the needle declineth from the Northend of the Meridian line in the
clinatory.

4 If the Southend of the needle look toward the flat, made your account
contrary wise.

CHAP. IV. The third division of Dials, either agreeing with the plain of the
Meridian, or disagreeing from the same.
ALl flats do either agree with the plain of the Meridian circle (which may
therefore be called meridian flats) or else they disagree from the same.

2 They are known thus: If the flat be erect and declining 90. degrees, it is
a Meridian flat, otherwise it is no Meridian flat; and then you must first draw
therein the meridian line, after this manner.

3 If the flat be Horizontal, take the clinatory How to draw the Meridian
line, in Horizontall flats.
and lay it flat down thereupon; and turning it about till the needle hang
precisely over the Magneticall meridian, by that side thereof that is parallel
to the true Meridian line of the Clinatory, draw a right line, for that shall
be the Meridian line desired.

4 In erect flats the Meridian line is perpendicular, and therefore laying the
Clinatory close to such a flat in such sort that the plumbline hang precisely
In erect flats.
on either side of the quadrant, a line drawn by the side of the clinatory,
parallel to that side of the quadrant, shall be the meridian line.

5 In direct flats, a line perpendicular to the line In direct flats.
aequidistant from the Horizon, is the Meridian line we seek for.

6 In flats reclining or inclining, declining also In reclining or inclining
flats, declining 90. degrees.
90. degrees (which are commonly called, East, or West reclining or inclining)
the meridian line is parallel to the horizon.



7 For alother In incl^ning or reclining flats declining less then 90. degrees.
inclining or reclining, and withal declining flats, draw a line upon some
pastbord or paper which shall be called the horizontal meridian AB. wherein
settingone foot of your co^passes, with the other draw an arch of a circle; and
therein reckon the complement of the declination FC. drawing a right line BC. by
the end thereof out of the center B. This right line you shall cross
squire-wise with another as AC. which may be called the base of inclination or
reclination, and must also meet with the horizontall meridian at A. and setting
one foot of your compasses in the crossing at C. with the other foot draw an
arc, counting therein the complement of the reclination or inclination AG.
drawing a right line by the end thereof, out of the center of the foresaid ark
CGD. and from A erect AD. perpendicular to AC. which may meet with CGD. the
line of reclination or inclination at D. Also from A. draw the line AF.
perpendicular to the horozontal meridian, AB. in the point A. and equal to the
former perpendicular AD. and from the end thereof draw a line to (the center of
the arc of declination) B. Then continuing forth AC. to N. (that CN. be
equal to CD) from N. you shall draw a line to B. which (if you have wrought
truly) must be equal to BE. Now the angle contained between the lines NB.
and BC. shows how much the Meridian line in your Dial ground should be
distant from the line which you drew aequidistant to the Horizon here
represented by BC. In this line therefore (in the Dial ground) set one foot of
your compasses, and extending the other that way which the Dial declineth,
draw an arc of a circle, upwards in recliners, but downwards in incliners:
and therein count the said angle from the line parallel to the Horizon, and
draw by the end thereof a line, which shall be the true Meridian in the Dial
ground.



8 From To find the angle which the dial ground (or flat) makes with the
plain of the meridian.
A draw AH perpendicular to EB. make BY. equal to BH. from I. let IK be drawn
perpendicular to BN. make CL. equal to CK and draw a line from L to A. of
these three lines AH. IK. and LA. make the triangle AHM. for then the angle
AHM. is the angle which the dial ground makes with the plain of the meridian.

CHAP. V. To find the elevation of the Meridian line above the Horizon.
THe Meridian line is either parallel to the Horizon, or else elevated the one
end How to find the elevation of the meridian line.
higher then the other.

2 If the flat be either horizontal, or East, or West, and inclining, or
reclining, the meridian is parallel to the Horizon.

3 In all other flats that disagree from the plain of the Meridian circle, the
Meridian line is elevated the one end higher then the other.

4 This elevation is either upright, as in all erect The elevation of the
meridian line in erect dials. In reclining or inclining direct flats; in
reclining or inclining declining flats.
Dials not declining 90. degrees, or else leaning, as in all inclining, and
reclining flats not declining 90 degrees, which if they be direct, is equal to
the complement of reclination, or inclination.

5 But if they decline, then the angle ABE. in the former figure, is the
elevation of the Meridian line.

6 If the meridian line be not erect, it leaves either Northwards, when the
elevated end thereof The elevation of the meridian whether North or South.
looks toward the North, or else Southwards when the elevated end looks
toward the South.

7 All flats are either Polar (which being continued* would go by the poles of
the world) as all Flats polar.
leaning flats, wherein the elevation of the meridian line is Northwards, and
equal to the poles elevation* and all erect decliners 90. degrees. Otherwise
they are no polar flats. Not polar.


CHAP. VI. The describing of the figure of the Dial first on paper or
pasteboard.
NOw it shall be best to take a sheet of paper, or rather a pastebord, that
you may therein describe the figure of your Dial, before you draw the Dial it
self upon his ground: that is, upon the Truncke, Stone, wall, etc.

2 This paper, or pasteboord therefore, you shall place, or understand to be
placed so as your Dial ground is or must be placed, and therein write the names
of the parts of the world, as they lie in respect of your Dial ground, as East,
West, North, South, Zenith, Nadir, upper part, nether part, etc. which you may
do by help of the magnetical needle: for the North end thereof (hanging at
liberty) shows the North, whereto the South is diametrally opposite; and your
face being turned toward the North, your right hand shows the East, your
left hand the West, the Zenith, or vertical point is above your head, the
Nadir under your feet. Note also, which end of the Meridian line must be
higher, and which lower; if the Meridian be not parallel to the Horizon.

CHAP. VII. The making of Aequinoctiall Dials.
ALl Dial grounds are aequinoctiall, or not aequinoctiall.

2 An aequinoctiall ground is that which agrees even with the plain of the
aequinoctiall Circle: which is thus known. If the Dial ground be direct, and
the Meridian line elevated Southwards, equally to the complement of the poles
elevation, it is an Equinoctial Dial ground, otherwise not.

3 In an Equinoctial Dial you shall describe the hour lines after this manner.

4 Set one foot of your Compasses in the Meridian How to make Equinoctial Dials.
line AB. and with the other, draw a circle DBC. and divide it into 24. equal
parts, as D. E. F. G. etc. beginning at B. the crossing thereof, with the
Meridian line; for then right lines, as AD. AE. AF. AG. etc. in the 1. and 2.
figure drawn out of the Center, by those divisions shall be the hour lines.

5 The style must stand upright out of the center Placing of the style.
of the Dial.

6 Of Equinoctial Dials there be two sorts, the upper and the nether.

7 The upper Equinoctial Dial looks upwards Upper Equinoctial dial.
to the elevated Pole of the world: And it shows the hour of the day, only
in the Spring and Summer time, as in the first figure.

8 The nether, or lower Equinoctial dial, is that Nether Equinoctial dial.
which looks downwards to that Pole of the world which is beneath the
Horizons and shows the hours only in Autumn, and Winter, as in the second
figure.

CHAP. VIII. The finding of the substilar line, and style, in grounds not
Equinoctial direct, and Polar.
IN all Dial grounds that are not Equinoctial, the substilar line, and the
distance of the style from the substilar must be found.

2 The substilar line is that right over which the Substilar line.
style must be set.

3 The distance of the style from the substilar, is Distance of the style from
the substilar.
the angle, or space contained between the style, and the substilar line.

4 The finding out of these is diverse, in diverse The finding of the substilar
line.
kinds, and therefore must be specially showed in each kind.

5 In direct Dial grounds not Equinoctial, and In direct flats not aquinoctial
In Polars not Meridian.
Polars not Meridian, the substilar line is the same with the Meridian line, or
else parallel thereto, in declining polars.

6 In Polar ground* agreeing with the plain of In Meridian Polars.
the Meridian, the substilar line may thus be found.

7 Set one foot of the compasses in the Southend of the line that you draw
equidistant from the Horizon and extending the other foot toward the North end
of the same line, draw an arc of a circle: therein reckon the elevation of the
Pole beginning at the foresaid line: for a right line drawn thereby out of the
center, shall be the substilar line AB. figure. 3.

8 In all Polar grounds draw a parallel CD. (figu. The stilar line in all Polar
Dials.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.) to the substilar line at a convenient distance from the
same; for that shall be the line representing the style.

CHAP. IX. The finding of the distance of the style from the Meridian line in
Dials that be neither equinoctial nor polar.
IN all Dial grounds that be not aequinoctiall nor polar, before the substilar
line, and distance of the style from it can be found, first the distance of the
style from the Meridian line must be found after this manner.

2 If the Meridian line be parallel to the Horizon, as BC. the distance of the
style from the Meridian line, is equal to the height of the Pole, as BR.

3 But if the elevation of the Meridian be either upright, as AG. or leaning
toward the North, and withal greater then the Poles elevation, as AH. the
height of the Pole BR. taken out of the height of the Meridian line BH. or BG.
shall leave the distance of the style from the Meridian line RH. or RG.

4 If the elevation of the meridian line be Northwards, and less then the
height of the Pole, as BY. take the elevation of the meridian line BY. out of
the height of the pole BR. and there shall remain the distance of the style
from the Meridian line RI.



5 If the elevation of the Meridian line be Southwards, and either greater, or
equal to the complement of the Poles elevation, as AF. and AE. then the
complement of the Meridian lines elevation, FG. or EG. added to the complement
of the Poles elevation GR. shall make the distance of the style from the
meridian line.

6 If the elevation of the meridian line be Southward and less then the
complement of the poles elevation as CD. the elevation of the meridian line CD
and the height of the Pole C^. put together shall make the distance of the
style from the meridian line.

CHAP. X. The finding of the substilar line and the distance of the style from
it, when the style makes a right angle with the meridian line.
SEcondly, in a ground not Equinoctial nor Polar we must consider whether the
style make a right angle, or an oblique angle with the meridian line.

2 The style shall make a right angle with the meridian line, if the elevation
of the meridian line be Southwards and equal to the complement of the Poles
elevation, as in the 9. 10. 11. and 12. figure Herein a right line drawn
squirewise overthwart the meridian line, toward that part of the world, which
is opposite to that whereto the dial ground declineth, shall be the substilar
line, as BA. in the 9. 10. 11. and 12. figu. and the distance of the style from
the substilar line shall be equal to the angle which the dial ground makes
with the plain of the meridian circle as the angle BAD. fig. 9. 10. 11. 12.
which angle is found by the third Chap.

CHAP. XI. From which end of the Meridian line, the elevation of the style is
to be counted.
IF the style make an oblique angle with the meridian line, we must first find
out from whether end of the meridian line, the elevation of the style must be
reckoned, thus:

2 If the meridian line be parallel to the horizon as in the 13. figure, the
elevation of the style shall be reckoned from the North end of the meridian line
in reclining, and horizontal flats looking upwards, as BR. from B in the former
figure, but contrariwise in incliners as PC. from C. in the same figure.

3 If the meridian line be elevated the one end higher then the other from the
horizon, and the dial ground look toward the South, the elevation of the
meridian being also Northwards, and less then the elevation of the pole: the
elevation of the style shall be counted from the upper end of the meridian line:
as IR. from I.

4 But if the elevation of the meridian be greater then the elevation of the
pole, or upright, or southwards and greater then the complement of the poles
elevation; the elevation of the style shall be counted from the nether end of
the meridian line, as PM, PN, PO, from MNO.

5 If the elevation of the meridian line be Southwards and less then the
complement of the poles elevation, the elevation of the style shall be counted
from the upper end of the meridian line as DP. from D.

6 If the Dial ground look toward the North, the elevation of the style from
the meridian line shall be reckoned contrariwise in every kind.

CHAP. XII. The finding of the substilar line and style in Dials that be not
Polar nor Equinoctial, The style making oblique angles with the Meridian line.
Having thus found out from whether end of the meridian line the elevation of
the style is to be reckoned, set one foot of your compasses in the meridian
line as in A. and stretching forth the other foot toward that end of the
meridian line, from which the elevation of the style is to be reckned as
toward L. draw an arch of a circle MDLN. and (beginning at the Meridian line)
reckon and mark therein the elevation of the style from the Meridian line, LD.
figure 13. 14. 15. in the rest LO. either Eastwards or Westwards in direct
Dials, as in the 13. 14. 15. fig. but in decliners toward that part of the
world which is opposite to the part whereunto the Dial declineth, as in the 16.
17. 18. fig.

2 Then in direct Dials, a right line ACD. fig. 13. 14. 15. drawn out of the
center of the said arc by the mark of the styles elevation from the meridian
line shall be the line representing the style, and therefore the distance of
the style from the substilar line shall be the distance of the style, from the
meridian line.

3 But in decliners you shall thus find the substilar line: From O the point
of the styles elevation from the meridian line in the foresaid arc draw OP. a
perpendicular to the meridian line AL. and taking the length of this
perpendicular with your compasses, leave one foot in P. the concurse thereof
with the meridian line, and with the other describe a quadrant of a circle QRO.
beginning from the Meridian line, and so proceeding unto O the other end of the
perpendicular line: and in that quadrant beginning at the meridian ALQ. reckon
and mark QR. the complement of the angle contained between the plains of the
dial ground and of the meridian circle, and take with your compasses RS. the
distance of that mark from the meridian line, and setting one foot of the
compasses in P. the meeting of that perpendicular with the meridian line, with
the other make a prick T, in the same perpendicular line: for then AB. a right
line drawn by this prick T. out of the center of the foresaid arc MDLN. shall
be the substilar line.

4 Then take with your compasses TR. the distance of the foresaid mark in the
quadrant, QRO. and this prick, and leaving one foot of your compasses in the
same prick T. with the other make another prick V. in the arc you first
described; for then a right line AV. drawn thereby out of the arch you first
described shall be the stilar line, or line representing the style.

5 In Dials not polar nor aequinoctiall, if the distance of the style from the
substilar line be but small as in the fig. 10. 12. 17. it may be increased by
drawing a parallel CD. to the style already found, The style augmented.
which for distinctions sake may be called, the style augmented.

CHAP. XIII. The drawing of the line of Contingence, and of the Equinoctial
circle, and how it must be divided.
NOw in all Dials that be not aequinoctiall, draw a right line, EHF. so long as
you can, making right angles with the substilar line, which is called the line
of contingence, or touchline.

2 Then describe the Equinoctial circle GHI. after this manner: Take with your
compasses the shortest distance between H. the intersection of the line of
contingence with the substilar line, and the stilar line, and leaving one foot
in that intersection, with the other make a prick B. in the substilar line,
whereupon describe a circle GHI. which shall be called the equinoctial circle.

3 If the distance of the style from the substilar be augmented, you must draw
two touch lines and two aequinoctial circles: as in 10. 12. 17. figures.

4 The half of the aequinoctiall circle next the line of contingence must be
divided into 12. equal parts, beginning at H, the intersection thereof with the
substilar line in all direct dials, and erect or meridian polars which are
commonly called East or West dials erect, as in the 3. 4. 5. 6. 13. 14. 15.
figures.

5 In polars not meridian nor direct, let HK, in fig. 7. and 8. (the complement
of the angle which the dial ground makes with the plain of the meridian) be
numbered and marked in the aequinoctial circle, beginning at the substilar line,
and proceeding that way which the dial ground declineth as from H. to K. for
at that mark K you must begin to divide.

6 In decliners not polars, if the style make a right angle with the meridian
line, as in the 9. 10. 11. 12. figu. a parallel to the line of contingence,
drawn by the center of the aequinoctiall, shall show the beginning of the
division, as BK in figu. 9. 10. 11. 12.

7 But if the style make an oblique angle with the meridian line, and the line
of contingencye, cut the meridian line, as in the 16. figu. your ruler laid to
that cutting at X and the center of the Equinoctial B. shall show in the
peripherie thereof, the beginning of the division K if the distance of the
style from the substilar be not augmented.

8 But if it be augmented (as in the 17. figure) the shortest distance HX
between H the intersection of the touch line, with the substilar line, and the
style not augmented AV must be taken with the compasses, and resting one foot
in that intersection H, with the other make a prick Y in the substilar line,
toward B the center of the Equinoctial; by which prick Y and Z the mutual
intersectio^ of the next touch line with the meridian line, let a right line YZ
be drawn, for BK. and BK. paralels to it drawn out of the cenrers of both the
Equinoctials, toward the meridian line, at their crossings with the
Equinoctials K and K shall show the beginnings of their divisions.

9 But if the touch line cut not the meridian line as in the figure 18. let a
parallel thereto XY be drawn, which may cut the meridian line in Y and take
with the compasses the shortest distance ZA betwixt the intersection thereof
with the substilar line and the style not augmented; and leaving one foot in
that intersection Z, with the other make a prick B in the substilar line
toward the center of the Equinoctial; from this prick draw a right line BY
from B to Y the intersection of the said parallel with the meridian line; for
BKA parallel to this line drawn out of the center of the Equinoctial B. shall
show the beginning of the division K.

CHAP. XIIII. The drawing of the hour lines in all Dials that be not
Equinoctial.
Having thus, divided the Equinoctial circle, lay your ruler to the center
thereof B. and to every one of those pricks (...) by which it is divided, and
make marks (...) etc. in every place where it crosses the line of contingence
for then

2 In all polar Dials paralels to the substilar line, drawn by those marks,
shall be the hour lines, as in the 3. 4. 6. 7. 8. figu.

3 In Dials not polar, in which the height of the style is not augmented, right
lines drawn out of the center of the dial by those marks shall be the hour
lines as in the 9. 11. 13. 14. 15. 16. 18. figu. And if any of the divisions of
the aequinoctiall circle do fall in to the substilar line, a parallel to the
line of contingence drawn by the center of the said dial, shall show two
opposite hours, distant by the space of six hours from the substilar line; as
for example in direct Dials, six in the forenoone and six in the afternoon, as
in the 13. 14. 15. figure. Also if the ruler laid to B. the center of the
Equinoctial circle, and some division thereof, as V in the 16. and 18. figu.
cannot cross the line of contingence, and yet draws nearer to it,: draw BY.
a right line from the center of the Equinoctial by that division, and draw AF a
parallel to that line, which may cross the substilar and line of contingency in
F. then let HA. the other part of the substilar that is between the line of
contingence and the center of the dial A. be cut in such sort that the
segments, of the substilar line concurring at the line of contingence AH and
HB. may keep the same proportion which the greater segments BH. and HA. have,
which are contained between the center of the Dial and line of contingence,
and betwixt the center of the Equinoctial and the line of contingence. And let
aright line BF. be drawn by that section B and the section of the line of
contingence F. For AI a parallel to this right line drawn out of the center of
the Dial shall be the hour line that we seek for.

4 In those dials wherein the distance of the style from the substilar is
augmented, right lines drawn by those marks in both lines of contingence
which are proportionately distant from the substilar line shall be the hour
lines.

CHAP. XV. What number must be set to the hour lines.
IN meridian Dials, the substilar line is the line of the sixth hour: but for
the rest, we must consider whether it be an oriental or an occidental dial.

2 An oriental Dial looks to the East, and the forenoone hours only must
be set in this Dial, and therefore the substilar line shows six of the
clock in the morning; from which toward the South are the morning hours
before six, viz. 5. 4. 3. etc. but toward the North after six, 7. 8. 9. 10.
11. as in the 3 figure.

3 An occidental Dial looks directly Westwards: and only the hours after
noone can be set into this dial. Therefore the substilar line shows the sixth
hour after noone: from which toward the North are the hours before six in
this order. 5. 4. 3. 2. 1. but toward the South after six thus. 7. 8. 9. etc.
as in the 4. figure.

4 In Dials not Meridian, if a ruler laid to the center of the aequinoctial and
the beginning of the division thereof do cross the touchline; then the hour
line drawn by that crossing is the line of twelve a clock. But if it cannot
cross the touch line, imagine notwithstanding, that crossing and the twelve a
clock line, drawn thereby without the bounds of your Dial, whereabouts you
think it would be, if the ruler and touch line were continued forth long
enough.

5 Then in all Dials not meridian, imagine the style to be fastened in his place,
in aequinoctial Dials perpendicularly erected out of the Center. In Dials that
be not Equinoctial, conceive it to be placed exactly over the substilar line,
so much raised from the same as the stilar line in your paper or pastbord, is
distant from the substilar line.

6 After this, place your paper or pastebord (whereon the figure of your Dial is
described) in the same site or position that the dial ground is, or must be
placed* so that the quarters of the world written thereupon, may answer in like
position to the quarters of the world as they lie in respect of your dial
ground: for then if the 12. a clock line be toward the North, from the style
it is the line of the 12. hour of the day. From hence therefore toward the
West are the forenoone hours, 11. 10. 9. 8. 7. etc. and toward the East, the
afternoon hours, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. etc.

7 But if the 12. a clock line be Southward from the style, it is the line of
the twelfth hour in the night from thence: therefore on both sides are the
night hours: toward the West, after midnight, 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. toward the
East before midnight, 11. 10. 9. 8. etc.

CHAP. XVI. What hour lines are to be expressed in all sorts of Dials.
IN all Dials, those hour lines only are to be expressed, upon which the
shadow of the style shall fall. Therefore the hours of the day only are to be
expressed.

2 In Dials not Polar, wherein the height of the style is not augmented, if the
style point upwards, and the elevation thereof from the substilar line, be not
less then the complement of the suns greatest declination, all the hour
lines serving for the longest day, are to be expressed therein.

3 But if the cleuation of the style from the substilar be less then the
complement of the Suns greatest declination, draw a right line out of the
intersection of the line of contingence, and substilar perpendicularly
overthwart the stilar line: and setting one foot of your compasses in the
center of the dial, and extending the other toward the other end of the stilar
line, draw an arc there from equal to the complement of the Suns greatest
declination: and thereby draw a line out of the center of the Dial, and setting
one foot of your compasses inthe intersection of this line with the foresaid
perpendicular, extend the other foot to the stilar line: Then keeping this
distance, set one foot of your compasses in the center of the aequinoctial
circle and with the other cross the line of contingence on both sides the
substilar: now if you lay your ruler to these crosses and the center of the
Dial: right lines drawn thereby beyond the center of the Dial shall continue
between them the space wherein no hour lines are to be expressed.

4 This rule holds also in meridional Dials inclining, when the elevation of
the style is counted from the upper end of the Meridian line, and the elevation
of the style from the substilar is less then the complement of the Suns
greatest declination.

5 If the style point downwards, no hour lines are to be expressed above a
line parallel to the horizon drawn by the center of the Dial.

6 And if the cross in the line of contingence (made as before was showed) be
above the line aequidistant to the horizon, drawn by the center of the Dial;
no hour lines are to be expressed above a right line drawn from the cross
and continued beyond the center of the Dial.

7 If any part of the Dial whereupon the shadow of the style may fall, be void
of hour lines: let the hour lines before described be continued forth into
that part of the Dial, as in the 13 and 15 figure.

CHAP. XVII. How to translate the Dial drawn on paper or pasteboard unto the
Dial ground.
THe figure of your Dial being thus described, you shall translate the same
into the Dial ground, after this manner.

2 Place the paper or pastebord whereas the figure of your dial is described in
such sort, in the Dial ground is placed, so as the quarters of the world
written on the paper or pastebord may answer in like position to the quarters
of the world as they lie in respect of the Dial ground.

3 Then as the hour lines and substilar line are described in your pastebord,
so in like manner, and in like position, let them be inscribed nto your Dial
ground that so little part of the ground as may be, be left void of hour
lines serving for use, and that the spaces on both sides from the substilar
line drawn on the Dial ground be proportionable to the number of hour lines
that are to be expressed in the Dial.

4 In Polar dials draw a right line squire-wise overthwart the substilar in the
Dial ground; then take with your compasses the distances of the hour lines
from the substilar in the pastebord, and set them into that line drawn
squire-wise in the Dial ground, setting always on foot in the intersection
thereof with the substilar line, and with the other foot making pricks in the
said line drawn squirewise: And let paralels to the substiar line be drawn by
those pricks, for they shall be the hour lines we seek for, set into the
dial ground.

5 The style must be parallel to the substilar line, and must be placed directly
over it, so much distant from the same, as the stilar line is distant from the
substilar in the figure of your Dial drawn on the pastbord or paper.

6 In Dials that be not polars, wherein the elevation of the style from the
substilar is not augmented, describe two peripheries of equal bigness on the
Dial ground, the center thereof being placed in the meridian line, the other
upon the center of the Dial in the bastbord: then in this peripherie take the
distances of the substilar and the hour lines from the Meridian with your
compasses, out of the figure of your Dial in the paper or pastbord, and set
those dista^ces likewise into the dial grounds, and by them draw the hour
lines and the substilar from the center of the dial.

7 The style must be fastened in the center, and must hang directly over the
substilar, elevated so much from the same, as the stilar line in the figure of
your dial is distant from the substilar.

8 But in Dials that be not polars, wherein the elevation of the style from the
substilar is augmented, let the substilar line be described in the Dial ground
so much distant from the Meridian, which you first described therein, as the
substilar is dista^t from the Meridian in the figure of your dial. And let two
lines of contingence be drawn squirewise ouerth wart that substilar in the
Dial ground, so much distant each from other, as the lines of contingence in
the paper are. And let the distances of the hour lines from the substilar line
be taken in both lines of contingence in the figure of the dial, and be set in
like manner in to the lines of contingence, answering to them in the Dial
ground, setting one foot of your compasses always in the substilar line, which
is in the Dial ground, and with the other making marks in the lines of
contingence drawn therein: for then right lines drawn by those marks,
differing alike from the substilar line, shall be the hour lines. The style
must hang perpendicularly over the substilar line, so much distant from the
same, and from the sections thereof with the lines of contingence, as the style
augmented in the figure of your Dial is distant from the substilar.

Equinoctial Dials. North direct reclining 51. degrees, ^0. minutes, or the
upper Equinoctial Dial.


South direct, inclining 51. degrees, 30. minutes.


The manner of finding the substilar line in Meridian Polar Dials.
This example serves for the Oriental dial.



Meridian Polar dials.




A South direct dial reclining 38 degrees 30. minutes, or a South direct polar
dial.


A North direct dial inclining 38 degrees 30. minutes, or a North direct polar
dial.


South declining Eastward 27. degrees, reclining 34. degrees 40. minutes.


North declining Westward 36 degrees inclining 32. degrees 15 minutes.


North declining Eastward 43. degrees reclining 42. degrees 20. minutes wherein
the style and meridian line make right angles.


North declining 84. degrees westward, reclining 7 degrees 20 minutes, the
style pendicular to the Meridian line.


South declining Eastward 31 degrees, inclining 48 degrees. ^0 min. the style
perpendicular to the meridian.


South declining Westward 86* degrees 40. min. inclining 4. degrees style
perpendicular to the meridian.


In all the figures following, the style makes a sharp angle with the
meridian: a direct dial lying leuel with the Horizon, commonly called an
Horizontal dial.


A South dial erect direct.


A North Dial erect, direct.


A South dial erect declining Eastward 30. degr.


A South erect dial declining westward 80. degr.


North declining westward 41. de. 40. min. reclin. 4^. de. 30. min.



