A DISCOVERY of sundry errors and faults daily committed by Landemeaters,
ignorant of Arithmetike and Geometry, to the damage, and prejudice of many her
Majesty's subjects, with manifest proof that none ought to be admitted to that
function, but the learned practisioners of those Sciences:

Written Dialoguewise, according to a certain communication had of that matter.

By Edward Worsop, Londoner.

Every one that measures Land by laying head to head, or can take a plat by
some Geometrical instrument, is not to be accounted therefore a sufficient
Landmeater, except he can also prove his instruments, and measurings, by true
Geometrical Demonstrations.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Middleton for Gregory Seton.

ANNO 1582.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and his singular good Lord, Sir William Cecill, Baron
of Burghley, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord high Treasourer
of England, and one of the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable privy
Counsel.
AMong the number of our worthy acts of Parliament (right Honorable and my
most singular good Lord) the statute of land measure is of great importance,
and equity. Certain persons (wanting sufficient knowledge for the executing
of that statute) notwithstanding intrude them selves into that weighty
function as sufficient. Sundry of their false rules, and untrue ways of
measuring, as also sundry true rules (by some of them) falsely applied, in this
small treatise are discovered. Mine intention was not in the time of penning
thereof, nor long since, to publish the same: but of late upon great urging,
and persuasion of him (at whose request I did write this talk) and of certain
other my friends and acquaintances: I yielded at their requests to the
publication thereof. The necessity, and worthiness of the matter require
learned and exquisite ordering, which I must resign to be performed hereafter
by the learned. By this treatise I may be likened to a broyled founder, whose
only charge is to make mixture of metals, and to roughcast them. The filing,
grauing, and polishing, are done by other artificial workmen, who goodly set
out the same to the eye according to the richenes of the metal. I, a simple
man among the common people, have set forth this discourse to their behoof, by
the playnest ways I could devise, and for their easiest understanding: Sundry
learned works of the Mathematicals (for such as understand or affect learning)
are extant in our vulgar tongue: as Euclide, the works of Doctor Record, of
Master Leonard Digges, of Master Thomas Digges, and of some others. But because
these learned books can not be understood of the common sort, and that they
be as iuels, and riches, shadowed or wrapped up from their sight: I have
thought good by a plain and popular discourse, to lay open unto the
understanding of every reasonable man, the necessities and commodities of those
singular works and knowledges, and the great abuse, inconveniences, and
injuries, the common weal susteineth by crediting and reteyning of ignorant
doers, and neglecting of learned and skillful writers, and practisioners. As
wise and learned men, when they speak unto a simple and unlearned man: frame
their speech to his understanding, which in the like cause they would utter
otherwise if they spoke to one learned: so must some man to the behoof of the
common weal manifest those enormities popularly, that the hurt which
ignorance brings in this weighty matter may universally be known. I
(although far unmeet to take so weighty a cause in hand) have adventured
for the discharge of my conscience, and my duty to the common weal: to
manifest (as I best could) certain great inconveniences which the common weal
daily susteineth by unlearned practisioners, humbly submitting my self where
reformation is needeful, to the correction of the learned. And for because it
is universally known, that the continual application of your noble heart and
mind, is to the furtherance of learned knowledges, of equity in causes,
suppressing of ignorance, and to the commodity of the weal public (whereof
your Honor is a principal pillar) and for that your Honor has been mine
especial good Lord, I do presume (as enforced thereto by duty) to dedicate
unto your Honor this small treatise: most humbly requiring pardon for such my
great boldness, as also that your Honor would vouchsafe to receive the same into
your noble patronage.

Your Honors most humble to command, EDWARD WORSOP.

The coppie of a Letter sent with this Book.
TO perfo^rme my promise, and satisfy your request: I have set down in
writing (as near as I can call to remembrance) the communication had in our
journey, touching untrue measuring of land, insufficient landmeaters, and why
they are still permitted. For the further proof of these matters, I have
drawn sundry figures like unto some of those you saw in my book: which
proofs the unlearned in Geometry may easily conceive. I pray you reserve this
book for the satisfaction of your self, and your friends. I would be loath
it should come to the hands of learned Mathematicians, for they may justly
reprove sundry of my demonstrations, and declarations: because they are not
penned as learning, and art require. If they were penned in artificial order,
and terms: you could not understand them, because you are ignorant of the
Mathematicals. If you will be instructed in Arithmetike, Euclide, Tectonicon,
and Pantometria, according to your earnest protestations: and study those
books earnestly, because they are the best writers, extant in our vulgar
tongue touching the Mathematical part of surueie: you shall then perceive,
what great pleasure, and commodity, is received from learned, and artificial
writers, over that can be had from them, which in their writings descend to
the capacity of the vulgar sort. Then also you will yield your self more
beholding unto me for writing this popular discourse at you request, to the
diminishing, and aduenturing of mine estimation among learned Mathematicians:
then now while you think it artificially done. Although my knowledge in
Geometry is very small, yet I would not abase my self by penning any
demonstrations popularly: but to pleasure you, and your friends, and for that
I would many should understand, the great hurtes the common weal sustaineth by
landmeaters ignorant of Geometry. When you have attained knowledge, I hope you
will deal with me as good natured men deal with their nurses. Good natured
men during their lives love their nurses, because they received their first
sustenance from them: although their stomakes would loath to suck their milk
as they did in their infancy. When you shall find your self learned in
Geometry, and that you can understand the demonstrations of learned writers:
you will repute my writing as cold and thin milk, in comparison of other
meats, that are strong and of good nourishment. From London the two and
twenty of September. 1581.

Your loving Friend Edward Worsop.

printer's device probably of Henry Middleton: McKerrow 215, "Ornament of a
lion's face over a shield, two owls, and the initials H. M."
An advertisement to the Reader.
SCales, compasses, and sundry sorts of Geomatricall instruments in metal, are
to be had in the house of Humfrey Cole, near unto the North door of Paul's,
and at the house of John Bull at the Exchange gate: in wood, at John Reads in
Hosier Lane, at James Lockersons dwelling near the Conduite at Dowegate, and
at John Reynolds at Tower Hill. Every figure in this Treatise is drawn
according to some Scale, therefore the having of scales and compasses, and
applying them to those figures, will make the demonstrations, and proofs
herein very easy to the readers thereof, though they understand little or
nothing in Geometry. I have thought good to give advertisement hereof, because
many that would provide such things, know not where to have them.

A DETECTION OF Sundry errors, committed in Landmeating.
Speakers. M. Peter. Ihonson a Clothier. Worsop a Surueyor. M. Watkins. Steven
a Seruingman. M. Peter. THis seems to be rich pastureground, a tenant (in my
judgment) may safely give a mark by year, for every acre thereof.


Johnson I would take a pasture ground with us, and give that price for every
acre, measured with the perch of xvi. foot, and an half, called statute
measure, and ten shillings for every acre, if it be measured with the perch
of xii. foot.


Worsop An acre measured by the statute perch, conteyneth (almost) twice so
much ground, as an acre measured by a perch of xii. foot. If the statute acre
be rented at xiii. s. iiii. d, the acre measured by the perch of xii. foot,
will not come to vii. s. i. d, rate like. You should deceive your self ii. s.
xi. d. in every such acre by that account.


Johnson You are greatly deceived, for by all reason, the acre measured with
the perch of xii. foot, must be almost iii. quarters of the statute acre,
because xii. foot, are almost iii. quarters of xvi. foot, and an half.


Peter How much ground of statute measure, are xi. acres of woodland measure,
the woodland perch being xviii. foot?


Worsop Above xiii. acres, and xiiii. perches, to my remembrance.


Peter Your remembrance, or your casting have failed you. You are greatly
deceived in both your reckonings.


Worsop I shall be very sorry, if I be deceived in either of them: for I have made
sundry surueyes where occasion has served to reduce such acres as have bin
measured by the xviii. foot perch, and the xii. foot perch unto statute
acres. The xviii. foot perch for woodland is used in most places hereabouts:
I have not seen the xii. foot perch used in these parts: but far from London
in some Manors, that measure is allowed of, and is called in some places,
tenant right, in other some, curt measure.


Peter I always thought, and have sundry times heard that xi. acres measured
with the perch of xviii. foot, make xii. statute acres. And this reason has
always induced me to think it true, because the xviii. foot perch exceeds
the statute perch by half a yard, which is a twelfth part thereof: for the
one perch is xii. half yards long, and the other but xi. therefore seeing the
perches differ but a tewlfth part the one from the other, the acres (in mine
opinion) measured with those perches, can not make any other difference.


Worsop You do not know, or not consider, that when you talk of the diversity
which unequal perches make in land measure, that then you speak of the measure
of planes and flattes. You think you are in the comparison of lengthes, when as
in deed you are in an other matter. Ye must understand that Geometry treats
of three sundry measures. The first of lengthes, which is called liniarie
measure, or the measure of lengthes, or lines. By this part, you may know how
far any place is from the standing of your foot, also the distance between
place and place, and how much higher, or lower any place is, then the leuel of
your eye, or foot. The second of length, and breadth, called superficial
measure, or the measure of planes, or flattes. By this part of Geometry is
measured, all manner of land, board,, glass, pauements, waynskottings, hangings,
and such like. The third of length, breadth, and thicknes, called solid, or
bodily measure. This part shows how to measure all manner of timber, stone,
vessels, and such like. M. Peter said truth, that the perch of xviii. foot,
and the perch of xvi. foot and an half differ in their lengthes, as xii.
differ from xi. for the one is xii. half yardes long, and the other but xi.
But ye must understand, this difference is only in respect of their lengthes,
called liniarie measure. In land measure (which respects length and breadth)
the difference is otherwise: as I will make plain unto you by an easy example.
Suppose you have two tables, or bords, the one iiii. foot every way, ye other
six. How much is the one longer then the other?


Peter By the one half.


Worsop You say truth, and therefore you account the one table to be greater,
then the other, just by one half.


Peter It must needs be so.


Worsop I pray you how many foot of wainscot does a table contain, that is
iiii. foot every way?


Peter xvi.


Worsop It does so, and then by your account the other table of vi. foot every
way, must contain xxiiii. for the half of xvi. is viii. which if you put unto
xvi. they both make xxiiii.


Peter You say true.


Worsop I pray you how much is vi. taken vi. times?


Johnson Six and thirty.


Worsop By your reckoning it should be, but xxiiii.


Johnson We al know, that six times six, is six and thirty, but how proves
this, such diversity in the acres?


Worsop It shows unto you at the first, that measures cast up by their
breadthes and lengthes, must otherwise be considered of, then measures whose
lengthes only are compared together. A table that is iiii. foot broad, and
vi. long, contains xxiiii. foot of board, therefore a table that is vi. foot
every way, must needs contain more.


Watkins This stands so by reason, that it must needs be as you say.


Worsop I have in my cloak bag certain figures drawn in a book, (which I
must give unto a friend of mine) that will explane this error, and sundry
others, which landmeasurers (unlearned in Geometry) often commit.


Peter I pray you let us see those figures.


VVorsop You shall when we come to our Inn.


Peter It will be late ere we come thither, therefore we shall have small time
then to talk of these matters: because men scatter when they are lighted. Also
we must part company in the morning. Therefore I pray you let us see them now,
which if you vouchsafe, I, in some other matter, will requite your courtesy. It
stands me upon to understand the troth of this matter, by reason of a wood
sale, that I, and an other should pass.


VVorsop To pleasure you, I will presently show them. Here is the book: these
iii. figures prove that which I have spoken. three grids to prove that
multiplying length and width yields area: 4 x 4, 4 x 6, and 6 x 6


Peter I see in deed that iiii. every way makes xvi. and that vi. every way
makes six and thirty. and iiii. broad and vi. long make xxiiii. What mean
you by this word (Scale) which I see in so many places of your book?


Worsop The Scale is a measure used in platting, taken at the will of the plat
maker, either greater, or less, to set forth the plat measured in true
proportion, and Symetrie, upon paper, or any other superfice.


Watkins I understand not this definition.


Worsop Here (as ye see) are sundry scales, and every of them is just five
inches long.

compass with three scales each five inches long, each with one of the inches
divided into 4, 5, or 10 parts The first, has one inche divided into iiii.
parts, the second into five, the third into ten, ye may apply these inches and
divisions, to what denomination you list. The Geographer applies them to
miles, or furlongs. The Surueyor, to perches, the Carpentor, to feet, and so
may any other arts man, in naming any other measure greater, or less. Suppose
I should describe a country, that lies in square form, xviii. miles on every
side, upon a piece of paper, that is less then v. inches square. In this case,
the scale of iiii. will best serve my turn. For one inche being divided into
iiii. parts, does represent the length of iiii. miles, therefore iiii. inches
represent the length of xvi. miles, and ii. parts of the divided inche added to
them, must needs represent xviii. miles. But if I should describe a Shire, or
Country, upon the like paper, that lies three and forty miles square, in
this case I must be driven to use the scale ten: that is to say, I must take in
inches, and iii. parts of the ten, in the inche divided into ten parts, which
represent three and forty miles. For iiii. inches represent forty miles,
and the three divisions taken in the said inch divided into ten parts,
represent the three odds miles. The self same scales will serve, if you should
plat closes, within the like scantling of v. inches, the one being xviii.
perches on every side, the other xliii.


Peter I now perceive what is meant by this word scale. I remember I have
seen the like lines, and compasses set inmappes, but I never understood what
they meant till now.


VVorsop The knowledge, how to apply the compasses to the scale, is
commodious, for thereby when mappes, or carts, are perused, it may be known
how far any one Region, City, or place is distant from any other, either by
land, or sea. Also, when a Surueyor has delivered up his plat, the Lord
sitting in his chair at home, may justly know, how many miles his Manor is in
circuit, and the circuit of any particular grounds, and wastes: and how many
perches, or furlongs it is, from any one hedge, or corner of hedge, to any
other hedge, or corner.


Johnson I perceive also what you meant, when you said, ye may apply these
divisions, to what denominatio^ you list. As if you would know by any cart, or
map of England, how many miles it is from Northampton to Sarisburie, then
miles are the denomination: but if you would know by any platte of land, how
many perches any ground is over, then perch^s are the denomination. And you
call the opening and extending the compasses upon the scale, the application of
the compasses to the scale.


Worsop You conceisse the meaning rightly.


Johnson What mean you by these several words, in true proportion, Symetrie,
and superfice.


VVorsop To set forth a plat, in true proportion and Symetrie, are to say, to
take, and set forth any plat in such sort, that you may readily tell thereby,
every angle, bought, crook, and straight line in the thing measured, and how
far any place is distant from other. Also you may know by your plat the whole
circuit, and outboundes of your land, which Geometers call the perimetrie.
Superfice is to say, the upper face of any thing, as in measuring of land,
pauements, hangings, and such like, we desire only to know the content of the
outward plain, or upper face of the thing, not regarding thicknes, weight,
grossenes or depth: but only the mesure of ye upper parts as in grounds: which
consist only of length, and breadth, whether they be flats, or leuels, hills, or
valleis. It would be too tedious to describe them at large: therefore I refer
you to learned authors for your further instructions of their proprieties, and
accidents.


Johnson What is meant by this word, Parallel?


VVorsop Parallel lines, are such lines, as (being drawn upon any plain, or
superfice) are equally distant ye one from the other. If you draw them of never
so great a length, yet will they never concur, or meet together. If they
incline never so little ye one to ye other, they are not parallels, but
inclining lines, as you may see by ye parallel lines ab and cd; inclining lines
of and gh examples of these lines a. b. etc. d. which are parallels, and the
lines e. f. and g. h, which are inclining.


Ihon. Why write you such strange and far fetched words and terms, seeing you
can write their meanings in plain english, if you would?


Worsop He for whom I have written this book, will not think them strange, or
far fetched, because he gives himself to the studies of Arithmetike and
Geometry, and therefore acquainted with words and terms of those arts. There is
not any doctrine, or science, but has of necessity his peculiar terms:
neither does any learned man in any science, condemn an other learned man, in
an other science, for a strange and far fetching speaker, because he
understands not many of his words and terms. Many of the profoundest
learned men in the Universities, understand not a number of terms, pertaining
to the common Laws, which a young student of less then a years continuance,
understands very well. And contrariwise, a great number of profound learned
men in the laws of the Realm, understand not a great number of terms, used
in Philosophy and Logike, which a young Logician understands very well. The
Ciuilian, understands not many terms of Phisike, nor the Physician many
terms appertaining to the Civil Laws. The Greek terms appertaining to
Arithmetike, Geometry, and other Mathematical sciences, seem stranger unto al
sorts of men, then the terms of other sciences, and therefore, of the
ignorant very much derided, who account them more curious then necessary. Yea
some men that are learned in other sciences, but ignorant in the Mathematikes,
think them terms of hard and dark knowledges, and not greatly necessary,
because they think much vanity in them. Both these sorts of men, which
condemn before they know, are in great error. The ancients, and best learned
writers of Mathematical sciences, were Grecians: the Latins, receiving their
knowledge from learned Greek authors, never altered the Greek terms, but
used them as well in works of their own making, as in translations. The
Italians, French men, and Germans, finding them in the Latin, used also the
Greek terms, as followers of the Latins. Therefore the learned might judge a
great presumption, and lack of discretion in us, if we should translate these
Greek terms, into our English words: seeing the learned of other nations,
retain them still, though they can write more compe^diously, then we. We are
not able to utter Greek terms compendiously, but by circumlocution. I think
one special cause, why learned writers in the best languages, use the Greek
terms in all their works, is, because readers of their books should compare
them, with Greek, and Latin authors, in whom they shall find the self same
terms, whereby the knowledge of these sciences, is much easier attained unto.
For if a man find one thing in sundry languages, and diverse ways defined
demonstrated, and applied, he is very hard of capacity, if he shall not be able
to understand some of them.


Ihonson I thought verily before you told these causes, that you, and your
friend for whom you have written this book, had devised terms much like the
devise of Pedlers French, because you would not have your cunnings in land
measuring known to any but to your selves.


Steven And I would have thought them, words of coniuration, because being once
in a place, and half a dossen others beside my self, where lay a book that
had many crosses in it, and a great number of like figures, and circles, and as
one of our company did read such strange words, one other said: my friend,
you were not best to read too far in that book, least you fetch one up,
that will ask what he shall do, and if you can appoint him nothing, neither
know how to lay him down again, he will do much hurt. And because it was
in a Priests his house, I may say to you, it so feared some fools of us, that
we were glad when we were out of doors. I never heard that the Priest was
suspected for coniuring, he could do many pretty feats, for he made dials
upon walls, and in gardens, he could measure land, and tell how wheels, and
other gins for milnes should be made. He has told how things should be made
and mended, concerning water works, and milnes, that if the country had
lacked his help, a great deal of money would have been spent in vain by
most men's sayings. I heard him say unto landemeasurers, that they must needs
make wrong measure, if they proceeded by such way as they had cast their work,
and determined to proceed. One time (as I waited on my master when he went to
the measuring of a meadowe that lay ii. miles from his house) there was great
talk, and arguing by the way, whether it were possible to tell how far one
place in view is dista^t from an other: and how much one place is higher then
an other, except it were first measured. Master Morgan answered that it was
possible, and very easy to be done. Then Master Allen asked him if he could
do it by any of those instruments we carried with us. He answered that he
could. Whereupon M. Allen suddenly staying, said: I pray you tell me how far
it is from the place where I stand to yonder oak. I will, said he, and
immediately he piched one of his instruments, and looked through a fine knacke,
or Iig, and measured a good pretty way from him, not toward the mark, but
sidewise: and at the corner where his measuring ended, he looked again through
his Iig, and casting a little with his pen, he told justly almost how many
perches it was from his foot to the oak: for he missed not a perch in a length
that was above five furlonges. When we came to the oak, whose height from a
certain knot in a bowgh, down to the ground was almost three and fifty
foot, he told within two inches the just height by looking through an other
Iig. One did clime the tree, and laid one end of a wier line to the knot, and
there held it, and let the other end fall down, by which means we made
trial. We that saw how near he had told the length, and height, before they
were measured, said it was pretely done. M. Allen asked if any good service, or
commodity to the common weal might ensue by these fine sleightes. Yea said
M. Morgan, very much. For except a man can take lengthes and distances, he is
insufficient to measure land: because in land measuring, the measurer many
times through the impedimentes of thickets, waters, myers and such like, must
be driven to take lengths, and distances. Neither hills, nor dales, for the most
part can truly be measured, except their heightes and depthes be taken. Also
he that can exactly take them, can give a very near guess, when he comes on
any ground whether it will co^taine his generals army or not. He also can tell
what quantity of ground the enemies camp ouerspreadeth: and give a near
guess (if he see the enemies in battle raye) what number is of them. Also to
know how to take lengthes, and heightes, be chief points in undermining:
namely if the undermining begin far from the place that should be blown up.
The height of towers, steeples, and wales, are known hereby, so that scaling
ladders may be made fit: and it may be known how much is between story and
story in any house, without measuring them. Also how many foot high any tree
dothbeare timber, and most requisite to batteries, and bowgeings, and to know
how far any piece bears point blank. The degrees of longitude, and
latitude, the elevation of the poles, and the height of the sun, things in
navigations of great necessity: namely in long and far viages, when they
would know unto what coasts, and countries they are nearest, are known, and
found out by geometrical instruments prepared for the taking of heightes,
lengthes, and distances. The chieffest piece of art in the description of
countries, is the taking of heightes, lengthes, and distances. The knowledge of
them are incident to many other necessary matters.


Peter Call you these pretty feats, and fine sleightes, and such instruments,
knackes, and Iigges? Me thinks he that can do these things, performs
matters of great weight in the common weal, and ought as much to be accounted
of, and advanced for these knowledges, as learned men in other faculties for
their knowledges.


Steven When the land was parted between my Maistres, and her three sisters,
M. Morgane was a whole month with my master, and measured for him. There were
then certain lawyeres, surueyors, and country measurers, and for three or
four days great controversy was among them, and such a stur as I never saw
amongst wise men. Some would have the land measured one way, some another:
some brought long poles, some lines that had a knot at the end of every
perch, some lines that were sodden in rosen and wax, M. Morgane had a line of
wyers. They measured the poles, and lines with two foot rulers, and yardes,
whereof some differed from other, half an inche, which made great variance, for
every man justified his own ruler. If I durst to have adventured at the first,
I could I have gained twenty nobles by laying on master Morgane his doings.
There was such lusty bargaining on all sides, that crowns, and angels were
but tryfling lays. Master Morgane laid little or nothing, but always as he
said, so it was agreed upon: he could always give such reasons, and so well
prove his doings.


Peter Then he measured for them all.


Steven Nay, that he did not. The land was to be divided into four parts.
The sisters and their husbands agreed that every of them should bring their
surueyours at the time appointed: so that when any ground was to be measured,
rented, and valued, it might be agreed upon by their general consentes. Order
was taken that a certain meade should first be measured, and that every
measurer, should measure by himself, and that none of the other measurers
should be with them: and that every man when he had done, should deliver up his
content of acres unto Master Allen, who went with them to receive the same, and
to see that one should not tell another how much he made it, because it was
thought good to see how they would agree. But when their reckonings were
compared together, they disagreed very much. For one made it xxiii. acres, an
other xxi. and an half, an other xvi. and iii. roodes, and Master Morgane made
it xvii. and almost a roode. Hereupon rose great contention and wagering, but
at last all gave place to Master Morgane his measure. He that made it xvi.
acres and iii. roodes, found that he misreckoned himself almost iiii. acres
too little, and afterward he swear by Gods soul that he was glad thereof,
because by that occasion his content came nearest to Master Morganes.


Ihonson I marvel what may be the causes of their so great disagreeings, and
differences in one, and the same so small a piece of ground.


Worsop No marvel, for the common ignorant measurers by their general rule
are for the most part subject to make grounds greater in quantity then in
troth they are.


Peter I would very feign see how it can be proved, that xi. acres by the
xviii. foot perch, make of statute measure xiii. acres and xiiii. perches.
When I am satisfied in that matter, we will hear further of that partition.


Worsop Number the square feet, contained in these iii. figures. The figure A.
shows the square feet contained in the statute perch, which are CC. lxxii.
and a quarter. The figure B. the square feet in the xviii. foot perch, which
are C C C. xxiiii. And the figure C. the square feet, in the xii. foot
perch, which are. C. xl. iiii. Your opinions are, that a measure made with the
xviii. foot perch, is greater then a measure made by the xii. by the one
half, because xviii. is xii. and the half of xii. But ye see it is far
otherwise, for C C C. xxiiii. the greatest square, contains C. xliiii. the
lest square, twice, and xxxvi. over, which is the fourth part of C. xliiii. So
that one acre measured by the xviii. foot perch, is equal unto ii. acres,
and a roode, measured by the perch of xii. foot. Such proportion as the
surveyor's diagrams: grids showing the number of square feet in (A) the statute
perch (16-1/2 feet); (B) the 18-foot perch; (C) the 12-foot perch squares of
perches have each to others: the grounds by them measured have also. But
because you are ignorant of Geometrical proportions, that is to say, of
Geometrical relations, comparisons, or respects, and that the proportion of the
square of the statute perch, to the squares of the other perches, fall so upon
the fraction, as I cannot express them by number to your understandings:
therefore I will set aside art, and artificial terms, in this our talk, and
frame my speech as I best can to your understandings. Ye all know that
eight score perches make an acre, as eight score pennies make a Mark of money.
Whether our coin be fine, or base, eight score pennies ever make a Mark: so
whether the perch be little, or great, eight score perches ever make the
acre. When ye talk of ii. unequal perches of land, ye must not think that
ye talk of ii. such unequal poles, or lines, as Surueyors measure with, for
they are instruments to lay out the sides of a perch of land, and not
perches of land. If a man buy a piece of Dornixe of a yearde broad, to hang
a room withal, and when his hanging is made up, he lacks a yard of
stuff to perform the same: which he buyeth. In this case the square yearde
of bought s^uffe, perfourmeth the hanging, and not the yearde where with the
stuff was measured. As a yearde of Dornixe cut off from the piece, is
contained within the bounds, and limittes of four edges, or seluages, every
one being a just yearde in length: for that quantity of Dornixe is called a
square yearde of Dornixe: so is that quantity of ground, called a perch of
land, which is contained within the limittes of four perches being laid
square. And as eight score pennies, make a Mark of money, so eight score such
parcels, or pieces of ground, make an acre. Ye have told that C C C xxiiii.
square feet are contained in the perch of eighteen foot, which sum eight
score times, makes fifty one thousand eight hundred and forty. For one
hundred foot eight score times make sixteen thousand, then two 3 hundred eight
score times, must make eight and forty thousand. And eight score, four and
twenty times, make iii. thousand eight hundred and forty.


Johnson I understand very well that this is true.


Peter I have tried it in multiplying 324 by 160, and find it to agree that
ways.


Worsop Ye have told also that two hundred three score and twelve foot and a
quarter, are contained within the statute perch, which sum eight score
times, makes xliii. thousand, D. ^ lx. squ are feet.


Peter We have cast this among our selves, and find it to be as you have
said.


VVorsop Take the lesser sum out of the greater, and note how many remain.


Ihonson There remain viii. thousand, two hundred and fourscore.


VVorsop Ye say truth, and ye perceive that the one acre exceeds the other,
so many square feet of ground. Can ye tell how many times C C. lxxii. and a
quarter are contained in eight thousand C C. lxxx?


Peter As we have cast, xxx. times, and C xii. foot and an half over.


VVorsop Then ye perceive that the acre measured with the perch of xviii.
foot long, is greater then the acre measured with the statute perch, by xxx.
perches of land and Cxii. foot and an half over. How much is thirty eleven
times?


Peter C C C. and xxx.


Worsop How much is C. xii. and an half, eleven times?


Johnson xii C. xxxvii. and an half.


VVorsop How many statute perches is that?


Peter Four statute perches, and an half, xii. foot, and a quarter and an
half of a foot.


VVorsop Thus ye have found C C C xxxiiii. perches and an half, and a few od
feet, which is ii. acres, xiiii. perches and an half. If you put them to xi.
acres, then you have xiii. acres, and above xiiii. perches, according to my
former saying.


Johnson I pray you let us try the diversity, between the statute acre, and
the acre of xii. foot perch.


VVorsop Ye see the xii. foot perch contains C xliiii. square seete: how
much is that sum eight score times?


Peter C xliiii. eight score times is, xxiii. thousand and xl.


VVorsop How many times is C C lxxii. and a quarter contained in xxiii.
thousand and xl.


Peter Four score, and four times, and an half, xxxiiii foot, and seven
parts of a foot, the foot being divided into eight parts.


Worsop Ye know that those lxxx. and iiii. times are so many statute perches?


Peter We do so.


Worsop How much money is lxxx. and iiii. penies?


Johnson Vii. s.


Worsop Ye see by your own reckoning, that if the acre measured by the xii.
foot perch, did make lxxx. and v. statute perches, as ye see it does not
fully, that your rent could be but vii. s. and a penny, after the rate of xiii.
s. iiii. d. for the statute acre.


Ihonson It is most true.


Watkins These reckonings, and profes, are very finely, readily, and plainly
contrived. Till now I never heard ground cast up to half a quarter of a
foot, and so plainly proved to every man his understanding. And yet I have
heard that some will not miss an inche of ground when they measure.


Worsop It is a small matter for one to cast up any measure that he has made
within less then an inch, but to measure exactly within less then an inche is
a greater matter then I ever knew any would take upon him to do. For albeit the
art does exactly teach ye way, yet are we not able (such is our imperfection)
truly to execute the same. And where you think that this account has been
finely, and readily cast up: you much mistake it: for it has been very
grossly done. The five ways are done by Arithmetike. I will by Arithmetike
do more in a line, then thus in a leaf: and in the space of ii. minutes,
which this ways can skantly be done in half an hour. He that is a good
auditor will quickly cast such a reckoning with his counters. But because
neither time nor place would permit me to use any of those means, I was forced
to prove this in such sort, as every of ye might best understand me.


Watkins I think I understand what you mean by these words, square feet,
square perches, but yet make further explanation of them I pray you.


Worsop That figure is called a square, which has all his iiii. angles right
angles. Every plain, or superfice bounded with iiii. sides, has iiii. angles,
or corners, as ye may perceive by these figures, A. B. C. D. You may try by
the scale of ten that every side of diagrams comparing squares (A) and (C) with
parallelograms (B) and (D), where the sides of (A) are the same length as the
sides of (B) but the areas are different, and likewise for (C) and (D) the
figures A. and B. are xx. in length, and every line is a straight line: and yet
the one figure is greater then the other. The figure A. is the greater, because
it is a square figure: and the figure B. is much less then the figure A.
because it lies not in square form. Like wise the figure C. is a long square,
and therefore much greater then the figure D. which lies not square, and yet
the sides of the one are equal to the sides of the other. Three kinds of
angles are to be considered of, by landmeaters: namely the right angle, the
obtuse angle, and the sharp angle. It can not be said that any figure, or
close lies square, except his corners be found right angles. Who so is
ignorant of certain peculiar properties, and conditions appertaining to these
iii. kinds of angles, can not truly measure land. It is not enough for a
measurer to know the sides of grounds, by laying his pole, or line, but he
must know moreover the contents of the corners: for the square lying,
narrownes, or broad opening of the corners in closes, make the contents diverse,
although the sides be found equal by measure.


Watkins Is he that knows the particular properties of those iii. kinds of
angles, to be accounted a sufficient measurer?


Worsop No more then he is to be accounted a sufficient Gramarian, that
knows but iii. rules appertaining to the first part of speech.


Johnson Notwithstanding your sayings, I like best the old manner of measuring,
by laying head to head, and side to side, taking their halfes, and that ways to
cast up the contents.


Worsop That way is not true, but where the corners of the close be right
angles, and the hedges straight. You shall not find one close amongst an
hundredth to lie in that sort. The measurers eye, is not able to judge exactely
whether grounds ly square (though he have great experience and good art) if
he have not some Geometrical instrument to direct him. If a ground of four
sides, have not at least two right angles, it may not be cast up by laying head
to head, for that kind of casting will produce a false content. Tell me I
pray you, how many acres a close of four sides contains, if every side be
just xl. perches in length?


Johnson Forty times, forty pence, is xx. nobles, and xx. nobles, is ten
acres. diagrams comparing square A and rectangle C with parallelograms B and D,
where the sides of A are the same length as the sides of B but the areas are
different, and likewise for C and D square A, each side measuring 40 units


Worsop This is a true content if the close lie in such fashion, as the figure
A represents: having all his sides straight, and angles right. But if it lie
in fashion like to the figure B, then it is but eight acres. The cause of this
diversity is, the difference of the angles. By judgment of your eye, you may
perceive, that the close A, is greater then the close B. All the sides of both
the closes, or figures, are equal in length, and every of them lies straight.
By the figure a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. you may see the proof of this
diversity. Every side of the figure a. b. e. f. is xl. perches, as you may
try by the scale x: and because his angles be right angles, therefore his
content parallelogram B, each side measuring 40 units diagram of parallelogram
B superimposed on square A (from the figures on the previous two pages) to
demonstrate the difference in area is just ten acres. The figure h. d. e. f.
has also every of his iiii. sides xl. perches, and yet a close lying in form
like to that figure, is but 8. acres. The figure a. b. c. g. is parcel of ye
figure a. b. e. f. which figure a. b. c. g. is xl. perches one way, and viii.
ye other. Forty pence. 8. times, is ii. acres: which ii. acres, being taken
from x. acres, there remain viii. acres: which are included in the figure g.
c. e. f. And ye may easily perceive, that the figure h. d. e. f. is equal to
the figure g. c. e. f. for the triangle c. d. e. is equal to the triangle g.
h. f.


Peter If the triangles. g. h. f. etc. d. e. be equal, then your meaning is,
to put unto the figure h. c. e. f. the figure g. h. f. in steed of the figure
c. d. e.


Worsop You conceive it right. For suppose I would cut of a piece of ground,
from a close, or ortyeard, as here the piece of ground c. d. e. is cut of from
the close h. d. e. f. and on the other side, namely on the side. f. h. I would
take in another piece for it, in like fashion, and bigness, as the piece cut of,
was, because I would have the ground lie in square form, for the pleasure of
mine eye: your reason gives you, that there is no difference in respect of
quantity of ground, between the first close, and the last, because so much is
taken in on one side, as was taken away from the other.


Peter If the ground taken from the one side, and the ground added to the other
side, be truly measured, it must needs be as you say: but how can you prove
that these two triangles c. d. e. and g. h. f. be equal?


VVorsop The equality of these two triangles is proved by the fourth
proposition of the first book of Enclide his elements. But because you
understand not geometrical demonstrations, I will not prove it unto you, as the
art requires, but by a gross, and unlearned way, for you shall so best
conceive the proof. Ye may try by the scale, and compasses, that the side c.
d. is equal to the side g. h. and the side d. e. to the side h. f. and the
side e. c. to the side f. g. Then lay a white paper under the triangle c. d. e.
and with a pin, or needle, let that paper be pricked in the corners c. d. e.
and laying your ruler to those pricks, draw finely three straight lines, and
they will include a triangular superfice equal to the figure c. d. e. then with
a knife, or sisers, cut out the triangle drawn upon the white paper, and lay
it upon the triangle g. h. f. and ye shall find, the one paper, just as big as
the other, without more or less. If the papers be equal in bigness, then your
reasons must needs give you, that the figures h. d. e. f. and g. c. e. f. are
equal. The self same troth that is in the measure of paper, is also in the
measure of ground: one reason serves forboth. Thus ye see, that the figure h.
d. e. f. is equal to the figure g. c. e. f. and therefore much less then the
figure a. b. e. f. And yet the sides of the figures h. d. e. f. are equal in
length, to the sides of the figure a. b. e. f. and the hedges of the one, are
as straight, as the hedges of the other.


Johnson If land may not be measured by laying head to head, how should it then
be measured?


VVorsop I am no more able to instruct you by one days talk, how to measure
land: then a learned Physician, is able to make you a good physician in the
space of a week. There is not any that can measure land as it ought to be,
except he first be well instructed, studied, and exercised in the sciences of
Geometry and Arithmetike. He that takes upon him to be a land meater, and is
ignorante in these sciences, is no other wise to be accepted for a good land
meater, (although by hap he measure some fashioned grounds truly) then he
for a good physician yt cures some certain disease by chance. I show not
these figures, and proofs of errors, that I think thereby, ye may be made
good land meaters upon a sudden: but that ye may perceive, that your unlearned
measurers, which you allow of, and suppose to do well, do utterly abuse you,
in delivering up false contents. There be three erroneous ways in great use,
among unlearned land meaters. One is, to lay head, to head, another, to
measure a ground round about, and to cast the measure of the whole circuit,
into four parts, or sides: and then to cast it up, as though it lay square.
Many use this way in measuring of coppies, woods, and bushie grounds, when
they can not see how the hedges ly: but how untrue that kind of measuring is,
you may perceive by the square figure. a. b. c. d. which is much bigger, then
the figure included within it, and yet the hedges of the included figure, are
longer then the hedges of the said square figure a. b. c. d. If you measure
the crooked lines with fine threedes, you shall find them longer then the
straight lines, as the crooked line a. b. is longer then the straight line a.
b. by the length of the line b. e. In like sort, you may try the rest. Thus
ye see, whether they lay head, to head, or cast the whole circuit into four
parts: yet either way they make the lesser ground, contain more, then the
greater. For those crooked hedges being cast up as though they lay straight,
will yield a far greater diagram of an irregular piece of land shown within
square ABCD to demonstrate that crooked lines cannot be used to calculate area
in the same way as straight lines quantity of ground, then the square close
a. b. c. d. does: and yet the square is greater, for the close with crooked
hedges, is included within it. The third way is, they will lay out a square
(here represented by the pricked lines, which in deeed is not a square) and
afterward they will make allowance, for all the nookes, and corners. This were
a good way, if they could lay out a square truly, and also truly cast up the
corners. But seeing the learned in Geometry, can not lay a square truly, but
by the help of some geometrical instrument: ye unlearned (being ignorant how to
use such an instrument) can much less do it. I dare lay with any of those good
felows, xx. to one: yt they cannot lay out a piece of ground perfitly square,
only by ye judgment of ye eye: and other help, I never saw any of them use.
They also cannot measure the nooks and corners truly: because they know not
how to cast up triangular superfices, by such rule as their form requires.
There be sundry kinds of triangles, as well of right lines, as of spherall,
spirall, and mixed, to every of which appertain peculiar rules, to the
attaining of their contents. In woods, rough grounds, and marshes covered with
waters, they, which have art, cannot for the most part lay out squares, but be
driven to measure, and to take their angles on the outsides, or upon the
banks, or walls. If arts men can not lay out squares in such grounds, the
ignorant can much less do it.


Watkins It seems unto me, by that you have showed, and proved, that if all
the hedges of a piece of ground be cast into one sum, and divided into four
equal parts, if then those iiii. hedges be laid square, that such a close,
would contain more ground, then if it were laid in any other fashion.


Worsop You must understand that this is only meant of closes of four
straight sides. I can lay closes in diverse forms, whose hedges shall be
straight, and but viii. score perches about, and every of them shall contain
above x. acres, and differ, one from another, in their contents.


Peter I never heard in all my life, that more ground then ten acres, could be
contained within the compass of viii. score perches. How much ground can you
lay within that compass?


Worsop Twelve acres and almost three quarters of an acre: it shall not lack
iiii. perches thereof.


Peter In what fashion, must such a piece of ground lie?


Worsop In a perfect round, like unto this round figure.


Johnson In our Country we measure such a piece of ground round about, and
then cast it into iiii. sides, and we think it truly cast.


Worcester. You may perceive yt to be erroneous by ye circle and pricked square a. b.
c. d. which gives you 8. score perches in square, and also viii. score perches
in round. You shall find by the scale ten, that every side of the square is
iiii. inches, that is to say xl. perches, therefore all the iiii. sides are xvi.
inches, which make viii. score perches. Also if you measure the circle, with a
fine thread of xvi. inches long, from the streike in the top, round about,
you shall find the same also to be just xvi inches about, even as the
circuit of the square a. b. c. d. is. Your eye gives you, that there is much
more paper included within the circle, then within the square, and yet no more
perches are in the circuit of the one, then in the circuit of the other.
diagram of a circle


Peter I will not ride any further, til I have tried this, for I have a silk
thread in my bag. First I will measure the iiii. sides of ye square, and cut of
the thread at that length. Now I will measure round about ye circle, from the
strike in the top. I do assure ye they agree to an heirs breadth. It is very
evident to the eye, that much more paper is contained within the circle, then
within the square: therefore common sense gives, that if grounds be enclosed
with hedges of like lengths, and fashions, that more ground must be contained
within the round diagram of square ABCD superimposed on a circle hedge, then
within the square.


Johnson I never (in all the days of my life) could have devised such a proof
as this, my head is so gross. I marvel much how you can lay viii. score
perches in a round, without more or less. I take it to be a great piece of
cunning. Can you do the like upon land, as you have done upon paper?


Worsop I can lay out grounds in any fashion, as well upon land, as upon paper:
but more time must be had, to the doing of the one, then to the doing of the
other. How to transform figures, according to their sides, or contents, to
any other fashion, or kind of figure, ought (of necessity) to be known unto
landmeaters. I find ii. sorts of people of great contrariety in their
opinions, concerning the attaining unto the knowledge of land measure. The one
thinks it but a slight, and learned by and by: the other dispaireth of his
understanding, thinking his senses over dull, and gross, to attain the
knowledge thereof. Both these sorts of people, are in wrong conceits. He that
thinks it but a slight, is of such courage, that he will (according to the
common saying) leap over the style, before he come near it. For says he, If
I might be but one week in the company of a cunning measurer, and have but a
little instruction from him: I could learn all his cunning in that space. So
sclender a knowledge is land measure in his silly conceit. If this jolly
fellow know how to take a plat by any one instrument, and cast up the same,
by Multiplication, and Division, in whole numbers, taught in the vulgar
Arithmetike, he thinks himself to have cunning sufficient. He will never
trouble his head, with the vulgar fractions appertaining to those numbers, for
they serve but unto the parts of perches. Such a measurer may be likened to
one that will take upon him to be a keeper of accountes, though his knowledge
serve not further, then to cast such sums only as be in pounds: if there
be shillings and pence, he will never trouble him self with them, nor beat
his brains to learn how to cast them. Such measurers know how to make their
plat join, although neither last angle, nor last length be correspondent to
their scale, and instrument. If the ii. last lengthes join, either by in ward,
or outward angle, they think their work very good. I have known some (when a
plat has been well taken) so erroniously cast up the same, through false
rules in casting the triangles, and ignorance of the fall of ye perpendicular,
that the measurer which works only by the perch, laying head to head, would
have given up a truer content then they. The ignorance of the time is such,
that to talk by roate of measure, with making show of some instrumets
procures great credit to such measurers. Whosoever cannot prove his instrument,
his plat, and the casting up there of, by Geometrical demonstration, is not
otherwise to be accounted of for a good land meater, then he for a good
Latinist, who can only recite certain sentences, being unable to perse one
word: or he for a good Orator, that is ignorant of the parts of an Oration,
and the Rhetorical figures. As one that never read in the Bible, and yet will
take upon him to be a Preacher, or one that never read Litleton, will
notwithstanding take upon him to be a Counselor in the laws, ought to be
accounted insufficient for those functions: even so ought he to be accounted
insufficient for a land measurer, ye has not red Euclides Elements, but is
ignorant of his definitions and propositions: especially such, as concern
liniarie and superficial measures. As Euclide is a greek author, so is the name
of his Elements greek, to a great number of such land meaters, as hold their
credit, by the sign of the instrument. Other tenure they can not plead, then
the sign of the instrument, and a gross, and unlearned order of platting,
which they attained unto by an imitation and exercise, and not by learning and
understanding, why it is so done. As in Divinity, Law, and Physike, none are
admitted to be practisioners, before they be so studied in the best authors,
entreaters of those knowledges, that they are able to prove their doings, by
good doctrine, so should not any be admitted to land measure, except he be so
studied in Euclide his Elements, and other good writers of Arithmetike and
Geometry (whereof great plenty are extant in diverse languages) that he is able
to prove, and demonstrate his doings by their definitions and propositions.


Watkins What is the cause why insufficient landemeaters be suffered, and that
order is untaken, that none shall be permitted to measure land, but such as
can sufficiently do the same: being thereunto admitted, by the learned in
Arithmetike, and Geometry, appointed by authority for that purpose. It
seems unto me (as I gather by your speeches) that the ignorant win unto
themselves great good opinions, and by shows and brags, carry away the doings
from the learned.


Worsop The abusing and contemning of the Mathematicalles, is the chiefest
cause* In the time of Popery most singular knowledges were shut up. A
Ciceronian, was accounted an heretic. They could not abide the opening of
learned knowledges. They made darkness, and ignorance, two of their pillars.
They fed the people with scumme and dross, as well in humane sciences, as in
divine. For as in stead of divinity, they brought in superstition and
idolatry: so in stead of the pure Mathematical knowledges, they used
coniurations, sorceries, inuocations of spirits, enchauntments, and other
unlawful practices, under the names of Diuinatorie and Judicial Astrology.


Watkins Coniurations, sorceries, inuocations of spirits, enchauntments,
witchecraft, and such like are cut off by our statutes, so that none use them,
but fellons, and reprobates. I understand not what you mean, by Diuinatorie,
and Judicial Astrology.


Worsop Diuinatorie, and Judicial Astrology (as a learned author says)
entreat of the reuolutions of the years of the world, of natiuities, of
questions, of elections, of intents and thoughts: it teaches moreover to
foretell, to call back, to avoid, or fly the ends of all things that may
happen, and the secret disposition of Gods providence. An other says, that the
practisers thereof say, that they can tell of all things that are not come to
pass, before they come to pass, by the course and moving of the stars. By
this they make their Prognostications, that tell of rain, and fair weather:
sickness, and health: war, and peace: plenty, and dearth: with such like. By
which also, they cast natiuities, tell fortunes, pretend to give knowledge of
things that be lost: and last of all, appoint you days, and times, good or
ill, when to journey by land, when by water, when to marry, when to buie, and
when to sell. Some of these doctrines, and practices, are unlawful. The
Prophet Esaias in his xlvii. Chapter says, Let the heauengasers, and the
beholders of stars, and mooneprophets, come on now, and deliver thee, yea,
and let them show, when these new things will come upon thee. Behold they
shall be like straw, which if it be kindled with fire, no man may rid it, for
the vehemency of the flame: and yet it gives no synders to warm a man by,
nor clear fire to sit by. Thus are they with whom thou have wearied thy self.
By this it appears, that heaven gasers, beholders of stars, and
mooneprophets, can not by their prognostications foretell the secret
disposition of Gods providence. Therefore they are ill suffered to foretell of
wars, of plagues, of famines, of unseasonable weathers, to their own
destruction, as straw consumed with fire, and to the deceiving of the people,
who can receive no more good by their diuinations, then warmth and light, from
the synders of burnt straw. Jeremy says in his tenth Chapter, Ye shall not be
afraid for the tokens of heaven, for the Heathen are afraid of such. Yea all
the customs, and laws of the Gentiles are nothing but vanity. By these words
they of the household of faith are taught, not to fear, howsoever planets
threaten by aspects. In the eighteenth Chapter of Deuteronomie, among other
prohibitions, it is forbidden that there be not any choser of days, among the
Israelites: for the chosing of days is an abomination before the Lord. It is
one of the sins, for which God cast out certain nations before ye Israelites.
So abominable are such elections in the sight of God. One of the ils which
Manasses did in the sight of the Lord, even after the abominations of the
Heathen, was, that he maintained tellers of fortunes: and built altars for all
the host of of Heaven, and worshipped all the host of Heaven, as it appears
in the one and twenty Chapter of the fourth Book of the Kings. Therefore,
the casting of natiuities, the telling of fortunes by Palmestrie, and by such
like ways, are also abominations before the Lord. The Priests of the
Gentiles, (being ignorant of the true God) devised these abominations. They
brought the people in belief that certain ingenious men, and women (after
their natural deaths) were stellified. They named certain stars after the
names of such men, and women, and made the people believe, that they were Gods,
and Goddesses, and that they had placed themselves in the heavens, to behold
the earth, and doings of men, and to order men, and humane things, according to
their pleasures, and dispositions, when their turns of regiment came about.
The Caldeans, and Egyptians, having observed certain courses of stars,
planets, and constellations, which God appointed them in their first creation,
say, that that planet shall be lord of the ascendent for that year, which is in
the sign ascendent above our horizon, at the hour when the Sun enters into
the first minute of Aries. And that all things that year are governed here on
earth, chiefly according to the disposition of that planet. Therefore they
caused Temples to be erected in the honor of them, which they devised for
their gain, and estimation, and for the better pleasing, and ordering of the
people. They fained a certain man called Mars, (who in that age, was the most
politic, valiant, and fortunate in martial affairs) to be the God of
battle after his death, and that he was placed in the heavens to our sights,
in the shape of a red, and fiery star, according to the nature of fierce
warriors: appointed unto him, for his habitation a large heavenly region. An
other called Mercury (because he had a deep and ready wit, and was
singular eloquent while he lived here on earth) after his death they brought
the people in belief that he is the God of eloquence, and the messenger of the
gods. Therefore Poets feign, that he tied wings to himself, when he went on
any message, and painters paint him with wings, as they fondly paint Angels. To
him also, they appointed an heavenly region. They fained a certain woman
called Ceres, to be the Goddess of corn, because she first devised the yoking
of oxen, the plough, and that order of tillage. The invention of the art of
whooring, is attributed unto Venus, who therefore was reckoned in the number of
the Goddesses, and called the Goddess of love. For she being unchaste, and
occupied in all excess of carnal pleasures, taught the women of Cyprus, to
please men with their body for money. This so pleased ye priests and the
people, yt they have appointed ye brightest planet (ye sun and moon excepted)
in remembrance of her, to the greater celebrating of her honor. Many other men
and women, they fained to be turned into Gods, and Goddesses, as Jupiter,
Apollo, Saturn, Juno, Pallas, and such others, some for their humane virtues,
and some for their vices: assigning stars, and planets, and erecting Temples
and Oratories in the honor of them. We read in the Acts of the Apostles of
Jupiter his Priest, and of the Temple of Diana the great Goddess of the
Ephesians. These Caldean, and Egyptian Priests, and fabling Poets, fained
stars, planets, and constellations, to be the chief governors of men, and
humane causes by turns, much like the chosing of some kind of officers, one
year in, the next year out, and within a few years after, in again. For one
while Mars is Lord of the ascendent, an other while Jupiter, an other while
Saturn, and so of others. When Jupiter is Lord, they prognosticate a
prosperous, and happy year: But when Mars is Lord thereof, they prognosticate
chiefly of wars, and destructions, namely if Venus be retrograde, that is
declining from him. But if she be in conjunction with him, the fury is not
only then qualified, but turned unto pleasantnes: and in stead of great
wars, they prognosticate great adulteries, insolences, and vnchastities. Thus
these diuinors behight generally unto the whol^ world, an universal spending
of the year, according to the dispositions, and vsages of licentious persons.
The universal people at their appointmentes, must spend the whole year, either
prouidently, and virtuously: or dissolutely, and vitiously. If any be desirous
to understand at large the vanities, contrarieties, lyinges, falsehoodes,
heresies, and other abominations, proceeding from abused Judicial, and
Diuinatorie Astrology, let them read the treatise of Johannes Picus Mirandula,
Cornelius Scepperus, and Cornelius Agrippa against such Astrology: And also
two English treatises, the one entitled, An inuectiue against Astrology, the
other, An admonition against Astrology Judicial, and other curiosities.
Abused Astrology, is a greater hinderer and depressor of lawful Astrology,
and Astronomy, and the other singular and lawful mathematical knowledges:
then rank weeds of good corn. We may read in the first Chapter of Genesis,
wherefore God made the Celestial bodies, where it is thus written. And GOD
said, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven, that they may divide
the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and seasons, and for
days, and years. And let them be for lights in the firmament of heaven, that
they may give light upon earth: and it was so. And GOD made two great lights:
a greater light to rule the day, and a less light to rule the night, and he
made stars also. And God set them in the firmament of heaven, to shine upon
the earth. And to rule the day and the night, and to make difference between
the light and the darkness. Here the word of GOD shows for what causes the
Sun, Moon, and stars were made: namely to divide the day and the night,
and to be for signs, for seasons, for days, for years, to give light upon
earth, to rule the day and the night, and to make a difference between light
and darkness. Lawful Astrology, and Astronomy entreat not of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, nor of their courses, and aspectes to further end then
these. Who so goes further, commits as great evil, as he that adds to
the word of GOD, or makes the word of GOD a cloak to cover his wicked
diuinings. All sensible people perceive, that these lights, govern, and
divide the day and the night, for when the Sun is above our horizon, then is
it day with us: when under, then night. They be signs unto us of Gods great
power, majesty, and goodness. By the courses which GOD has given unto these
signs, we know the approaching, present, and declining times of spring,
Summer, Harvest, and Winter. Navigations into far Countries can not
conveniently be without taking the height of the Sun and certain stars,
whereby men know in what part of the world they are, and by the age of the
Moon, they know when it is full sea, or low water in any haven, or port,
whereby the safest times of bringing in their vessels is known unto them.
These and sundry other great commodities, receive we by these signs. We see
also that our seasons for plowing, sowing, setting, planting, shredding,
cutting, felling, reaping, and gathering, are known by the courses and
influences of these lights, and celestial bodies.

When the Sun is in the tropike of Capricorn, then is it with us winter
season: when in the Equinoctial, spring time: when in the tropike of Cancer,
summer. These and al other seasons are known to skillful Astronomers by the
courses of the celestial bodies. The knowledge of the day natural (which is
the space of four and twenty hours) and of the day artificial, which is the
time between Sun rising, and Sun setting, is of great necessity in our
humane affairs. In like manner to know in what space of time the year is
accomplished, is a thing of great commodity unto us. C C C lxv. days, vi.
hours, and a small portion more of time, make the year: which Astronomers have
found out by observing the course of the Sun through the whole zodiake. If
the reuolutions and courses of the celestial bodies, should not yearly be
exactly observed by Astronomers, they could not set forth almanakes, and if we
had not almanaks, great losses, inconveniences, and confusions in humane
affairs would immediately ensue. Philip Melanchton says in an Epistle of his,
that it is a great, and manifest profitte to keep a true, and certain
account of the year. How great would the confusion be of present buisines, of
contracts, of bargains, of judgments, and how great disorders would there be,
if there were not a distinction of years and months? If the numbering of
years were taken away, what great obscurity would there be in Hystories?
The beginning of the World could not be thought on, neither the begynninges
of religions discerned, nor the alterations of kingdoms distinguished. It is
evident, that the knowledge of these things are greatly necessary to
divinity, and to many parts of our life. Wherefore the ingratitude, or rather
the peruersenes of many can not sufficiently be marvelled at, which reprove
this doctrine of the heavenly motions, and description of the year. The
greatness of the profit, and the judgments of the wisest Princes, and of the
best learned, who with great labor, search, and diligence, have set the year
in order: ought to move the ignorant to detest the hearing, and using, of such
doltishe and scoffing reprofes, as are used against good arts, so excellently
set out, as it were by divine inspiration. The worthiest princes, magistrates,
and philosophers, have had a great care rightly to describe the year: that
times may be discerned, and the memory of things set forth, and conserved. We
must needs grant that our first fathers the Patriarks and Prophets, who
excelled in wisdom, and godliness (as it were by divine inspiration enforced)
have observed, and set forth, the distinction of years. We read the Patriarch
Abraham taught the Egyptians Astronomy, and Geometry. And godly Job names
certain stars by proper names. Great reasons, profes, and authorities, as
well from Divinity, as from Philosophy, and natural reason, might be
brought, how worthy and needful the Mathematical knowledges are. Therefore
they are greatly too blame, and much ouershoote themselves, in bewraying their
ignorance, and ill disposition, which scoff at Mathematicians, calling them
fantastical, and vain fellows. They which have no understanding in
Mathematical arts, when they see a fellow with a running head, or light
brain, especially if he be studious, and given to solitarines, say in way of
scorning, he has a mathematical head. They think they speak finely and
aptly, but they make themselves more ridiculous unto the learned by using this
new term, then the simple man, that calls an arbitrament, a bikerment, and
him very vnrude, whom they would condemn for carterlines. In their
imagination, a running or fantastical head, and a mathematical head, are of
one signification, which is far otherwise. Tullie says, If art, and nature
meet in an Orator, the excellency thereof is such as he cannot express the
same. In like manner, if a man have a Mathematical head, and mathematical art,
yt man is to be reputed a most excellent and most necessary member of the
common weal. For most certainly such a man can perform great, and weighty
actions, to the benefit of his Prince, and Country. How ungrateful, I may
rather say how dishonest, and despitefull are they which mock at the makers of
Almanakes: terming them fantastical, and mathematical heads, and keakers on
the new Moon: when as themselves continually carry an Almanake about them,
and set one up in their houses, as a most necessary instrument to their
private affairs. Evidences are daily brought unto lawyers, that the
expirations of leases, and of prescriptions, and the continuance of discents,
and pedigrees may be known. Men think a fee well bestowed upon their
Counselor, to be truly informed in any of these cases. Astronomers have so
reduced the years of our Lord, and the reigns of Kings, that the expirations
of terms, may readily be known. These reductions are extant in our vulgar
tongue, in three, or four varieties, and every of them of small price. Yet
Astronomers, are not only vnrecompensed for their pains taken to pleasure the
common weal, but are called vain fools for their labors.


Johnson What is the meaning of this word Mathematician, and what sciences be
they which you call mathematical sciences, or mathematicals?


Worsop He that has cunning in mathematical sciences, is called a
Mathematician. And those learnings, or sciences, which may plainly be proved
by true demonstration, apparent to sense, are called sciences mathematical.
Philosophy, Logike, and certain other worthy doctrines, are not learned by
most certain demonstration, but perceived by reason, and studious search.
Most men wrongfully conceive, that certain unlawful practices attributed to
Astrology are parts of the Mathematical sciences, which chiefly brings
such great discredit, and contempt of Mathematicians, and of the pure, and
single mathematicals. Some professing Astrology, impudently usurp the name of
Mathematicians, as popish, and superstitious Priests, the names of Divines. As
Papists abuse the word of God by joining Psalms, Epistles, Gospels, and other
parts of the Scriptures to their superstitious, and idolatrous abominations:
so have certain abusers of Astrology, intermingled their false, and vain
doctrines with mathematical operations. They make the mathematicals cloakes to
cover their wicked doctrines, as Papists do the Scriptures to cover theirs.
Divines, and other learned men (ignorant of Mathematical sciences) and in
manner all sensible men, perceiving how directly against the word of God, and
how utter false, their prognostications of drowthes, fluddes, war, peace,
sickness, health, plenty, scarcity, and such like are: and also the
untruths, vanities, and superstitious curiosities in elections, and settings
of figures: neglect, and condemn the mathematicals in general, because they
think these vanities proceed from them, which is nothing so. It is daily
seen, that evil disposed persons convert and abuse good things to wicked
actions. As good wine to drunkenness, good meats to surfeiting, a weapon to
murder, and roberies, marriage to debate, money to usury, the law to briberie,
the word of God to heresy. Yet wine, meats, weapons, marriage, money, law,
and the word of God, may not be rejected and contemned, because lewd disposed
persons abuse them. In all ages Arithmetike, Geometry, and Astronomy, have
been accounted liberal sciences: and must they now be disdained, and
rejected, because some usurping the name of Astrologers have abused them? It
behooves our University graduates (who are, or ought to be seen in the
Mathematicals) to uphold as much, as in them is, the seven liberal sciences.
They know Plato forbad any to come within his school that was ignorant of
Geometry. He called Arithmetike, and Geometry the two wings with which he
raised himself into the heavens. He knew, that hearers ignorant of those
sciences, could receive small profitte by his lectures of Astronomy, or of
sundry parts of Philosophy, and Logike. I have heard some Masters of Art say
(which have been but meanly studied in Euclides Elements) that they should
never have understood Aristotle his meaning in sundry places, if they had
continued ignorant of certain his propositions, and demonstrations. A Doctor
in Divinity, who was universally known amongst our learned men, to be a
singular Grecian, and schooleman: confessed to the like effect, after he
vnderstoode^ by instruction the two and thirty, and seven and forty
propositions of the first book. He would oftentimes say, that Logike, and
Philosophy, could not rightly, and perfectly be understood, except some
reasonable understanding of Arithmetike, and Geometry, were first had. And
that those things which are of most difficulty to schoolmen, would be unto
them as easy as the easyest, if they had any reasonable understanding in those
sciences. Plato wills that children should be exercised in numbers, and
numbering. If that course were taken with them, they should (when they came to
years of discretion) pass their affairs more understandingly, and with a
greater facility then now they do. Some judicial Astrologers please well
the fancies of many, because they will prognosticate good fortune unto them.
Many Genethliakes (to please the vain, and incredulous parents) behight good
fortune to their children. When any at years of understanding, is so fond that
he will have his nativity cast: such Genethliakes will learn by one means,
or other, the course, and some special chances, of his passed life. The
declaring of them wins such credit, that the foretelling of the other part
to come is believed, and expected. Certain cousening mates are dispersed in
many parts of this Realm, called of the people cunning men, or wise men. Some
others as foolishly (though they think they speak wisely and aptly) call them
Astronomers or Mathematicians. Silly maidens, and foolish wives, daily run unto
these couseners, to know how many husbands, and children they shall have, and
how long their husbands shall live, and whether they shall leave them rich, or
not. These companions will take upon them, to tell, and direct folks how they
shall get again into their possession such goods as they make account to be
lost, or stolen from them. Yea, they will appointe unto hazarders, and
thieves, fortunate times, and hours to make their attemptes. They say if
thieves make their attemptes when certain Planettes are in such and such
aspectes: that they shall not only obtain their purposes, but also it shall
never be known that they were the robbers. Many of these wise or cunning men
are so unlearned, that they know not any one definition, or principle of
Astronomy, Astrology, or of any other part of the mathematicals. They know
Astronomicall characters of Planettes, aspectes, and certain constellations:
and perhaps so much of the vulgar Arithmetike as a quick witted youth will
learn in xiiii. dais. They have commonly an Ephemeris calculated by some
learned Astrologer which is a necessary book for many good purposes. The
Ephemeris is an almanacke, or register, in which is showed among other things
what aspects the Sun, Moon, Planets, and constellations every day in the
year have each to others, as the vulgar Almanakes show where the sign is,
and the age of the Moon. He that can tell when the Moon changes, or where the
sign is, by looking in the common Almanakes, may as well be called an
Astronomer for that small cunning, as they for telling the aspects of Planets,
and constellations only by looking in the tables of Ephemeridis. They have
also certain Chaldean, Arabian, Assyrian, and Egyptian authors, as Haly
Abenragell, Mizaldus, Hermes Trismegistus, Albumazar, Erra Pater, Abraham
Avenezra, Abables filius Zaed, and such others. These authors presuming only
upon their observations (for they can not prove their judgments by natural
reason, nor by Mathematical demonstration) take upon them to foretell by the
constitution of the heavens, otherwise said by the aspects of Planets, and
constellatious: as well what shall every year generally befall in humane causes, as
to every man particularly. The strange names of these Heathen authors, cause
the more credit to be given to their blasphemous doctrines, and fables,
according to these verses:

If one affirm he learnd it of a Jew:
The silly people think it must be true.
It is not long since certain rogues (pretending to be Jews, or Egyptians)
took upon them to tell all sorts of people their fortunes by looking in their
hands. The people were too simple to let some rogues hold them by the hands,
whiles others of their company cut their purses, and picked their pockets. Those
roges told fortunes as truly, as such Genethliakes can. The forenamed
authors, and others their ancient sectuaries, give such differing, and
contrarious Astrologicall judgments upon every particular constitution of the
heavens, that our Astrologians know not which of them to believe, or follow.
The chiefest cause why our prognostications are so contrarious, is, for that
some of our prognosticators write after the opinions of some one of those
ancient writers, and some of an other. And they writing different, or contrary
the one to the other, of necessity some must hit right. Their judgments are
as the blind man casts his staff, peradventure hit, but most commonly
miss. Seeing unlawful Diuinatorie and Judicial Astrology, are so direct
against the word of God: such seducers of the people from steadfast trust, and
full depending in, and upon the deity: such sclander, and discredit, to the
pure, and single mathematical sciences, to the great hurt of our common weal:
because such excellent, and most needful actions as Mathematicians (if they
were duly esteemed) would perform to the behouse of the same, are neglected,
and left undone: it is to be wished, and we ought daily to pray, that it would
please God, to stir the Queens Majesty's heart, and the hearts of her
honorable Counsel, to appoint the learned Divines, and Mathematicians of her
Realm, to cull, and separate, these ill doctrines, from the good, and lawful
mathematical sciences. The last Parliament a worthy statute was enacted, which
forbids all diuinations, erecting of figures, and such like practices,
tending to her Majesty's most royal person. It were greatly to the honor of
God, and benefit of the Realm, if they were cut off altogether. The
Mathematicals being greatly applied to sundry vain, and ungodly practices, and
little thought on, or regarded, to be applied to such weighty causes in the
common weal as most requisitely they ought: may be compared to a sweet,
healthsom, and plentiful fountain, standing near a City greatly distressed
through the want of such a spring, and yet the Citizens rather let it run into
soul ditches, and marshes, in which it does no good, then they will conueie it
into their City, to their great pleasure, and health. We greatly esteem
artificial strangers, for their devises; and workemanshippes: but we respect
not the causes why their doings be more excellent then ours. The instructions,
that such artificers, or Mechanitians, receive from Mathematicians; is the
chiefest cause why they exceed us. He is called a Mechanitian, that can make
certain Geometrical figures, and do certain Mathematical conclusions, by
practice and imitation, according to instruction from his master, or some
learned man: but regards not the demonstration thereof, which is, the
speculation of the art. Some Frenchemen write themselves the Kings
Mathematicians, because they have office, and stipend, from the King to
maintain their charge, and studies. Others write them selves public professor
of the Mathematicals of such an University. Also every City in France,
Germany, and Italy, has one Geometer at the least, who has office in the
same, and stipend from the chamber thereof. Some great Cities have three or
four such Geometers at the least. Masons, Carpenters, Ioyners, Paynters,
clockmakers, In ginors, and such others: unto whose faculties most needefully
appertain the knowledges of making squares, roundes, triangles, and many other
figures, with their transformations according to any proportion assigned:
resort unto these professors and Geometers, to learn certain grounds, and
chief mechanical rules. Such of them as enter so far into speculation, as
that they understand Euclids elements, prove most excelent men. Few, or none
such come into this country. Mechanitians will serve our turn, yea we think
them most singular men, we are so gross, and unskillful in arts. As a man
having but one dim eye, is of blind men thought to be well sighted: so most
of us think Mechanitians great cunning men. Ignorance as I said, and the
abuses and contemptes, of the Mathematicals, are the chief causes, why
insufficient landmeasers he suffered to carry away the doings by shows, and
brags.


Watkins Diuinatorie, and Judicial Astrology, and every part of them, (as I
gather by your talk) should be abrogated as unlawful.


VVorsop You gather over largely of my talk. I spoke not against lawful
Astrology: but against such as attribute unto Astrology, and Astronomy,
sundry actions contrary to the word of God. Astrology (not contrary to the
word of God) is a commendable knowledge. Philosophy proves sundry
influences, proceeding from the celestial bodies, to the terrestrial, (first
observed by Astrologers) against which, I will not rashely speak: But refer
you rather to learned Melanchton that famous Divine, who calls them Epicureos
Theologos that impugn the lawful science of Astrology. These matters are so
far above common understanding, that we will cease to talk any further of
them: referring reformation where occasion serves, to magistrates, and tho
godly learned. Master John Dee in his mathematical preface, learnedly shows
what Astrology is. In that preface you shall find, how some over reach:
that is, unlawfully attribute more unto that science, then duly appertains
thereunto.


Johnson You found fault with me of late, for saying mine head was so
gross, that I should never have devised such a proof as you made, when you
proved that a close entrenched within a round ditch of viii. score perches,
was greater then a close entrenched within ditches of the like number of
perches, laid square. You seem to dislike that men should either show their
cunning, or confess their ignorance.


Worsop I found not fault with you for confessing your ignorance, but because
you showed your self dispaired of conceiving yt, which every reasonable
creature may conceive, if he will study Arithmetike, and Geometry. Neither do
I find fault with the other sort for showing such cunning as they have: but for
taking upon them more then they are able to perform: namely in so weighty a
matter as land measure. Ye must not think that these comparisons of figures,
and these proofs are my devises. My learning extends not to add a devise unto
Geometry. I have gotten my small knowledge by instruction, and study of
learned authors. Who so makes any mathematical devise ought to prove the same
in all parts, by Euclids elements: if he can not so do, his devise is but a
guess, and therefore not to be allowed. But if he can prove it by
mathematical proofs, then you may easily perceive that the like has bin
heretofore devised, because he finds rules for all ye parts of his devise. As
a Gra^marian yt is able to prove by the rules of Grammar that his Latin is
true, must needs grant that ye like Latin has bin spoken in times passed,
because he finds rules therefore: so if a man have devised any thing in
Geometry yt he can prove by the elements of that science, he must needs
grant that the like devise has bin heretofore, or else those rules could not
be extant. Most men when they see heights, depths, lengths, or distances truly
taken, ingins devised yt with small strength draw up, and hold things of huge
weight: manifest proofs why a close lying in such a fashion, contains more
ground then if it lay in such a fashion, although their circuites be equal:
with many such like: have in great admiration the wit of him that performs
such actions. They think men attain unto these knowledges only by their own
devise, and ingeniousnesse: and not by mathematical studies, and practices.
They refer all to natural wit, they have no respect to art, nor think
thereon. Every sensible man that will study Euclydes elements, and give
himself to practice, may with as great ease understand the Mathematicals, as
any of the other sciences liberal. The grounds, and reasons of Mathematical
operations be so plain, so simple and so easy to be perceived after some
reasonable instruction, and practice: that not any sensible man has just cause
to despair yt he shall not attein those knowledges, for children about ye age
of xii. years, by those means may easily learn them, they be so plain. After
a man is some what entered, he does greatly marvel to see such weighty
effects, proceed from such plain and simple rules. Every first entrance into
the study of any of the sciences liberal is hard. How dry, hard, and
unsavory seem the rules of Grammar until ye come to construction, and
proouing by the Grammar rules* every word of the sentence to be in
congruence. But when you can prove the congruence, then great pleasure is
received from that, which before seemed so hard, and unsavory? Even as a man
must know, and understand those dry rules before he can attain the knowledge
of the Latin tongue, so must he know, and understand, the definitions, and
propositions in Euclides elements, and how to apply them to his workings,
before he should be allowed a sufficient practisioner of the mathematical
part, or charge of Astronomy, Perspectiue, Cosmographie, Geographie,
Navigations, Martial exploits, survey of lands, mensuration of solides,
architecture, ingins, drenings or mountings of water, and many other faculties.
If in the practice of these forenamed sciences, the mathematical part be
defective: such practice may be compared to a natural living body, that has
some principal member or members, as arms, or legs, so benumbed, taken, or
shrunk up, that they stand not in any stead, but hang on like dead things. The
mathematical part is the head, or chief part of some of these sciences. If
the powers of the head be stopped, or taken away, the body serves to small
purpose.


Peter I perceive that Euclides elements is a book of mathematical rules, and
that by the knowledge of those rules mathematical operations are performed,
even as the Latin tongue is atteined by the knowledge of the Grammar rules, or
reading by the knowledge of the alphabet, and the other accidents appropriate
to that science.


Worsop You say truth. The elements of a science are the first, chief, and
principal rules of that science: whereof all the operations of that science
take their beginnings.


Johnson Are there not other authors that have written those rules, as
learnedly as Euclide, because still you nominate him?


Worsop There is not any comparable to him. For all his propositions are so
fully, plainly, truly, orderly, and learnedly proved: that all singular, and
learned writers of the Mathematicals since his time, have been content to be
tried by his elements, so excellent an author he is, and so plain, pure, and
simple is the subject of his matter, that he leaves not any thing doubtful,
or refers you to a quere. These be the causes why learned Mathematicians,
make the proofs of their doings by his propositions: and rely upon him as upon
a most sure foundation. There is not any writer of humane causes of whom so
boldly a man may say, (Ipse dixit) as of Euclide, so free is he from errors
and controlments.


Watkins In what age lived Euclide? You said he is a Greek author. Chief
officers in martial affairs, measurers of land, masters of ships, ingenors,
dreyners, mounters of water, and diverse other arts men, of whose faculties (by
your saying) the part mathematical is a principal member, understand not for
the most part the Greek tongue. Few understand the Greek tongue but
University men: would you not have any chief professors of these faculties
but graduates?


Worsop Euclide was living about xl. years before the Reign of Alexander the
great as Suydas chronicleth. Plutarch in his treatise of the life of Plato
says that Plato went from Athens to Megara, when he was xxviii. years of age
to learn Geometry of Euclide. Some of Socrates his scholars gave themselves
chiefly to the studies of moral, and natural Philosophy: as Plato,
Xenophon, and Antisthenes. Other some to the Mathematicals, as Aeschines,
Phedon, Euclide, and Aristippus. I have seen Euclides elements in the Latin
tongue, in ten sundry translations at the least. They are also extant in
French, Italian, Spanish, high Almane, and Dutch. But in the English tongue
far exceeding all other impressions, most learnedly are they extant.
Therefore our professors of faculties may learn and understand him
sufficiently to discharge their functions, although they understand not the
Greek. Graduates that perfectly understand the Greek tongue, and the other
sciences (by which they receive their degrees) are without doubt fittest to be
public readers, and instructors of the Mathematicals (although they should
teach in the English tongue) and although the Greek terms are expounded in
the English translation. They can best show the etymology, and deriuations of
words, and terms, the method, and other parts of learning.

Peter Who translated him into our tongue?


Worsop Master Henry Billingsly one of her Majesty's c^^^mers for the port of
London.


Peter The translation is made by a very honest Gentleman.


Worsop Even from his childehoode I have heard from others, and noted to my
self, such his great pains taken in study, his discretion, and such his
virtuous inclination, and impressions, that my mind always gave me, some
notable benefit to his country would proceed from him.


Peter How long has this English impression bin extant?


Worsop Ever since the year of our Lord God 1570. Great pains was taken at the
time of the impression by M. Doctor Whitehead a profound learned man, and M.
John Dee, who is accounted of the learned Mathematicians throughout Europe ye
prince of Mathematicians of this age: as Cicero named Cratippus ye prince of
Philosophers in his age. This M. Dee has put unto these englished elements,
many scholies, annotations, corollaries, and expositions which give great
light, and facility to the understanding of them. Also his mathematical
preface unto these elements, is a work of such singularity and necessity to
all students of the Mathematicals, that I wish them to make it a manuel.


John. I pray you let us see some figures representing straight hedged closes
just viii. score perches about, that shall contain more then x. acres. You said
you could lay closes in diverse fashions that should contain more then x.
acres, and yet but viii. score perches about We have seen it proved in the
round, now we would see the like proofs in some with straight hedges.


Worcester. I will show you some examples, by certain regular figures. I call those
figures regular, whose sides are equal the one to ye other, and whose angles
also are equal the one to the other. Every side of the five sided figure a. b.
c. d. e. is xxxii. perches in length, as ye may try by ye scale x. five times
xxxii. make 8. score. It is manifest to your eye that the said figure is
greater then the pricked square f. g. h. i. Every side of the square is xl.
perches, and therefore as ye have seen by former proofs, it contains x.
acres: but this equilater, and equiangle pentagon, or figure of five sides,
contains eleven acres, and five perches.

diagram of a pentagon superimposed on a square diagram of a hexagon
superimposed on a square The figure k. l. m. n. o. p. is an equilater, and
equiangle hexacon (yt is to say a figure of vi. equal sides, and of vi. equal
angles. Every side thereof is 26. perches, and two third parts of one perch.
A close lying in such fashion, contains xi. acres, an half, and 8. perches.
And yet his 6. sides cast together, make but 8. score perches, and so many are
the sides of the pricked square. q. r. s. t. whose content is but x. acres.

diagram of an octagon superimposed on a square The figure v. y. x. z. a. b. c.
d. is a regular octogon, every of his sides are xx. A close lying in such
fashion contains xii. acres, and x. perches. And that close also is but viii.
score perches about, and so much is the pricked square e. f. g. h. The more
sides a regular close has, the greater is his content. For the more sides the
nearer he draws to a circle: and every circle contains more area within
him, then anyother figure of many straight sides can contain, if their
circuits be equal in measure.

diagram of an irregular six-sided close superimposed on a square As all
regular figures of more sides then iiii. must always contain above x. acres,
if their perimetrie or circuit be just viii. score perches: so if they be
irregular, that is to say, if their sides and angles or any of them be
unequal, they may contain less then x. acres, as this close i. k. l. m. n.
o. which is but ix. acres and an half, and therefore less then the square p.
q. r. s. which contains x. acres, but much less then the former equilater,
and equiangle six sided figure, whose content is xi. acres, an half, and
viii. perches. The nearer any figure comes to regularitie, the greater is his
content. Ye now evidently see that land cannot be truly measured if the
measurer be ignorant of Geometry: for if his knowledge extend not further then
to lay head to head, and side to side, or to measure the whole circuit, and to
cast the same into four equal parts: or to make cross measures making the one
the head, and the other the side, most of his contents will be false.


Watkins We see evidently that the proofs which you have made are true, and
that common measurers make much false work: but seeing the statute for
landmeasure does not mention any thing of angles, circles, or other
Geometrical figures, but only of length, and breadth, most men think that we
are to respect our statutes, and to follow them: and not to follow the new
begun professors of Geometry: as though they were wiser, and knew better what
belongs to landmeasure, then the wise, learned, and experienced men of the
Parliament in those days. It seems by the ancient, huge, and sumptuous
buildings, and by the acts for all manner of measures, and assizes, that as
skilful Mathematicians were in those days, as in these. The statute says when
an acre of land co^teineth x. perches in length, it shall contain xvi. in
breadth. When xx. in length, then viii. in breadth. When xl. in length, then
four in breadth. Therefore if I measure ye side, and the head, which are the
length, and the breadth, I measure according to the statute, and other kind of
measure then the statute apointeth the people desire not.


Worsop That statute is well, and rightly penned, but of many (ignorant of the
Mathematicals) it is misvnderstoode. Though ye find not terms of art therein,
but usual words, yet those exact appointments, and reductions of breadths to
every length in that statute nominated, could not be done but by a
Mathematician. And although some of those breadths be untruly set down, yet
they of understanding perceive the faults to be either in the Printer, or in
the corruption of their copies. The hardest, and most cunningest reductions are
truly printed: but certain easy reductions are printed falsely. The varieties
of lengthes, and breadths in that statute expressed, tend to drive men to
learn, and consider, what the measure of an acre of land is. I told ye not
long since yt viii. scorrsquare perches make an acre. If ye have a piece of
ground, that is xx. perches long, and 8. broad, lying square like to the figure
a. b. c. d. such an enclosure is an acre of ground, for viii. times xx. is
viii. score. But closes in fashion like to the figures e. f. g. h. or r. s. t.
v. are but iii. roodes, though every of the heads e. h: f. g: r. v. and s. t.
be equal in length to the head a. d. or b. c. and every of the sides e. f: g.
h: r. s. and v. t. equal to the side a. b. or c. d. For every of those vi.
heads are 8. perches broad, and every of the vi. sides xx. perches long, as
ye may try by the scale of four. The inward inclination or bending of the
sharp angle e. h. g. abateth two perches in the breadth of the figure i. k. g.
h. which figure i. k. g. h. is equal to the figure a. b. c. d. and therefore
that figure e. f. g. h. is equal to such a figure as is vi. perches broad, and
xx. long: namely to the figure m. l. g. h. which is but iii. roodes. For vi
times xx. make vi. score, and vi* score represents iii. roodes. The line q.
o. is the breadth of ye figure e. f. g. h. and not ^. h. as the ignorant of
Geometry erroniously suppose. And the line v: x. is the breadth of the figure
r. s. t. v. one demonstration serves to them both. Breadths must be measured
straight, and upright, called of Geometers, perpendicular, or rectangular
measure* as al ye lines in the figure a. b. c. d. are perpendicular lines, for
they stand upright upon the line c. d. neither bending inward making a sharp
angle as the line ^. h. does with the line h. g. nor falling outward making an
obtuse angle as the line r. v. does with the line v. t. The line n. o. in the
figure e. f. g. h. lies not vprightlie as lines of breadth should: but
slopingly, for if it were laid or measured vprightlie, it would reach to the
line i. k. as ye may try by the upright line o. p. which is equale in length to
the said slope lines. n. o. or. e. h. The eye of the conningest Geometer that
is, cannot exactly judge when he measures land, upon what parts of hedges
perpendicular measure, that is to say measures of breadthes must fall, but by
the help of some geometrical instrument. Ye may by the example of the three
figures whose heads are viii. and sides xx. try and find that the like, and
as great errors may befall in every of diagrams comparing the areas of
rectangles and parallelograms square ABCD the other limitations of breadth, and
length in the said statute specified, as in these. An acre of ground included
in a quadrate) that is to say) within iiii. equal right anguled sides, or
bounders: as ye square a. b. c. d. must have every of those sides to be in
length xii. perches and an half, ii. foot, iii inches and an half, and the
fiftieth part of an inch. These* iiii sides added together make* fifty perches
and an half, xi. inches, and the twelfth part of an inch and somewhat more, as
ye may try by the scale of four. That length cast into a round close, like
unto this circle* e. f. g. h. and measured from East, to Weaste, here
represented by.e g. and from south to north represented by.f.h. (as many
erroniously use to do) taking ye one measure for the length the other for the
breadth: they shall produce by that way of measuring one acre, and an half, and
half a rood, which circuit in square form makes but one acre. Such a round
close by true measure is one acre, one roode, and three perches. Therefore such
a round close by that manner of cross measure is made one rood and xvii.
perches more the^ it ought to be: and by casting such a round circuit into a
square, they circle EFGH superimposed on square make the land less then they
ought, by one roode, and three perches. The words, and meaning therefore of the
statute certainly is: that in what fashion soever grounds do ly, that just
viii. score square perches must always make the acre. We must not think so
worthy a stat^^ for so weighty* a matter to be made upon so weak a
foundation or consideration: that the meaning was to allow of measures so
greatly disagreeing each from other, and so greatly swaruing from the troth
sometime by excess, and sometime by want. There can be but one true content of
a piece of ground, which cannot allowably be found by any measurer, but by such
a one as can prove the same by the elements of Geometry.

diagram comparing rectangle and trapezoid The greater number of measurers make
their measures, by laying head to head, and side to side, as though all closes
lay in right angles. By which doing I may compare them to a shoemaker that has
two or three hundred pair of shoes in his shop made al upon one pair of
lasts, For some feet his shoes must needs be too large, for others too little,
for some by chance they may be fit. Suppose there be a square close, having
either of his sides xii. perches long, and either of his heads vi. perches
broad like to the figure a. b. c. d. How much ground does such a close
contain?


Peter Six, twelve times, is lxxii. that is vi* s. If it were viii. perches
more, it were half an acre.


Worsop Suppose there be an other close, the one side w^^reof is xxi. perches
long, the other but xii. and either of the heade^ ^^ perches broad, lying in
fashion like to the figure e. f. g. h. How much does such a close contain?


Johnson Xxi. and xii. added together make xxxiii. The half thereof is xvi.
perches, and an half. These xvi. and an half I take for the length, and
taking vi. for the breadth, I find that xvi. d. ob. six times, is viii. s.
iii. d. which represents half an acre and xix. perches. If it were but one
perch more, it were half an acre, and half a roode. I see that iii. sides of
the one figure are equal to three sides of the other: and that their
difference is only in one side: for the heads a. c. and b. d. of the one
figure are equal to the heads e. h: and f. g: of the other figure: and the
side c. d. is equal to the side h. g. but the side e. f. is longer then the
side a. b. by ix. perches, for the one is xxi. and the other but xii. therefore
the longer sided close contains more ground then the shorter by half a roode
and vii. perches. For if ye take lxxii. perches, the content of the figure a.
b. c. d. from four score and xix, the content of the figure e. f. g. h. there
will remain xxvii. perches, which is half a roode, and vii. perches. Ye see
before your eyes that the figure e. f. g. h. is on the one side almost as long
again as the figure a. b. c. d. if it were iii. perches longer, it were full
twice so long as the other.


VVorsop Measurers ignorant of Geometry deliver up such contents. Sundry
buyers, par^eners, exchangers, lessees, and takers of land as ignorant as they,
content themselves with such measures. When the blind leads the blind, they
fall both into the ditch. Ye have great respect how much the close e. f. g. h.
is longer then the close a. b. c. d. but ye respect not how much the said
close a. b. c. d. is broader then the other. The shorter close a. b. c. d* by
reason of his square lying contains vii. perches more then the longer. But
for the easter proof I will admit it to be but vi. perches, as may be diagram
with trapezoid superimposed on rectangle to demonstrate the calculation of area
for each proved by this figure a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. The pricked square a.
b. c. d. in this figure, is equal to the other figure a. b. c. d. And e. f. c.
d. in this figure is equal to the other figure e. f. g. h. And the two
triangles e. g. c. and h. f. d. which are parcel of the figure e. f. c. d. are
equal the one to the other. The pricked triangle f. i. d. is equal to the
triangle h. f. d. therefore the square h. f. i. d. is equal to the two
triangles e. g. c. and h. f d. Therefore also the figure g. f. i. c. is equal
to the figure e. f. d. c. The figure g. f. i. c. is xvi. perches and an half
in length, and four in breadth, which make v. s. vi. d. but the figure a. b.
c. d. being twelve in length, and six in breadth, comes to vi. s. therefore
the figure e. f. c d. is less then the figure a. b. c. d. by vi. perches. So
that by your way of measuring ye make that viii. s. iii. d. which should be but
v. s. vi. d. which is all one reckoning as if ye made that three acres, which
in troth is but two. For viii. s. iii. d. is equal to v. s. vi. d. and to the
half thereof which is ii. s. ix. d. Those two sums cast into one, make viii.
s. iii. d. You said if the side of xxi. perches in length, had been xxiiii.
that then it had been double to that of xii: and you suppose that a ground so
sided, would be greater then that, whose side is xxi. wherein you are greatly
deceived. It is impossible to include any superfice or quantity of ground
within a close having either of ye heads vi. perches, the one side xii. and the
other xxiiii. For the two heads vi and vi. and the side xii. cast into one sum,
make but xxiiii. Therefore the side xxiiii. laid unto them drives the other
iiii. sides to a straight line: not suffering them to make any angles, so yt
they be as it were ii straight hedges the one standing upon the other, not
including any quantity of ground. Two right lines cannot include a superfice
by diagram of a trapezoid the sixth petition of the first of Euclides Elements.
The close a. b. c. d. having all his angles right, is greater then any other
close can be, if any one side of his length be made more then xii. For the
obtusenes or declination of angles diminishes quantity of ground, as ye have
seen by the other figures, and more plainly may see by this figure m. n. o.
p. which has three of his sides equal to three sides of the figure a. b. c. d.
but the fourth side is xxiii. perches and an half.

Measurers ignorant of Geometry, commit the like errors in measuring of
triangular, or three cornered closes. Most men think that a three cornered
close whose sides are xxx. xl. and lxv. perches, does contain more ground then
an other three cornered close whose sides are but xxx. xl. and l. because the
side lxv. of the one figure, is longer then the side l. of the other figure, by
xv. perches. But the longer sided close, namely the triangle p. q. r. is less
then the triangle s. t. v. by one acre, half a roode, and three perches. For
s. t. v. the shorter sided close, conteyneth three acres, and three roodes,
where the longer sided namely p. q. r. contains but two acres, and an half,
and xvii. perches.


Watkins I am now fully resolved that they which measure with the pole, or
line, (if they be ignorant of angles) do they know not what, and that they
greatly abuse them for whom they deal.


Johnson The world was merier, before measurings were used then it has been
since. A tenant in these days must pay for every foot, which is an extreme
matter. I know surueyors that use not measuring when they make their surueies,
which fashion I like best.


Worsop There is greater cause of good mirth, and joy, in these days, then
was in those you speak of. We have the light, and freedom of the Gospel, so
that our souls may joy in the true salvation. We have a wise, and merciful
Prince, who as God his good instrument has all the time of her Reign
preserved us from wars, spoils, and heavy taxes. If your meaning be that
smalnes of rents, and cheapenes of victuals make the merry world: then was that
world merier when the statute for land measure was first made, and duly
executed: then it has been at any time since the neglecting of the same. We
may find in our Chronicles, that in those days a fat ox was commonly sold
for a noble, a sheep for vi. d. a quarter of wheat for ii. s. Most tenants
that take land after the common measuringe pay for more then they should.
Therefore if the tenant had true measure, he might live meryer then he does.
Seeing most Landlords covet to let their grounds to the uttermost, and most
tenants seek to sell their wares at the highest prices: it is very requisite
for both sides, that the land be truly measured. True measure is not
extremity, but good justice. By the Laws of our Realm, and by common reason,
such like equality, and troth of diagrams of triangles PQR and STV, separately
and overlaid measure in landletting ought to be between Lord and tenant: as
is between buyers and sellers of cloth, silks, grain, liquors, stone,
timber, or of any other commodities for which our statutes have appointed
standerds, and assizes. I know sundry honest gentlemen professors of surueie,
that many times omit measuring. Surueie consists upon three principal
parts: that is to say the Mathematical, the Legal, and the Judicial. Unto
the Mathematical part belongs true measuring, which is Geometry: true
calculation of the thing measured, which is Arithmetike: and true platting, and
setting forth of the same to the eye, in proportion, and symetrie, which is
Perspectiue. To the Legal part belongs the knowledge of keeping courts of
surueie, of the diversities of tenures, rents, and services, likewise how to
make terrors, rentals, particulars, suit rols, customarie rols, and also how to
engrosse books, with many other things appertaining to yt part, as may appear in
the statute, called Extenta Manerij, but more at large in the treatises of M.
Fitzharbert, and Valentine Leigh touching surueie. The Judicial part
consists upon the consideration, and knowledge of the fertility, vesture,
situation for vent, health somenesse, commodiousnesse, discommodiousnes, and
such like of every kind of ground, building, and increase, in his own nature,
and kind. Some make apportionation, and valuing a member of this part, other
think them more worthy the name of a principal. I suppose the^ to be in common
to all the iii. parts. It is impossible for a surueyor to make a true value of
lands, except he first know ye tenure, rents, custo^s, and services to the^
appertaining in their proper natures, and kinds. He must have great respects to
the part legal when he valueth. And also as great respects to quality, and
quantity, which are the parts Judicial, and Mathematical. Quality, and
quantity be inseparable companions, they must of necessity be joined together
in apportionation, and valuing. Who can tell, what a cloth, or a piece of velvet
is worth if he be ignorant how much they contain by measure? A skilful man
knows by color, finenes, making, strength, and other points Judicial what
every yard of them is worth: but he can not value the^, except he also know how
many yards either of them contains. So is it of grain in heap, and of
liquors, of which the value of a bushel, or of a gallon may iudicially be
rated, but ye value of ye whole cannot be known, til true quantity, that is,
the number of bushels and gallons be also known. Some surueyors use not to
measure, because they are ignorant of the parts mathematical: but refer the
measuring to such, as take upon them the knowledge thereof. They show themselves
honest, in not taking upon them beyond their skill. Many are skillful in the
part Legal, and in many points of the part Judicial, which understand little in
the parts Mathematical: and therefore they deal not further then their
knowledge extends. Sometimes also the Lord desires not further information
then in the parts Legal, and Judicial: because by his evidences, records, and
accustomed nomination what number of acres every ground contains he is
satisfied touching the quantity. In cases of partitio^, exchanges, buyings,
sellings of land, woodsales and such like: exact, and true measure are most
requisite.


Pet. Two gentlemen (both my very friends) are very desirous to make an
excha^ge. The one has CCC. acres lying very near unto ye mansion house of ye
other. Lands of like value (which ly not passing 4 miles from those CCC. acres)
should be given for them. They have desired me to find means how this exchange
may indifferently be made. In less then ii. days it would be dispatched. If
I may have your help, you shall have good cheer, be very welcome to them both,
and pleased for your pains. We will al bear you company, and help you the best
we can.


Worcester. When opportunity on al sides serves, I will gladly make an equal exchange
for them. If the grounds be so great as you say they are, it is not possible to
measure, and rate them in so short a time. As I have diverse times measured
about CCCCC. acres in a day, so in some other dais, having had ye like time,
and help, and as fair weather, and taking as great or greater labor I could
not over come xl. The forms and fashions of grounds are ye chief causes why
measures are either long or speedy in doing. Many grounds yt lie long, and
narrow, by an indenting, crooking, and winding brook side, cannot truly be
measured, without great labor, and much expense of time. Many such grounds
have I measured (the ritchnes whereof has bin such) yt many men would have
given above xx. pounds for the inheritance of every acre thereof. When the
weighty buisinesses of partitions, excha^ges, and sales fall between me^: it
behooves yt the measurer have good skill, and yt he use great diligence,
exactnes, and circumspection in his measurings. If he should misdo one acre in
xx. in such kind of grounds: it were above xx. li. loss to ye one side, and an
unlawful gain to the other: which is a weighty matter to the soul, and
conscience of him yt either ignora^tly; or negligently shou^^eth up such
weighty buisin^sses. It is impossible for measurers ignorant of Geometry,
truly to measure such crooked grounds. They can not miss so little as one in
twenty. Many men (rather then they would wrongfully loose half an acre of
their inheritance) would spend an hundredth pounds in the law for the
maintenance of their right. Many times through the ignorance of unskillful
measurers, they loose scores of acres: yea sometimes in great grounds
hundreths. But that which the eye sees not, the heart rueth not. The blind
eat many flies they know not of. Many think that a Geometer can measure
land in shorter time, then a common measurer that measures only with the
pole. Unskillful, and unlearned measurers (for the most part) make more have
then good speed. The ignorant think if a Geometer but once look through the
sights in his instrument, that thereby he knows presently how many acres the
ground contains. True Geometrical measure asks longer time then only
running over a ground with a perch, or a line. Great cheer, and company
keeping, binder much in the time of surueying. A good surueyor will avoid
them. Diligent and exact surueying so fully occupies both the body, and mind
of the whole man, as he can have small leisure for talk, or recreations.


Johnson I know some that will justly tell, how many acres every parcel of
ground contains only by the view of them: not using either pole, or
instrument.


Worsop Diverse surueyors by their great experience, and by the help of deeds,
terrors, particulars. Jurors, and report of the inhabitants, can give a great
guess at the true contents of lands: and thereupon will set down their
judgments, which manner of surueying differs from exactnes. He that is much
exercised in the tals of money can give nearest guess how much bags, and
heaps contain upon the view of them. Likewise they which are greatly
exercised in buying of pieces of veluets, silks, and cloths: can by their
bulkes give sometimes near gesses at their contents: but yet their gesses are
uncertain, and most commonly untrue. The records of such coniecturall
surueyes, ought not to be produced as good, and sufficient evidence for proof
of the quantity.


Johnson Is then a Mathematician the best surueyor, ought not any to be
admitted unto survey but he?


Worsop He that understands all the parts of survey, best deserves to be
admitted to that function. There be diverse Mathematicians that understand.
Geometry, Arithmetike, and Perspectiue sufficiently for the Mathematical part
of surueie: that understand little in the parts Legal, and Judicial. Also there
be diverse that understand the parts Legal, and Judicial, that understand little
of the Mathematicals. Therefore when partitions, exchanges, buyings, and
sellings by the acre, are to be made, they to whom these matters appertain, if
they will have their businesses exactly done: should get such a one as
understands all the parts of surueie, or else two who by their knowledges
joined together are able to make a perfect surueie. If defection be in any of
the three parts, the residue of the survey is little better then labor lost,
such great errors will ensue thereof.


Peter I would feign be acquainted with some that understand all the parts of
surueie perfectly. You know many such.


Worsop I know very few such. Ye have heard of M. Thomas Digges, he is very
skilful in all the three parts. All surueiors are greatly beholding unto him,
for setting forth three books of Geometry, in which he learnedly teaches
Geometrical measurings. For the part mathematical all good surueiors owe unto
him great reverence, because he is a lantern unto them, as well in the
speculation, as the practice. He and M. Leonard Digges his father have bin the
first, and chiefest that have given light, and taste of this necessary part of
surueie in our vulgar tongue. M. Thomas Owen one of the Counselors of the
City of London (of any learned man toward the Law) best understands all the parts of surueie as I have heard from them that be skilful, and for ought
that ever I could perceive otherwise. He well understands diverse tongues, and
is so well furnished of the best authors in diverse languages, that he has
gotten much and rare knowledge from them. M. John Hills an Auditor (of any man
whose learning and practice I know) in my judgment is the perfectest, and
readiest man in all the parts thereof. He understands Arithmetike, Geometry,
and perspectiue, both speculatiuely, and practically singularly well. His
knowledge and daily exercise of Auditorie, mixed with the study of the common
Laws, and his great search and practice of the part Judicial, have brought
him to a profound judgment and knowledge. M. Fardenando Malyn, and M. John
Malyn his brother can surueie singularly well. They understand the Mathematical
parts perfectly, and are of good study, and great practice in the other. M.
Fardenando is the readiest man in the field yt ever I saw. M. Deuhurst, M.
Grent, and M. Godfrey can surueie very well. M. Godfrey has very good
knowledge in Perspectiue. I assure my self that many others are very skilful,
and can do very well in all the parts thereof: but I can not report the skill of
any upon mine own knowledge, saving of these.


Peter Me thinks many should give themselves to be skilful professors of
surueie: and to understand the knowledge, and practice of all the parts thereof.
What be the causes why there are so few surueyors, that can sufficiently
surueie?


Worsop Such sufficient skill as a surueyor should have, before he ought to
execute that office, can not be attained but by a longer study, and a greater
practice, then is commonly thought to be had thereto. It is also one of the
chargeablest studies, that one can enter into. There are few that will take the
pains to give perfect instructions to young beginners, and to set them in the
right course of study and practice, which is a great cause of much vain
expenses. The Mathematical part seems so dry, and hard, at the first
entrance, that some (as wearied) give over before they have passed half way.
Also measurers ignorant of Geometry make quicker dispatch, then the learned
and skilful can: which so pleases the ignorant because it diminishes present
charge, that they therefore little regard him, that makes true measure, which
in troth is penie wisdom, and pound foolishnes. Also through lack of good
order in this weighty matter, braggers that by show of their instrument win
credit, are sooner retained by the ignorant then a sufficient man. Some think
that to be a great piece of cunning which in deed is either an error, or but a
trifle. The benefit also to the skilful is so small, and the charge to be in
such readiness as they ought so great, that they give over as wearied, leaving
the matter to ignorant dispatchers, who stick not at any thing. If the learned
and skilful, did use conferences, and devise ways, how these inconveniences
might be redressed, true knowledge advanced, and ignorance depressed, as the
learned in other professions do: great utility would ensue unto our common
weal thereby. It is a lamentable thing that so great a mischief (as the
ignorance of true landmeasuring brings) has so long bin spied, and that no
remedy is therefore provided. Every man knows that land is our riches in
the highest nature, and yet true surueying, and valuing thereof is shoufled up,
as though it were a matter of small importance. If a receiver should in stead
of an hundredth pounds usually receive either too much or too little, though it
were under forty shillings, and the oversight but in money, his Lord, if he
knew it, would think him very unskillful and negligent in his office, and
quickly have an evil opinion of him therefore. But if ignorant measurers miss
x. acres in an hunderth (whose value is commonly above forty pounds) they are
not evil thought of therefore, though it be to the loss of so much
inheritance. Ignorance bears such sway, that for lack of good order these
chances daily happen.


Peter How may a man when he lacks a good surueyor, know him that is
sufficient, from him that is insufficient?


Worsop Rules can hardly be given unto the ignorant of survey, how to choose
one that is sufficient. If surueyors were in such order (as by good reason they
should, the weightines of their charge considered) then as the learned in other
professions are known from the unlearned, so might they. Not any student of
the Law can be admitted to the bar, except by the benchers he be thought
sufficient. None can be admitted in the Universities to any degrees of learning
but by the allowance of ancient graduates of the same profession. If the
skilful in the parts Mathematical, Legal, and Judicial would frindly, and
singly join together to reform, and instruct each others, and to reduce
surueie to a perfect order: without doubt many which now understand but parts,
and pieces rightly: but more things erroniously, or lamely, would in short space
prove sufficient men. Also excellent good ways for the best instruction of
young students thereof, would soon be had. They that enter themselves into the
study of this science, and would persevere therein, are driven to go so
blindely and confusedly to work, because they know not where to have right
instructions, that they fall into many errors, and receive great discourages.


Johnson Me thinks the number of surueyors in these days is too great.
Gentlemen know well enough how to let their lands to the uttermost. They have
cunning enough for that matter, they need no more help from skillful men.


Worsop Though some landlords deal over hardly with their tenants, the fault
thereof is not to be attributed to surueyors. Good and skillful surueyors will
refourme those enormities, and not augment them. The common people for the most
part are in great fear when surueie is made of their land. If the surueie be
skilfully made, it reformeth over small measures, and excesses of rents. None
can so well tell what is indifferent between Lord, and tenant, as the skilful
sureueyor. Some part of his charge consists upon judgment, therefore seeing
he is in some respects a Judge: if he be godly, and justly minded, he will not
exact upon the tenant, although the Lord please him for the surueie taking: but
will measure, and value, according to equity and indifferency, as well for the
discharge of his conscience, as the preservation of his credit. We are now come
to the Towns end, we will talk more of these matters an other time.


FINIS.

