THE SINCERE PREACHER: PROVING THAT IN whom is Adulation, Avarice, or Ambition,
he cannot be sincere.

DELIVERED IN THREE Sermons in Dartmouth in Deuon, upon 1. THESE. 2. 5. 6.

By WALTER WYLSHMAN, Mr. of Art, and Minister of the Word there.

If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. decoration or
printer's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Jonas Man. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND right grave and virtuous Matrone, and my best
approved good Patroness at greatest need; Mistr^s MARY COTTON, wise to the
right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM the Lord Bishop of the Diocese of Exon;
the glorious comforts of grace here, and the blessedness of immortality and
eternity in glory hereafter.
IT was the assertion of the wisest of the sons of men (Right Worshipful
Patroness) that all rivers go into the Eccles. 1. 7
Sea. Some think they do it to do their homage, and pay tribute to that
place, from whence they received their beginning. So has it been my long nine
years longing desire, ever since I have had a door opened (by your friendly
means) to enjoy and employ my poor Ministerial talent, in testimony of my
grateful remembrance of your undeserved, though by me of you then desired
favors in those days of my trials (al which trials the trier of hearts knows
came not on me for any singularity, but of mere simplicity and sincerity of
my conscience) that there might pass back from me to you some small slender
drops of those fuller streams of your then more then ordinary benevolence and
beneficence, and ever since most gracious countenance toward me. So that I may
say to you as S. Hierome did to a friend of his, tibi quod possum debeo and
quod non possum. I am indebted to you in the highest extent of my ability, and
in a higher strain then I am able to reach unto. In acknowledgement whereof
(seeing other hoped-for means fail me) I be seech you to accept of these
three Sermous, treating of the properties of a sincere Preacher, being the
first diuulged fruits of mine above twenty years labors in the Ministry.
Which I present not unto you with the best thought of requital of your
favors, but as a bill of mine hand what I owe, and how deeply I am engaged.
All which if upon perusal you find (as indeed they are) but rude and rough
hewed, yet I hope the worth of their subject (compared with the rockinesse and
barrenness of the soil and seat where they were bred) will win some favor
from your friendly and favorable aspect. Howsoever it be, this will breed me
some contentme^t, that by these I have endeavored what in me lies, to make
known mine unfeigned sensible thankfulness, for your respective and vnrequitable
kindnesses. And whatsoever is wanting in me, I pray the God of all fullness to
fulfill in you, making you the plant of his own right hand, being planted in
the house of the Lord to Psalm. 92. 14.
bring forth more fruit in your age, and to be fat and flourishing. And when
death shall approach to shut up the full period of your age-worne days, for
your favors showed to his servants, well may you be able then to consolate
your decayed spirits, saying with good Nehemiah: Remember me O my God
concerning this: and wipe not out the kindness that I have showed to the house
of God, and on the officer thereof. I humbly take my leave, Dartmouth in
Deuonshiere this October 14. 1614.

Your Worships ever devoted in all humble duty, Walter Wylshman.

THE SINCERE PREACHER.
1. THESE. 2. 5, 6. Neither did we ever use flattering words, as ye know; nor
colored covetousness, God is record.

Neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor of others.


THe whole scope and bent of this our Apostle, in the former part of this
Chapter, is, to perswode the Thessalonians to persevere in the constant
profession of that doctrine, which he, and his fellow teachers had taught
them, and they had heard of them. And to this end he produces diverse reasons:
As first, that V. 1.
their entrance was not in vain, but with such sound doctrine so accommodated
with sincere living, as that they dared to appeal to their knowledge and
conscience for the truth thereof. 2. That it was such V. 2.
doctrine, as that they resused not to suffer at Philippi, many reproachful
disgracements, wrongs and injuries, for the confirmation thereof. 3. All which
notwithstanding, they V. 3.
were bold to preach the same afterward unto them of Thessaloni^ca. 4. That
this was done without all V. 4.
manner of in-sinceritie in doctrine, in affection, or in the manner of doing:
in doctri^ne without error, in affection without uncleanness, in the manner
of doing without guile. 5. On the contrary, it V. 5.
was done in all manner of sincerity: For as we were allowed of God (says
he) that the Gospel should be committed unto us; so we speak not as they
that please men, but God.

Now in this text he proceeds to prove his fourth reason, that there was
none insincerity in their doctrine at all, by removing such faults as usually
make doctrines unsound or insincere, and the faults which he labors to
remove, are three capital faults in my text, which are as noisome to
sincerenesse in doctrine and religion, as pestilence, famine, and sword, are to
soundness in a Commonwealth. The first of these is Adulation; the second
Avarice; the third Ambition. Adulation; for we used no flattering words as you
know: Avarice, nor colored covetousness God is record: Ambition, Neither
sought we V. 6.
praise of men, neither of you, nor others. For the removing of the first,
because it is more palpable, he appeals to their own knowledge. For the
second, which is more inward, he appeals to Gods record. And for the third of
Ambition, either for praise, or promotion, he cleares it in the sequels by his
own practice, and thinks if he free himself of these three, that he shall
sufficiently confirm his assertion of their sincerenesse, not only in
doctrines, but also in the manner thereof: taxing by the way the false teachers
with these vices, of flattery, covetousness, and ambition in their doctrines;
which in whom soever they are, they prove the very corrupters of their
ministry, and the very cut-throates of the whole Church. I will therefore
briefly speak of each of these in order, so far as they shall belong to our
present purpose: And first of flattery; wherein I will observe these four
circumstances: First, what Adulatition is. 2. How manifold it is. 3. How
dangerous it is. 4. That the Minister that is a flatterer is not sincere. For
the first; what it is, the Grecians derive this word (...), to flatter, (...),
which signifies meat, because (as the Apostle says) they that are such serve
not the Lord Romans 16. 18.
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with fair speeches and flattering
deceive the hearts of the simple. Agreeing with which is the Latin word
Adulari, derived by the Grammarians from (...), which signifies servile or
base; for so are all flatterers, becoming mercenarie Jude, ver. 16.
slaves, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage. So that
flattery is, when any one regards or extolleth others for such things, as
they are not to be regarded or extolled for; and that to this end, that he may
obtain some such thing, as he leaudly and unlawfully desires to get at their
hands. In which kind of dealing there lie lurking two horrible vices: the one,
that he does falsely and fainedly, either praise, or think, or do such things
as he thinks will be pleasing to others, so that therein he is a dissembler
and slavish. The other vice is, that he does not this, either for the glory of
God, or the good of the party praised; but to currie favor to himself, and
to seek his own advantage, and this is servile also: and for this cause
flatterers are compared to dogs, which fawn to be fed, as may be seen in
Tertullus, the false fawning Orator, who to wrong innocent Paul, spared not
Act. 24. 2.
to extol unjust Felix. And in the men of Tire, who to purchase their own
peace, forbear not, against God and conscience, to advance godless Herod, to
be as God, which their doubling and daubing how it discovered them to be base
and servile, all men may judge.

The parts of this false flattery are two; aut exim loquendo discernitur aut
tacendo, by speaking, or by concealing it is discerned. By speaking, as when
they so seek to please them that they hope to be graced by, as that they
speak any thing that will humor them; as the 400. false prophets that were
fat fed at Iezabels table, when they perceived that Ahab their King was
disposed to make war against Ramoth Gilead, they framing themselves to feed
his fancy, faid, Go up, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the
King: Like as the flatterers of Herod did, before spoken of, who perceiving the
pride of Herod, a man that desired so much to be great, that he showed
himself to be an angelical devil: they spoke to him like the devil to
Heuah, Ye shall be as Gods: Vox dei non hominis, the voice of God and not of
man. As the Pope's shauelings now call their horrid Father, Papa noster deus,
the Pope our God. Whereas had they any grace, they would say in effect, as
faithful Michaiah said to Ahab, If thou go 1. King. 22. 17.
up, thou shall not prosper, bitt all Israel shall be as sheep without a
shepherd, etc. And as Phosion a Captain, notably answered his King
Antipater, who reqniring of him a thing unreasonable, I would (Sir) do for your
service all that is reasonable (said he) but you cannot have me both a friend
and a flatterer. And as Agamemnon said in like case to Menelaus, being
requested to join with him in a thing dishonest; My wits I would enjoy with
thee, but mad with thee I would not be.

The other part of flattering is by concealing, when as a man remembering the
Heathens Maxim, Obsequium amicos veritas odium parit: that is, Flattery gets
friends, and plain dealing fo^es, is afraid to reprove such faults, as by his
place he is bound to do, but either by silence sows pillowes under great
men's arme-holes, as Ezekiel says, Ezec. 13. 18.
or by his daubing heals their hurts with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace,
when there is no peace, Iere. 6 14
as Jeremy reproves: these like Satan beguile with unfaithfulness, and like
Judas desire to please with killing kisses: whereas had they any faith,
charity, or conscience, they would with bold Paul tell reproueable Gal. 2. 11.
Peter that he is to be blamed, and with discreet Nathan, discover Sam. 12 7.
to recouerable David that he had sinned, and with undaunted Elias auow that,
to taunting King Ahabs 1. King. 18 18.
face, that by him and his base Baalim, all Israel was troubled. And these are
the kinds of flattery. Now follows the third part of my division, and that
is how dangerous flattery is.

It is so dangerous as that Antisthenes said fitly, (...). i. It is far
better to fall into the hands of Ravens, then of flatterers: for Ravens devour
but the bodies of dead men, and these many times evil men: for it is
oftentimes a judgment of God to be denied burial, as was seen in Iehoiakim,
that was Ier. 22. 19.
buried as an Ass is buried, that is, was drawn and cast without the gates of
Jerusalem: but flatterers oftentimes corrupt and defile the minds of living
and good men, as may be seen in Caius Caligula, who was for a certain time a
good Prince, but the flatterers which he had about him, by their immeasurable
praises, made him become (as says Suetonius) a monster of men, assuming on him
not only the name of great Caesar, but of Jupiter, and of the great God
himself; for seeing himself so much adored of these sycophants, he fell
persuaded that no man durst ever enterprise any thing against him, and so
committed he a thousand cruelties, and strange and horrible wickednesses,
spending his time and power in all excess, wantonness, and riotousnesse;
wherein he never ceased to wallow and tumble himself, till he was suddenly
massacred and slain: The like you have heard of the flatterers of Abab and of
Herod, who 1. King. 12 Acts 12.
brought them to their fearful ruins and destructions. And therefore one
says of flatterers about great men, that they are worse the^ the dogs about
Lazarus; for these dogs licked Lazarus his sores for his good, but flatterers
lick the sores of great ones for their hurt: for if they perceive any vices in
the^, which are their soule-sores, presently they extol these vices with the
names of virtues, near in alliance with these vices: as their cruelty, they
call magnanimity; their prodigality, liberality; their luxury, humanity;
their covetousness, good husbandry; their pride, cleanliness; revenge,
manliness; and drunkenness, kindness and such like. So that well does the
Philosopher compare a flatterer, for his imitating, to an Ape that will do any
thing; for his counterseiting, to a false iemme or precious stone that seems
and is not; for his deceiving, to a shadow that appears and is not; for his
biting, to a viper that wounds deadly; for his killing, unto poison that
destroys speedily: All which dangers of flatterers well perceived Dioclesian,
who advanced from a low estate to be Emperor of Rome, and feeling himself
not able to endure those Siren songs of flatterers, willingly forsook all his
imperial dignities to live again in a private life; which he did for above
ten years space, and never repented him whilst he was a private man, that
he had dispoyled himself of the Empire: for as Flauius Vopiscus reports of
him in the life of Aurelian, he would often confess, that nothing was harder
then to know how to rule well; for four or five (says he) will assemble and
make a plot together to deceive the Emperor, after they will say all with one
voice what they will have him do: The Emperor, who is enclosed in his house,
cannot know the truth of things as they pass, but by necessity is constrained
to understand nothing but what pleases them to tell him, and make him
understand; so do they cause him to give offices to men by themselves in post,
which merit them not at all, and make him cast out such as best deserve them
for the good of the Commonwealth. What should be said more? to make short
(says Dioclesian) a good wife and a virtuous Prince is bought and sold by such
people. Behold the words of Vopiscus, who evidently shows that Dioclesian was
discontented to be Emperor, because he was governed, mauger his beard (as they
say) by flattering Courtiers, which caused him to abuse his estate. And
therefore worthily dealt Dionysius the tyrant with Damocles his flatterer, for
his fair words full of peril, causing a table to be spread before him with
all kind of dainties and delicates, and withal enioyning him to sit at this
table, bid him often to eat of these delicates, who having a sharp sword
hanging over his head by a small hair with the point downwards, durst not
taste any of them for the fear of the present danger; so said Dionysius are
thy fair flatteries, howsoever in show very glorious, yet I durst not taste of
any of them, because of the dangers that lay hidden in them. Thus you see the
danger of flatterers, they are the canker and very bane of Church and
Commonwealth. Now I descend to the fourth part of my division, to wit, that
the Minister that uses it is not sincere.

My reasons are these: First, it is 1. Cor. 4. 2.
required of the disposers of Gods secrets, that they should be found
faithful: where faithfulness is, there is sincerenesse; but there is no
faithfulness at all in them, that for favor or fear, sin on the right hand
or on the lest: on the right hand by flattering indulgence, as counting great
sins of great men small sins, and small sins no sins, or common sins
as virtues; or at least preach mercy where is no repentance; and therefore are
like those that the Prophet speaks of, Prou. 28. 21. Ezech. 13. 18. Ezech.
22. 28. Icr. 6. 14.
that will transgress for a morsel of bread: these are they that sow pillowes
under men's elbowes, and heal the breaches of the people with sweet words.
Wherein they deal like glosing Chirurgions, that meeting with a festred sore,
or with proud flesh, in stead of lancing and corrosiuing, use gentle strokings
and incarnatiues; and so the one makes the sore ten times worse, and the other
the blemish very much greater; and therefore as such patients in the end curse
such daubers; so God and man will at last curse such flatterers. For so says
the Prophet Isaiah, Woe Isa. 5. 20.
be to them that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
sower.

A second reason why the flatterer is not sincere, is, because that whereas he
being a Minister and messenger of God, should speak as God speaks; he
changes his course, and speaks as man fansieth. God speaks deeply, and to
the heart, he lanceth the spirit, and wounds the inward parts: So should the
Minister speak. He bids Isaiah show the people their Isa. 58. 1.
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. He must show forth the
mercy of God, and not hide his judgments. He has the Lords business in hand,
and therefore must be courageous. But a flatterer aims at men's favors, and
fears their displeasures. When he sees a thief, he runs with him, and is
partaker Psalm. 50. 18.
with the adulterers. He changes with the times, and will not strive against
the streams. But what do they? They deny God, betray his truth, and deceive
his people. Of such the spirit speaks, a Woe Eccles. 2. 13.
unto them that have a double heart, and to the wicked lips. And, a double ^am.
1. 18 Luke 2. 23.
minded man is unconstant in all his ways: and, he that is not with me is
against me: and, he that gathers ^. King. 8. 21.
not with me, scatters: and, how long halt ye between two opinions? If the
Lord be God, follow him; but ^. Cor. 6. 4. 15.
if Baal be he, then go after him. And again, what communion has light with
darkness, and what concord has Christ with Belial? Cursed is he that
flattereth the people, and is unfaithful in the Lords work. Thus you have
heard what flattery is, and the kinds and parts of it, and the danger
thereof, and that there is no sincerenesse in the Minister that uses it.
Whence we may see the force of our Apostles assertion, Receive our doctrines
for we are no flatterers. Observe the uses.

The first use is, It teaches every Minister to take heed of flattery, let
them use gentleness, but not glosing; fairness, but not fainednesse: let them
endeavor to please the people, but no further then God may be pleased also.
It is reported, that Alexander the Great had two friends that he much esteemed;
the one for fairness of condition, and the other for his faithfulness in
counsel: his pleasant friend was Hephaestion, but his faithful friend was
Craterus. Hephaestion his pleasant friend would displease him in nothing; but
Craterus his faithful friend would not please him but in just and good things:
whereupon Craterus was called the friend of ye King, but Hephaestion the friend
of Alexander: so that by how much Alexander the King, was greater then
Alexanders person; by so much a faithful friend is better then a pleasant
friend. And thus must every good Minister be in respect of God, he must be an
Hephastion, please him in every thing; but in respect of man, he must be
Craterus, please him but in good things; as our Apostle says, Let every Romans
15. 2
man please his neighbor in that which is good to edification: but if men will
not be pleased in this, but look to be pleased in their sins, then it is
better to please God then men; for as the same Apostle says, Gal. 1. 10.
If I should so please men, I were not the servant of Christ. And to this end,
because men will not commonly be pleased with that which God is pleased with;
therefore God commands Jeremy his Prophet, saying, Ier. 1. 7. 8. 9. 10.
Thou shall go to all that I send thee, and whatsoever I command thee shall
thou speak: he says further; fear not their faces, lest I destroy thee
before them; for behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron
pillar, and walls of brass against the whole land. And again he says, Let
them returue unto thee, but return not unto them; thou Ier. 15. 19.
shall be a consuming fire, and they shall be stubble before thee. When Moses
sought to refuse the message and thought himself over simple to go unto
Pharaoh, God answered, certainly I will be with thee: Exodus 3. 12. Exodus 7. 1.
2. Mat, 10. 27. 28.
and after he says, I have made thee Pharaohs God, and thou shall speak all
that I command thee. So Christ says, What I tell you in darkness, that speak
you in the light, and what ye hear in the ear, that speak ye on the houses;
and fear ye not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul;
but rather fear him that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. The
consideration hereof ever moved the Prophets and Apostles to warrant their
sayings with authority from God, and to set apart all fear when they speak in
his name. When Ahab reproved Elias, Art not thou he that troubles Israel? he
answered, I 1. King. 18. 18.
have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have for
saken the commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. The Prophet
Isaiah is bold with the Princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and says, Hear the
word of the Lord Isa. 1. 10.
ye Princes of Sodom, hearken unto the law of our God, O people of Gomorrah.
John the Baptist is nothing Mat. 14. 4.
afraid to tell Herod, a mighty Prince, It is not lawful for thee to have her
to wife. If Balake would Numb. 24. 13.
give me his house fall of silver and gold (says Balaam) I cannot pass the
commandment of the Lord, to do good or bad of mine own mind, what the Lord
shall command, that same will I speak. So that these Ministers that for favor
or fear flatter the people, are worse then Balaam that was but a wizard. And
thus you hear what is the Ministers duty, namely, to deal sincerely, and not
to flatter for any respect.

The second duty is for the people, that if the Minister ought to speak
sincerely without flattery, then the people ought to have sound ears and
hearts, to hear without pride; for where pride is in the heart of the hearer,
he will not suffer wholesome doctrine with 2. Tim. 4. 3.
his ear, but having his ears it ching after his own praise, he will after
the lusts of his proud heart, get him an heap of teachers, as the Apostle
speaks; for self-love having blinded his judgment, he thinks he must
walk on without all controlement: whereupon Solomon says truly; See thou a
man Prou. 26. 12.
wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of him: therefore
his counsel is, speak not in the ears of a fool, for he will despise the
wisdom Pro. 23. 9.
of thy words. And hereof come these slanders against them that speak with
most sincerenesse, of describing of men, and of pointing at men in the public,
and such like; For as Solomon says, A wise man Pro. 4. 16.
fears and departs from evil, but a fool rages and is careless. And,
Prou. 15. 12.
a scorner loves not him that rebukes him, neither will he go into the way
of the wise: whereas poor souls did they know who speaks in the Minister,
viz. God, and what he speaks, viz. his word; and to what end he speaks,
viz. for their good, they would fear the author, and love the means, and
embrace the end, and finding the secrets of their hearts to be made manifest,
they would fall down on their faces and worship God, and say plainly 1. Cor.
14. 25.
that God is in the Minister indeed, as the Apostle says. But because he has
no purpose to be reformed, therefore he has no pleasure to be reproved. And
here hence is it, that when Jeroboam 1. King. 12. 31.
gave himself over to commit wickedness with greediness, to the intent that
he might follow his profaneness without all kind of reproof, the holy Ghost
notes, that he set up to be priests of the lowest and basest of the people;
such as had neither will nor wit, knowledge, nor conscience, nor courage to
reprove him; and by this means he made al Israel to sin with him. A policy
that the devil has long practiced, as the most strong stratagemme still to
uphold his kingdom of darkness and ignorance by. Here hence came in our
impropriations of the Ecclesiastical livings, of the most populous and the
most freque^ted places (if you mark it) in this land, that private men having
away these Church-liuings, ye inhabitants might either content themselves with
a Sir John lack-learning, as Micha did with a running Leuite for ten shekles of
silver by Judge. 17. 10.
the year, and so be without all instruction: or else if they hire a Preacher
by a voluntary contribution, their paying might be as a means of his pleasing
them, by flattering and soothing them in their sins. For as Jesus the son
of Syrake Ecclus. 29. 26.
says, where a man is a stranger or befriended, he dares not open his mouth.
And here hence is it, that in many of these populous and untaught places; sin
does not only crawle in corners, but even stands up and walks and ietteth
in the streets with a whorish forehead that will Ier. 3. 3.
not be ashamed, as Jeremy says, and he yields a reason of it, cap. 23. 14.
For the prophets strengthen the hands of the wicked, that none can return from
their wickedness. Therefore I beseech you my brethren all present, I beseech you,
I say, to hear the word of God with reverence, and conscience, and pray for
me that I may deliver it with such soundness and sincerenesse, that Christ
our Sovereign may keep regiment in our hearts by the scepter of his word,
that Satan the unclean spirit being cast out, he may no more return amongst
us. You know what Christ tells his Disciples, Matthew. 5. 13. Ye are the sale
of the earth: and, ye are the light of the world. Now all know that salt must
needs be sharp to a rotten or green wound; and light must needs be painful
to a feeble or tender eye: yet even as the patient will willingly undergo the
displeasure of the cure, rather then he will forgo the pleasantness of the
remedy; so must we do to be freed of our souls maladies and miseries. A
good Physician must needs disquiet his sick patient before he can heal his
disease: and a good Surgeon must lance and rip up festred wounds, before he
can apply helpful and healing incarnatiues. We are spiritual Physicians and
Chirurgions, the word of God the souls potion, and the wine and oil of the
souls sores is committed to us, that by us it might be applied to season,
supple, and salve all maladies. If it seem unpleasing, yet it is most
profitable, therefore endure it; which that you may do with willingness and
cheerfulness, I will shut up this point with that worthy saying of a faithful
Orator of Titus Liuius, lib. 3.
Rome, called Quintius Capitolinus, who on a time making an Oration to the
Romans, after he had lively showed them their faults, in that they ceased not
to disobey their superiors, whereby some great disorder and confusion might
fall to the Commonwealth, adds in the end, these words: Masters, I know well
that a man may utter more pleasant talk, and tell you of things more plausible;
but as for me, my nature is not to flatter, and the present necessity causes
that I love rather to tell you true things then pleasant. I have a good mind to
please and content you, but I love much better to preserve and guard you from
falling into destruction, how little thank soever I have of you. These
remonstrances and words of this good man were of such efficacy, says Titus
Liuius, by the pure and native truth which he showed unto the people, without
flattery, that he appeased the tumults and discontentments of the City. So I
doubt not (my brethren) but that seeing I may appeal (with our Apostle) to
your knowledge, and consciences, that my carriage in speaking unto you, has
been without flattery, in sincere plainness; but that in the end I shall
attain to Salomons experience, namely, he that reproves a Prou. 28. 23.
man, shall find more favor at the length, then he that flattereth with his
mouth.

THE SECOND SERMON.
1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. Nor colored covetousness, God is record.
YOu have heard (beloved in our best beloved Jesus Christ) that the Apostles
bent was, to persuade ye Thessalonians to persevere in that doctrine, which he
and his fellows had taught them. And to this end he produced diverse reasons,
the last and not the least whereof was, that they had taught them in all sound
sincerenesse; and to this end he endeavors in this verse and the next to
remove such capital faults, as might tax them of insincerenesse, and these
are three in number; to wit, Adulation, Avarice, and Ambition: which three are
as noisome to sincerenesse in religion and doctrine, as pestilence, sword, and
famine are to soundness in a Commonwealth. Of the first (of Adulation) I have
spoken already: now follows the second (of Avarice) in these words: Neither
used we colored covetousness, God is record. Wherein as in the former of
Adulation, because it was more gross and palpable, he appealed to their
knowledge; so here in this sin of covetousness, because it is more inward and
secret, he appeals to Gods record, saying, Neither used we colored
covetousness, God is record. And as for the third, of Ambition, either for
praise or profit, he cleeres it in the sequels by their own practice, and
thinks that if he free himself of these three, he shall sufficiently
confirm his assertion of their sincerenesse not only in doctrine, but also in
the manner thereof. Taxing by the way the false teachers with these three,
which in whom soever they are found, they prove the corrupters of their
Ministry, and the ruinaters of the Church. Now in following of this stream
of covetousness, I will observe the same order, that I did in the former of
flattery, for I will handle these four circumstances: first I will show what
covetousness is. Secondly, how manifold it is, and what are the parts thereof.
Thirdly, how foul and monstrous a sin it is. And fourthly, that the Minister
that is carried away with it, cannot be sincere. Finally, these heads being
handled, I will draw forth some uses, and the remedies that we are to make of
it. For the first what it is, the Latins derive this word Avarice from Aueo
and ab auro vel are, so that they make covetousness to be an immoderate desire
of money or gold. The Greeks call it (...) which signifies an immoderate
desire to have more; so that how much soever the covetous man has, yet not
therewith contented he still desires more. In like sense the Hebrews call it
(...) which is an over earnest desire of gain, which is never without
oppression and wrong. Hence then I may thus define it, viz. that Covetousness
is a base affection of the mind, arising from mistrustfulnesse of God in his
providence, whereby one does so immoderatly desire earthly riches, as that
never contented with that which he has, he still desires more then he has,
respecting neither right nor wrong done to others, to the intent that he may
attain his desire for himself: all which being obtained, he still wants as
well that he has as that he has not: for that which he has he dares not
enjoy for fear of necessity, and he still vexes himself with the want of
that he has not, because he would abound: so that still wanting the use of
that he has, and the possession of that he has not, he is ever vexed with
woeful perplexity. Which definition considered with his causes, will appear to
be the more absolute. The efficient cause whereof is infidelity, even a
mistrusting of God in his alsufficient providence, and a trusting in uncertain
riches. And therefore our Apostle terms covetousness idolatry, because the
covetous man attributes that to riches, which belongs to God, viz. trust and
confidence. The matter of his desire is worldly gain, which (like ye world) is
mutable and fading. The formal cause is his immoderate desire of riches, which
cannot be satisfied. The final cause is Philautia, a desire to set himself
alone aloft, and this monster, like a Cerberus, has three heads, viz. fear of
poverty, love of pleasure, and love of glory. Whereupon Saint Ambrose rightly
compares Avarice to a strumpet in a Ladies habit, sitting on a chariot
supported with four wheels, viz. Faint courage, Inhumane carriage, Contempt of
God, and Forgetfulness of death. This chariot he makes to be drawn with two
black horses, the one he names Rauine, and the other Nigardship. To these
both there is but one carter, and he is named Desire to have. This carter
drives with a whip having two cords, the one named Appetite to get, and the
other, Dread to forgo. Thus you see what covetousness is, and how she is
mounted. Now if ye expect, that I should set open and anatomise unto you all the parts and members of this huge monster Covetousness, I confess that it
surpasses my reach: for as it is seated in the soul, which is a spirit, so it
arises from the affection or desire, which is infinite, and therefore it being
in nature infinite, her parts are also infinite, they cannot be numbered.
Therefore S. Paul speaking of this monster Covetousness, which is but one,
says, that it is the root 1. Tim. 6. 10.
of all evil, which is innumerable. So that if it be the root of all evil,
then it is the root of idolatry, the root of impiety, the root of
infidelity, the root of blasphemy, the root of simonie, the root of
usury, the root of briberie, the root of parricide, the root of homicide,
the root of theft, the root of lying, of extortion, of oppression, of all
false dealing, of lying, the root of contentions in the Church, the root of
brabling and brawling in the Commonwealth. And as it is by nature spiritual,
so it prieth into every corner, and pierces into every heart; it annoyeth our
Physicians, it infecteth our Divines, it choketh our Lawyers, it wounds our
farmers, it baneth our Gentlemen, it murthereth our tradesmen, it bewitcheth
our Merchants, it stingeth our Merchants, it stingeth our mariners, oh cursed
covetousness! it is the poison of all things, the wound of Christianity, and
the bane of all godliness: for covetousness marreth all, it marres all every
where, in all places, in all degrees, amongst all persons. It marreth marriages;
for it coupleth old dotterds with young giglots; it marres hospitality, for it
shuts the doors against the poor; it marres almesdeeds, for it closes the
hand and heart against the needy; it marres religion, for it makes a show of
godliness without the power thereof; it marres professors, for it bars their
practice; it marres the Ministry, for it choketh zeal; it marres the
Magistrates, for it corrupts justice; it marres all things, for it is a very
plague. By all which you may guess of the universality of the parts of
covetousness. If you will have her parts more compendious and more comprised,
I will gather my self within the bounds of Philosophy, which makes the parts
of Avarice to be these three, according to the three chief kinds of her
actions: the first is to get greedily: the second is to keep needily: and the
third is to spend sparingly and misarly. More briefly, her parts are Capacitas,
repacitas, tenacitas: that is again, her greedy getting, her needy keeping,
and her miserable sparing.

For the first part Capacity, which is an immoderate and unjust holding of
that which he has, whereby he makes more reckoning of his riches and worldly
mucke, then of his neighbors necessity and misery: such was the holdfastnesse
of Dives in the Gospel, that Luke 16.
not once moved with poor Lazarus his misery, would not give one crumme to
ease his hunger; and his reason was (as it seems) his lothnesse to depart from
any thing, being wedded to his wedge, and his despair, as the Poet says, Quod
si Hor. Sat. Lib. 1. sat. 1.
diminues, vilem redigetur ad assem: if he should once lessen his mine, he
doubted it would come to a mite: so that in his we may see an heart set upon
riches, and riches upon an heart; heaps of wealth like the hills that Wants
cast up, Cumuli tumuli, every hill is a grave, and every heap a tomb to bury
himself in.

The second Rapacity, that is, that greedy desire of gain, which makes them
that are infected therewith, not to reckon of the lives of the owners thereof,
as Solomon says. Pro. 1. 19.
Nay they are so greedily set upon gain, as that they care not for their own
lives neither, as may be seen in that golden-humored Midas, who obtaining his
request, that all that he touched should be turned into gold, wrought his own
famishment, for gold could not feed him; and therefore Saint Paul says, that
they that will be rich, that is (over 1. Tim. 6. 9.
greedily desire it) fall into the snares of the devil. Whereupon Salust
says, that covetousness is always infinite and insatiable, which is not
lessened, either with plenty, or want.

The third part of covetousness is Tenacity, which is a base and miserly
hoording up of wealth with a mistrustfull wretchedness, lothing to afford
himself any comfortable use of al his great store and provision of his riches:
but as Solomon Eccles. 5. 16.
says, he eats his bread in the darkness with much grief, and in his
sorrow and anger. And as David says, rises early, and goes late to Psalm.
127. 2. Hor. Sat. Lib. 1. ^at. 1.
bed, and eats the bread of carfulness. Such an one was Vuidius, that
Horace speaks of, that abounding in wealth, would not afford himself
clothes, but went in a curtalized coat; for which miserlines his servants slew
him, says the Poet. And such an one was the churl in the Gospel (as it
seems) for until he had more corn then his barnes could hold, he never said
to his soul, Take thine ease, eat, and drink, and take thy pastime: but when
he thought he had meat enough, God would not leave him time enough, but told
him, that in that instant night his soul should be taken from him. Thus you
see covetousness displayed with her parts. Now it is easy to see how foul
and monstrous a sin it is.

Covetousness is so ugly and monstrous a sin (as you have heard) that it is
the mother-sinne, and beldame of all other sins, and all other sins are but
as it were proctors and factors to this sin, and serve but for porters, to
fetch and bring in her living. For she makes Symonie her drudge, Bribery her
drudge, Usury her drudge, Deceit her drudge, Swearing her drudge, Lying her
drudge, etc. Oh what a devil incarnate is this, that sets so many vices
aworke, and has so many retainers and underlings to serve her turn! No
marvel then if covetousness be compared to the unmerciful grave, to
insatiable death, to all-deuouring hell, which can never be satisfied. Bursa
auari, os diaboli (says one), the purse of a covetous man is the mouth of the
devil, which is always open to receive, but shut to give: like Polyphemus in
Antro, who had omnia se aduorsum spectantia nulla retrorsum: all toward him,
but none from him: see his picture in Alcmeon, who being willed by Croesus to
go into his tresure-house, and take as much gold as he could carry away with
him, provided for that business a long hanging garment down to his ankles,
and great boots, and filled them both; nay, he stuffed his mouth, and tied
wedges of gold to his locks of his head, and no doubt but for hurting himself,
he would have forced his skul, and bowels within his breast to have his load at
full. So that you see the insatiableness of covetousness on gold, his heart
is so set on it, and it so sits on his heart, that there is no room at all for
any grace in the covetous man's heart; but even as in the body, when the spleen
swelles, all other parts decay and consume: so when the heart swelles with over
great desire of riches, all the graces of God consume and fade away. We see
the hawthornes in the spring time have fair white flowers, and pleasant to the
sense, yet all the while it is but a pricking thorn, and he that catches too
hastily to these flowers shall prick his hand: so are riches, says Christ,
though glorious to the eyes, Mat. 13. 22.
yet but thorns to the covetous, they will prick both hand and heart, and the
heart once wounded, the whole man will be consumed. Instance for this was
Judas, who no doubt at first was a man of many good parts; he forsook all to
follow his master Christ, preached the Gospel, and wrought miracles as well as
any of the rest; but once inamoured with the flowring whitethorne of riches,
and eagerly catching after it, his heart was pricked with the thorn that lay
hid in these flowers, in such sort as that it swelled and festred in him unto
death, bringing him unto a most fearful and doleful downfall at the last.
And good reason, for the covetous man is unjust against God, against man,
against himself, against his wealth. Against God; for he doubts and denies
his providence, and prefers earthly trash to God that should be his heavenly
treasure. Against man his neighbor in keeping all unto himself, whereas God
has made him but a steward, not a Lord thereof to dispense unto others. Yea he
does not only keep his own from him, but by force as a Lion, and by fraud as
a Fox, he wringeth and wresteth his neighbors wealth to himself; and
therefore Syrake calls the defrauder Ecclus. 11. 32. Iam. 5. 4.
of the poor, a man of blood. And S. James wills such cruel cormorants to
weep and howl, for the hire of the laborers cries against them, etc.

He is unjust against himself; for he does even sell himself to the devil
for wicked gain, and like a sumpter horse, bears burdens to the devil all
his life time, that in the end of his days he may be thrust into the dirty
stable of hell, with a gald back, and a wounded conscience. Whereupon
Syracides says well, There is nothing worse ^^^lus. 10. 9.
then a covetous man: why art thou proud O earth and ashes? there is not a more
wicked thing then to love money, for such an one would even sell his soul, and
for his life every one is compelled to put out his own bowels: agreeing with
which is Solomon: He that is greedy Pro. 1. 1^
of gain, would take away the life of the owner thereof; and by a consequent
his own too, who must go for a recompense of his neighbors life.

Finally, he is unjust against his wealth; for he hides it, and depriues it
of the end wherefore it was ordained, and suffers it to corrupt, and his
garments to be motheaten, (as Saint James says) and therefore no marvel if the
wrath of God come upon such. And thus much for the foulness of this sin of
covetousness. Now I descend to the fourth circumstance of my division, which
is, that no Minister, overcome with this sin, can deal sincerely. My reasons
are these:

First, every Minister is, or should be, the messenger of the Lord of hosts:
This heavenly Master, and earthly Mammon cannot be served of one and the same
servant together, says our Savior, for they are Mat. 6. 24.
contrary one to the other: therefore that Minister that is overcome with
covetousness, is fallen from Christ, as was seen in Judas, and cannot be
faithful unto him. Again, Mat. 13. 2.
the deceitfulness of riches, and the cares of this world, choke the word
(says Christ). Hence I thus reason: where the word is choked, there the
conscience is clogged; where the conscience is clogged, the heart is corrupted;
where the heart is corrupted, that man is not sincere: therefore the covetous
Preacher is an insincere Preacher. For even as all beasts, that go with their
breasts on the ground, were accounted abominable by the law of Moses; so are
euit. 11. 42.
all those, be they Ministers or others, whose hearts are as it were soddered
unto the earth. And here hence is it, that the devil used this as the last,
but not as the least engine to foil Christ himself, in tempting him, saying,
All this will I give thee: thinking with the Poet, Auri sacra fames quid non?
which certainly prevails much where grace gardeth not. Therefore we read,
Revel. 12. 4. That the devil, the great Dragon, drew the third part of the
stars of heaven with his tail, and cast them to the earth; and no marvel if
he thus strive to prevail: for if he once corrupt the shepherds, it is an
easy matter to consume the sheep. It is not therefore without good cause, that
our Apostle does so much strive here to clear himself of all colored
covetousness: for h^d he been covetous, he could not be sincere; for
covetousness and corruption are always companions, as was seen in Balaam,
who loving the wages of unrighteousness, as Peter styles 2. Pet. 2. 15.
it, though he protested, that if Balak would give him his house filled Numb.
22. 18.
with gold and silver, yet he could not, nor would not speak more or less
then the Lord commanded him; yet for the love of that wicked gain he not only
went, though first forbidden of the Lord, and after gave wicked counsel to
Balake (as Josephus reports) for his gain. Joseph. Josephus Flauius.
Antiquit. Iudaic. lib. 4. cap. 6.

The use therefore of this doctrine is, first to teach us, who are like to prove
sincere Preachers, and who not. The Scribes and Pharisees (says Christ)
devoured widows houses, under a pretense of long prayer: these Pharisees have
their followers the Papists, who through covetousness make merchandise of all
that they do. They sell the use of time, of meats, and of marriages; they sell
their Masses and their prayers, and their pardons, and purgatory, and heaven
it self; they make money of Peter, and of Paul, of the Apostles, and of
Martyrs, and of Christ himself. These no doubt are they of whom Saint Peter
speaks, through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise
of 2. Pet. 2. 3.
you: and therefore these men cannot in their doctrines be sincere. Come we
unto others, that through desire of greatness count gain to be godliness,
joining house unto house, and Church unto Church: if these should appeal with
our Apostle to Gods record, I fear me they would make their faults broad to
their consciences. And certainly doubt is to be taken of such men's sincerenes:
for how shall they teach others to be sincere, that are not sincere
themselves? Yet here we must take heed, that we do not count al to be
covetous, that abou^d in the use of earthly riches; for it is not the having of
riches, but the trusting in riches that makes one covetous, as our Savior
expounds Mark. 1 ^ Ecclus. 13. 25.
it. Therefore says Syrach, Riches are good to him that has no sin. Else we
shall condemn holy Abraham, Job, David, Solomon, and such like, who were
marvelous rich, and nothing the worse for their riches; whereas retchlesse
carelessness and profuse prodigalnes is a sin against nature, for he that
shall not in an upright and holy manner provide for his own, is worse then an
infidel: Tim 5.
yet we must not so trust in riches, as that without these we mistrust Gods
providence and promises. As poverty therefore is evil in cclus. 13 25.
the mouth of the ungodly, so riches is not evil in the heart sanctified.
Goods then with godliness is no hindrance to sincerenesse; but mistrustfulnes
with much or little riches, breeds neither soundness nor sincerenes.

A second use is, that such people as in their own knowledge and consciences,
perceive their Pastors to be faithful and freest off covetousness, these
should give great credit to their doctrines for sincerenes. In the eleventh of
the Acts it is recorded, that when the Church understood, that a great number
at Antiochia believed and turned unto the Lord, they sent Barnabas unto them;
who when he was come and had seen the grace of God, in the sincerenesse of
his heart, he was glad (says the text) and exhorted all that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord, Where the holy Ghost shows, that his
so holy exhortation had a great and a blessed effect, for much people joined
themselves unto the Lord. And what was the cause that should move this people
thus to join unto the Lord? it is there noted, that he was a good man and full
of the holy Act. 11. 24
Ghost. As if he should say, his goodness and sincerenesse was of great force
to move them to turn unto ye Lord. So we read of Herod, though otherwise a
proud Prince and profane, yet when he heard John Baptist, he did many
things, Mark. 6. 20. 21.
and heard him gladly. And what was the cause that should move him hereunto?
the holy Ghost notes the cause, that it was Iohus sincerenesse. For Herod
feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and reverenced him:
so that those that will not reverence their sincere Preacher, are more prosane
then wicked Herod was. And yet behold ye proteruitie of these times, wherein
all for the most part hate to be reproved, because they have no hearts to be
reformed, who like the perverse Galathians, count him Gal. 4. 16.
their enemy that tells the^ the truth. The reason whereof our Savior yields,
namely, that he that evil Ioh. 3. 20.
does, hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should
be reproved. So that the most profound are esteemed the most profane, even
monstrous persons, Zach. 3. 8. as signs and wonders, Isai. 8. 18. the most
conscionable thought to be most contentious, Ierem. 15. 20. But what does this
bewray, but that the whole body is dangerously sick, and out of order? even as
a man in a fever, when the gall has dispersed it self over the stomach,
finds no good taste or relish of the best meats: and as the sluggish sleeper
in the lethergie holds him his greatest foe that is his best friend, in awaking
him; so it fares with those poor souls, that are most sick with sin, they
would go to perdition in peace, and cannot abide to be roused out of their
sins. Therefore we have great cause to pray with David to establish us with
right and free spirits, that being spiritual we may be able to discern all
things as they are; we may love soundly them that deal sincerely, and have
them in 1. These. 5. 13.
singular regard for their works sake.

Finally, seeing that covetousness is so great, so gross, and so general a
sin, let every man betimes examine his own soul, whether it have taken any
hold in his heart: for (assure our selves) their lives are miserable, and their
ends damnable, (as Phil. 3. 19
S. Paul says) that live and dye in this sin. And therefore seeing the
danger is so great, and yet the sin so common, need have we (every one of
us) to pray to God with David, to incline our hearts unto his Psalm. 119. 36.
testimonies, and not to covetousness. Which that we may do, we must labor
to get that blessed gift of contentatio^, that the holy Ghost Heb. 13. 5
exhorts unto, saying, Let not your conversation be in covetousness, but be
content with that you have: for he has said, I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee. A notable example of this virtue we have in the Apostle Paul, who
had learned in whatsoever state he was, therewith to be content: Phil. 4. 11.
12.
and therefore he says, I can be abased, and I can abound: every where and in
all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, to abound, and
to have want. This which Paul practiced is soon said, but not so soon done.
That we therefore may after his example be content in every state of life, and
shun this foul sin of covetousness, let us consider of these
preservatives. First set before our eyes the commandment of God that says,
Thou shall not covet, not thy neighbors house only, but not any thing that is
his. For look what is sin to take in the sight of man, is sin to wish in
the eyes of God; but in man's sight, it is sin to take any thing that is thy
neighbors, for it is against the law of nature, that wills thee to do as thou
would be done unto; and against the law of justice, that commands to give
every man his due: Therefore (says God) thou shall not covet any thing that is
thy neighbors, be it never so little, it is too much to covet; and though he
can spare it, God will not spare thee for wishing it: and though it be not
much wherein thou offend'st, yet the Majesty of God is great, whom herein thou
offend'st: therefore thou see there is no warrant at al, to covet.

Again, consider that though a man have that which he does covet* yet it
cannot profit him, unless God bless it. The Israelites (says David) coueted
flesh for their lusts, and God gave them their desire; with their desire he
gave them flesh, but he sent leanness withal Psalm. 106. 15
into their souls: so, many are sick with Ahabs disease, proposing to
themselves if I had such a dwelling, then I should have content; if such a
living, the^ I should have no want. But consider, I pray you, may not this be a
fond and false persuasion? may not God cross thee in thy wished-for dwelling,
with vnwished for diseases in thy body, and with torturing horror in thy
conscience? and then thy dwelling will not delight thee, and thy covering will
not content thee. And as for riches, thou may drink in gold with Balthazar,
and see with him Dan. 5.
thy doom and downfull graven in the walls of thy palaces, that may more
quail thee, then thy gold and wine can comfort thee. Therefore David's counsel
is worthy, Psalm. 62. 10. 11. where he advises, saying, If riches increase, set
not thine heart upon them. Why? for three reasons: first, for God spoke once or
twice, and I heard it, that power belongs to God. As if he should say,
Nothing has any power to do a man good, but only God. Secondly, to thee, O
Lord, belongs mercy: noting, that nothing procures pity and mercy, but
only God: and that a man is loved and kindly entreated, it is not from his
wealth, but from God that puts love into men's hearts. Thirdly, thou Lord
rewardest every man according to his work: teaching, that God looks to our
works, not to our wealth; when he comes to judgment, sin then shall have
shame, and sincerity salvation; whatsoever our wealth has been, riches
deliver not in the day of the Lords wrath, but righteousness delivers from
death: riches then cannot help, why therefore should we so much covet them?

Thirdly, consider how little will content nature; we brought nothing with us
into the world, and we shall carry nothing out. If therefore we have Jacobs
wish, food and raiment, let us therewith be content. Nay, we have warrant to
crave no more then Agur craved; Feed me with food convenient for me, Prou. 30.
8. therefore our Savior taught us to pray on this manner, Give us this day our
daily bread: that is, bread for our substances; or such bread as is sufficient
to preserve our lives, And that God is displeased at men's over greedy craving
much, he would have us to learn by his allowance in the wilderness, for
there he fed his children from heaven with Mannah Exodus 16. 20
sufficient for the day; and if any in greediness would bring in more, he
caused it to putrify and to be full of worms: to teach us, that he accurseth
all that we crave, more then he allows us.

Fourthly, consider that whatsoever we have, if but mean fare, if but poor
rags, but a ruinous cottage, yet it is far better the^ we deserve; bread or
water is too good for the best of us: our sins can challenge nothing but
sackcloth to cover us, and if we had our desert, our houses should be hell. And
therefore strive to have a sense and feeling of the want of Christ, and to see
our damnable estate in our selves without him; and then, though a man were
covetousness it self, this will be a means to turn his heart from the pelf
of this world, and to seek wholly after spiritual and heavenly things. For
the consideration of our own misery in our selves, and a lively sense of the
need we have of Christ, will make us hunger after him and his righteousness
above all things in the world. We find by experience, that many are endued
with good gifts of knowledge, of joy in the Word, of zeal in good things, etc.
who nevertheless in their callings are overcome with this foul sin of
covetousness: and the reason is, because they were never thoroughly touched
with any sense or feeling of their need they had of Christ: and therefore they
never thought with S. Augustine, Quid prodest, si omnia habes, eum tamen qui
omnia dedit non habere? What profit is it to have all things, and to want the
giver of all things, without whom all possessions and possessors are vile and
miserable? The consideration whereof made Moses (when he came to years) to
^eb. 11. 26.
entertain affliction, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the
treasures of Egypt: because he had respect to the recompense of reward. So,
did we (beloved) see out vileness without Christ, and made once to hunger
after him, the^ every one would begin to say with S. Paul, I esteem all things
as dung, ^hil. 3. 8.
in regard of Christ: and with David, As the Heart brayeth after the rivers
^sal. 42. 1.
of waters, so thirsts my soul after thee, O Lord. This is the counsel of
Christ, First seek the kingdom ^at. 6. 33
of God and his righteousness. We must in our selves be as the wounded man,
that lay in the way, that Christ Jesus ye true Samaritane may come by us to
supple our wounds, and to pour his own precious blood into our souls; for as
Mary said, God fills the hungry with Luke 1. 53
good things, but the rich he sends empty away. Thus you see that the feeling
of the want of spiritual grace, makes men contemn, or to set light of earthly
riches.

Finally, consider the special, wise and fatherly providence of God, in
disposing and governing the things of the world, he has riches enough in his
hand for all: If then it do not seem good to his wisdom to give thee more
or better things; know assuredly, that that is best for thee, who can choose
better for thee, then thou for thy self; for he is a most wise caruer, and
Psa. 34. 10.
faithful Creator, and can deny no good thing to them that fear him: the
consideration whereof made holy Job to praise God in wealth and woe, saying,
The Lord Job. 1. 22.
has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And
David comforted himself upon this special providence of God, acknowledging,
that the Lord being his shepherd he should want ^sa. 23. 1.
nothing; and therefore finding this Lord to be the portion of his inheritance,
and of his cup: he was sure he would maintain his lot; and confesses that
the lines are fallen salm. 16. 5. 6.
unto him in pleasant places; yea, that he had a fair heritage. Thus, if with
David, any one can once make the Lord his portion, he cannot but be full of
contentation. For how can he want any thing, that has for his portion the
Lord, the guider and giver of all things?

THE THIRD SERMON.
1. THESE. 2. 5. Neither sought we praise of men, nor of you, nor of any others.
HEre is the third fault, which the Apostle labors to remove from himself,
to prove his sincerenes by; namely ambition, either for praise or profit; of
which he labors to clear himself in the sequels, by his, and his fellows,
practice; and assures himself, that if he can free himself and them from this
and the two former vices, that he shall sufficiently confirm his assertion of
their sincerenesse, not only in doctrine, but also in the manner thereof.

In handling of which fault of Ambition, I will observe the same order that I
did in the former two, of Adulation and Avarice. For I will follow these four
circumstances. I will first show what Ambition is. 2. How manifold, and what
are the parts of it. 3. How foul and dangerous a sin it is. And 4. that the
Minister that is ambitious, cannot deal sincerely in his doctrines: and
finally these heads being handled, I will draw out some use that we are to make
of it, and some remedies thereof.

For the first, what Ambition is, our Apostle says in my text, we sought not
praise of men, nor of you, nor of any other. Where our Apostle seems to
import, that ouer-greedy seeking, and an ouer-griple desire of the praise of
men, is Ambition; and so do the very words themselves in the Original
signify, if we well consider them; for Ambition is a Latin word, derived of
the verb Ambire, which is, to go about, to sue, seek, and keep a quoile in
the world for praise and promotion; to which the Greek word philotima agrees,
which signifies over great love of honor, and greedy desire of glory. Whence
(I think) I may thus define Ambition, viz. Ambition is a base sin, whereby a
man is so carried away with an inordinate desire of his own praise and honor,
that whether he deserve it or no, he regards it more then Gods glory, or his
neighbors good. Which definition being compared with her parts or causes, will
(I guess) appear to be an absolute definition; her parts I make to be her
Kind and Difference; her kind is, that it is a sin, or base sin, her
difference from other sins is, that it makes a man sick with self love: For
the kind, that it is a base sin, I prove by reasons natural, politic, and
divine. Natural reason proves it, For whereas man by nature is a sociable
creature of the same matter and mould, form and fashion with others, and
therefore should affect and delight in and with others; ye Ambitious man is so
taken up with self-loue, and with a desire of his own praise and preferment,
that he becomes a Timon, a Misanthropos, a despiser and hater of all others in
respect of himself. Tullij offic. lib. 3.
Whereupon Heathen Tullie could say by the light of nature, that in a free City
nothing can be imagined more foul or monstrous, then the ambitious desire of
preferments. To which accords divine Jerome, saying, Vilium est hominum alios
viles facere, and qui suo merito placere non potest, placere velle aliorum
comparatione: that is, it is the property of vile and base men to disgrace
others, to be graced themselves (as all ambitious men seek to do) and having
no merit of his own by comparison, to seek to be accounted of by others.

Secondly, that this is a base sin, crossing policy, I prove; for it seeks the
downfall of all humane society. For whereas one strives to be above another,
there is nothing but envy and destruction of one against another: Epist. 2.
Lib. 12.
whereupon Seneca says well, Take heed of Ambition, it is a vain swelling,
and turbulent evil that has none end, and vexes himself as much to see
another before him, as himself to be behind another; so that it is carried
with a double envy: vides autem quam miser, si is cui inuidetur and inuidet:
behold then(says he) how miserable the Ambitious man is, if he enuic him
that is envied by him? which thing Prou. 13. 10.
made wise Solomon to affirm, yt only by pride does man stir up contention,
but with the well advised is wisdom.

Divine reason proves ambition to be a base sin; for whereas God has
reserved these three things to himself, viz. Vengeance, Judgment, and Honor;
the devil by this sin of Ambition, striving to be equal with God, of an
Angel of light, became a spirit of darkness: whereupon Basilius magnus
calls it the devils disease, because it makes men like the devil; for the
ambitious man has no belief, as our Savior says, How can ye believe Ioh.
5. 44.
that receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes of
God alone? So that you see proved by reasons natural, civil, and divine, this
genus, or kind of my definition, that Ambition is a base sin.

The difference of this sin from others is, that this sin makes one to be
sick of self-love, even with an inordinate desire of his own praise and
honor; so that, as Icarus, he would mount above the mountains: for whereas
the covetous man desires riches, and the flarterer bellie-cheere and
maintenance, the Ambitious man aims only at honors; so that he regards not
friend, brother, nor father; but with Absolon, will seek his fathers head, to
have his crown.

Hence we may descend to consider the causes both efficient, material,
formal, and final of this soul sin; the opening of which will make us
further and fuller to behold the ugliness of this base monster.

The efficient cause of Ambition, is ignorance: for howsoever some think, that
pride was the cause of the fall of men and Angels, though it be not denied but
that pride was in this sin, yet the breeder of this pride was folly, which
made them proud; therefore Job (says God) found folly in the Angels: so that
ignorance being the mother of folly, is the first cause of the pride and
Ambition of Angels and men; and good reason, for no man knowing God or himself
as he ought, can be proud: so that one may be bold to say to the Ambitious,
That folly was his mother, and shame will be his daughter.

The material cause of Ambition is, vain praise and honor, which so
bewitcheth the heart of the foolish, as that their whole man is set upon it, as
S. Bernard, in lib. 3. de consideratione affirms, saying O ambitio ambientium
crux? quomodo omnes torques? omnibus places? nil acerbius cruciat, nil
molestius inquietat, nil tamen apud miseros mortales crebrius negotijs eius:
that is, O Ambition, the cross of the ambitious, how do thou torment all,
and yet please all? nothing does more cruelly crucify, nothing does more
trouble somly vex men, and yet nothing is more common with miserable mortal
men then her affairs. Act. 12, 23. We may see, that Herod Agrippa, to win
honor of men, usurped to himself the honor of God, and for it God made him
more base then a worm.

The formal cause thereof is, an over greedy and inordinate desire of honor,
such as was seen in Julius Caesar, who being ambitious of a Monarchy, shamed
not to utter the words of Euripides, Sipeierandum est, regnandi causa
peierandum est: as if he should say, Swear, and forswear for a Kingdom: for
the getting of honors, forget God, kindred, and conscience: so that the end of
Ambition is also to prefer his own honors before Gods glory, or neighbors
good; as was seen in Herod, but specially in Jeroboam, Act. 12.
who to uphold his own honor, set up Idols in Bethel, and Dan; fearing lest
if his subjects should go up to Jerusalem, to the place of Gods worship, the
hearts of the people should turn again unto 1. King. 12. 27.
the Lord, and to Rehoboam King of Judah; and so he preferred his own honor to
the honor of God, and the salvation of his people, so horrid and horrible is
this sin of Ambition, whose kind is (as you have heard) a base sin, whose
property is, too great a desire of honor; folly is her mother, and shame her
daughter; her matter, honor; and form, too great a desire thereof, and her
end brings contempt of God and man, to commend her self. Thus we read that
Abimelecke slew Judge. 9. 5. Matthew. 2. 2. Sam. 15
his own brethren; Herod killed his own son, and Absolon would have slain
his own father for a kingdom and for honor.

Let us therefore in the second place consider the parts and litter of this
monster; for this cur'st mother, wants not her accursed daughters; I will
therefore observe for her parts these four, viz. Self-loue, Forgetfulness, A
singular opinion, and Fury.

For the first, that Self-love is Ambitions daughter, or at least her sister,
will easily appear; for a man's seeking for honor, at length brings him to be
so greatly in love therewith, as that in comparison thereof he despises al
others, as Saint Paul Gal. 4. 17
speaks of the false teachers, They would exclude you (meaning from us) that
ye might altogether love them. So there are too many amongst us in these
days, that perceiving Satan's kingdom to begin to be weakened, and the Dagon
of superstition to begin to fall down, by the faithful labors of their
brethren: yet because this was not done by them and their advice, that they
might have the praise and honor thereof; therefore merely through self-love
they set themselves against these good proceedings, and by these means uphold
still Antichrists kingdom, and so become authors of division and confusion;
as S. Jude says, these are makers of sects: whom Saint Paul V. 19. 1. Tim. 4
2. and 4.
therefore terms lovers of themselves, and lovers of pleasure more then
lovers of God. This is one Cub of this cursed litter.

A second Cub is Forgetfulness; for a man's ouer-weening desire of getting
honors to himself, makes him utterly forgetful of God, of himself, of
others: for even as the stomach ouer-stuft with wind, is apt to receive no
nourishing meat, until it have vent for that wind; so the Ambitious man
being ouer-stuft with pride, has no room in his heart all this while for the
knowledge of God, himself, or other; which knowledge of God, etc. if it had
once entered into his heart, it would presently make him to fall from his pride;
for it would tell him, that God cannot endure the children of pride, as Job
says: and that God resists Job 41. 25
the proud, but gives grace to the humble and meek, as James says; Iam. 4. 6.
and therefore that pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before Pro.
16. 10.
the fall, as Solomon says. Also, that the pride of man shall bring him low,
Pro. 29. 23.
but the humble in spirit shall enjoy glory, as he elsewhere says. So that it
is not without good cause affirmed, that e coelo descendit Nosce teipsum. i. It
is a special gift from heaven, for a man to know himself. Whence I conclude,
that where Ambition is, there ignorance of God and himself is.

The third Cub of this litter, is a singular opinion of himself: which makes
the ambitious man say to his brethren, in comparison of himself, Stand there,
or sit here under my Iam. 2. 3.
footstool, as James reports. To which height of pride, that proud Prelate
and Antichrist of Rome by his ambition has aspired, making Emperors his
stirrop-holders, and Kings (as did Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 7.) his footstool: of
such S. Jerome says, Isti tantam sibi assumunt authoritatem, vt sieve dextra
docent sieve sinistra, sieve bona, sieve mala, nolint discipulos ratione
discutere: These assume to themselves (says Jerome) so great authority, that
whether they teach truth or falsehood, good or evil, their hearers may not
enquire into it by reason. And of such the Prophet Habakuk speaks, the proud
man is as he that transgresses Hab. 2. 5.
by wine: therefore shall he not endure.

The fourth Whelp of this litter is Fury, as Solomon says, Only by pride does
man make contention, as may Pro. 13. 10
be seen in Nebuchadnezzar, who in his ambitious humor was pleased to have
his image to be set up, and adored, who hearing that Sadrak, Meshak and
Abednego would not feed his proud fancy, and approve of his profane pride,
brake out into fury and rage, saying, What disorder, etc. and when they
utterly refused to adore his image, then was Nebuchadnezzar full of rage, says
Dan. 3. 19
the text. So that the ambitious man is for his fury like a mad man, and
therefore not worthy to be counted a man.

Thus you see the parts of Ambition how deformed they are: Now I will descend
to the third part of my division, to show how foul this sin is; and it is so
soul a sin, as that Timon makes this sin, as the Apostle does
covetousness, to be the root of all evil. S. Basil calls it the Devils
disease, because it first diseased devil and man; for Lucifer and Adams
ambition to be as high as God, made them to be inferior to all other
creatures. Whereupon Syrak says, That it is the original Ecclus. 10. 14.
of sin, and he that has it, shall pour out abomination, and at length be
overthrown. Therefore S. Bernard terms Ambition a subtle evil, a secret
poison, an hidden plague, the mistress of deceit, the mother of hypocrisy, the
father of forgetfulness, the original of vices, the food of faults, the rust
of virtues, the moth of holiness, the blinder of the heart, making diseases
out of remedies, and begetting faintness out of medicines. And to this end S.
Basil alleging Christ's saying of the^ that give, fast, and pray, to be seen
of men, that they have their reward, wills all men to take heed of Ambition,
which is (says he) the sweet spoyler of all spiritual gifts, the delightsome
enemy of our souls, the moth of al virtues, and the most pleasant betrayer of
all happiness. All which we may see most fully verified in Julian the
Apostata, of who^ the penners of the Tripertite History write at large in the
sixth book thereof, showing that Julian at the first being an Emperor of many
good parts, after that the Siren songs of flatterers had blown up his heart
with Ambition, he was so violently carried away with the desire of glory and
honor, that he vaunted that he would match Alexander the Great; yea he was
so besotted with that humor, as that he fained that Alexanders soul was
fleeted into his body; and perceiving the multitude to hate the Christians,
he set himself against them to win popular applause, vaunting that he would
pull down Christ the Galileian from heaven, and so held on till God from heaven
caused a dart to stab him to the heart. So that you may see in Julian the viue
picture of Ambition, and withal a president in him of Gods fierce wrath
against this base sin, bringing him to a most shameful and fearful end and
destruction. Al which being so appare^t, together with the cruelty that the
ambitious practice, not sparing friend, brother, or father, as you have heard,
you perceive the foulnes and ouglinesse of this sin: which being so
manifestly proved, I come to the fourth part of my division, that is, that the
Ambitious Minister cannot be sincere. My reasons to prove this are these three,
viz.

First, every ambitious man is an hypocrite, for he does al to be seen of men:
where hypocrisy is, there can be no sincerenes, as our Savior proves at
large, Matthew. 23. therefore a Minister ambitious, cannot be sincere.

Secondly, continuing in his ambition he is an heretic: for what more
palpable heresy can there be, then to glory in his own gifts and honors?
What have thou that thou 1. Cor. 4.
have not received? says S. Paul: so that for a man to glory in his own
gifts, is to race out the foundation, that every good and perfect gift comes
from God. So to glory in a Iam. 1. 17
man's own merits, is to deny Christ's merits; and to glory in his own wit and
freewill, is to deny the holy Ghost to be his guider; and to seek only his
own praise, is to deny the communion of Saints: which being so, he is an
heretic, and therefore cannot be sincere.

My third reason is, that the ambitious man is a thief, and therefore cannot
be sincere. The ground of this reason is the Maxim of Christ; He that speaks
of himself, oh. 7. 18.
seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the
same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. Whence I thus reason: Every
sincere Minister is bound to seek Gods glory that sent him, and not his own
glory; else he is not true nor sincere, but a thief and a rob-god: but every
ambitious Minister seeks not Gods glory, but his own: therefore he is not
true, but a rob-god, and by a consequent insincere. That every ambitious
Minister seeks not Gods glory but his own, it is manifest from the former
part of Christ's assertion, for he speaks of himself: therefore he seeks
his own glory, therefore not Gods, for these are opposite: and for this cause
our Apostle Paul was willing to be base, that God might be honorable: yea he
had a desire to have his name raced out of the book of life, rather then Gods
glory should be obscured; and for this cause did often hazard his own life
and liberty, to uphold Gods glory: whence I may boldly collect, that for any
Minister to seek in his ministry his own praise and honor, and for the
getting thereof to neglect Gods praise and honor, is to be a thief and
rob-god, and therefore such an one cannot be sincere. Hence then you may see
the force of our Apostles reasons: We have not used in our doctrines
flattering words, nor colored covetousness, nor sought praise of men: and
therefore our doctrines are sincere and sound. If so, then you ought to be
constant followers of those doctrines, which have bin taught with such
sincerenesse.

The use of this doctrine is, to teach all in general (but specially Ministers
of Gods word) to take heed of this sin of Ambition, which is so foul a sin,
as that it makes them that have it sick of the Devils disease, and will in the
end bring them to the Devils distress, to be cast out of heaven and
happiness, without speedy repentance: for it makes them prove hypocrites,
heretics, and sacrilegious the eues against God that sends them: and therefore
God that makes not the wicked innocent, will not, nor cannot Iod. 34. 7.
leave them vnco^demned, without amendment. It was the rule of our Apostle,
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all Cor. 10 31.
to the glory of God. It was our Apostles Absit, God forbid that I should
rejoice, but in the cross of Christ: and therefore our rejoicing should be in
the Lord, and for the Lord, to his praise and glory. And thus shunning our own
honor for the honor of God, God will make greater honor to follow us, as the
shadow follows the body; for his promise is past vnreuocable, those that
honor me, I will honor. When God bid Moses to go on his message to Pharaoh,
Moses being privy Exodus 3.
to his own wants, in humility desired God to send another. But we want not
now store of ambitious Numb. 1
Corahs, that will be ready enough to step up in Moses place, and to sit down
in his chair too, without bidding or sending at all. Christ said to Simon
Peter and his fellows, Matthew. ^
Freely ye have received, freely give: but now ambition makes many a Simon
Magus to give for reward, before he receive of free gift. So that two such
monsters meeting together in ye Church, as Simon speaks of, to wit, pleotexa
and philodoxia, Covetousness and Ambition, they have almost ouerturned all
zeal and religion: for where soever these reign, religion goes to ruin; as
may be seen in that Antichristian darkness of Rome, that for ambitious desire
of reigning, have set all things to sale: they sell Sacraments and prayers, and
Purgatory, and pardons, and Masses, and merits, etc. So that one may marvel,
that they vaunt that they succeed Simon Peter, their deeds pleading so openly
that they succeed Simon Magus. And I wish that amongst us Professors, this
treasonable sin had no treadings; which for the ambitious desire of gain,
and greatness in the Church-sellers, and of honors in the Church-buyers, have
eaten up ^sai. 3. 14.
the Lords vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in their houses: but the
Lord will enter into judgment with them, says Isaiah. Seeing therefore that
this sin is so great and grievous, it stands every man in hand to strive
against it, and in the fear of God to desire his assistance, that we all may
be kept free from this sin so dangerous. The remedies whereof are these:
first, the fear of God: for the eye of the Lord Psalm. 33. 18. 19.
is upon them that fear him, to deliver their souls from death, and to
preserve them in the time of dearth. Therefore David exhorts the Saints to
fear the Lord: His reason is, for nothing wants to them that Psalm. 34. 9. 10
fear him. The lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they which seek the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good. It was Daniels experience of Gods
promise, when he was shut up in the lions den in Babylon, and had now fasted
three days, when God sent Habakkuk to him with his provision, which he had
made for Dan. 14. 37. 38.
his reapers, and cried to him, O Daniel, Daniel, take thy dinner that God has
sent thee: Then said Daniel, O God, thou have thought upon me, and thou never
failest them that seek thee, and love thee. And indeed it is the faithfulness
of Gods promise, I will not fail thee, nor forsake Joshua. 1. 5 Heb. 13. 5
thee; and his most wise providence, that made meat before he made man; he
cannot forsake the work Genesis 1. 2 25. 26.
of his own hand; but he that has given us his son, will with him give us
all things also: he that has prepared a kingdom for his, will not fail to
furnish the^ with things necessary to bring them to that kingdom. Therefore
following the counsel of Saint Peter, Commit ^. Pet. 4. 19.
your selves to him in all distress, in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

The second remedy is godliness, which has the promise of the life 1. Tim. 4.
8.
that now is, and of that which is to come; and therefore godliness is 1. Tim.
6. 6.
great gain, (...), with the use of his sufficiency, says Tremellius: or with
approving of his lot, says Arias Montanus, whereby the holy Ghost would teach,
that the godly man's lot is God himself, and therefore he has a goodly
heritage, sal. 16. 6.
as David says; for how can he want goods, that has God, the author of all
goodness? how can he want treasure, that has the treasure it self?

Thirdly, therefore we should follow the counsel of our Savior Christ, First
seek the kingdom of Mat. 6. 33
God and the righteousness thereof, and then all other things (be it wealth,
or worth, or honor) shall be cast upon us. David (says God) will not famish
the soul of the righteous, and he never saw the righteous forsaken, or their
seed to beg their bread.

Fourthly, God has promised to 1. Sam. 2 30
honor them that honor him, but he rejects the proud, putting Luke 1. 5^
down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble and meek: as Adam
when he would be cheekmate with God, brought both himself and his posterity to
a stale, plunging himself and them into destruction and perdition; but David
that was despised in the sight of 2. Sam. ^ 2^.
Michal, for his humbling himself before God, was by God taken from the ewes
great with young, to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance Psa. 78.
in Israel.

Fifthly, he that is a servant in his fathers house, shall be provided with
things convenient; for God will withhold no good thing from him that leads a
godly life.

Finally, he is a very ambitious rob-God, that is desirous to take that
commendation to himself, that is appropriated only to the Lord; therefore let
all walk humbly before God, and surely in due time they shall be exalted.

To conclude this text, it is notable that the Apostle says here, that he
sought not praise, which is to be understood, that he sought it not in the
first place, or chiefly; else honor follows the honorable, as the shadow the
body, and bones est virtutis praemium, honor is the reward of virtue.
Secondly, he sought not honor by sinister and unlawful means; but by causing
his light to shine before men, he made them by seeing his good works to
glorify God, in so doing, he could not want his own glory too; for God will
honor them that honor 1. him; and the people are commanded 1. Sam. 2. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12., 13.
to know them, that are over them in the Lord, and admonish them, and to have
them in singular love for their works sake. Therefore he does not say, We
received not praise, but, We, sought it not. The duty then of the people is,
to give to every man his due, honor, Romans 13., 7.
to whom ye owe honor, as the same Apostle says. For this cause the younger
are commanded to honor the elder, and the elder that rules well, is worthy of
double honor; and this is both just and profitable. Just, because we must do
good to them that do good to us, else we shall be unthankful, and worse then
sinners, and there is not a more proportionable duite, then to give honor to
whom it is due; therefore it is just to honor our teachers. It is also
profitable, as well to our benefactors, as to our selves and others. To them,
for hereby they are encouraged to do their work with joy, and not with grief:
to themselves, leb. 13. 17.
for else it will be unprofitable for them. To others it is profitable; for by
the just praise given unto benefactors, others are encouraged to take the
greater benefit by them, but cuius persona contemnitur, eius oration despicitur,
whose person is contemned, his speech is despised: there is no such enemy to
profit, as preiudicatenesse; as was seen in the countrymen of Christ
himself, amongst whom he could do no great work because of their unbelief.
Again, when others see virtue to be honored, they are thereby the better
stirred up to the study of the like virtues: so that to give deserved honor
is both just and profitable. Which too much reproves those that in stead of
giving due honor and deserving praise, load the best deserved Ministers with
reproach and disgrace: these should know whose Messengers they wrong and abuse,
even the messengers of the Lord of hosts, who will not suffer such wrongs
unrevenged. Therefore (beloved) let us endeavor on all sides, in the first
place to advance Gods honor; and secondly, to honor, that the teachers
striving to soundness and sincerenesse in their doctrines; and they, together
with the people, to perseverance and constancy in faith, and in manners, both
seeking the praise and honor of God, neither may be deprived of such honor and
praise, as God uses to give unto his Saints and servants.

Now the God of all glory and honor, and the giver of all grace to them that
do him honor, make us all walk by one rule, and to seek that honor that
comes of God, and not of men. To this God only wise, the Trinity in unity,
be given and ascribed in the Congregations, all praise, and honor, and glory,
and Majesty, and might, by us and all, both now and for ever, Amen.

(...) Soli deo gloria.
FINIS.

