A RECEYT TO STAY THE PLAGVE. Delivered in a Sermon by R. W. Minister of Gods
word.

LONDON. Printed by I. N. and are to be sold by Robert Rird, at his shop in
Cheap Side, at the sign of the Bible. 1630.

To the Reader.
REader (whether Citizen or Cuntry-man) the Title of this sermon, (A Receipt to
stay the Plague,) may aquaint you with the scope of the Author. A subject as I
conceive fit for this time wherein the hand of God is more especially upon us,
threatening death and desolation by this disease of the Plague. And as in all
diseases so in this, the cause being taken away, the Effect cease. To work
this Cure, the Author has taken the same method, as in the view of this his
insuewing labor will appear, The approbation of it when it was preached by a
Religious and Learned Minister, an entire friend of mine on the like occasion
that it is now printed, Concurring with the coueniency of it at this time and
the Christian like desire, that I a poor fellow Minister suruiuing him have to
do good, has Imboldned me to further the publishing of it, conceiving that
the general mortality both in City and Country will require pardon of this my
boldness referring the issue to God, and heartily desiring our mutual prayers
for a good success of this Receipt.

By an unworthy Minister of the Gospel. T. R.

A RECEIPT TO STAY THE PLAGVE.
NVME. 16. part of verse. 46. Go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an
atonement for them, for there is Wrath gone out from the Lord; the Plague is
begun.


IT ought to be the care of a faithful Steward over the Household of GOD,
that they have their meat given them, not only (...) in their just proportion
and measure, but (...) in their due time and season, Luck. 12.42. which was
Saint Paul's rule to Timothy, that the food ministered to the people of God,
should be both seasoned and sesonable, a point not only of Good learning, but
of good discretion, to have a word in time for him that is weary, Esa. 50.4.
Which practice in the Minister of God, is the true following of the Apostles
counsel, Apply your selves to the time, Romans 12.11. Not that they should be
men-pleasers, or time-seruers, but to apply themselves to the time, in the
occurrents and occasions thereof. In due consideration whereof, being by Gods
blessings enabled again to speak unto you, there could not be a fitter
Scripture for you to hear, or me to discourse of, then this that I have read.
The calamity of the times, the measure of our sins, the wrath of God, the
severity of his punnishment, all calling upon us, to go quickly to the
congregation and make an atonement, etc.

There are two maine sins in the former part of this Chapter that provoked
the wrath of the Lord against his people: the first was an open rebellion of
the faction of Corah, and his confederates in the 1.2.3. verses, etc. the
second, a general murmer of all the Congregation against Moses and Aron, Gods
Magistrate and Gods Minister, ver. 41. The former was punnished by an example
of Justice without an example; they and all theirs went quick into the grave,
verse. 33. The latter came unto such a provocation, by their adding sin unto
sin, that the Lord threatened to consume the whole Congregation in a moment
with a fearful plague, verse 45. To prevent which, and by some means to
abate at least the edge of Gods fury, Moses gives this sudden, but safest
advice to Aaron, to take a Censer, and to put fire therein from the Altar, and
to put on Incence, and then to get him quickly to the congregation, and to make
an atonement, etc. So that, the text you have heard, is a remedy, or a
medicine for a fearful malady; Physic for the Plague. Which first, must
be taken with all speed that may be; for the disease is desperate, and
therefore Sine mora, Go quickly. Secondly, the place where, is in the
Congregation. Thirdly, the Medicine it self, is a precious Ointment, and
Plaster of Atonement. Fourthly, a principal Actor in ministering the
physic, is the Priest. Fifthly the motive wherefore, to appease the wrath of
the Lord, gone our against the people. Lastly, the means whereby that wrath was
executed, the Plague was begun.

The whole then being an advise of Moses the Magistrate to Aaron the Priest. It
appears even in the very entrance of this Scripture, that contrary to the
principles and positions of Iesuitisme, Magistrates have power to give Order
for the Worship and Service of God; and that the Prince of the people is Custos
vtriusque Tabulae, Deu. 17.18 The Book of the Law shall remain with the King.
So that the King has power not only to command in Civil Affairs, but in
matters concerning Divine Religion; So did David, so did Solomon, so did
Ezechias, so did Josias, and so did the King of Niniue in a case of Gods wrath
pronounced against the City, Proclaim a Fast. Joel. 3.7. So did the Christian
Emperors in former time. So did Moses here, as a chief Magistrate, give
order for a public work of Religion to be done in the public Congregation.
Again on the other side, howsoever we learn, this is a work fitting to be
done in cases of extremity; yet in that Aaron does it not, but by order first
prescribed by Moses, it crosses the presumption of their zeal, and the
affectation of singularity in any private man, or any particular Congregation,
that shall run before a State, and prevent them in their actions, that may
concern the common calamity of a Country, or a City, for which God is to be
pacified, and the Land purged in general, when as the Governors in their
places are far more wiser then any private man, to know the danger, and
without doubt, may be presumed to be as zealous in the fittest time to apply
the remedy. Therefore, whatsoever every private man is bound to do betwixt
himself and his own soul, betwixt himself and his own Family, (as bound he
is) by his prayers and his penitence to auert the wrath of God already gone out
against the sins of a Nation: yet I find no vvarrant for any to take upon
them to gather any Congregation, to sanctify a public Fast or to call unto
mourning, before the Magistrate has given order for it. But that once done,
we find here, and that in express terms, that it must be done quickly;
Go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them. Agree with
thine adversary quickly, Mat. 5.26. while thou art in the way, before thou come
unto the Judge. If God once be an adversary, agree quickly. It is so with men,
much more ought it to be so with God; give all diligence to be reconciled
unto God. Mora trahit periculum, delay breeds danger; he that is not fit to
day, will be less fit to morrow, and no man knows what to morrow day shall
be, if it be not done before the hand strike us to death. It is not then a
temporal, but an eternal plague: for hereafter there is no hope of help.
Delay is one of the Devils most dangerous assaults, whereby he gets too much
advantage of the souls of men, while they dally with Gods judgments: and
therefore Hodie, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts:
yet a little while is the day with you, the night comes when no man
works. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near, Esa. 55.6. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2.
Cor. 6.1. The time is now ours, we have right in it, that which is to come, is
the Lords, to judge the mis-spending of this, Revel. 10.6. The Angel swears
by him that lives for evermore, that time shall be no more; that is, after
this time, no more time for repentance, no more time for atonement: therefore
do that you ought to do for your own good quickly.

This day, this hour, this time, Now there is room, there will be none
hereafter. It will be too late to knock with the silly Virgins, when the
door is shut, Go quickly. They have a rule in saving policy for avoiding of
the Plague, and it consists in three words, Cito, Long, Tarde: Go quickly,
Go far enough, Make no haste to return. I would we would be persuaded to
use them not in saving Policy, but in saving Piety.

And first to begin with Cito, for that I find in the Text a rule prescribed by
the Holy Ghost, to fly unto God quickly, not from him: for alas whither shall
a man fly from him; the wings of the morning are too slow, the bottom of the
depth is too shallow; the fathermost part of the earth is too near to keep us
from him.

Secondly, Long, for that employed in the atonement, not far from his
Justice, seeing it is to swift for us, and will soon overtake us wheresoever;
but far from our sins, that have called out his Justice, that by our
repentance and amendment we may stay the course of it.

Lastly, Tarde; that is not to return in have to our sins again; for sins
returned unto, provoke a worse judgment: Sin no more, least a worse thing
come unto thee, was the after diet that he gave unto the sick man, Ioh. 5.14.
The tree that is twice dead, is near unto cursing: No Leper in Scripture is
twice cleansed; no Prodigal is twice received; no lost Sheep is twice brought
home; no dead man is twice raised, no Devil is twice cast out. The relaps of
sickness is dangerous, but the relaps of sin is more dangerous: Go quickly
to God, go far from sin, make no have to sin again.

Go quickly to the Congregation. That Is the next circumstance, the place
where: for albeit every man should endeavor in his secret closet to reconcile
himself unto God, and to commune with his own heart, even in his Bedchamber,
as the Psalmist advises, Psalm. 4.4. yet where all men are sinners, and the
hand of Gods wrath seems to be stretched out in general, without respect of
persons, age or degree: All men are bound to one and the same work, that with
one consent, and one act the Lord might be entreated by the whole
Congregation. For howsoever the Lord is well pleased with every particular man's
service in prauate; yet that which he shall do in public, is de meliore
bono, and much more acceptable. There was a Law made for it, Deuteronomy. 12,5. In
that place which the Lord your God shall choose amongst all the Tribes, to set
his Name in in that his habitation you shall seek unto him. Neither was this a
Law Iudicicall, or Ceremonial, that bound the Jew only for a time; but
moral and perpetual, that binds the Christian for ever: nor was it a Law for
the Jewish Synagogue only, wherein they taught and offered up their Incense,
Sacrifice, and Oblations on the Sabbath days, but for the Temple under the
profession of the Gospel also; that as God is to be praised in the great
Congregation so he was to be pacified in the great Congregation. Therefore as
the Prophet said well, I will praise thee, O Lord, in the great congregation,
in much people will I give thanks unto thee, Psalm. 35.18. So Moses did here
advise as well, that what Aaron did herein, he should do it in the
Congregation.

In the banishment of the Isaraelites by the waters of Babylon, where they sat
and wept, Jerusalem was vowed to be their chiefest joy; not for any other
thing, but that there they might worship the Lord in his holy Temple, and in
the Congregation of his Servants. And when Christ gave the promise to two or
three, it is evident, that he intended not private meetings, so much as
public Congregations in the Church, as appears by the connection of the
Text; Et ero vobiscum vsque ad confirmationem saeculi, Mat. 28.20. Is a promise
to the Assembly in the Church, where with one mind, and one mouth, God may be
served and glorified, Romans 15.6. which was the Apostles exhortation, Ephe.
3.21. That praises might be given in the Church through Jesus Christ unto all
generations for ever. So that the fitness of place has here in Moses
direction a good correspondence with the fitness of time, as most acceptable
to God, and most apt for men to make their atonement in. And therein we fall
upon the third Branch, the Medicine for the malady, Go quickly unto the
Congregation, and make an atonement for them, etc.

The whole need not the Phisician, says Christ but the sick. These people
were sick, and sick unto death; the way to cure them, was to make an
atonement for them; the manner how it was to be done, was by offering up
Incense; which albeit, it were a ceremonial action, yet was it always
joined with a religious act of devotion in prayer and penitence. To which
purpose the Prophet prays, Let my prayer be set before thee as incense, Psalm.
145.2. And indeed it is a most apt resemblance: for as the use of Insense was
to sweeten that which was unsavory; even so the wicked thoughts of our
hearts, and the unclean actions of our lives, which yield an unsavory smell in
the nosthrils of the Lord are sweetened by no other means, but by the Incense
of our prayers: therefore to show how the one is resembled by the other, it is
said, that while the Incense was in burning, the people were without at their
prayers, Luke, 1.10. And in Revel. 8.3. the sweet odours that were offered in
the golden Censers, were offered with the Prayers of the Saints.

So that the first Ingredience for the Atonement, was prayer; but not prayer
alone: For as Mary Magdalene came not to Christ with the Box of precious
Ointment and sweet perfume only; but she brought withal a sorrowful heart,
and penitent tears for the sin of her Soul. So to the action of prayer must
be joined the work of penitence: for such was the practice of Gods people
ever. 1. Sam. 7.3. The Ark of the Lord being taken by the Phylistines, the
Prophets exhorts them to repent, and turn unto God, and he would deliver
them; and the event proved the promise to be true. Which example, albeit it
concern a case of war, and so not improper for our times, yet the practice
may serve as well for this of sickness.

The same Order did Daniel observe, in the Atonement that he made with GOD,
Dan. 9.5.6. Together with their prayers, there is the acknowledgment of their
sins; We have finned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly;
yea, rebelled, and departed from thy precepts, and thy judgments. And then he
shows wherein: For we would not obey thy seruauts the Prophets, which spoke
in thy name, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the
people of the Land. Wherein he confesses that every one had sinned, accusing
all, excepting none, a Congregation of sinners, and of sin, and therefore all
had need of atonement in the Congregation; albeit, no doubt of it, but some
had offended more grievously then other some: yet all were guilty. So the
Prophet Joel calls all the Inhabitants of the Land into the House of the
Lord, to offer up their prayers and their Penitence, Joel. 1.14. Without which
no marvel it is, that there can be no atonement, but that God does still
keep man under with his heavy hand, Iam. 4.2. In another calamity, he says,
You fight, and you war, and you get nothing; What Is the reason? Because you
ask not, that's primus error, the first defect. Again, you ask, and you
receive not, why so? because you ask amiss, that's the next defect; there
wants somewhat to their prayers, to make up their attouement. The Prophet
Ezechiel in his fourth Chapter, speaks plainly to the point, That even the
prayers of the most godly are not aproued of God unless they for whom they
pray do repent. Although Noah, Daniell, and Job, these three men stood up, yet
shall they only save their own souls in their righteousness. So says God
Iere. 15. If Moses and Samuel were before me, I would not yet regard this
people. So that for the Act of atonement, albeit the prayers of the faithful
are powerful, yet are they not so powerful as to relieve impenitent sinners;
therefore did God, Iere. 7. borbid the prophet expressly not to pray for the
Israelites: Pray not for this people, neither lift thou up thy voice for them.
So God rejected the prayers of Samuel for Saul. Upon which follows this
conclusion; That if the penitence of the people be not joined with the prayers
of the Priest, the atonement will not be made, and so we must consider of the
person of the Priest, and no otherwise. Which is the fourth circumstance
observed, that although (...) principal Agent to offer up the Incense of
prayer for the people; yet not he only for them, but they with him, and for
themselves, must desire the Lord not to correct in his wrath according to their
sins, but to remember them according to his own goodness True it is, that
the Commission is delivered here to Aron, but the Congregation were to join
with him in the execution. The Minister of God is a principal man singled and
set a part for the execution of the will of God, the declaration of his word;
the direction of obedience, and all religious actions. But all the burden of
Gods service does not lie upon him; and therefore the wisdom of our Church did
well ordain that in the service of God, the Minister should not perform all;
But that the people should join in the open confession of their sins, and in
the prayers for remission, or at the least, say Amen to every sacrifice of
Prayer, and of praise performed in the Congregation; and yet though they were
tied to this, still the chief care and duty lies upon the Minister, nor must
he be defective, whatsoever the people be; but say as good Samuel said, 1.
Sam. 12. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
for yon. And so much in one word may suffice for the atonement, and the
person. Now follows the reason; For there is wrath gone out from the Lord the
Plague is begun.

In such a case as this was, the first and principal thing that is to be
sought out, is to enquire into the Cause that brings it on. The cause in this
chapter as you have partly heard, was an injury offered unto the Priesthood,
and the presumption of Corah in vilifying both Moses and Aron. I take no
pleasure in applying the sin by way of comparison: I only pray that the
Sacrilege of this City be not the principal sin laid to their charge in
this Plague: We have heard enough, if any thing he enough. God give
understanding hearts to apply, and to lay the finger upon the right soar. For
too sure we are the wrath of the Lord is gone out. The Judgments of God for
sin, and against sinners, as they are many in number, and diverse in kind,
sometimes secret, sometimes open, so they are ever just and upon good cause.
Oculta multa, iniusta nulla, says Saint Augustine, Yet many, to too many are
to seek for the true cause as well as for the consideration of the person from
whom Judgment comes, making rather every thing then their own sins; and
every cause in the course of nature, then the God of Nature, and the cause of
all causes the Author of their punishment: Whereof it comes to pass, that men
think all judgments to be ordinary, and none extraordinary, or to be the rodd
of Gods Vengeance wherewith he punishes sinners, and so never apply the
punishment either to themselves, or their sin or once cast up an eye to the
Lord that punnisheth: Where as indeed two things are principally to be
considered in any Epidemicall disease or public misery.

First, the cause wherefore, and then the hand that smites. Wherein the
judgment of the World that looks all to second causes rather then the first,
and principal, is so fowly corrupted, that men know not well, either where to
ask counsel, or how to behave themselves being surprised with any danger;
taking still the wrong cause for the right, and the second for the first.
Whereas the true cause is the corruption of manners that corrupts our bodies,
and rottenness in sin that brings rottenness in the flesh. But as the
Physician for the body hitting upon the right cause of the disease, does with
better judgment and happier success, cure his Patient. So we, when we shall
find the true cause of Gods wrath, shall the better know what to do in that
affliction, and how to avoid it; Wherein the first thing to be done is to look
into the Motive that called out wrath, and then unto the hand that does execute
it. For the first, that sin is the maine cause of Gods displeasure, it needs
no farther search then the guilt of our own consciences; and the iniquity of
the times beyond measure sinful: So that the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against the ungodliness, and vnrighteonsnes of men, Romans 1.18 Its not
this or that Conjunction of the Planets, or the sundry Ecclipses of the Sun
and the Moon that wisards fondly immagine; but the Lord of heaven and of
heavenly creatures, of the earth and all that therein is, that so draws the
sword of his wrath, that the very air, and breath of our life shall be our
poison for the sin of the Soul; and where he is not prevented, and that
quickly with an earnest inuocatiou of his name, and unfeigned repentance of our
sinful lives, The very dreggs of his wrath will be powered out, because men
are settled in the lees and dreggs of their sins. Let not men then look to
the right hand or the left, and like the corrupted sons of Adam, conceal
their own faults and lay them upon others, but let them turn their eyes
inward, and look into the blots and stains of their own uncleanness;
Search and try their own hearts, and they shall soon find the cause of the
breach between God and Man.

The sin certain of the first man, was the first breath; and ever since as
sin has increased and a bounded, so has God and man been separated and
divided. And howsoever in the abundance of his merecy he has such a regard of
sinful man, that he is reconciled in the atonement made in his only Son,
and man's alone Savior: yet such is the condition of his Justice, that as his
mercy wants not abundant clemency; so the same wants not due severity: Nor can
he endure the thing that is evil; nor can his eyes that are pure eyes, behold
any thing that is unclean in it self, or by the blood of the uncleansed, but
still he pnnnisheth with justice the sins of the wicked. And though there be
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Rom, 8.1. Yet there is
correction due to such as live after the flesh, and not after the spirit: And
though the blood of Christ were an Atonement sufficient for all our sins,
and by his death he appeaseth his Fathers wrath, and paid the prise of our
Redemption: yet that blood of his left no liberty to build our sins upon his
death; for that is sucking of the blood of CHRIST to fast, and turning the
grace of God into wantonness. For though God was reconciled unto man by his
Son, yet that reconciliation never reached so far, as to make a peace
between God and sin. True it is, that great sins are forgiven in the
Atonement made between God and his Son in the penitent: yet does he
punnish even small sins, still in the sons of men that are impenitent; and
albeit his mercy does always fly and cry about his Throane, yet it does not
so cry, as that he can hear no other cry against us. For the cry of our sins
will go up as here it did, and never fease crying in his ear for Justice till
they awake him, as it were out of the sleep of his long suffering and
patience, Abels blood will cry against Carne, Genesis 4.10. David's sin of
Adultery and Murder will call for Iustire, 2. Sam. 12. Gehesies corruption will
draw on a Leprofie, 2. Kings. 5. And the very Stone will cry out of the wall of
Oppression, Hab. 2.11. So that howsoever for our comfort, he has an ear of
mercy for crying sinners: yet to restrain our corruption and to keep us in
awe that we sin not, he has also an ear of Justice for crying sins; and no
evil does at any time befall vson't, it is the punnishment of some sin; and
whereas God does many times forbear many, and like Ionathans Bow shoots short
of us, or on the right hand, or the left, or beyond us: yet that forbearance is
no acquittance, but makes his punnishment more grievous when it comes. For as
it is impossible but the all-seeing eye of God should see the sins of the
Sons of men: so it is impossible that seeing in the end he should not
punnish, and though it be certain sure that non nisi coactus percutit, he
never strickes but when he is urged, and then Castigat nolenter, as Gregory
Nazianzene says. Yet when he is urged, and our sins force him thereunto, he
will punnish with a witness, where men then have made a covenant with Death
and a league with Hell, its high time to make an Atonement with God, for if he
once begin, without that he will surely make an end: And if his wrath be
kindled, yea but a little, Blessed are all they that put there trust in him,
Psalm. 2.12. But if a great deal, then woe be to all those that provoked him.
His judgments are not terriculamenta nutricum, Collusions of Nurses to keep
children in awe; but confusions of men abounding in sin. If the wrath of God
fasten upon us but in this world we shall find it like the Brand in Caines
face, that cannot be rnbd out; like a botch or a blaine, that all the Balm in
Gilead cannot cure: for its a fearful thing to fall into the bands of the
angry God, and if his wrath be once gone out, its time to make have. For the
word of his wrath in the course of the Scriptures is never used but in the full
measure of iniquity, and the full measure of his Justice; For till the sins
of Israel came unto provocation, and hardening of hearts; he never swear in his
wrath, that they should not enter into his rest, Psalm. 59. and the last verse.
Its the execution of Justice in the highest degree, which God himself
testifies, Deuteronomy. 32.21. They have provoked me to anger with their vanities,
but I will move them: For fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn unto the
bottom of Hell, and shall consume the Earth with her increase: I will send
plagues and bestow my arrows upon them, they shall be consumed with a bitter
destruction. In a word, the terror of Gods wrath is so terrible as no man can
express it, for who knows the power of his wrath, Psalm. 90.11. Whereby we
see how great a danger it is for men, when his wrath is gone out against them,
I say, when it is gone out: For though it be wrath, and the wrath of the Lord,
yet so long as it is suspended by the Omnipotency of his power, or the
abundant grace of his mercy ouerruling his Justice, and so concealed from us,
or at the least, not gone out against us, the fear and the danger is the
less: But if it be gone out, then its more then time to look about. For if
the pillars of heaven, as Job says, tremble and quake at his reproof, Job.
26.11. What shall Sinners on earth do? Its a great mercy of God that their is
a suspention of his Justice, for it is his mercy that we are not all consumed:
But if that mercy be abused, then the wrath of the Lord is no longer
restrained, but even from heaven it self, from whence comes the influence of
all good blessings to the sons of men, even from thence shall his wrath be
sent forth: and when men poison the Air with sin, then God will poison men
with the Air: and the very breath of one man shall be the baine, infection,
and death of another: which is not only the going out of his wrath, but the
execution thereof, the last circumstance in the Text.

The Plague is begun, and therein we shall do well to enter into
consideration, not so much of the nature of the Punnishment, as of the second
thing to be thought of in the Judgments of God, which is the hand that
smites. Wherein howsoever natural men seek out natural causes, as I have
said; yet he that savors of any Religion, cannot but say, Digitur Dei est,
this is the hand of God, himself so witnessing of himself, Esaias. 45 7. I am
he even I, which make peace, and create evil Malum paene, he means, the
evil of punnishment, natural causes, being no causes, but only means which
God uses to chastise the sins of men, he being the principal and the
efficient of all judgments. The Scripture is both plentiful and plain,
showing in direct words; That as all punnishment comes from God, so this of the
plague especially, and therefore the Prophet prayed, Psalm. 39.11. Take away
thy Plague from me; for I am even consumed by means of thy heavy hand. And
King David acknowledges in his choice that the punnishment of the Pestilence
comes from the immediate hand of God: So the Scripture calls it, Exodus 9.3.
The Sword of the Lord, 2. Chron. 21. And the Arrows of his vengeance, Psalm.
91.5. Fulmen coeleste, the Thunderbolts of heaven, and Bellum Dei contra
homines, as some do call it no ordinary judgment: The reason, because the
sins that call for it are no ordinary sins. For as the sin here was no
ordinary sin; So if the sins of our age though they be too common, are no
common sins, but equal, if not transcend that of Corah, and his
confederates, of which at large in the former part of this Chapter. Who can
think that a common death is a sufficient punnishment, and not rather look
that the earth should open her mouth and swallow up the offenders alive; and
they go down quick into the pit, as in the 30. verse. This Generation of
ours, being too obdurate, and hard hearted to be moved with ordinary judgments.
Whereupon the Lord is forced extraordinarily to punnish, and as it were
immediately by his own hands. For it is he that does cast into the bed of
sickness. Reucl. 3.12. Job the exact pattern of patience, and mirror of
Affliction, looked farther and unto higher matter, then Wind, and air, storm
and tempest, the Sabeans, or Satan himself; and said, Dominus dedit, Dominus
abstulit. So that we must learn not like beasts, to look after the Stone but
after the right arm that threw it, and not so much to seek to fly the
persons and the places infected, as their own sins which such an infection
follows.

For when men have done what they can do, either to prevent it before it come,
or to cure it when its come; and the careful provision of the Magistrate is
approved good, and every several man's care not without good cause: yet its
the Lord that must bless the means of our safeguard: and that he may bless,
let men say what they will, there is no such Physic as Prayer and Penitence,
thereby to make an Atonement between God and our sins. For as God will be
known in his Justice, so he will be known in his Mercy; and he will hear
them that call upon him faithfully. For it is the grace of his mercy, and the
mercy of his grace, that far exceeds all the grace of Herbs and Drugges,
all the virtue of Simples and Compounds in the World, for the cure of those
Soars that Sin does make. To the obtaining whereof, Let us quickly, every
man for himself, and all, one for another fly unto the Lord of mercy, by the
fervent Devotion of our prayers; Let us desire the Lord to turn our hearts
unto him, that he may turn his Plague from us; That unto our Prayers we may
join our Penitence, and with our Penitence, the amendment of our lives, that
we may thereby enter into a serious Meditation of our own sins, that have
provoked his Wrath; and of his wrath that does punnish our sins;
acknowleging, and that feelingly, that the things that we suffer, are most
justly due to the sins that we have committed: seeing he that suffers most,
cannot suffer so much as he does deserve.

In one word, let us desire the Lord of all mercy, to be merciful unto us, and
to give us grace to stay the course of our sinning, that he may withal stay
the hand of his punnishing. That albeit he have begun, yet that he would go
no farther, but say it is enough. That among all the blessing and favors
bestowed upon this Church, upon our most Noble King, upon his right worthy
Counselors, the whole State and his people, he suffer not the measure of his
Justice, to exceed the measure of his mercy, least we be consumed in his
wrath, and brought to nothing in his heavy displeasure. Spare us good Lord,
spare us we beseech thee, For the grave cannot confess thee, the dead cannot
praise thee, but the living, yea the living shall glorify thy name in the
multitude of thy mercies: as we do this day, yealding unto thy glorious
Majesty, all power, praise, glory, and thanksgiving, the rest of this day and
for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

