THE DISPOSITION OR GARNISHMENTE OF THE SOVLE To receive worthily the blessed
Sacrament, denyded into Three discourses,

1 Preparation. 2 Presentation before Christ. 3 Enterteinment.
Qui timent Dominum pra^arabunt ^^orda sua: and in conspectu (...)
sanctificabunt animas suas.

Those that fear God, will prepare their hearts: and in his sight, sanctify
their souls

Eccl. 2. Imprinted by Ioachim Trognesius. 1596.

Cumque plena fuissent vasa, dixit ad filium suum, affer mihi adhuc vas: et
ille respondit, non habeo, stetitque cleum.

And when the vessels wear full, she said to her son, bring me yet a vessel,
and he answered, I have none, and then the oil seized.

4 Reg. 4. Substantia enim tua, dulcedine^ qnam in filios habes ostendebat, and
deseruient vniuscuiusque voluntati, ad quod quisque volebat conuertebatur.

Thy substance did show the swetne^ thou had toward thy children, and
serving ichones will, it was converted to what every one desired.

Sap. 16. To the virtuous and zealous Matrone Mistress S. H. and her Religious
and fernent Son M. R. H. perfect devotion in this life to the Eucharist, and
full possession thereof in the life to come.
IN the depth of winter, when light ^^^keth, heat faylethe, Rivers are
congealed, a hoarie froste covers the face of the earth; then the vital
spring, vent forth of their hidden vainis, more ^bundance of water, a warmer
liquor more fervent streams, a better digested' substance. In like sort (my
dear friends, whom I love most effectually, because I know that you love God
effectually) it fares with you while the light of true Faith and Religion, is
banished out o^f England, the heat of Ch^ritie exiled, the fluds of alms
and bosp^^alitie (which in former ages ran a ^^ine) are frosen with
imp^tatiue Justice, and a solifidian error: while all the churches are hoary
white without Image, Taper, Alter, priest, sacrifyce, piety or devotion: your
faith shyneth more bright, your hope appears more firm, you^ charity
castethe a greater flame, your bowels of mercy issue forth fuller streams of
liberality and christian commiseration. When others lie either wallowingin
wickedness, or buried in sleep, or drowned in sensuality, many hours before
the son shewethe his beams above our horison: your prayers, your sighs,
your tears, appear before the face of God. They spread their rays in the
Land of the everlasting, as acceptable to god, as delightful to Angels.
Your prayers ended in voice and external show but not in heart and internal
devotion, immediately follows some other godly exercise of piety and
Religion: After some charitable work of mercy and compassion, consequently to
this some good conference or study of spiritual books, so that from morninge
till night, you seem to me to do nothing else, but weaue such a spiritual
Cortayne, as covered the tanacle, more various for virtues, then That was with
silks: Or like those ^haynes of goulde the Spowse of Christewar^ besett with
studs of silver. Murenulas auteas faciemus tibi, vermiculatas argento. We will
make thee bracelets of goulde, studded with silver. Cant. 1. But above all
your singular virtues, none stroke so deep a maze into me, as your feruoure
and devotion in receiving the blessed Sacrament. I know part, but he only
knowethe all, whom there you participate, What hazard you put your selves into,
to come by it, with what I^bily of heart you communicate, and what notable
effects thereupon enssue. Therefore to you I present these my simple Meditations
the which I am assured you practyse better, then I can pen them. Therefore
accept them as a form rather of that you do, then of what you should do. And
in recompense of my pains, I will crave nothing else. but one effectual sighe
to my sweet Savior when you communicate, and enjoy the heat of your
devotion, for that I^ weigh above all treasures. From my cell in the Charter
house at Maclin.

Youres in Christ. T. N.

To the Reader.
In the first ingresse of this discourse before I descended to any particular
Treatise, I preconceiued, that these my sclender Meditations, should come to
the view and censure of three sorts of persons; Catholics, protestants, and
demi-catholickes, or catholique-like protestants; or external protestants,
and internal catholics: some call them Churche-papistes, others Scis
matiques, whose minds I thought good to prepare in particular before I went
any further.

To the Catholic Reader.
AFter I had finished my Former Book, of the possibility and conuenience of
the Real presence of our blessed Savior in the Eucharist, my especial
friend (who^ for love I love, and for virtue I reverence) who was the cause of
penning thereof, insisted vehemently with me, to proceed to an other work, by
declaringe the worthy disposition wherewith they ought to come who attend to
reap the manifould fruits and treasures of this Sacrifice and Sacrament. His
request for many respects, I could not nor would not resist, not only for the
reasons he brought, because the other served for speculation, this for
practtise: the other for deeper Judgments, this for meaner capacities, the
other tended to inform the under standinge, this to move affections: but also
in regard of my own proper exercise and devotion to the blessed Sacrament:
that while I endeavored to teach others, I might instruct my self, and like the
water man, who by moving his boat forward, makethe his own iournay: so I by
stirring others to seruour, might enjoy some heat thereof my self. Yet I
never minded, to let the^ come to sight of the world but only to some
particular friends, till he assured me of the great good he expected thereof to
many souls most precious in gods sight, whose authority I permitted to weigh
down mine own Judgment, and prevail against mine own reason, thinkinge that
as god did refresh and revive Sampson by Iudic. 15
sending forth a spring of clear water from an assesiawe, as he made a crow
the cater and cook of Elias, as with 3. Reg. 17.
the rural meats and rustic cates provided for Abacuckes reapers, he fed his
dear Prophet Daniell, and as very Da. 14.
often with unfit instruments, he wrought wondrous effects: so perhaps he
might do by me, whom as unworthy, he admitted to break the substance of his
Sacrament to his children, so he would direct to show them the manner of
eating, to whose honor and glory, I referr them both.

I am also to aduertyse thee, how these meditations, pass in prolixity mine
accustomed manner of writing, yet because I Judged, they would not only help
a man to receive devoutly, but also further him in many other spiritual
exercyses: I was contented to follow my friends advise, who demed the treatise
better, when the discourse was fuller.

Some I know would desire an other part hereunto ad^oyned, as an
accomplishment of the whole, that is a Discourse of the frequent use of this
Sacrament; but I thought it superfluous, because he that read the these 2
books, and weighs as he ought the inestimable and superexcellente riches
communicated to them that devoutly communicate, and besides his own frailty,
the temptations of the devil, the evil examples and occasions of the world,
if he may frequent this Sacrament often and will not, I hold him either very
unwise, or very vicious: For who is he that feelethe him self wounded to the
heart, and will not seek ^ physician, at whose hands he were sure to receive
a present remedy? Were it not a folly to persuade this man with many reasons
to look for such a physician to procure such a meditine, 4. Reg. 5.
when Naaman Syrus came so far a iournay with uncertainty to be cured of his
leprosy? Were it not madness to persuade a man that were not mad, feelinge
him self starve for hunger, to eat meat set before him? Were is not
doultishnes to exhort a prisoner cheaned and fettered, to accept his liberty?
Were it not a want of sense, to persuade the blind to desire to see, the deaf
to hear, the ignorante to be wise, if they might come by those gifts of
nature so easelie as we may by like gifts of grace communicatinge as we
ought, with due preparation and denotion?

He therefore that will peruse the second treatise, if, as he reads, he weigh
the matter maturely, pondering it with the balance of catholic iudgmente, he
shall not need much more to induce him, to eat of this food, as necessary
for the soul, as meat for the body.

Lastly when I cyre my book of the possibility and conueniency of the real
presence, for brevity sake I call it the book of causes of the institution,
for that the most part thereof is Spente, in declariuge 42. causes of the
institution. Moreover for that mine intention in settinge forth this discourse,
was to help good catholics to communicate devoutly and religiously, therefore
lest the length of the book should terrifye them and bring a loathsomnes (as
though every time they communicate, it wear necessary to transcourse the whole
tretise) I have at the end drawn a table where in one prospect, who haith red
it once over, may call to Memory those heads and points that are requisite. I
have also in two words, Fear, and Faith, comprehended almost, the
substance of the first and last treatise. The second is reduced to diverse
Chapters, every one ser^ing for a particular receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, so that perceiuinge what the words represent and reading one
Chapter, a man may sufficiently though not condingly, prepare him self to the
Bl. Saccrament.

TO the protestant reader, wherein is declared how we have free willto do good
works.
MANY erroures I find in the forged

After one is justified, they have by good works: as that all o^re justice,
virtues, and operations, done either by the good inclination of nature, or
help of godds favor and grace, are sins, a steaned clothe, abominable in
Godds sight, deserve death and hell.

That we are not able (sustyned Plerophoria, that is a certain internal and
full persuasion, that god haithe accepted him into the number of his elect, and
that as assuredly he shall never desce^d to hell as Lucifer shall never ascend to
heaven. What folowethe of this? Edamus, bibamus, 1 Cor. 15. Is. 22.
eras morieu^ur. Let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall dye. Let us enjoy
All pleasures and voluptuousnes in earth, because we can not loose life
everlasting, and so we shall be pertakers of Paradyse in this world, and in the
world to come. But the protestant presently will reply, that such a man had
never faith, because faith necessarily brings with it good works. Ah poor
wretches, then a protestant can not make such a resolution what hi^dreth him?
Haith he not liberty to sin, although he lack liberty to do well? Do we not
see daily those that boasted sometimes of this security, to chang their religion
and become catholics or puritans? This answer declares well what the
protestants defend, but takes not away the argument, as if a man should say,
David in killing Vrias had no charity. 2 Reg. 11.
It is true, but this yeldethe not the cause why he had no Charity according
to the protestants religion, no more then he that sees a tree withered,
rendereth a reason why the tree lacks life, by saying it lacks leaves,
because this is an effect: the reason is lack of nourishment, or some fault in
the root. Now these men will swear unto death that they see their faith as
well as the best protestants in the world, which is, as they say, the life of
all good woorks, and therefore they will lowse their senses to all lusts and
ryotousnes.

Besides all protestants by this means, should be confirmed in grace, not only
not to sin finally, but also at any time for the like reason we may and must
give of the one, as the other. Yet I hope they will not deny but S. Paul,
Mary Magdaleyn, S. Peter, David, and diverse others, as good protestants as
they, sinned, and that most heanously for all their Plerophoria. For I would
learn of them whether David, or S. Peter, by sinning, lost their faith or not?
For that they lost their Charity, the Scripture proves most plainly Qui non
diligit, 1. Io. 3.
manet in morte. He that love the not, remaneth in death, but David in killinge
Vrias, loved him not, David therefore remained in death. The death of the soul
is want of charity, David was dead in soul, David therefore wanted charity,
but according to the protestants ignorant divinity, he that h^ith faith, can
no want charity David had faith, therefore he could not want Charity. The Mayor
is a-lowed of all protestants, because charity is the fiute of faith: The minor
they also grant, for he that once had faith, can never loose it, David had
faith before, therefore by sinninge, he lost it not. This point I have declared
more largely, because I take it that thousands of our country men are gone
to the devil grounded upon this heretical foundation. And I hard of men of
good credit, that there was a puritan of late that killed him self not far
from London and left written upon a table, that no man should conceive ill of
his death, because he knew him self one of gods elected, and therefore he
shortened his days to go to his maker. And in very deed if the protestants
religion were true, we must needs confess, that he wa^ saved: neither by this
enormous sin and presu^ptuous he^esy either lost he his faith, or his
Charity, for he that once haith faith, can never loose it finally, but is
assured of his election.

Many more erroures I find in the protestants religion which overthrow good
works, but especially one that touches to the quick and stingethe to the
very heart of devotion and piety, that is want of free will to do well. For if
we want free will, then all good works proceed from us by a certain
necessity and compulsion, neither lies it in our power, to serve God when we
will, fast when we will, love God when we will: neither can we pray more
fervently, nor fast more rigourouslye, nor love God more exactly, if we resolve
our selves never so effectually, because it lies not in our power to perform
those determinations although we be guyded and assisted by godds grace. This
heresy, for that I know it haith made great impression in many men's hearts,
and the very thought thereof might not impeache a little all my labor and
industry, to dispose good souls to receive: by gods grace brefly I intend to
overthrow. For of all other it seems to me, not only impious, absurd, and
irreligious, but also senceles and most palpably to be perceived.

Three or four arguments only I mean to propou^de, reserving the rest for
amore conueuient place.

First I will begin with common experience, that every man prouethe in him
self, for as sensibly as I perceive in my self free will to sit down and rise
up, to open mine eyes and shutt them: so evidently and sensibly even now I
perceive, that if I will, I may pray and not pray, give alms and not give
alms, fast to day and not fast, say in my heart, o lord I love thee, and
presently make a rash oath or offend god. And in truth he that will deny these
experiences, may as well deny that he sees or hears, his ears being attent,
and his eyes vnshutt.

But the protestants say, this can not be done without Godds grace, and did
ever Catholic deny this? Had not Adam before his fall according to the
protestants doctrine, free will? and yet he neither could pray nor love God
without grace. But this doctrine repugneth with gods word. This we deny,
and let but the protestan es bring one line from thence to prove evidently
their error, and I will Join issue with them.

The se^ond experience I gather, by

Secondly I would desire the protestants to give me a sign, whereby they know
in civil actions, that men have free will, or what manner of dealing they use
with them whom they know to have free will, and would induce their liberty to
one part, rather then to an other: and I will find expres^y in scriptures the
like proceeding of God, in woorks of pyetie and religion.

Election and choice can not be but in

This choice and election in works of virtue and Religion, we find in the
scriptures ascrybed to men. Iosue puttethe it in the choyee of the Israelites,
Ios. 24.
whether they will serve the true God, or false godds. Optio vobis datur,
oligite hodie quid placet, etc Election is given you, chose to day what
pleases you whom you ought most to serve, whether the gods whom your fathers
served in Mesopotamia, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you dwell:
for I and my house will serve our Lord. And the people answered, god forbid
that we should forsake our Lord and serve strange godds.

Hear we see choice proposed, the true God, and the gods of Mesopotamia, and
the gods of the Amorites, put to their election, whom of these three they
intended to serve: the people reiecte the false god, and elect the true god.
What liberty can a ma^demaunde more manifest then this, in any woorke^ of
piety or religion?

The like free will we have regestred that Solomon used, when God willed him to
ask what he would, Postnla a 3. Reg. 3.
me quid vis, vt them tibi, Demand of me What thou will, that I may give
thee. Now Solomon was put to his choice, he might have asked wealth, long life,
revenge of his enemies, yet he preferred wisdom before them all: and this
election so pleased God, thathe would not demand them, although he might,
for so much those words signify, Quia post ulasti, Because thou have desired
this thing; and asked for thy self, neither long days nor riches, nor the
lives of thine enemies: with wisdom he gave him all the rest. For if he could
not have desired the other of god, at what time he requested wisdom: God had
notrendered a just reason why he gave him with wisdom, riches and glory, for
the particle Quia, yeldeth a reason or cause of this gift.

The like we have of Abraham, who might have offered and not offered his Son
Isaac. The word tentauit, God tempted Abraham, declarethe liberty. It was
put in his election, for so those words signify, Per memetipsum iura^i etc. I
have sworn by my self, says our Lord, because thou have done this thing,
and not spared thy son for me, I will bless thee etc.

Some protestants will say, that Abraham could not but offer his son because
he was a figure of Christ, and a representation of his passion: but by this
answer they might as well say, that Judas was compelled to sell Christ and the
Jews to crucify him, because god foretold them by his Prophets, and
represented them by figures in the old testament, which wear a horrible
blasphemy. True it is that as god foresaw that Judas by his liberty abused,
was to sell Christ, and therefore depainted it in the old Testament: even so
soreseing the good use of Abrahames free will with his grace, or deyned the
oblation of his son as a figure of Christ's passion.

In civil actions we declare liberty Magistrate in his law will say, if a
man steal, he shall be hanged, if he defend his country, he shall be
rewarded, if he committ treason, his treason shall be punished, etc.

In works of piety and religion, in a hundredth places of scripture we find
the like conditions annexed to Gods Leui. 26 Deu. 28. Psalm. 94 Mat. 19
promises or threatninges, If you hear me, you shall eat the fruit of the
earth. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Si vis ad
vitam ingreds, serua mandata. If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments.

Those that have free will to do Nisi paenitentiam egeritis omnes similiter
peribitis. If you do Luc. 13
not penance, you shall altogether perish. Nisi quis renatus fucrit ex aqua and
Io. 3.
spiritu, non potest introire in regnum dei. If one be not regenerate by water
and the spirit, he can not enter into the Kingdom of god. Nisi manducaueritis
Io. 6.
carnem filii hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non hahebitis vitam in
vobis. If you eat not the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you. If a man had not grace to repent, or it wear
impossible having grace but to repent, soothly these comminations wear
ridiculous. For wear it not a madness for a hundrethe men houldinge a minister
tied hand and foot in a cord, they above in a turret, and he below, to
threaten him death and all terrors if he came not up, if they intended
effectually afterward by main force to hayle him up? This poor minister can
not stir or move him self upwards, and yet they stand threatening, to what
end? when they have done all they can, they must compel him, and enforce him
up. After this sort stands it with the protestants, they say man lies
bound hand and foot wit and will, body and soul, in the cords of sin. He
can not ascend, no not lift up his hand without the impulsive and compelling
grace of Christ god must draw him up without free will, and liberty, and yet
he standethe threatening and denouncinge hell to all those that will not ascend
up unto him by good works and religious operations. This ridiculous
docttrine, intelligat qui intelligere potes^, ego illam non capio. For a man
would not threaten a horse fallen into a ditch, to rouse him self, except he
intended that the horse moved with the imagination of terror, should help him
self, and concur with his Master to get forth: for if the owner would
wholly hoyse him out by maine strength, he never would threaten him, neither
for this respect a horse haith reason, for that beasts do by sense, men
work by Iudgmente and discourse, as if a man wear fallen into a ditche and
to be helped after the same sort, he would move him self by discourse and
liberty, as the horse by imagination and sensue appetite:

Them that God endueth with liberty,

The like persuasions God uses in the Scriptures, to inclyne our wills to
serve his law. Here upon came those voices, Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis
Mat. 11
and onerall estis, and ego reficiam vos. Come unto me all you that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Conuertimini ad me, and ego conuertar
ad Zac. 1.
vos. Convert unto me, and I will convert unto you. Reuertimini ad me, and Mal.
3. and Hier. 3.
ego reuertar ad uos. Return unto me and I will return unto you. To what
other effect tended these induceme^ts and pe^swa^i^ons, but to bend our free
will on one side? No man needethe to persuade a man to eat, that haith the use
of reason, when he i^ almost starued for meat, because necessi^ie will
compel him thereunto: but if he be very sick, if he loath meat, then because
his free will may be induced by persuasions, we use to exhort him by shewinge,
what good meat will bring, and what evil abstinence will yield: So if God of
necessity impelleth us to goodness, we need no persuasions, but having
liberty, well appears to what purpose they serve.

When men possess liberty, we blame them for their offenses, or we or fall
into some incurable disease by his evil carriage, we accustom to say soothly
he deserved it, who might have carried him self better and would not. The same
lamentations, reprehensions, and expostulations, we find in the Scriptures
used by God against men after their sins, Jerusalem, Mat. 23.
Jerusalem, quae oceidis prophetas, and lapidas eos qui ad te missi suut,
quoties volui congregare filios tuos sicut gallina congregat pullos sub alis,
et noluisti. Jerusalem Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stoneste
them which were sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered together thy
children as the hen does gather her chikins under her wings, and thou would
not. Ezec. 18. and 33. Isa. 5
Quare in peccatis vestris moriemini? Why will you dye in your sins? Quid
debui facere vltra vineae meae et non feci? expectaui vt faceret vuas, fecit
autem labruscas. What should I have done to my vineyarde that I have not done?
I expected sweet grapes, and it yielded sour.

Good Lord I will tell you: the protestants say, you should have given such
grace unto them, that your vineyard (that is the Jews) could not but bring
forth ripe grapes: for they hold opinion, without it they could bring forth
none other, And thus they condemn you in their judgments, not to have
performed all things necessary, to cause your vineyarde to fructify,
according to your expectation. Again they accuse you most blasphemously, of
folly and doultishnes, in expecting sweet grapes of that vine, which neither
was wattered with your grace, nor fomented with the celestial heat of your
favor, nor sprinkled with the sweet dew of your daily blessing, but planted
in a baren desert upon a wyndie mountain, vbinec ros necpluuia, where there was
neither 2. Re. 1.
dew nor ravne, and therefore the protestants accuse you of ignorance, in
expecting such fruce, and excuse the jews in not yelding.

Nothing else you shall find so often inculcated in the prophetts almost, as
this ingratitude, and evil carriage of the Jews when they might have done
well if they would. But in the new Testament we have Christ his own words,
by which we are assured he gives no such grace ordinarily to me^ as
protestants dream of, as compels our free will without liberty, to come
unto him, Ve^^b^ Corizaim, va Mat. 11 Luc. 10
tibi Bethsaida, quia si in Tiro et Sidone, factae fuissent virtutes, quae in
te factae sunt: olim in sacco et cinere paenitentiam egissent. Woe be to thee
Cotizaim, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if in Tire and Sidon, had been wrought
the miracles, that have been wrought in you, they had done penance in
hayrecloth and ashes long ago. Christ hear lamenteth that the inhabitants of
Corizaim and Bethsaida, were not converted: and to show that the saulte was
their obstinacy, not the defecte of his grace, he auerreth, that defecte of his
grace, he auerreth, that with the same helps, those of Tire and Sidon would
have been converted. Whereby manifestly appears that they might have been
converted, and would not, else Christ without all reason, had lamented of their
obstinacy and in daration.

Hereunto I might reduce all those Scriptures, wherein we are commanded to do
good, or woorks of piety, or religion: for every Law intrinsical^y and
necessarily, requires a possibility and free liberty, to be observed.
Likewise all those places, whearin men are praised for doing woorks of piety
and religion, for the title of praise is joined to the good use of liberty,
when for Gods cause a man might have transgressed and did not. Those and
many more of like sort, I leave for brevity.

The fourth principal argument, may be collected out of Scriptures,

What better reconc^liation hereof can we bring, then that of S. Paul, Non 1.
Cor. 15. Apoc. 3. Mat. 22.
ego, sed gratia dei mecum. Not I, but the grace of God with me. God knocks,
and we let him in: God inuiteth us to his marriage, and we bring hither Ibid.
Mar. 12 Io. 1. Mat. 13
our wedding garments: God teaches and we accept his doctrine: God
illuminateth all the world, and we open the windows of our hearts: God sows
the seed, and we fructify with it.

The places of scripture, be many: some few I will set down. What is more
proper to god, then to wash our Souls? and therefore David said, Psalm. 50
Lauabis me, and super niuem dealbabor. Thou shall wash me, and I shall be co^
whyter then snow. This same god commaundes the children of Israel to do them
selves, Laua a malit tacor tuum Hier. 4
Jerusalem, vt salua fias. O Jerusalem, wash malice from thy heart, that thou
may be saved,

What wonder woorkethe God about us more admirable, then in changinge our
hearts, in giving us hearts of flesh pliable to be dealt withal, and by taking
away hearts of flint, not aable to be pierced, and so by creating in us a new
heart. Auferam a vobis cor lapideum, and dabo vobis cor carneum. I will take
from you a stony heart, Ezec. 11
and I will give you a sleshly heart. And in an other place. Dabo vobis cor
nonum, I will give you a new heart.

This same heart, men make likewise, Facite vobis cor nouum and spiritum nouum,
et quare moriemini domus Ezec. 18
Israel? Make you a new heart and a new spirit, why will you dye o house of
Israel? This same heart men does mollify, by not hindering it against Godds
inspirations, Hodie si vocem eius audieritis, nolite obdurare corda vestrra.
Ps. 94
To day if you shall hear his voice, harde^ not your hearts. If David desire
god to inclyne his heart to keep his commandments, Inclina cor meum in
testimonia tua, et non in auaritiam. Ps. 118
Inclyne my heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness: In the same psalm
he will say of him self, Incl^naus co^. meum ad faciendas iustificationes tuas
propter retributionem I have inclyned my heart to observe thy iustifications,
for a reward.

If in one place a sinner cry to god Psalm. 84
Convert nos deus salutar^s noster. Convert us oGod our Savior. In au other
place, God will cry to the m, Conuertimini ad me et ego conuertar ad vos. Zac.
1
Be converted to me, and I will be converted to you. If God justify a sinner,
and as a proper epithete, he will betake his title to him self, yet a servant
of his was not afraid to say, Ergo sine causa iustificaeui. cor meum. Psalm. 72
If so the wicked prosper and the just be afflicted, to what end have I
justified my heart? If god say, Faciam vos ambulare in praeceptis meis. I will
cause you keep my commandments, yet Christ will asscrybe the keeping to men Si
vis ad vitam ingredi, serua maudata. Mat. 13
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

The Fifth Argument, we may deduce to follow Virtue, to embrace Christ. Of a
number, some few I will set down.

Hominis est animam praeparare, etdomini Prouer. 16
gubernare linguam. It concerns a m^n to prepare his soul, and our Lord to
guide his tongue. That is, Although man with godds grace, preparethe his soul,
to utter any good thing: vet he needs besides, a particular succor of god to
utter his co^ceiptes. Samuel willed the Israelites if they had determined to
abolishe all profane gods, that they should 1. Reg. 7
prepare their hearts to God. Praparate corda vestra domino, et seruite
illisol^. Prepare your hearts to God, and serve him alone. Roboam is
repreh^nded, Quia non praeparauit cor suum vt 2. Par. 12
qu^reret dominum. Because he did not prepare his heart to serve our Lord. And
the wise man affirms universally; that all good men, prepare their hearts.
Qui timent dominum, praeparabunt corda sua. Those that fear God Eccl. 2
will prepare their hearts. And all the Mat. 3. Marc. 1
Evangelists except S. John, allege those words of Isay as S. John baptistes
Luc. 3
thcame, when he came to prepare the way for Christ, Parate viam Domini, rectas
facite semitas eius. Isa. 40.
Prepare the way of our Lord, makeright his paths. These preparations effected
by man, ascrybed to man, man reprehended for not making them, do sufficiently
prove the concourse of free will with godds grace, for otherwise god should be
said to prepare the heart and not man.

The sixth argument those scriptures Domine adiuua me, Ps. 108 and 118 and 69
Marc. 9 Psa. 18 26. 32. 61. 62. 70. 117
O God help me, or that God is said to be our helper, Deus adiutor men's O God
my helper, because this arguethe both concourse of God to succoure us and our
cooperation to succor ourselves or to concur with god. Wherefore S. Paul
calls men the helpers of God, because they woork together with God.
Vnusquisque propriam 1. Cor. 3
Mercedem accipiet secundum suum i^borem, dei enim adiutores sumas. Every one
shall receive, according to his works, for we are godds helpers, that is, we
concur with God in the manuringe of his feelde, which are you, we work with
God in the spiritual buildinge of his Church.

Again those places serve for this purpose whearin men are said to work their
own salvation or sanctification. Cum timore and tremore, salutem vestram Phil.
2.
operamini. With fear and tremblinge, work your salvation. Qui 1. Io. 3.
habet hancspem, sanctificat se. He that haith this hope, sanctifyeth him self.

Moreover all those scriptures wherein Christ is said to knock at the door and
desire to enter, or to expecte that we come to him. For if he effected all, of
necessity he opened the door of him self, he neded not to stay till we would
come to him. Ego sto ad ostium Apoc. 3.
and pulso, si quis mihi aperuerit, in^roibo ad eum. I stand at the door and
knock, if any open it, I will enter into him. Aperi mihi soror mea. Open Can.
5. Isa. 5.
the door to me my sister. Tota die expandi manus meas ad populum incredulum.
All day I have extended my hands to an incredulous people. Venite Mat. 11
ad me omnes qui laboratis. Come to me all you that labor and be heavy laden
and I will refresh you.

The last reason shall be reason it self, for in truth as experience does
manifestly prove our liberty: so reason does without reply convince it. The
first reason, is remorse of conscience in this life and in hell. For if men
had not liberty, remorse should be wholly extinguished. For what evil soever
we do of necessity, presently we excuse it, and acquit our conscience with
the impossibility. As if a man should drink poysen, not knowinge, he never
would have any scruple of conscience, because it was inauoydable, he could not
prevent it. But if he procured it of him self, or might have prevented it and
would not: then the torture of conscience, will presently rack hi, because he
might have done good saved his own life, and would not. For he that resists
any sin does well according to that saying, Beatus ille Eccl. 31
qui potuit transgredi, and non est transgressus. Again the torture, the worm
of Conscience, that stickethe so deep with her stinge in the soul of all
damned creatures, should never appear in hell, if man wear depryued of
liberty. For their torment consists in this, that for their own demerites
being created of God in such sort, that if they would, heaven laid open for
them by doing well: and yet they cast them selves into hell by their own
accord by woorking evil. For if they could not have done well but of
necessity wear plunged into finne, I see not what remorse they can have.

The second reason is, for that noe Law with justice can be enacted, but such
as may be observed, because the end of the law is to make good subjects, and
therefore it wear most absurd, that all men were not able tokepe that law,
which was ordained for all men. Again every law may be preuaricated, for else
why should punishment be annexed to the law? and so consequently every law
suppose the liberty. Moreover the very state of man, who is as it wear in
this world fighting, requires liberty. For standing between heaven and hell,
God and the devil, placed in this theater either to overcome or be overcome:
all reason required, that he might be pliable both ways, and of a flexible
will, either to accept god, or reiecte him, follow Satan, or pursue him, yield
to his temptations, or resist them, as by practice we see effected in the
tragical comedy of Job. For if Job had lacked free will to do well, what
great masterie had it been for God, with such necessary grace, to have ouerco^
Satan? But Job having free will, frail flesh, assaulted of the devil,
pursued of his friends, tempted by his wife, spoiled of his riches, bereaved of
his children, vlcered in body, and yet to overcome all insernall forces, by
such grace of God, as he might have used or abused at his pleasure: plainly
conuinceth the great victory both of God and Job against the devil, because
for godds love, his changeable will, perseuered without change.

Scotus one of the mirroures of wit

If we want free will, what Judgment shall that be in Scriptures so often do
evil.

In mine opinion, all the thieves and

Finally this errou^ is the root of all licentiousnes. For thus God knows
two may reason in England, and in the protestants schole insolubly; Either we
have grace to do well or not, If I have it, then it is impossible to do evil,
if I have it not, it is impossible to do well, for all goodness proceeds of
grace which compels our wills, and all evil comes of lack of grace, which
we have not at our wills. Therefore let all Epicures live as licentiously as
they will, all riotous persons pass their days in all dissolution, for this
error will warrante them sufficientlye.

The arguments or rather sophismes that protestants bring against this
infallible, experimented, practiced, and allowed verity, in all antiquity,
deserve rather hissing then answearinge, yet one I will answer, that by it
the reader may Judge of the rest.

They allege forsothe that part of the scripture in the parable, where the
Luc. 14
King commanded his servants, to compel them that they found in the high
ways, to come to his marriage dinner, and the other scripture wheare Cau. 1.
Ose. 11 Io. 6. et 12.
God is said to draw men unto him. But this rotten objection, oflong since
rooted out heresies, must have as old a solution, for by this drawing and
compulsion, the scripture meanethe nothing, but that god uses great helps to
draw men unto him, for which they are in excusable if they come not. As if one
inuyte me to supper, yet I excuse my self, he insisteth with many reasons, at
the last he induces me: after I say, he compelled me to come he brought so
many persuasions. For do we not see that one of them which wear compelled,
came without a marriage garment? so that this compulsion Mat. 22
of godds grace, slandeth with the abuse thereof.

I have been longer in this preface, then perhaps the proportion of the gate
with the house required by just Ceintrie, yet the opportunity and necessity,
causes builders often times to break their square, as it befalls me at this
present. And therefore I leave of purpose an other discourse of the meritt of
good woorks, the which I could prove as manifestly as this, and perhapps it
wear as necessary: but an other occasion will not want. In the mean time, I
request all protestants in the wounds of Christ Jesus as they tender their
own salvation, to ponder these reasons with the balance of indifferent
judgment, and dailye to go forwards in good works for which they shall
receive their Judgment.

To the Catholic like Protestants.
Your case, as it is most miserable, so it is most compassionable, for it
seemethe, you in heart desire to serve god, and yet this desire is ouerweyed,
with the desire to enjoy the world. Your case I said was most miserable,
because exiling out of the Church, you are like the straying sheep erringe in
the desert mountains, exposed to the pray of all ravening wolfes. You have no
weapons to defend your selves, depryued of the sacraments, spoiled of the
communion of Saints, the incessant prayers and Sacrifice of Christ's faithful
flock. Alas what will befall you? either the wild and savage beasts will
devour you, or for lack of spiritual food, you shall dye in those
unfruitful soyles. What can the protestants Churches afforde you? Ah infected
sermons, corrupted with heresies. What prayers? Alas, how will god hear them
who will not here him? The Communion, o poisoned cupp, better it wear for you
to eat so much ratsbane, then that polluted bread, and to drink so much
dragons gall, or vypers blood, then that sacrilegious wine. Noe doubt, but
after that bread, enters in Satan, and after that cup, some of the
infernal crew. This you know and in your hearted confess, and therefore your
sin is questionles the greater. You favor Catholics and in what you can,
do them good. Ah, quid prodest homini, s^ vniuersum mundum lucretur, anima
Mat. 16
vero suae, detrimentum pat^atur?

For what does it profitt a man if he gain the whole world, and sustain the
damage of his soul? What will it avail you at the day of Judgment, to have
favored Catholics, when you shall be condemned your selves for half
heritikes? What good Catholic is theare in england, that would not loose with
all his heart, your temporal favors, for your spiritual good, and wishethe
not rather that you wear favored of God, then gracious before men? If all the
favors, riches, and sures of the world, wear summed in one man's dominion,
yet who doubts but that it wear better to receive once devoutly the blessed
Sacrament, then to possess them all. Therefore you may see what detriment your
soul sufferethe, for the small favors you minister unto Catholics. Ah
fear not that they shall be destitute either of spiritual graces or te^porall
favors.

Cast your eyes upon Gods providence, and you shall see him tendering them,
as the crystal humor of his eye. Abandon for Christ Jesus sake their
excernall conversation in religion, whose company internally you deteste. For
in very deed most of the protestants hate you, the catholics mislyke you,
the devils laugh at you, and Apoc. 3 Eccle. 4
god does vomit you out of his mouth. Woe be to that man that goes with two
hearts, that walkethe two ways, that intends to serve both God and Mat. 6
the devil, to be Christ's disciple, and a fauoryte of the world.

I wonder how the very hell you feel in your souls, the horrible torture of
your consciences, enforcethe you not to leave that hellish Sinagog?

In good sooth if ever you enter into your selves, and consider your present
state in what perils and laborinthes you have cast your selves into: I meruel
you either congeale not with fear, or pyne not away with melancholy, or your
hearts burst not with desperation.

For in your own conscience, you live in continual, horrible, and sclanderous
sin. The hour of your death is ever imminent, the severe Judgment of God,
you are assured you shall not escape, the eternal pains of hell you are
certain expecte you: and yet can you live merrily, laugh, and pass your time
careleslye? This sin of youres I take to be a sin against the holy Ghost,
and a fynall impenitency, because in you^e hearts you have determined, so long
as this rigor of laws and punishment of Catholics indureth you will
persevere in your accustomed irreligious profession of protestancy, from which,
I say no more, but Christ Jesus deliver you, for whose reclaim I will not
cease to pray.

THAT NOE MAN CAN PREPARE HIM SELF Condignly to receive the B. Sacrament.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THe sacred Eucharist, is not only a most Maiesticall and divine object,
deserving the profoundest wits for speculation: but also a Sacrament and
sacrifice by God ordained for action, and instituted for a real participation.
Whence-from proceeds, that it concerns us with no less industry to prepare
our souls religiously to receive it, then profoundly to understand it.
Therefore having declared the speculatiue part in the precedent book, the
practical we reserved for this present: not that those Meditations wear not
ordained, or not most apt means to induce our hearts to receive this food of
life with all respect, love, and affection (for all knowledge of God
distillethe into the heart a certain sweet motion or impulsion to love him)
but because they wear something remote from practice, they taught not fully the
way and particular means how our souls ought to be disposed, to participate
this holy Sacrifice.

First then of all the next disposition that I can find, is a most prosound
humility, whereby with heart and tongue we confess our selves not able to
prepare our souls, to receive condignly such a majesty, and that all our
diligence, arriueth not to the thowsande part of that which he deserves. For
if the natural philosophers mostewisely and naturally auert, that inter locum
and locatum, recipiens and receptum, debet interueuire proportio, that is,
betwixt the place and the placed, the receiver and the received, the conteyner
and the contained, must be found some proportion: Alas what proportion can we
make betwixt God and our souls? his majesty, and our misery? his greatness,
and our weakness? his goodness, and our wickedness? For if I consider his
greatness, it is immensiue, quem caeli, Reg. 8
and cali caelorum capere non possunt. Whom the heavens and the heaven of
heavens, can not comprehend penetratinge and enuironinge this world and all
the contained therein, as the boundless ocean sea penetrateth and enuironeth a
spring, yet remaininge without an incomprehensible vast^es of water. How then
can my body or soul receive such an immensitie? What proportion or
correspondence can we find? If I consider his majesty, his purity, his
excellency and perfections: then I heare^ that Angels non Job. 4 and 15
sunt mundi in conspectu eius, and quanto magis nos qui habitamus domos luteas,
and tanquam aquam bibimus iniquitat^m. The Angels are not clear in his
sight, and how much more we that inhabit howses of clay, and drink as water
iniquity?

If his Angels now possess their complete glory, dwell in the imperial
heaven, wheare they never cease day nor night to singe his praises, if they
enjoy a state impeccable fro blott, blemish, or wrincle of offense, and yet
they are imperfect, stained, unclean in his sight: what then am I, repletus
Job. 14
multis miseriis, repleate with many miseries, conceived in iniquity, borne in
misery, living in sin and wickedness? so that hear I find noe way to
prepare my self, the are can not be any proportion or just measure betwixt us.

If I consider his infinite wisdom, lucem habit at inaccessibilem. He
inhabiteth 1. Ti. 6
light not accessible; Mine eyes will be dazeled with the vehemente brightness
of his beams, and the very Seraphimes them selves, who are all eyes and
understanding, confess their Isa. 6
infirmity, inueyling them selves with their goulden wings. If I consider
his love, the vehemence thereof strikes me into a maze, for I know the
conditions thereof to excede so far the baseness of my love, that if the
Seraphims veyled their feet to declare the imperfections of their
affections: I may well with Adam seek Genesis 3
some shrowde, to defend me from shame, as one affraide to appear before his
face, with such remisnes and congealed friendship; therefore hear I find no
gate open whereby my loving Lord may enter into my heart. The like I might say
of his omnipote^cy, of his Justice, his bounty, and other attributes. Yea I
will go further, if only I lacked proportion, if only my soul for a
natural imperfection, wear incapable of him: then perhaps I might be excused
in part if I came to receive him: but having so often, so voluntarily, freely,
and deliberately offended him, What can I answer him? What an vnfittte Temple
have I prepared for him? O vere most truly I have made Do^cum orationis, Mat. 2
H^er. 7
speluncam latronum. The house ofprayer a denn of thieves: the tente of
virtues, a cave of serpents and basiliskes, of vipers and infernal devils.

But then what remedy? wheare shall I find a way to wind forth of this
laberinth? for receive him I must, receive him condignly I can not; not to
receive him, is death, to receive him with a certain proportion I ought. What
pillar of fire, can lighten me from heaven? what voice can comforth me?
Humility. Say with the Ce^turion, Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum
meum, sed tantum die verbo, and sanabitur anima mea. Lord I am not worthy
that thou should enter under my roof, but only say the word, and my
soul shall be healed. So the Church says, and so in very deed we must say
and confess, that the first and chiefest preparation we can make, is to
acknowledge our selves insufficient, to make any condign preparation: and this
not only in words, but also in heart, as this discourse evidently shows.

THAT GOD REQVYRETH A Certain Preparation of them that receive this
Sacramen.^.
CAP. 2.
ALthough the unsearchable providence

Ezechias could not recover his Isa. 38
^^fe, yet God would not restoare it, ^^cept he received the pultes of Ihais.

Naaman Sirus, could not fyndeany 4. Re. 5
cure of his leprosy within the compass of nature, and God would not
miraculously heal him, before he washed his body seven times in Iordaine.

If Elias be almost starued for hunger, 3. Re. 17
he must go to the woman of Sido^, to be supernaturally reliued.

If our Savior convert water into Io. 2
wine, he will have them to prepare the matter for his miracle, by fillinge
their vessels. Io. 9


If he give sight to the blind borne beggar, it must be after the bathinge in
Siloe. And finally, his universal practice in curing the soars of the body
and greifes of the soul, was not fully brought to effect, except the patientes
in some sort or other, disposed them selves to receive his divine influence.
Hereupon came those voices, Credis? Confide, quid vis? vis saluus esse? Do
thou believe? Have confidence, What wouldeste thou I should do? and such like
speeches, all which pregnantly prove, that God exacteth of men, a free and
voluntary cooperation and preparation to their justification and salvation. For
then he knew the music to be most sweet, when the treble and the basse, the
highest and the lowest, God and his creatures, consorted in one harmony, by
due order, proportion, and subordination. For it standethe not with the nature
of frendshipp that a man should be either admitted into the amity of God, or
increased in his love, having free will, withowt the cooperation thereof, no
more then a man that had hands, should feed without putting meat into his
mouth, or a fish should live without swimming, or a bird withowt flying.

Since therefore the sacred Eucharist, joins our souls and bodies really with
Christ, cures our spiritual maladies, increases our friendship with God,
describethe us Citizens in the heavenly Jerusalem, fills our hearts Ephesians. 2
with divine favors and graces: there is noe reason but we should dispose
our selves to receive it, by free will defyre it, by fervent love affect it,
and with the arms of Charity, most religiously embrace it.

We know the Eucharist, is a food ordained for the norishmente of the in
gods favor. All norishment requires a lyuelie body, not ouerlaide with
malignante humors, prepared by hunger and natural heat, to cooperat with
it, for the reparation of lost forces.

Moreover the Philosophers hold omne agens agit, secundum dispositam materiam.
Every agent workethe, according to the disposition of the matter. So we see
the soon, if it pass through a clear air, what a floodd of light it issues
from heaven upon the earth: if it find some rare or thinn clouds in the way,
the force is somthinge diminished: if a gross and thick cloud, be
interposed, the vehemence is greatly stayed, but if a mistie fogge, it scarce
appears; if the moon, theare follows an eclipse though it wear at none.

In like manner, if a soul come to this fountain of light but eclipsed, that
is haith a mortal sin interposed which fully and wholly hinders the
influence thereof: then what can follow but night and darkness, at what tywe
the toades and serpents range abroad, seekinge for their pray. If fogges of
sensualitye, clouds of concupiscences, mistes of petie malices, ouercaste the
heart: the force of devotion, the feruoure of Charity, the sweetenes of love,
(the proper effects of this celestial food,) are greatly hindered.

Thearfore it lying in our power to prepare the way for these streams of
light, since he haith said, Parate viam Marc. 1
domins, rectas facite simitas eius. Prepare the way of our Lord, make
straight his paths. Let us not harde^ our hearts, let us not stop his course
give him free passage, prepare his way with piety, devotion, and religion.

Does not faith teach us, and divinity whole rivers of these supernatural
riches? why fill we not our hearts as far as they are capable? Haithe not God
said, Aperi os tunm, and implebo illud? Psalm. 80
Open thy mouth, and I will fill it? Ah it is not the defect of Christ and his
sacrifice, but our want and indisposition.

The vessels first failed, before Elias oil seized, and our souls shall
first 4. Re. 4
be stopped with imperfections, then this Sacrament stayed to imparte his
graces. Therefore let us enlarge our souls with charity, let us make them
deep with humility, let us raife them up a lofte with love and feruoure,
let us open all our passages with prayers, meditations, sighs, and godly
affections, let us shutt up all the sluices, and sinkes, to sin and hell,
that no malice or impiety, no sensuality or concupiscence, pass into the
bosom of our hearts, and then, erit sicut flum^^ Isa. 48
pax tua, thy peace shall be as a fludd then the soil of the soul will flowe^
Exodus 3 Ps. 147
with milk and honey. Then, Ex adipe fruments satiet te. Then, Torculari^
redundabunt vino, and horrea tua abundabunt frumento. Thy wine presses shall
ouerflowe with wine, and thy Joel. 2
barnes abound with wheat.

When I call to memory the wonderful 3. Re. 6 and 8 2. Par. 3 and 4.
temple of Jerusalem, how many thowsande woorkmen for so many years
continually labored there, when I see such choice of stones and timber, such
abundance of gould and treasures such cutting caruing, grauing, pointing,
painting, decking, and adorning, of that material, inanimate, and tipicall
Temple of God: I can not be but so greatly confounded in my self, to conceive,
with what diligence, cost, reverence, and nycenes, they prepared that house for
Gods Arck, a chist of wood, a figure and gross portrature of this heavenly
food, a foote-stoole for Gods feet to stand upon: and I who am to receive
God him self, the true arcke into my living soul, use so small and could
industry to enterteine him.

So many stately Churches as I see bu^lded in England, condemn my indeuotion:
for they manifest unto their founders religion and piety to this blessed
sacrament. They builded them with their blood, their sweat, care, and long
labor: and how much more ought I to do, for preparinge mine own soul,
for whose cause god would have Temples, Ministers, with all other rightes and
ceremonies appointed?

Finally let us but weigh the dignity and worth of him whom we are to receive,
by how many Tytles we are bound to endeavor to show the extreameste
diligence possible to provide him in our hearts a condign tabernacle.

Who is this that thou shall allodge? God. And what can be greater? and
therefore all preparation too little?

Who is this that will harbor in thy heart? The owner of thy heart, thy
landslorde, he comes to visitt his own possession, that farm he let thee:
and will thou not prepare a decente room for him? Who is this that will
soiourne with thee? thy redemer, he that delivered thee out of boundage, he
that paid thy ransom, he that set thee at liberty. And will thou not render
him thanks? Will thou not acknowledge his benefits? Will thou not by diligent
preparation show thy self greatfull? Who is this that will visitt thee? Thy
dearest friend in the world, one that loves thee better then either father or
mother, and haithe showed his love more effectually then either of them both,
by sheddinge all his blood to save thy life, to cure thy soul, and will thou
be so churlishe as not to entert^ine so true, so entyre and so faithful a
friend with bowels of Charity, with zealous desires, with enflammed affection.
Who is this that comes thus masked, with the ryndes of bread and wine to be
eaten of thee? Thy pastoure, to feed thee with his own blood: thy preiste, to
sanctifye thee with his own Sacrament: thy master, to illuminate thee with his
own faith: thy spowse, to marry thee, by his divine and ineffable union: thy
physician, to cure thee with his immortal flesh: thy life, to reuyue thee
with his glorious body; thy last end, to deify thee with his diuinitye. And
for so many graces and favors, do thou imagine that he expects not some
preparation, some correspondence? truly if he did not, yet courtesy, civility,
humanity, the law of nature, the bound of a loyal mind, good manners, would
enforce any noble heart, to stretche the veins of his wit upon the tenters, to
find out all means possible, to gratify such a benefactour, to content such a
gueste, to interteyne such a friend.

If thou love God effectually, this languag will not seem new, for souls
that are touched with his divine fire, can never rest, but are always
excogitating, inuenting, and practicing new ways how to receive him, how to
please him how to enterteiue him.

THAT THERE BE TWO SORTS OF PREPARATIONS.
CAP 3.
AS there be two sorts of persons whom Christ haith invited to his table,
sinners and just me^: so he haith appointed two sorts of preparations, the
first of necessity, the other of decency: the lack of the one causes
damnation, the want of the other, impeacheth devotion: Of that is said, Probet
semetipsum homo, and sic 1 Cor. 11
de pane illo edat, and de calice bibat: qui cuim manducat et bibit indigne,
iudicium sibi manducat et bibit, non d^udicans corpus domini. Let a man prove
him self, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that Chalice, for
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks iudgmente to him
self, not discerning the body of our Lord. Of this said Christ, Qui lotus
Io. 13
est, non indiget nisi vt pedes lauet.

He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet. Of these two
preparations, I mean to deliver all that follows in this treatise. And first
of all what preparation of necessity Christians are commanded to bring when
they come to participate these sacred mysteries. Undoubted it is, that who
soever will eat this food and not to his damnation, must come without spott
of mortal sin, that is in his conscience he persuades him self, that he is
in the favor and grace of God.

Many reasons I could bring, to confirm this position, but for this present
I will content my self with two.

The first is the general rule of receiving sacraments, that whosoever
participateth them in mortal sin (except baptism and penance) sinnethe
mortally, yea and sacrilegiously, because he hinderethe the influence of God in
his veins of grace, frustratinge the Sacraments of their effects, which
questionless can not be but agreate injury to almighty God, and a notorious
irreuerence unto his instruments of grace.

The Second reason, is peculiar and proper to the Eucharist where Christ is
received: for who dare receive him being his mortal enemy? what proportion is
betwixt God and Beliall? life 2. Cor. 6
and death? light and darkness? a denn of devils, and the glory of Angels? a
sink of filth, and the God of purity?

This is that Judgment S. Paul said they eat, not iudginge the body of 1
Cor. 11
our Lord, but casting so precious a Iuell, into so loathsome a dongehill: so
sweet a liquor, in so stinkinge a vessel, the dainties of heaven, in a plater
of hell. This can not be done without a horrible offense and a most heinous
crime. These says S. Ciprian, Libr. de caena do.
lick the stone, but neither suck honey nor oil: and better had it been for
the^ with a millstone about their necks, to Deu. 32 Mat. 18
have been drowned in the bothom of the sea. A man therefore that haithe
committed a mortal sinne^ can not be admitted to eat at this table, except he
obtain first forgeuenes thereof, at the hands of God, the which he may get by
contrition, that is a most profound and internal grief rooted in the love of
God, and hatred of sins, as injuries done to him.

But this preparation, because it is very hard to come by, and seldom sinners
addicted to the world, return to him with such perfection of love: therefore
the holy counsel of Trente Ses. 13 Cap. 7
remembered a laudable practice, commonly exercysed before in the church, that no
man guilty of mortal sin, should receive this Sacrament, without
premittinge sacramental confession. For the difficulty of contrition, and the
enormous sacraledge of eatinge our Savior without remission of sins did move
the Church to premitt confession, as a way more easy and more secure.

After the soul be washed, with this laborious baptism of penance, it must
in effect, or at the least in firm purpose, perform, all that an entyre and
complete confession requvrethe.

The vserer must make restitution, and desist from all his trade: The manchante
must restoare his evil gotten goods, rectify his contracts, use just
measures, etc. He that lived in hatred, must procure reconciliation. He that
passed his days riotously, must leave his evil company, avoid dangerous and
experimented occasions of deadly sin: finally he must agree with his
adversary while he walkethe in the way, that is, his own conscience, that it
accuse him not one day, before his Judge, when theare is noe place of
appellation, nor time of amendment.

A case of conscience might hear be proponed, for Catholics in England: if
being in prison for religion, and not having any means to com to a priest to
confession: if such a one might receive the blessed Sacrament without
Confession, having only contrition of his sins. Some will say, let him
confess by writing: But whether confession by writing, be aualeable or not, I
will not now dispute, I know theare are some that defend it, but I can not
allow it, because by letters, I can not know the present state of the
penitent, when I give the absolution: it may be he remembers so me other
mortal sin, the which he would confess before I absolve him: it may be he
sins at the same time: it may be he haith some circumstance necessary to be
confessed. Yet whether this be a true opinion or not, I houlde it in noe wise
convenient, to be practiced in England, for the sca^dall that might occurr, if
any such letters were intercepted by protestants. Therefore I am os opinion,
that such a person after that he haith endeavored for his possibility, with
prayers to god with grief of sins, with a firm purpose never to fall
again; that he may receive the blessed sacrament with contrition, although he
can not come to confession: because the precept of confession, being appointed
by the Church, we are to suppose, that she never intended thereby, to hinder
such good souls from the blood of Christ, who stand prepared to offer their
blood for Christ. And it seems not agreeable to the bowels of pietye, to
deprive her children, in such extreme conflictes, of all spiritual armor,
against the adversaries of her faith.

After then I am confessed and intend infallibly, with Gods grace, to
perform all that concerns a good confession, I may presently after I have
breathed forth so many sins, receive the blessed sacrament.

After this disposition, I am not bound under a mortal sin, to any other
preparation, for by confession, I am reconcyled to God, endued with his grace,
appareled with the weddinge Mat. 22
garment appointed for this feast, an nombred amongeste the friends and
children of God, written as an inhabitant for the city of Angels. Yet the
remembrance of my passed offenses, the shame of my transgressions, the horror
of displeasinge so sovereign a majesty, ought a little to withdraw me from
kissinge his side, which not long before, I had so notoriously wounded: to
make retire from imbracinge him, whose love not long ago, so basely I
dispysed: to cause me stay my foot for using him so familiarly, whose
friendship hard before, I disdayned so contemptuously.

Therefore I will dispose my selfbetter for the dignity of his person, the
perfection of his love, the admirable fruits and graces, which this blessed
food affords, to all those who condignely receive it, the which preparation,
shall be presently declared.

WHAT DECENTE PREPARATION WE OUGHT to use, before we communicate.
CAP. 4.
I Once demanded of a godly and devout Religious man, what was the most
forcible mean, that he by long experience had proved, to help a man to pray
well and devoutly? He answered me, a good life, continually to live well: The
which mean in very deed is most forcible, for such men have their hearts
replenished with Gods graces, their passions burste not forth vehemently,
their souls are endued with many good habits, they fall rarely, rise more
fervently, and consequently converse with God more familiarly, and pray more
devoutly. I say after that manner what preparation principally oughtewe to
bring to the Euchariste? a continual good life. What secondly? A continual
virtuous life. What Thirdly? I answer the same. For those that live
religiously, quickly can reuyue and stir up, the grace of God that lodges in
their hearts; they can presently with one blaste, accende the flame of Charity.

But because we find few of this stamp, therefore we must descend to more
particularities, That all those who for the time paste, have lived lowsely, or
at this present fall often, yet by Gods grace recover again, or contend not
much to go to perfection, but will be content with a certain mediocritie; yet
would willingly go forward, else they must needs go backwardes, because in
the service of God, there is noe staying in any one point of holiness, but of
necessity, they must either ascend, or descend, as a boat goinge against
the stream, must either go forward or backwarde.

For these therefore, incipientes, and proficientes, for them that begin to
serve God, and them that have made some progress in gods service, these
notes may serve. For fasting, wearinge of shirtes of hair, disciplines, alms
deeds, lying hard, and other like mortifications and holy exercyses,
concerning the body: theare can no prescripte general rule be given: for as
the complexions, abilities, and means to effect these are different; even so
the practice of all can not be alyke, but these rules may be taken as
conueniente.

First the more a man mortifiethe his body by prudence and discretion, the
less difficulty he shall find in all his spiritual exercyses, because one of
the greatest enemies we have, is our body, if it be pampered, and therefore
mortification, is a good preparation.

Secondly the best discretion in this, I take to be an obediente mind of the
peuitente, to his ghostly father, that he propound his desires, and the other
approve or disprove them: for commonly a man is not the surest judge in his own
cause.

Thirdly all those who communicate once a monthe, or once every week, ought
to use some one or two of these mortifications: for this sacred mirhe, will
preseme our senses from corruption: these spiritual actions, in time, will
spiritualize our carnal bodies, and make them fit instruments to serve
our souls, as harboures for the sacred eucharist.

Fourthly these serve as preambles, for this blessed Sacrifice: for as Christ
did suffer many cruel pains, before he sacrifised up him self upon the
Cross: even so we (that must dye with Christ spiritually by compassion in
this sacrament, and suffer with him, 2 Timothy 2
to glory with him) ought to prepare our selves to this holy Sacrifice, with
some painful mortification.

These premised, it follows that we entreat of those spiritual meditations,
devout exercyses, and godly preparations, that all good souls may
conueniontly, easily, breefely, and religiously practice, before they sit
down to this table, all which I reduce to six acts of five virtues. And the
very same which the Council of Trente reckeneth, as dispositio^s to
justification: those I Judge most fit preparations for the sacred communion:
Fear, Faith, Hope Charity, Repentance, which I deuyde into two operations,
detestation of our passed life, and a firm resolution, not to fall again,
the which for memory sake, I thought good to comprehend in this one word Fear:
For Fear of it self, represents unto me, the first act. F, the first
letter of Faith: Faith, Hope, and Charity. R, the second Consonante,
Repentance, the which can never be effectual, except it carne with it grief
for sins paste, and a resolute good will of amendment. These be those six
wings which the Seraphims, that are inflammed with love, wear furnished
withal, when Isa. 6
they appeared before the throne of the majesty of God. And all devout
catholics endued with them, may have free access unto the tree of life, the
scate of God, that is his altar.

These be six gates, through which all courteours must pass, that willenter
into the presence chamber, to deal with the king of heaven.

These be six harbingers who prepare the lodging of the holy Ghost in
justification, and most fit to do the same office for the son of God, in
the communion. For if theare we enter into friendship with the holy Trinity,
here we renew it and increase it: If the are we abolished deadly sins, here we
extinguishe venial: If theare we left the devil, the flesh, and the world
hear we triumph over them: If there we wear united to god in spirit, here we
are joined both in body and soul: If theare we gathered the blossoms of
grace, and first fruits of glory, hear we reap the cropp of them both.

And therefore as the holy Ghost in justification, appointed the aforesaid
virtues, as ornaments to deck the soul against his entrance: in like sort
our blessed Savior equal unto him, and of the same substance, seems to
exact of us, the like preparations for his interteinemente.

Of these six therefore, some few discourses I mean to deliver: Howbeit I
thought good to aduertyse thee gentle reader, that if time and opportunity
will permit: it wear good to take some two or three of those causes or
effects of this Sacrament, entreated in the former book, of the causes why
God instituted this heavenly Banquet: and every day to stinte a time, to
meditate or consider, the admirable good, which issuethe from this fountain of
life. For if we see many men labor and sweat all the weke, to take a little
sensual so la^e upon the sunday: with what greater reason ought we to labor
some few hours every week, to participate this divine refection, and
spiritual consolation?

Moreover, if thou synde thy self laden with venial sins: wash thy feet,
purge them with Confession, Laua iuter innocents manus tuas, and Ps. 25
circunda altar domini: Wash thy hands with Innocents, and compass the
altar of our Lord. Have a diligent care, that no unclean thoughts obscure
thy mind: no hatred or malice, occupy thy heart, for these two defectes,
hinder greatly this sacrament of Charity and purity. If of frailty they
occurr, lift up thy heart to god with some affectnall speech, as, Cor mundum
Psalm. 50 Mat. 26
crea in me deus. Ignosce illis domine, quia nesciunt quid faciunt. Create in
me o Lord, a clean heart. Forgive them o Lord, because they know not what
they do.

FEAR. 1
Fear the beginning of wisdom, is Psa. 100
the first gate, by which we must enter into the palace of wisdom, whose
chamber of presence is this sacrament.

But because fears are various, therefore I will distinguish them, that we may
better know what fear is required, and what fear is to be rejected.

Four sorts of fears, I find proved by experience, and taught of divines:
worldly, seruyle, filial, and angelical. Worldly


Worldly fear, is an inordinate affection of the soul, whereby a man flies
Fear.
the service of god, to avoid pain disgrace, or some other temporal loss.
This fear god knows, reigns over to many in England, who flee from God to
keep their goods, frequent the Churches of protestants, because they will
not be thought Catholics, they dare not come to the Food of life, lest they
loase their temporal life. But the day will come, when they will curse this
hellish fear, which hinders them of the joys of heaven, and heaped upon
them, the pains of hell. This fear, all that come to the Altar of God, ought
to detest.

Seruyle fear, consists in auoydinge sin, lest God would punish 2
Seruyle Fear.
the offense, with loss of Glory, or gain of torments: and this Fathers
compare to a needle of silver, that drawethe after it a threede of goulde: for
commonly all those who are justified, first eschew sins, lest god would
punish them, and then they abhor them, because they so injuriously of fend so
loving a Father: and so this silver fear, leadethe in the threede of goulden
Charity.

Many could and indeuout Christians, come to this sacred feast, once a year,
rather for fear of hell, then for any great devotion or love, they bear to
God, or to his Sacrament: and such without all question, are most base minded,
and scarce deserve the name of Christians: But if they have this joined with
Charity, then it will serve to make Charity go forwards. For when our love
is could and remiss: the fear of loasinge life everlasting, or increase of
glory, helps our souls greatly in this state of misery. And therefore even
good souls, may make this discourse with them selves, I will frequent the
Eucharist, for thereby I know my glroy shall be increased, and my soul
confirmed more steadfastly in grace, for which cause, I shall not sinnlo often,
and consequentlye auoy de hell.

Filial fear, the of spring of Charity, 3 Filial Fear.
hates sin, as an offense of God, so good and loving a Father; and this
questionless, is most requisite, for all those that frequent this Sacrament.
Therefore let every good soul, cast a glaunce with the eye of his
understanding, and contemplate all his passed life, and afterward let him
think with him self, most certain I am that mortally I have offended my god
my Father, but were these sins yet forgeuen me? Have I confessed them with
such diligence, with such grief as I ought? Have I not left many unconfessed
for negligence? Have I not since that time often with secret hatred, with
hidden concupiscences, with clowdie desires, of pride, and wealth, offended my
Father: I know what perplexities, affrighted even his greatest Saints: And
what shall I say? One cried, Delicta quis intellig it? ab Psalm. 18
^ccultis meis mundae me domine. Who knows his sins? From my
secrettoffences, cleanse me o Lord. An other doubting said, Verebar omnia opera
mea. Job. 9
I feared all my works. An other remitting the Judgment of his cause, to the
mercy of God, confessed that he knew not him self then guilty of ^ Cor. 4
any crime: but for that God haithe purer eyes then any men, he can find a
gross saulte where men discover no error, therefore he referred all unto his
merciful Judgment. And so must we in this preparation, accuse our selves in
the sight of God, open our wounds, to this heavenly physician, that he may
with his precious blood, cure our soars, and give us full remission of our
sins.

Angelical fear, is a most profou^d Angelical Fear.
reverence, humility, respect, and submissio^ unto god. For the Angels knowing
the majesty of God, his perfections, and infinite goodness: they fall down
before him, they woorshippe him, they cry incessantly, Sanctus, Sanctus,
Sanctus, dominus deus Sabbath. Isa. 6
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath. And this sear, this reverence,
humility, respect, and submission, happy is he, that can bring it in the
highest degree, to the holy Euchariste. Wherefore we must prostrat our
selves before the blessed Trinity, and from the bothom of our hearts, bless,
glorify, and woorship them, and particulerly for this admirable gift of the
venerable Sacrament. Blessed is that soul, that can so submit her self,
before the prefence of god, that with most lowly and profounde humility, she
can acknowledge the majesty of God, and her own misery, that one abisse may
call upon an other, in voce Psalm. 4^
cataract arum, that is, our nothing of his omnipotency, with the virtue of the
cataractes, that is the wounds of Christ. By this is appearethe, that servile,
filial, and Angelical fears, prepare our Souls to this Sacrament.

FAITH. 2.
THere are three sorts of virtues, of penance, and religion. The first have
God for their next object: the second our actions: the third, partly our
actions, partly God.

All divines confess, that albeit, all virtues are mentorious of gods grace,
and eternal glory: yet the Theological they prefer before the rest, because
they immediately converse with God, their scope is wholly for him, they mingle
no creature with God, and therefore the exercise of them, as itis to us most
beneficial: so to God, most grateful.

He then that intends to communicate, may breefely run over, all those
mysteries, and points of Faith, which we are bonnde to believe. For men in
very deed have a precept, to exercise somtymes, these Theological virtues;
and none more conuense^t, then when they dipsose them selves, to receive this
Sacrament of Faith; They may then with tongue and heart say and confess, that
they believe, 1. there is a God. 2 That he created heaven and earth. 3 That he
punishes vice and rewards virtue: those with eternal pains, these with
eternal ioies. 4 That he haith a special providence over his servants. 5 That
our souls are immortal. 6 That we are conceived in original sin. 7 That
Faith, Hope, and Charity, are necessary means to salvation. 8 That
repentance after actual crimes, god requires at our hands; We may repeat
the articles of our Creed, (for the other 8, were requisyte to have been
believed in all ages) 9 as, That we confess God the Father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost. 10 That the Son was in carnate for us. 11 Conceived by
the holy Ghost 12 Borne of a Virgin. 13 Was crucified. 14 Dead and buried. 15
That he descended into hell. 16 He roase again the third day to life. 17
Andascended into heaven. 18. Wheare he sits on the right hand of
his-Father. 19 The holy Catholic Church. 20 The Communion of Saints. 21
Remission of sins.

Besides that, there be seven Sacraments in the catholic Church, Five
whearof apperteyne to all men, as baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist,
Penance, and Extreme vnetion. Two concern not all, but certain persons, as
Matrimony, and order. 23 That the Scriptures proceed from god. 24 That our
Savior is really in this Sacrament, wheare the more learned sort, may
exercise their faith most excellently, about transsubstantiation, and all those
points which the Catholic Church haith determined in this mystery, or what
else foeuer. And after this exercise, let them say, O Lord I believe all thief,
but Marc. 9
help my faith: I am prepared to dye for them, and therefore grant me grace to
be able to perform it.

HOPE.
Gods goodness after two manners may be considered, first relation unto us, by
pouring down graces and favors, as the light of the soonne adorneth the
sphere and body of the soonne, and besides powrethe down light, heat, virtue,
and influences upon the earth. The first goodness of God, diuynes call
absolute: the second relatyue. The first is the object of Charity; the
second, the object of Hope. For the virtue of Hope, haith two acts or
operations; one to expect and desire of God, life everlasting, and the means
to atchiue it: an other to love God as good and beneficial unto us. Both which
operations, be most convenient preparations, for the soul that intends to
receive abundance of grace in the Eucharist, because therein we have our
Savior, our last end and felicity, and the chefest mean that God haith
delivered to his Church to attain unto felicity.

Therefore let thy heart then breath forth some affectuous exercise of hope.
Say, O Lord in thee I hope, thou art my hope, thou art my last end, thou my
glory, thou my pathe, thou my way. Ah when shall I see that day, that happy
day, that day without night, that everlasting day, when this soonn shall never
set to me, when no cloud shall ouercast him? I hope o Lord by thy grace, by
virtue of thy promise, that I shall perform all that thou have commanded me,
and so enjoy shortly that I hope. And therefore come dangers, come perils,
come temptations, come persecutions, come prisons, come feters, come rack, come
gallows, come death, come whatsoever the devil can suggest, or malice deuyse:
in thee I trust, thou can, thou will defend me if I fail not, and yet by
virtue of this bread of life, I hope never to fail.

Many more such sweet speeches, thy soul may most affectuously utter by the
virtue of Hope.

The other operation of louinge of God, as communicatiue of his goodness, as
beneficial unto us, serves no less for our purpose, then the former. Because
hear we may discourse over all the benefits that God haithe bestowed upon men
in general, by gifts of nature, grace, and glory, and upon us in particular.
The general are, Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Grace, and Glory, offered
to all those that will accept them: particular, to be borne of Christianes, to
be baptized, to have offended, and yet that Gods justice would not condemn
us to hell in such estate, but called us again, justified us: and so by
passing distinctly over the favors of God, I know not how, but the soul
ordinatily feels, a most sweet affection and tender love unto the geuer. In
so much that S. Augustine in his confessions, thanked God for the milk he
received of his nurse, by his divine providence. For it is most certain, that
if we be of the number of gods elected: all particular gifts and graces
wear conferred to us, with an intention that we should effectually by the^
take occasion to serve God, and consequently meritt life everlasting.

Wherefore I would counsel every one, to weigh his life paste, and what means
God used, to do him good, as to converse with godlymen, to read such
spiritual books, to see, hear, or understand, of examples which moved him
to virtue, terrifyed him from sin. Let him call to memory so many
illustrations, godly motions, fears of death, desires of heaven, sweet shows
of virtuous life, deformities of a vicious, terroures of hell; glory and peace
in the service of God, finally what infinite ways God provided to help him to
his last end.

All which recapitulated in one sea of graces: let him thank God for the^ Let
him say, O bountiful Lord, thy goodness is endless, thy mercies bou^dlesse:
how shall I repay such graces and favors? I am not able to answer a myte
for a million: and low, to make them more aboundante, thou have prepared for
me, the treasures of heaven and earth in this Sacrament. As thou art mine, so I
will now and ever be thine. What I can do for thee, I will perform, by
enriching thy chur ches, feedinge thy poor servants, procuringe thy glory.
etc.

CHARITY.
IF ever in this life Charity have occasion, 2 Timothy 1
his disciple, to stir up the grace he had received by imposition of hands,
by the Sacrament of holy orders.

And in this, we must imitate the cock, who flakereth and shakethe of drowsy
sleep defore he croweth. This reuyuing of Charity we may come by, if we
procure in our Souls, a great thirst of the water of life, and a great
hunger of this bread of immortality.

And in very deed theare lackethe nothing to attain thereunto, but a little
demurr and consideration of the mystery. For if one put his hand in a flame
and presently pull it back again, the flame will not burn him, but if he
demurr a little, no doubt but fire will show what it is: so he that lingerethe
a while in weighinge what he receives, shall not need any great exercise to
procure an inflammed desire, but like the Spowse who said, Fulcite me floribus,
stipate me malis, quia amore Cant. 2
langueo. Fortify me with flowers Inuyrone me with apples: For I languishe with
love. He will languishe with the faintnes of consuming affection, and cry with
David, Quemadmodum Psalm. 41
desiderat ceruus adfontes aquarum, ita desiderat anima mea ad tedeus: quando
veniam and apparebo ante faciem tuam? As the heart thirstethe after the
fountaynes of water, so my soul thirstethe after thee my God: when shall I
come and appear before thy face.

In this consideration we may breefly call to memory, the evils, the presence
of our Savior in this Sacrament remouethe from us, and the good it brings to
us. For if I be infirm, he will cure me: if wounded, he will heal me: if
weak, he will comfort me: if blind, illuminate me: if poor enrich me; if
naked, cloathe me: if hungry, feed me: if dead, reuyue me; if sensual,
spiritualize me: if drowned in worldly delights, divert my heart to the true
Joys of heaven.

Sins paste, he pardonethe: from future offenses he preserves: temptations,
he diminishes: passions, he brydleth: concupiscenses, he restrayneth: remorse
of conscience, he appeaseth: the pains of purgatory, he releaseth: the flames
of hell, he who ly extinguisheth: all evils in fine fly from the face of his
majesty, as serpents and snakes from the light of the soonne.

The good he brings, is no less then the evil he expels: For (by his
presence) he does dignify our souls, deisy our faculties, unity us really to
him self, join all the faithful in a perpetual leauge and amity,
replenishe us with graces, sprincle our hearts with his blood, inflame them
with his love, arm them against enemies, so^ve in them the seed of
immortality; befides a sea of mo favors which we declared in the book of the
causes of this institution.

I think that no man of discretion, would not desire most earnestly such a
food, which bringethe with it so many treasures. Yet hear I might exclame and
call upon heaven and earth, to wonder at the blyndnes of men, who ripp owte the
bowels of the earth, delue into the heart of craggie rocks, for the thirst of
goulde and filuer: who sleep neither day nor night to hunt for honors: who
spend their life, their patrimonies, their credit, their bodies, their
souls, for a dram of dronken delight and carnal pleasure, and yet will
scarce spend the tenthe part of that diligence, to winn the treasure of all
treasures, the honor of all honors, the delight of all delights, true,
permanent, glorious, not inferioure to man, but elcuating him, to the equality
of Angels.

If a man be very sick, the thirst he haith to recover his health, causethe
him abide launcing, cutting, Lurning, he will not refuse purgations, though his
sight repyne at them, his imagination abhor them, his taste detest them, his
stomach, both loath and languishe at them. And so dear brother oughteste thou
to conceive thy self to be most miserably sick, for sundry spiritual
infirmities of evil habites, strong passions, vehemente concupiscences, many
venial sins, diverse evil occasions, which in short time without all doubt,
will draw thee near a spiritual death, if thou preserve not thy soul with
this medicyne of life.

Neither must thou think, that preseutly thou shalt recover thye spiritual
health, for neither do patientes presently recover their corporal: but expect
a time, use it often, procure that thy body be kept in good order, thy soul
collected, thy company and conversation religious: and then after half a year
of this carriage, tell me whether this medicine haith not greatlycomforted thy
soul, rectifyed thy faculties, and caused thee, to render that fruit thou
wished. Inflammed with this heavenly desire, and languishinge with this sacred
hunger: I will say with David, No^ dabo somnum oculis Psa. 131
meis, nec palpebris men's dormitationem, and requiem temporibus meis: donec
inueniam locum Domino, tabernaculum deo Jacob. I will not permit mine eyes to
sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, nor my temples to rest: until I provide a
place for our Lord, a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. I will neither sleep
nor rest, till I find the place of my God, till I see him, till I prepare him a
grateful seat, a godly tabernacle, a princely throne. With the spowse in the
Canticles, Cir cuibo querens quem diligit anima mea. I will circuit,
searchinge, whom my soul does love. I will use these circles. I will first
consider how God created me right, but I fell; then he redeemed me, but yet I
was negligent to apply his precious blood unto my soul: He gave me then his
sacred food, wherein he is the applyer, the applied, and the means of
application. O how many circles of Gods love and our ingratitude, might
devout souls run over, in meditatinge the passion of Christ, and the
manifould favors he shewethe us, in this Sacrament?

UNION IN WILLS. HOW WE MVST PROCVRE to unite our Souls to God, in preparing
them to receive him.
ALL natural bodies, the nearer they approach their places and centers, the
more they accelerate their motion, they runn with greater force and vehemence:
So our hearts running to God the most natural place of our souls, the very
center of all pyctie and religion, with the wings of our wills, we ought
rather to fly then run. And therefore as our Savior comes to us running
over the mountains, and passinge ouer-hilles, Cant. 2
moved with the motion of love: so let us with the like love, encounter him. He
comes to unite him self to us (as was declared in the 41. cause) let us
endeavor to unite our souls to him. And first of all, our wits and
understanding: Reuele to God thy secrets, Psalm. 36
make him partaker of thy councels, of thy designementes.

But some wrangsing Sophister will say, to what end? does not god know omnes
cogitationes nostras a long? allour Ps. 138
thoughts a far of? Does not he see them better then we? To what end then
should we reveal them? He can satisfy this speculation. He knew well the
contrary to be most grateful to God in practice who said Effandite coram illo
corda vestra, Pour owte your Psa. 61
hearts before him, open unto him your desires. He knows them before I am not
ignorante, effundite, pour them forth, and he likewise will confirm it Psalm.
36
that said, Reuela Domino viam tuam, and ipse faciet. Reveal thy way unto out
Lord, and he will work. For in truth although God know all we have in our
hearts, yet, I know not how, but (in vnfouldinge our secrets, unto him) we
receive a marvelous contentation, as the prodigal son returning to
hisfather, discovered his lewd behavior, and ryotous life in saying, Pater
peccaui in coelum and coram te, and Luc. 15
iam non sum dignus vocari filius tuus. Father I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and am not now worthy to be called thy son. His Father knew
well before his erroures, he had seen his repentance, but yet this pouringe
forth of his soul, was questionles, no less grateful to the Father, then
comfortable to the son. And David the Prophet seems to empty all the secrets
of his soul, in his psalms, Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco, and
peccatum ^^um contrame est semper. Tibi soli peccaui, etc. Because I
acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin is always against me, thee alone I
have offended. So ought we in particular to receive the memory of our passed
life, the sins of our youth what graces God gave us, and how negligently, how
indeuoutly, how irreuerently we departed our selves with him and them. And
truly if this be done with good attention, and but a mean affection: It
fillethe the soul with marvelous consolation. For me think I see God, powringe
into those vessels of that heart, as many graces as it reuealeth secrets;
because he knows well enoughe, that men can not instruct or open unto him,
any thing that he knows not: vet that friendly affection, that amiable
conversation, that endeuorethe to accomplish true frendshipp and amity, is
most aceptable to his majesty, and consequently, most profitable to us.

UNION IN AFFECTION.
THis Union of affection, the best offspring of Charity, questionles co^teyneth
the sum of all perfection: whereof he that intends to fill his soul with
Gods favors and graces, must perfume it with this sacred incense, and
conform his will with gods will, his intention, with Gods intention, his
desires, with Gods desires. For in very deed, this makes not only a good
Christian, but also a perfect spiritual man.

Two things specially God desires, for which he created this mighty mass of
the world, his own glory, and our sanctity or rather let us say but one,
take whether of them you will: our holiness, is his glory, and his glory, is
our holiness. For gods glory is, that we think of him, as creatures of their
Creator: That we knowledge him, serve him, and love him in our selves,
procuring continually, that others do the same, and this is our holiness.

He therefore that pretendethe, to make an exquisyte preparation, Let him hear
dilate his heart, and extend his affection. I know some good souls in the
world, who every morning so soon as they awake, the first word that issues
out of their mouth is this, O Lord grant me that I may spend this day most
fervently to thine honor and glory. And as often as they hear the clock
stryke, pass by any church see any Image, they renew this sweet and angelical
breath. And truly in this point, we should be like the covetous marchantes,
who let noe occasion pass wheare they think they may gain. You may see how
they stand expecting at their stawles, every look or glaunce, every stop or
stay, of passingers, is a sufficient motive, to inuyte or call them to buy: So
should these souls do, who are trained up in the shopp of devotion, and
love of God, let pass noe little occasion, wheare they may glorify God by
perfecting their own souls, by benefyting their neighbors. For I let pass
the bound we have to do so, for diverse benefits god haith bestowed upon us. I
omit the excess of meritts we offer up to God: I will say nothing of the
fervent love of God which deserves it, but that this affection, this desire,
this thirste of gods glory, is a great sign of predestination. For I am not
ignorant, that Fathers assign many great and notable conjectures, of the
present grace and favor of god, of eternal predestination and future
blessedness: as to live alonge time without mortal sin, is a good sign of
present grace, and predestination, but secret sins creep in often, and a
certain remissness of good woorks, cracketh the brake many times, wherein men
seemed to sail securely.

Patience in adversity, arguethe a stedfastnes of mind, and exceesse of
fortitude, but yet often he that is patient to day, loses his patience to
morrow, he that was patiente in loosinge his goods, will not stick to fall
into some other sin, or if he be patient in one matter, he is impatiente in
an other. To hear willingly the word of God, (so our Savior taught us) is a
good sign, for he that affectethe gods word commonly haithe an intention to
observe it, but this sign often fails, for many for vain curiosity, or to
manteyne their wrangling spirits, as Caluenistes are never quiet, but when
their ears are tikled with itchinge sermons, or cauelinge cathechismes. To
love and pray for our enemies, is a good sign of predestination, a note of
great charity, but yet it may proceed of a certain natural disposition of
a noble mind, rather then the true love of god. For many disdayn to revenge
injuries done unto them, for a natural inclination to magnanimity, as the
eagle to seize upon the flies, although they molest her. Martyrdom, a
confession of Christ's faith, a sealinge of his love with blood, is an
excellent sign, but yet we see how many heritykes have offered them selves to
death for their fantastical opinions. Yet in my Judgment, this affection,
this neuer-resting desire of Gods glory, this continual procuring of a
man's own perfection, or the spiritual good of his neighbor, is as
manifest a sign of predestination, as any of the rest. For such souls are
like unto a needle touched with the load stone, that never restethe till it be
fixed with the polestarr: even so they touched with predestination, ueuer rest
night nor day, eatinge and drinkinge, at home and abroad, in prison and in
liberty, they are always stirringe, they never can be quiet, till they be
united with their pole, with god in heaven.

I know this sign does not inuincibly prove that a man is in grace, or
predestinate, yet it is one of the best conjectures, because it carriethe with
it so many excesses of virtue internally and externally for a man's own
perfection, and the perfection of others toward God and our neighbors.

Moreover it can not proceed but from most vehement Charity, and a continual
motion of gods grace.

I have seenc this fervent affection in certain devout persons, put in
practyse, and they seemed unto me, Scintillae Sap. 3
discurrentes in aruudinet^, certain sparks offyre flying among dry canes
burning all they meet withal: Their eyes, actions, and words, wear all
inflammed with this desire of Gods glory and honor: They wear never well,
but when they meditated, invented, or executed something for god for the
reducing of sinners to good life, heretics to the church, and good men to the
increase of perfection.

In this union of our wills with gods will, consists the sum, the soul,
and verey essense of that preparation, we ought to bring to this Altar of god.
For by this affection, our hearts are i^larged, the vessels of our souls are
made more capable, The temple of Christ is much more amplifyed. Therefore he
that intends to receive our Savior, with convenient devotion: let him make
a most firm resolution, not in words, but really, and from the bothom of his
heart, that he will neither speak, think, nor do, any thing in all his life
(as far as god will grant him grace) but all shall tend to gods honor
and glory, to the profitt of his own soul, and his neighbors. This is a
heart, secundum cor dei, correspo^dent to the heart of god. O what a divine union
will this be, wheare Christ geuethe him self wholly to man, and man
consecrateth him self wholly to Christ.

Me think I see the soonne and moon in the full, to stand one against the
other, a river running with a most vehement course, and incorporatinge it self
with all the endless water of the ocean sea. Me think I see a fire fall from
heaven, and consume this divine sacrifyce, as it did devour the sacrifyce, the
wood, and water Elias had 3 Re. 18
prepared.

O blessed souls that understand this point and put it in execution. O how
grateful an oblation is this, to him that thirsts after our good? O how
rich will such souls return from this tresury of all gods graces? All
other unions, all other vertnes, wait upon this good will, the efficacy
whereof, the execution will try.

ZEAL.
GOd in this Sacrament, showed not only the first effect of love which is
union, but also zeal, ecstasy, and benevolence, as was declared in the former
book of causes.

And therefore love requyring a reciprocate and mutual correspondence, we
ought to come prepared, to receive him with a proportion to such love, as he
offers him self withal.

This effect of love, causes grief and anguishe in those souls wheare it
reigns, because they can not abide that God be iniuryed, they can not
tolerate the blasphemies of me^, their improperations, maledictions, theftes
heresies, and such like offenses. For when they perceive God so despised, whom
men ought so to have woorshipped and reverenced: They consume away with
grief, and so said he that felt it him self, Tabescere me fecit Ps. 148
zelus meus, My zeal did consume me.

He then that drawethe near unto Christ by intending to eat his body,
consequently to his former resolution must determine with himself to proclaim
open wars with sins and heresye, that he will root them owte of the world,
with as great industry and diligence, as lies in his power. So taught he us
that said, Qui diligitis Psa. 96
dominum, odite malum, You that love god, hate evil. For the love of God
engendereth in our hearts a horroure and detestation of sin, because sin
was that which nailed him on the cross sin proclameth war against his grace,
sin carries mortal hatred against his love, sin finally hindrethe us from
due preparation, and would rob us of the fruit of this Sacrament. Therefore
let the devout receiver renew this holy hatred, let him proclaim an endless
war, without hope of peace or truce.

EXTACIE.
(...) actions by saying, this o Lord I do for thee, this I offer thee, this
I will effect most diligently and for thy love.

Heareupon will ensue an admirable peace and tranquillity of mind, and that
quyetnes of conscience, that surpasses all sense. Besides an alacrity of heart
to go forward in the service of God, according to that saying of David,
Cucurri viam mandatorum tuorum, Psa. 118
cum dilatasti cor meum. I have run the way of thy co^mauudements when thou
have dilated my heart.

Truly after that a man is thus translated into God, he shall find hear upon
earth, a heavenly paradyse, yea he shall possess a paradyse of pleasure in his
own soul, and consequently a most fit soil to plant the harbor of life,
our Savior Christ, with the sacred fruit of his Eucharist.

BENEVOLENCE. 5
IF I have consecrated to God, my heart with affection, and all that I am, by
offering him my body and soul, what remaynethe to imparte by benevolence? Love
can not want this effect, and therefore we must find owte some object.

If my faculty serve, I will be bountiful to the Church by adorninge his
sacraments: I will succor those which suffer in prison for the confession of
this mystery: I will procure means, although never so many dangers ensue,
that God be glorified by the distribution of this sacred food. For better it
wear that I should be depryued of a thowsande lives, then God depryued of his
glory. If my ability afford not, then will I wish and desire that it did, and
supply in affecte, that which I want in effect. Then I will ascend with my
prayer into heaven, and request all the neene quieres of Angels, Archangels,
Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers, Princes, Cherubims and Seraphims, all
the trowpes of Patriarchs and Prophets, all the college of Christ's Apostles,
the invincible army of Martyrs, the holy congregation of Confessoures, the
unspotted society of Virgins: to bless and praise God for his admirable love,
in instituting this Sacrament, and beseech them with their inflammed
affections, to accompany my could desires.

After with the three children, I will invoke all the creatures of God to
bless him by saying, Benedicite omnia Dan. 3
opera domini, domino etc. Praise ye our Lord, all works of our Lord. And
with king David, Laudate Dominum Psa. 148
de coelis etc Praise ye our Lord from heaven. And inuyte them now not only
to praise him, as dwelling in heaven, but also as soiourning hear in earth.

The denoute receauer, might add hear, a reciprocate love of God, according
to those diuersityes of love, which we declared in the other book of causes,
that our loving God in this crament, did manifest unto us, as a pryzinge love,
a vehemente love with 12 proprieties, an extensyue love, and a tender love. All
which, as we there appropriated them to God: so hear we may procure in some
part, to apply them unto us, and endeavor to actuate them in desire or effect,
as near as we may. And therein, those that receive this Sacrament every day,
shall find most abundant matter for Meditation, and those which communicate
once a week, for diverse days, and diverse times.

GRIEF FOR SINS PAST.
The Fyfih act of Preparation.
ALthough by confession and contrition, our sins be pardoned, yet we must not
live in security that God haith forgeuen them, according to that saying of
the wise man; De propitiato p^ccato, noli esse sine met is Eccl. 5
Be not without fear of the forgeuen sin. And therefore the practice of good
king Ezechias, may teach us a good lesson, Recog^tabo (saiethe he) omnes
annos meos, in amaritudine animae Isa. 38
meae. I will think of all my years in bitterness of my soul. I will therefore
cast an eye over my whole life and in one prospect, behoulde the deformity,
the multitude, the iniquity, the turpitude, the malice, of my ouerpassed
course, in what a hell of wickedness, I lay buried, in what a dangerous state I
had cast my self, and yet God of his mercy haith vouchsafed, not only to
call me out of that chaos and abisse of miserye, but also haith been contented,
to admit me to the participation of him self, that I might suck honey owte of
his side, in whose face so often I have spitte the rancoure of my spyte and
malice. O what fountain ofteares hear would I wish, to bath my soul in, not
tears of water, but tears of blood. For what tears can rynse that soul
which nothing else but only Christ's blood could cleanse? Hear I would weep
with Mary Magdalen: Hear I would Luc. 7 Psalm. 6 Mat. 26 Psalm. 50
wash my cowch with David: Hear I would complain with S. Peter: Hear I will
cry, Amplius laua me domine ab iniquitate mea, and a peccato meo munda me.
Wash me again O Lord from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. O
Lord I hope thou have forgeuen me my sins, but yet I am not contented, wash
me more, wash me again and again, Ah cleanse me from my sin, leave no spott,
no evil habitt, no vicious inclination, no scarre thereof in my soul. For,
Peccatum meum coutra me est semper, My sin is against me always: Me think I
hear continually my conscience ringing a peale to the ears of my soul, and
soundinge this lamentable Anthem without intermission. O unhappy art thou: do,
say, or think what thou can, thou have committed such, and such horrible
crimes, thou haste disgraced, dishonored, despised, and crucified thy God: and
now think thou to have such free access to eat his facred body and blood?
With what face caust thou appear before him, whom so iniuriouslye, so
tratorouslye, for so small intereste, for thine own loss, thou have thus
handled? Amplius laua me. Ah sweet Jesus wash me more. What now avail thee
all those pleasures, Sap. 5
what delight have all thy sensualities left behind them, but the poysened
sting of remorse? Ah, Delicta Psalm. 24
mea ne memineris domine. Sweet Jesus remember not mine offenses. O my God I
would come unto thee, to embrace thee, but my sins do fear me. Oza touched
but thy Arcke, and 2 Reg. 6
presently he was stricken dead. And if one irreuerence deserved such
punishment, what shall I expecte, who have committed thowsandes, and am to eat
the true manna contained in the arcke? If Absalon durst not look 2 Reg. 13
his father in the face for three years, after he had committed one sin: how
dare I look upon this host after so many. If Moses caused the people Exo. 19
to prepare them selves for three days before they received their Law in the
Tables of stone: alas what shall I do who have offended so often, to receive
the Law-geuer him self. If so many 1 Reg. 6
thowsandes dyed, for curiously behoulding gods Arck, which apperteyned not
unto them: Alas I will say good Lord perhaps this sacred food apperteyneth
not to me, and therefore I shall fall into the same punishmente with them, for
having committed a more horrible offense. But yet o lord hopinge in thy
goodness, trustinge in thy mercy; hear I present my selfebefore thy majesty,
prepared to accept what cross, what punishmente, what aduersitye, thy graceous
hand will impose upon me. I am ready to tolerate sickness of my body,
temptations of my soul, imprisonment for my religion, death for the
profession of my faith. Ah sweet Jesus, for extraordinary delights, I am
contented, I desire (with the help of thy grace) extraordinary pains: And I
would wish that rather malice should fail in inuenting, then I in sufferinge.

A PVRPOSE TO OBSERVE Intyrely the commandments of God.
The Sixth act of Preparation.
Charity or the love of God, haith two acts or operations, so annexed unto
it, that neither they can be intended nor executed without Charity, nor
Charity consist without them, yet Charity is the mother, and they the
daughters.

The first Act, is detestation of sin. The next, emendation of life, or a
constant purpose never to transgress mortally, the Law of God. These two
acts I say, issue out of the love of God, for no man can love god effectually,
but he detesteth virtually, all that offends, iniurieth, or impareth his
honor. Likewise he that loves God from his heart, can not but consequently
desire and intend really to observe, all that concerns the ma^tenance and
preservation of their love. Vos (says Christ) amici mei eritis, si Io. 15
feceritis ea quae ego precipio vobis. You shall be my friends, if you do
those things which I command you.

He then that comes to the Eucharist, ought to renew this good purpose, of
obseruinge the commandments of God, because this Sacrament being
instituted, to fortifye and corroborate our souls, enablinge them to observe
more exactly, the precepts of God: What a notable disposition will it be, to
propounde with our selves, most firmly to keep them? But because we know,
that, sine Christo, Ibidem.
nihil possumus facere Without Christ we can do nothing: therefore to help us
to the perfect execution, we receive his body, we crave his grace, we have
recourse to him in this vehement necessity. And therefore let us say, O Lord
we now will begin, to observe Psalm. 7^
thy law, to obey thy commandments, to execute all exactly, that thou have
appointed so lovingly.

These six acts of Fear, Faith, Hope, Charity, Grief, and Emendation,
comprehend the whole preparation, requisyte before receiving of the Eucharist.

Yet in these, I find degrees, for some bring more and some less, according
to the measure of gods grace, and their free wills, for so God haith tempered
them together, and tuned nature with the key of grace, that the excess of
persection in either part renders the harmony much more sweeter, and
specially because the increase of virtue so depends upon us, that gods
grace is ever addressed to help us to a greater degree then we accept of, or
put in execution, as I said, the river ever yeldeth more water, then we bring
from it.

Yet hear it is to be noted, that commonly diuynes grant, that in this
sacrament, by three causes, our grace, Charity, and perfection, are augmented.
First, ex opere operato. For the woork wrought, that is, for the only
receyuinge of this sacrament. So that if one wear in grace, and had noe
disposition at all, he should receive a certain degree of grace, as when
little children in passed ages did communicate, although they brought noe
preparation actually, yet because they wear in grace, thaire grace was
increased; the reason whereof we gather out of those words of Christ,
Quimanducat me, and ipse viuit propter me. Io. 6
He that eats me, lives for me. Which words being absolute, must be
understood, to agree to all sorts of persons that, non ponant obicem,
interpose not some impediment, which children do not. Yet for the reverence to
this maiesticall Sacrament, the holy Ghost directed the church, to prohibit
the use thereof to children and infantes.

The second increment of Grace, proceeds from the disposition, for if a man
fear, believe, hope, etc. or exercise any act of virtue: God rewards it
with present grace, and some degree of future glory.

Hereupon came those axioms in faith, Timor domini expellit peccatum. Eccl. 1
The fear of God, expellethe sin, the which it could not do in effect, but
by the force of grace, that God powers into the soul. Fides tua, te Luc. 7
saluam fecit. Thy faith haithe saved thee. Qui habet hanc spem, sanctificat 1
Io. 3
se. Who haith this hope, sanctifyeth him self. Remittuntur ei peccata multa,
Luc. 7
quoniam dilexit multum. Many sins are forgeuen her, because she haithe loved
much. And although most of those places, show but that grace in our first
sanctification, is conferred unto us for these dispositions: yet I hope noe man
will deny, but the same are instruments deserving for the increase of justice.
Because he wear very blockishe that would say, that virtue is better
rewarded of god when a sinner begins to live virtuously, then when a just
man continuethe his loyalty and service to god, for so grace should be a
hinderance to reward, and sin a furtherance: and a man merit less being
gods friend, then when he was his enemy: the which is not only absurd,
but also folishe. He therefore that disposethe his soul by the aforesaid
virtuous operations, for them precysely receyuethe a certain degree of grace
and glory.

Thirdly he receyuethe increase by the union of these two: that is, God
communicates one portion of grace for the Sacrament precyselye, one portion
for the disposition precysely, and one portion, for the conjunction of these
two: that is, this Sacrament conferrethe a certain limited portion of grace
by it self, yet when it fyndeth the subject better disposed, and more capable:
according to the capacity, our Savior increases his influence, not unlike
to the Soonne, which communicates more light to those subjects, who are
clearer and more transpara^t, as we prove in glass, Crystal, water, and
aere. The reason of this excess, procedethe from the manner that God uses in
conforming grace as near as may be, to the manner of nature, in her operations.

This augmentation and growth in grace, requytethe abundantly, the little
labor and pains we bestow in preparation.

For what is it to grow in grace? To have our Souls refyned more exactly, and
the Image of God more lively renewed in them? What is it to grow in grace? That
our wits and wills, our hearts and affections, be more prone and pliable:
and better inclyned to goodness? What is it to grow in grace? To arm our
souls and fortify them against all spiritual encounters. What is it to grow
in grace? To love God more, to increase in his love and frendshipp. What is it
finally to grow in grace? To have a title to an excess of glory in the
Kingdom of heaven: to increase our glory, enryche our crown, to adorn us in
this life: and after, to yield us no como^blisse in the life everlasting.

THE SECOND PART. OF PREPARATION WHEN we Communicate.
THe time when we communicate, I understand, not the real momente when we
receive the host, but a good little space going before, some half an hour or
a quarter, at what time I approach near the place, wheare my Lord and Savior
remains: or if I communicate at Mass, all the time of the mass.

At that present (according to his precept) I will first call to memory, his
bitter passion: I will Imagine, I did see him distilling his sacred blood in
the mount Caluarye, to wash my sins, to cure my soars, to deliver me from
death, to conducte me to a perpetual life. I will sit under the shade of
this tree, and see if he will let fall into the lapp of my heart, some of those
fruits, which he brought from heaven, whose virtue causes immortality. Hear I
will set my soul fully in order, to receive my Lord. But because I know, that
as one sort of color, loathethe the eye, one sort of meat cloyeth the
stomach, therefore I will put on the habites of diverse persons, who come all to
this fountayn of life, to this tree of paradise, to this gate of heaven, to
quench their thirst, to restore their forces, to demand some spiritual
refection.

First I will come as a beggar poor and naked, to be appareled with this
sacrament. 2 As wounded to death, to find hear the medicyne of life. 3 As a
son, to his father. 4 As a friend, to his friend. 5 As a soldier, to his
Captain. 6 As a scholar, to his master. 7 As a creature, to glorify his
Creator. 8 As one chayned by enemies, sekig for his redemer. 9 As a gardin
after winter withered, and dried, to demand the dew ofheauen. 10 As an
infant, to the breaste of his mother. 11 As lackinge some particular virtue,
like a Lazarus, to crave the cru^mes of gods grace. 12 As the three kings
came to adore Christ. 13 As a shipp in a tempest, to desire some prosperous
goal. 14 As the prodigal son. 15 To honor godds Saints. 16 As a heart,
thirsting the fountain of life. 17 As a pilgrim. 18 As a faithless spowse, to
her husband. 19 As propitiation for the dead. 20 As a grateful obsequy to
God, for all his Saints. 21 As moving to prayer.


NAKED.
CAP. 1.
AFter the first and great fall of Adam, Genesis 3
we know he lost his garments of immortality, and in lieu of them, was cast
out of paradise not only naked, but also disgraced with misery, and shame:
And God to declare the base attire and beggerie of his soul, appareled him
with the skins of beasts, that he might understand, his Angelical robes,
were changed into the very scu^me of brute creatures. These beastly rags he
bequethed to all his posterity, and left them as a part of their inheritance.
Yet this attire by baptism we cast away, Christ clotheth us anew, Quot quot
baptizati Gal. 3
estis, Christum induistis. How many of you are baptized, ye have put on
Christ. But alas by actual sins, we are turned out of these garments, and
fallen into as beggarly an estate as before, in such sort that our Savior
recounted to one, his internal misery, and spiritual spiritual poverty, who
thought him self well appareled, Dicis (says Apo^. 3
Christ) quod dives sum and locupletatus, and ^ullius egeo: and nescis quia tu
es miser, and miserabilis, and pauper, and caet^s, and nudus. Thou say,
that, I am rich, and welthie, and I need nothing: and thou knows not, that
thou art a myser, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Lest I
perhaps be fallen into this misery, and be ignorant thereof: I will request
my savior, to cloth me with this Sacrament, the which I know not only to be
meat to feed my body, but also a garmente for my back. For me think I hear
him from the cross (under which I sit) exhorting me to buy this apparel of
him to clothe me again. Suadeo tibi emere Ibidem.
a me aurum ignitum, probatum, vt locuples fias, and vestimentis albis
induaris, vt no^ appareat confusio nuditatis ^^ae. I exhort thee to buy of me
glowing gould, proved, that thou may be ri^he, and be appareled with white
garments, that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. What goulde is this
so glowing, so fined, but our Savior in the Euchariste, but ninge with love,
not defiled with any impurity? For he is new goulde, never stained with sin,
proved with temptations and torments. What can more enrich us then this
treasure? And what garment is more fit and suitable to our soul then he that
made it and redeemed it, the first piece from whence it was cut? For let us
gather all the good and profitt we receive of our garments, and we shall most
evidently see, how the Eucharist better appareleth our souls, then any
garments our bodies.

Four commodities our attire affords. First it keepethe the heat and
warmnes of our bodies. Secondly it defends us from external injuries of
weather, as rain, wind, could, etc. Thirdly garments adorn and deck the
body. Fourthly many garments yield a most grateful smell.

Let us runn over them all and contemplate then in the Euchariste, the which
concernethe the heat of our souls, the internal devotion and Charity, for
those words, ad literam to the letter, must be thus understood, If you eat
not the flesh of the son Io. 6
of man and drink his blood, you shall have noe life in you. That is, you
shall loose your spiritual life the heat of Charity, for without this garment
it vaporeth forth. Therefore we must procure the Eucharist, to keep in the
vapoures and exhalations, that the soul may be warm with piety and devotion.

Besides, the Eucharist is meat, it norisheth, and what more preserves and
manteyneth our natural heat, then meat? Therefore the Euchariste in this
surpasses all sorts of garments: for it does not only co^serue the heat of
our souls that we have, but also adds an internal heat, which noe garment
affords.

The Euchariste secondarily, protecteth us from injuries of spiritual enemies,
who with tempests of temptations, with congealed frostes of wicked examples,
with boisterous winds of persecutions, contend to extinguish the spiritual
heat of grace and Charity: But that table which Christ haith prepared for
David, against the^ that afflicted him: supplyeth the want Psalm. 22
of a winters robe, no could can pearce it, no wind pass through it.

The Eucharist thirdly, adorneth the receauers, by making one body with them:
by communicating to the soul, the richest treasures of heaven: by enduinge it
with virtues: by refyninge the Image of God: by deifying all devout
Communicants with his presence. No scarlet, no purple, no stones, no pearls,
no dyamondes, no clothe of tissue: may be compared to this attire. For as the
soul surpassethe by thowsandes the body in perfection: so the garments of the
soul, the garments of the body, by millions, in degree of excellency.

Lastly the Eucharist was represented by those garments which Jacob Genesis 27
appeared withal before his oulde father Isaac, who feeling the fragrante
smell thereof, tanquam agri pleni, cui dixit dominus, As of a full feelde, the
which God haithe blessed: gave him that solemn benediction of the dew of
heaven, and the ^att of the earth, abundance of corn and wine. Hear the
soul appearinge before God with the spiritual garments of the Eucharist: the
eternal Father, our true Father by creation, our Father which is in heaven,
perceauing the supernatural sent of this perfumed attire: by the hands of
the holy Ghost, raineth upon us his celestial benediction, the dew of grace,
and internal virtues, the fatt of the earth, the fruits of all good works,
abundance of corn and wine, that is, the means how to receive his blessed
body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, as often as we desire, for
this questionless, is an exceeding and excellent benediction.

Therefore I beseech thee o sweet savior, since this Sacrament will cover so
well mine ignominye and shame, conserve the natural heat of my soul defend
me from external injuries, adorn me more decently, then any corporal attire,
render such a grateful smell unto the holy Trinitye, that thou will not
permit me to be ashamed under thy Cross, that I dye not for could, where such
warm apparel may be had, that I may appear before the face of my God, and
not hyde me from him, as my first shameful naked father did. Let me not be
clothed with the skins of beasts, that is the garments of sensuality, but
with the robes of Angels, the purple of Charity.

But what is this contradiction sweet Jesus I here in thy speech? Thou say
that I am miserable, poor, blind, and naked. How can a beggar buy so rich a
treasure? How can he that haith not clothes to serve his necessity, bargain
for such merchandise, as will cause superfluity? Did not thou say once, Come
to me, and emite sine pretio, Isa. 55 Apoc. 22
and buy without price? If I be a beggar, I can not buy it; If I pay nothing
for it, I buy it not, but thou give it to me. By these means, I must buy it,
and not buy it, which is a manifest contradiction.

O blessed Savior, glory for ever be to thy name. Ah, no man appearethe so
beggarly before him, but he may, (if he will) buy the most precious treasure
of heaven, the sacrament of the Eucharist, this obryzed gould, this new goulde,
this glowing gould, Apoc. 3
this approved gould, this goulde that will enryche him for ever. For God
assistethe all men with his Grace, to save them if they will use it: He
knocks Ibidem.
to enter, if they will open the door of their hearts: He sows the seed of
his word, in the feeldes of Mat. 13
their souls, if they will manure it; He cryethe upon them, if they will
Psalm. 94
hear his voice: He commaundethe them to come, if they will obey his precepts:
yet because he will not draw any man but with free will, the nature whereof is
such, that it can not stand with necessitye or violence: it will have
liberty to do and not do.

This free will, this to do that we might have omitted, this liberty, is all
the price that god demaun death, even of the poorest beggars that live, for the
greatest treasure that heart can conceive: the which in very deed, is not
comparable with the reward, with the merchandise, that we buy: yet such is the
goodness of God, so much he pryseth our liberty, so greatly he estemethe this
free love, that he will give him self wholly for it.

We buy then the Eucharist, because we give God our free love for it. We buy it
not, because we pay an equal price for it: we bargay ne nothing for it,
because the excess of Christ, surpasses so far, all we can say or do, that
in comparison, all is nothing, yet this little (because it is ours) god
accepts for a meritt and desert.

Although the blessed Sacrament, adornethe our souls more gloriously, then
ever Solomon was adorned in all his glory, and bewtisyeth it better, then ever
the lillies of the feelde wear decked Mat. 6
in their cheifest pride: yet these garments wherewith Christ apparelethe our
souls, dif^er in many points points from the most precious robes that ever
clothed man's body.

First because there was never garmente

So long as the children of Israel Deuteronomy. 29
wandered in the desert, so long as they were fedd with Manna from heaven,
vestes non sunt attritae, their garments wear not torn with wearing: so long
as we feed of this heavenly Manna in this life, veyled with a cloud, and in
the other, face to face, our graceous garments shall never be consumed.

Secondly there is no garment, but through the substance: but these garments
of Christ are so well wouen, so well sowed, and so cloase: that no temptation,
noe persecution, noe distress or tribulation, can pass through them to annoy
the soul, if we do our endeavor. So said she who had proved, Aquae multae
non potuerunt extinguere Cant. 8
Charitatem. Many waters could not extinguish his Charity. Why so? Because the
heat thereof was guarded and kept in, with the Garments of Christ, the sacred
Eucharist.

Thirdlye all other garments, are Suscitans a terra inopem, ^ de stereore
erigens paup ^re no, vt collocet Ps. 112
cum cum principibus, cum pr. populi sui. Raysinge from earth the needy, and
from the dunge erectinge the poor, that he might place him with princes, with
the princes of his people. For as we declared in the book of causes, by this
Sacrament, the receauers are deifyed by the real union of our Savior with
them: they are exalted to a supernatural resemblance of god, Facti diuinae
nature ae participes, Being 2 Pet. 1
made partakers of his divine nature. For in very deed grace and Charity,
which our Savior distilleth from this Sacrament, eleuate the soul, to a
supernatural and divine perfection, and consequently carries it beyond the
bounds of nature: which neither the artificial atture of Solomon, nor the
natural garments of the lillies or roses, ever could effect. Therefore if my
blessed Savior would vouchsayfe to cover my nakedness with these glorious
garments, I would accounte my self happy. I would not cast lottes with
covetous soldiers to have all, or loose all, for so perhapps I might go Mat. 27
without them: but I crave them for love, as the Liuerye of my Lord. I would
be known in the Court of heaven to carry his arms, his cognizanse, because I
will glory more therein, then all base worldlinges in their gaiest attire.

WOVNDED.
CAP. 2.
I May (for exercise of my devotion, and incertitude of my repentance, after my
most certain fall, and relaps into so many offenses) Imagine that I am that
disgraced traueler, who straying Luc. 10
betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho, fell into the hands, of those graceless
thieves, who spoiled me of grace, and wounded me in nature, robbed me of the
treasure I brought from Jerusalem, and half dead, abandoned me, leaving no
refuge, but this good Samaritan, this Viator declinans ad manendum. Hier. 14
This passinger declyninge a little to stay with me, of whom first of all I
must expecte some sacred medicyne, to cure my wounds, that he power in his
wine, and annoint them with oil: I will open unto him the places, I will show
the pain, I will discover in what continual agonies they have cast me: and
then I hope to find redress. My wit, the light of my soul, the pylott of my
spiritual ship, the soonn of my little world, they have blinded with
ignorance, wounded with erroures and false opinions: I am become extreme
curious in other men's affairs, and marvelous negligent in mine own matters;
I see, that lies before me, and make great other menns faults, but with other
eyes I behold that lies within me, and concerns me most.

What distractions feel I in all good actions? If I converse with God in my
prayers, my mind wandereth most indecently and most irreuerently in
impertinent discourses, in foreign countries, in temporal business: There am I
most absent, wheare I ought to be most present.

How seldom do I remember god? How many hours pass I vaynely withowt
thinking upon him, who never omitteth minute, but he thinks of me? O
fountain of all Light, power thy sacred oil into the lamp of my soul, that
I may see more distinctly, what concerns thee, and what concerns me. This
Sacrament I know, is not only meat, but also a medicyne: It is not wine
alone, but wine and oil. For if it wear not oil, the scriptures would never
so often have inculcated, the benediction of God principally to consist in
corn, wine, and oil: except this blessed Psa. 4
land of promise, the holy Catholic Church, did afford her inhabitants,
abundance of them all.

I hope then by the benefyte of this spiritual unction, that the mistes of my
mind, the erroures of mine understanding, shall be in great part taken
away, or diminished. But the weakness of my will, yeldeth nothing to the
ignorance of my wit, in faults and imperfections. For what extreme
difficulty find I to do well? What extraordinary facility to do ill? I
ascend the hill of virtue by vyolence, and descend into the cave of vice, by
a natural inclination. What exorbitant desires do boil in my breast, to
please and delighte this sack of durte? this meat for worms? this gate of
sin? this body of mine? What care, what industry, use I, to find out
means to feed and pamper it^

But contrary wise, I attend nothing less then my soul, how it behaueth it
self, what hunger it suffers, what repast it ought to have.

Temptations abound, and I regard not: occasions of offense are daily
offered, and I flee none: sins excede in enormitie, and number, and I never
repent me. How inconstant do I find my self in all affairs? Now I will,
now I will not: yea in theselfe same moment, I feel my soul willing and
unwilling to effect diverse things.

This instabilitie causes in me, an internal combat, where I must both
feight, and defend: I must be the agent and patient.

O blessed spring of all comforthe, power thine oil of consolation, into these
hard impostumed wonndes: Mollify them, with this mollifyinge balm. Hear I
lack wine to rynse my soars, and therefore wash them o lord with this sacred
wine, sprincle me O sweet Jesus, with this I sopc and blood, for thereby my
wounds shall be washed, my faculties fortifyed, my soul corroborated and
enabled for action.

Mollify the hardness of my heart, with this sweet oil, annoint my heart, with
this sweet oil, annoint my stiff and vnplyable joints, that I may exercise
them to thine honor and glory.

But what shall I say of the untowardness of my passions? my sensuality,
co^cupiscenses, and all that vghe brood of original sin, who like so many
vypets, would kill their mother, so many hungry dogs, devour their master, so
many horseleches, suck owte the swetest blood of my soul. Ah alas, A planta
pedis, vsque ad v^rticem Isa. 1
capitis, non est in me sanitas. From the soale of my foot, to the crown of
my head, theare is no health in me. Ah good Lord, I may rather say I am dead,
then wounded: and therefore I can not find out any way, to heal those soars,
but thy blood which raises the dead to life.

AS A SON TO HIS FATHER.
CAP. 3.
IT wear hard to discern, whether is more sweet to a good man, to be called
the son of God, or grateful to God that the just call him Father. For
questionless this title is the first and sole, with which God appointed us to
call upon him, in that sacred prayer, which he him self regestred to be
recyted of all his faithful children, Pater noster qui es in caelis.
Our-Father which art in heaven. And therefore before I receive my heavenly
father, I will dispose my self, as a son ought to present him self before
such a father.

I am not ignorante that Christ as God, is my Father by creation, yea more
then my father, because my soul did wholly proceed from God, and my body
wherein my parents challenge their part, by a more special and excellent
influence, was produced of God, then by my carnal progenitors. Therefore I
will acknowledge my Savior, as my Father, the principal. Author and framer of
my nature.

But because this agrees to all me^ as well as me: I will pass a little
further, and call him mine adopting Father, yea rather supernatural Father by
a new regeneration in baptism, wheareby, the Adoption of God, surpassethe all
other adoptions that occurr betwixt men. Saluos nos fecit, per ad Tit. 3
lau^erum regenerationis. He haith saved us by the lauer of regeneration. For
men that adopt others, to be their children, take those that be strangers unto
them, that are not their own sons. 2 They adopt other men's children, for
lack of properissue. 3 The adopted must freely accept the adoption when he
comes to years of discretion. 4 He must show him self obediente and
dutiful, to his adoptinge Father. 5 He can not possess his inheritance, till
his Father be dead.

All these conditions most excellently agree to Christ, in adoptinge men to
the kingdom of heaven. For although God be our father and noe stranger unto us
according to our nature, yet to eleuate us supernaturally by grace, to the
kingdom of glory, this our nature can not challenge, she is a stranger, it is
not due unto her, it proceeds of gods good will, mere supernatural and above
the bounds of nature. And therefore in this respect we may be called
strangers to God, and God to us. 2 God haith a natural son within him
self, to whom all his kingdom apperteynethe, by as good right and title, as to
him self: but for that he participateth the whole substance of his Father, and
the same nature, therefore his bounty needed Sons of distinct nature from
him self, specially seeing his kingdom was most sufficient for all.

3 No man is justified when he haithe the use of reason, or admitted to
baptism without his proper assent, Quotquot Io. 1
autem receperunt eum, dedit eis potestatem filios dei fieri. To so many as
received him, he gave power to be the sons of God. Therefore first they
must receive Christ by faith, and not yet presently they are annombred among
the children of God, but thear is required a further disposition a nearer
preparation, a louinge assent, for faith only enableth them to see, by what
means, they may become the children of God.

None shall enter into the kingdom Vos amici mei estis, Io. 15
s^ feceritis quae ego praecipio vobis. You are my friends, if you do those
things which I command you. And twenty more places pregnantly prove that no
man can gain the kingdom of heaven, except he effect that Christ foretoulde,
Si vis ad vitam ingredi, Mat. 19
serua mandata. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

For this reason, howbeit Christ 5 Apoc. 13
was, Agnus occisus ab origin mundi. The Lamb killed from the beginning of the
world; yet none of those Patriarchs or Prophetts, could enter into the gates
of glory, till Christ our Savior, dyed upon the cross, who then opened with
the blood of his passion, these Sancta sanctorum, Holies of holies, which
always we are covered, but once a year, to signify hissolemne entrance into
glory.

Before I come to kneel in the sight of this my louinge Father, I will
meditate with my self, these points of adoption. I will offer my self unto
him as a most obedient son, desireous in all things to deport my self, as
shall best agree with that dignity I am called unto, and standethe with the
honor of my Father.

But I know not how by receiving this blessed Sacrament, I am adopted in a more
excellent manner, then by baptism, by justification, by infusion of grace.
True it is that in baptism, I receive the grace of God, a participation of his
substance, and hearein, this spiritual adoption, may rather be called a
regeneration (as the Scriptures call it) then an adoption: because, as Tit. 3
in natural generation, the Father co^municateth to his son, a part of his
nature: so God in this spiritual regeneration, imparteth a certain
participation of his substance, which is grace, whereas the adopting Father,
co^municateth no internal substance or quality, to his adopted son, but only
an external and terrene inheritance: But in this holy Euchariste, he powrethe
into us all his substance, he admits us unto his kingdom, he openethe the
gates of heaven, for soul and body: we prove our selves, and voluntarily
accept him for our Father.

And therefore I will call this sacred communion, a divine regeneration, and a
most real adoption of Gods deifyed children: and finally, the third
natiuitye in this life, most like to our fynall regeneration in glory.

By this admirable participation of Christ, by the influence of his grace, I
know that my supernatural adoption shall be ratisyed, the love betwixt my
Father and me, confirmed, increased, and reuyued. And therefore attentively I
will recyte our Saviors prayer, by saying, Pater noster. Our Father,
expending every parcel thereof as most apperteyninge unto me; for whom
especially, it was instituted of Christ.

AS A FRIEND TO HIS FRIEND.
CAP. 4.
IT wear great presumption for a man, to think him self a friend of god, if
god him self had not vouch safed, in so many places of scripture, to ennoble
the style of the just, with the title of friend. For as betwixt the Father and
the son, is included a certain Identitye, betwixt the master and his
seruante, superiority and subjection: so betwixt friends, there must needs
be a certain equality. So said Christ to his disciples, Dixi vos amicos, Io.
15
quia omnia quae audiui a patre, nota feci vobis. I have called you friends
because all that I have hard of my Father, I have manifested unto you: and
consequently inhaunced you from the base state of servants, who know not their
masters secrets, to the equality of friends, to be partakers of my most
profounde mysteries. And the reason may easily be yielded, for that if god be
the hyre and guerdon, deserved of the just by their merits and labors in
this life (according to that God uttered to Abraham, Ego ero merces tua Genesis 15
magna nimis. I will be thine exceeding great waige:) Then certainly, the just
possessing god as their crown and God embracing them as his beloved creatures:
there must of necessity follow, respectyue and reverent equality, not in
perfection, but affection, quia amicorum, omnia sunt communia. Because all
things of friends are common, by which friends enjoy all things as common.

Since therefore god (as I hope) haith accepted me into his frendshippe, and
vouchsafed to call me friend: I will endeavor (as near as I can) to observe
the conditions of true friendship, neither to vyolate any circumstance or iott,
that such bountiful amity requires.

And for that grace perfectethe nature, and the true beams of natural reason,
serve as preambles unto grace; Romans 1
Therefore I will search the conditions of human frendshipp in nature, and
transfer them to the divine friendship of grace, that nature and grace may both
consorte in one heavenly harmony.

The Romans (in whom natural reason showed greatly the beams of her light)
among many statues they erected, one was the Image of frendshippe, to show
what conditions, in true and faithful frendshipp, the light of nature
required.

This Statua, was a young man in the pryme of years, bare headed, clothed
with a torn mantle, poynting with his finger to his heart, about which was
written, Long, and Prope. Far of, and near hand. In the hem of his garment
was graven, Hiems, et Aestas, Winter and Summer. The youth and flower of
years, signified the fervor of love: that although the silver hayres, and
hoary heads of friends commend their frendshipp greatly for antiquity, yet
they exacted youth and strength, for the force and vehemency, because love
ought always to be yo^g, feruente, and zealous, never oulde, could, or
remiss.

This condition greatly importethe a friend of God, and I would it wear
prynted with letters of brass, and imprinted with indelible characters, in
every good man's heart, that his love must always be fresh, ever new: for
quod senescit, prope interitum est. Heb. 8
That which waxes old, is near decay: that every day, yea every hour, he
say with David, Dixi, nunc cepi, Psalm. 76
I said, I now begin. What my paste life haith been, I know not, my love to God
haith been nothing, childish, full of defectes and imperfections, Dixi nunc
cepi. Now I will begin, as if I had lived before all in a dream.

Every morning, the first thought that shall open the eyes of my soul, shall
be this, Dixi nunc cepi, This day I will begin to honor, grorify, and love my
god. with that other fervent lover of Christ, I will forgeate what Phil. 3
I have left behind me, and carefully preconceaue, what lies before me, how I
may come to my eternal rest, how increase in gods frendshippe, how I may
serve him more diligently, more fervently: Dixi nunc cepi. Therefore lukewarm
love, of God Apoc. 3
hated, of me shall be detested, and in the beginning, continuance, and ending,
of every action, dicam nunc ceps, I will say, now I begin, for, Iustorum
prouer. 4
semita quasi lux splendens procedit and crescit, vsque ad perfecttam diem. The
way of the just (that is the works of godds friends) goes forward: they
increase like a glisteringe light, till perfect day: that is, even as the
soonne rising upon our horison, increases in light till midd day, and
shynethe more brightlye upon us: so ought the friends of God, like so many
spiritual soonns, shine in his church ever increasing till they come to their
cheifeste heighte, that is the hour of their death: that first life fail
them, then desire of proceeding in gods grace and frendshipp.

He was bare headed, because true friendship, requires no veyles, for real
friends, profess their frendshipp, no shame can surpryze them, they are
always prepared, to defend their friends, to show their faces for them: if
any dispraife the^, they answer for Luc. 7 and Io. 12
them, as Christ for Mary Magdalen, If any impugn them, they desende them, as
S. Peter did endeavor by cuttinge of Malcus ear, to defend Mat. 26 Io. 18
Christ against the Jews: If any injury them, they account the injuries to
concern them, as much as their friends: so Christ esteemed the persecutions of
the faithful, followed so earnestly against his friends by S. Paul, to have
been committed against him self. Act. 9 and 22


Finally a true friend, will tender his friends case, and profess his friendship
in all occasions.

O happy wear Christians, if among them there wear many of these corragious
and open professed friends of Christ. True it is, that (thanks be to God) the
fervor and profession of english Catholics, is spredde through the whole
world, what they suffer in goods, body, honor, and life, rather then they
will impeache, in any point, the glory of their faith: But we must not only
profess our frendshippe to god in the main point of all, butalso when
particular occasions are offered, when any sin or offend God, (if we can)
prevent their faults, correct or amend them.

A true friend will not omit so many and convenient oportunities, as daily we
see offered: who converse much in the world, shall find open feldes ouerrunne
with this pestiferous darnel, by blasphemies, oaths, detractions,
imprecations, maledictions, impurity and thowsandes such detestable sins, the
which will minister abou^dant mattter, for the friends of Christ to extirpate
and root owte.

His mantle was torn, to express a^ effect of frendshipp, hardly found, but
highly pryzed: that specially frendshipp appears, when friends suffer one for
an other: when they spend their honors, goods: their garmets are rent, their
bodies afflicted: when they desire to show their frendshipp in some dysaster;
when they procure occasions: when they rejoice in such sufferings, disgraces,
losses, wounds and finally death it self.

In the frendshipp and love of God, He that once arryueth to this degree of
perfection, that Christ's cross seems sweet unto him: He that can gather
lillees among thorns, and reap fruit in deserts: In temptations, profitt: In
desolations, meritt: In afflictions, joy: In persecutions, peace and quyetnes
of mind. This man haithe found a paradyse in this lyse.

For as nothing in this world occurreth oftener to good men, then calamities and
crosses: so by taking a delighte in them, they have found out an indeficient
spring of spiritual joy and comfort. For how is the devil, the flesh, and the
world, confounded, by their own persecutions, when they see the just
rejoicing, exultinge, and triumphing in the midst of their torments: that
their pains, are accounted gains; their tortures, treasures: their prisons,
the gate houses of paradise: their gibets, joys? How can they be revenged of
such men, since the strongeste poisons, their virulent malice can devise, they
convert into so good blood, none otherwise, then the vigilante stork, the
stings of snakes, into sweet flesh? And therefore he that by long experience,
had tried this truth, willed us to make an accounte of this, as of the sum
and whole joy of this life: Omne gaudium existimate fratres mei, cum in varias
tentationes incideritis. Jacob. 1
Esteem it my brethren all joy, when you shall fall into diverse temptations.
And Christ him self, Beati cum maledixeri^t Mat. 5
vobis, and persecuti vos suerint and dixerint omne malum aduersum vos
mentientes propter me: gaudete and exultate, quoniam merces vestra, copiosa est
in coelis. Blessed are ye, when they shall reuyle you, and persecute you, and
speak all that naught is against you, untruly for my sake, be gladd and
rejoice, for your reward is very great in heaven. And the Apostles followed Act.
5
his precept in practyse, Ibant gaudentes a conspectu concilii, quoniam digni
habiti siut, pro nomine Jesus, contumeliam pati. They went from the sight of
the counsel reioycinge, because they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach,
for the name of Jesus. For they knew well, that torn bodies, were the best
liueryes: that Christ gave his guard in this life: that in the day of their
death, a rent garment, for love was more to be esteemed of Christ, then cloth
of gould, or any kings purple. They knew that the love of God, was an
odoriferous gum, whose fragrant smell did lie hidd, and therefore either with
burning coals in the fire, or with the pestill in the mortar, the sent was to
be dispersed. All they knew full well, that Christ's garments before them,
were torn with thorns, and rent with nails, that he declared him self a
most faithful friend, by tearinge his soul and body, in two pieces. Ah they
knew this sacrament instituted in such a form, red them a sylente lesson of
sufferinge pain and crosses: that Io. 12
like wheat sown, they should dye to sensuality: like wheat threshed, Mat. 3
they should be persecuted, by the world, like wheat ground, they Luc. 22
should be tossed of ^athan: like whete baked, they should be burned with
griefs and afflictions: like bread cut, chewed, consumed, they should be
cut, mangled, and killed, before they came to that end, which Christ
intended, vz, his glory, and their felicity.

With his finger he poynted to his heart, to signify that friendship ought to be
cordial, not ceremonial: not only in mouth, but also in heart: not in
external complementes, but principally in internal affection. Populus hic
lablis me honorat, cor autem little, Mat. 15 Marc. 7 Isa. 29
long est a me. This people (says god) honors me with their lips, but
their hearts are far from me, that is, they love me, with external show, not
with internal devotion. It haith no good root, that they do, to honor me,
and consequently I make no account of such service. And in very deed it is not
durable, but like that seed which natum aruit, quia non habebat humorem.
Being shot up, it Luc. 8 Mat. 13 Mar. 4
withered, because it had not moisture. These men we may compare, to deformed
women, who lacking natural beauty, cast over a marble gloss by art, the
which if they mask not well, the soonn, wind, or wether, will discover their
theft; so they who have no natural devotion, no cordial love, no internal
affection and friendship with God: if any occasion be offered, they presently
loose their color: If the religion change, before they loose their goods,
they will recante: If occasion of worldly delight be presented unto them, they
care not to syn mortally: If they fear to loose temporal preferment, they
will first loose their spiritual aduancemente: If in ^yne any godly exercise
impeach their wealth, honor, or reputation, they are content to leave them,
neglecte them, dispyse, and contemn them.

Therefore receiving the holy Eucharist, whearein is included the cordial
love and affection of my Savior: I will enforce my self, so much as I can, to
plant the love of god as deep in my heart as I may. That it being sound
lyuelie and rectifyed, the external bewty of good woorks, my words, Actions,
gesture, and conversation, may show, from how connaturall a principle they
proceed, from how lively a spring they flow, how proportionate they are to
their subject, not as heat in water, or white teethe in an Ethiopians body:
but as a good color is joined to a good complexion. And therefore I will cry,
Spiritum Psalm. 50
rectum domine innoua in v^sceribus meis. Renew o Lord a right spirit in my
bowels. Let me not be like them of whom it was said, Cor eorum non cr^^ Psalm. 77
rectum, nec fideles habiti sunt. Their heart was not right, neither were they
accounted faithful.

They wrote abowte his heart, long and prope, Far of, and near hand, to give
friends to understand, that neither distance of place, nor tracte of time,
ought to impare their love: because as these two circumstances, diminish feaned
frendshipp, so they declare true and faithful amity.

In the love of God, this condition imports much if it be well observed. For
som-times men go far from god, as the prodigal son wa^dered Luc. 15
from his Father in foreign regions, and there miserably consumed his
patrimony: and no meruell, because he was far from god, and consequently from
goodness. For, qui elongant se a Psalm. 72
te, peribunt. Those who estraunge the^ selves from thee, shall perish. As we
see the distance of the soonne in winter, to cause the nakedness of trees,
flowers, and fruit, could rain, yse, and snow. Somtymes God seems to
estraunge him self from us, as our Savior Christ insinuated when he said,
Deus deus men's, quare me dereliquisti. God my Mat. 27
god, my god, why haste thou forsaken me? Which occurreth commonly in spiritual
desolation, in ariditie and drynes of soul, when it seems that God haith
shutt all the cataracts of heaven, that Genesis 8
they should not watter the soil of our souls, when he permittethe wicked
men, to persecute his servant, when in fine we feel no taste of God, we see
no light of heaven, we perceive no sent of devotion. In this sterilitye, we
must not think that god haithe whollye aband oned us, for then he would not
have said, Cum ipso sum in Psalm. 90
tribulatione. I am with him in tribulation. For then God haith most care over
us, because then, we most need him. But he will only teach us to serve him
like men, he will draw us from sensible devotion (wherein often we seek our
selves, for a certain spiritual delight in God,) to a reasonable obsequy, and
friendly conversation.

When I come to this Sacrament, although I perceive no iotte of sensible
devotion, whearewith many as it were fly with spiritual wings unto it: I
will not desist from mine accustomed Exercyses and stinted time of prayer and
meditation, because I know it is pleasant rowing with wind and tide: but
against the stream, against the wind, it requires no small force: and as it
is of more difficulty, so of more devotion and meritt. And doubt not, but he
that geuothe the force to feighte, will not stay long from thee, to rejoice in
the triumph of thy victory.

Aestas and Hiems, engraven in the hemme of his garment, signified temporal
prosperity, and adversity, riches or poverty, sickness or health, and such
external changes of fortune, which dissolve for the most part worldly
frendshippe. These they would have noe hinderance to true amity.

For he that will leave his friend in these, never loved him truly, because he
rather attended his own intereste, then his friends person, virtue, and
fidelity.

If god afflict me either with sickness or poverty, if he grant me health, or
riches, I will never change my style toward him, but as a rock in the sea in
calmes and tempests, stand immouable. I will not that satan say of me truly,
as he said of Job falsely, Does Job. 1
Job fear God without cause? Haste thou not blessed the works of his hands and
has not his possession increased in earth? But extend thy hand a little,
touch all he possessethe, and then try if he will not curse thee.

And although prosperity and adversity be both gifts of God: yet I will
inclyne my heart more to this, then that, because therein I shall be more like
my Savior, there is less danger of offending, there is more occasion of
meritt, the which favor I will ask in this Sacrament.

AS A SOVLDIER TO HIS CAPTAIN.
CAP. 5.
SIttinge under the standerde of Christ's holy cross, openinge the spiritual
eyes of my soul, I will contemplate the universal world, wherein I behold my
Savior Christ on the one side, proclaming an endless war (yet most just and
worthy) against Satan, and all his damned devils: on the other side there is
represented unto me, Lucifer, General of all the wicked, proclaminge war
against Christ, and all his elected, as a tirannicall inuader, and an unjust
usurper.

First I will suppose that this my meditation, is no Imaginary speculation,
but a matter really and in very deed, daily effected. For daily and hourly
this Sampson, inuadeth the Philistians: Iud. 15 and 7. 1 Re. 17
this Gedeon, the trowpes of Madian: this David, the Giant Golyath: this more
puysant Captain, binds the Mat. 12
strong man armed, depriueth him of his tirannicall possession, surprisethe his
vessels of gould, keeps in asaistic all the treasures of his house, unjustly
usurped. Truly S. Peter willed us 1 Pet. 5
to be vig^^ante, because that Satan our ghostly adversary like a roaringe
Lion, did range about, seeking who^ he could devour. And S. Paul Ephesians. 6
toulde us, that our feight was against these princes of darkness, and the
wieked spirits that fell from heaven. And Job called his Angels, his
soldiers, Nunquid est numerus militum eius? Is Job. 25
theare any number of his soldiers? because of this spiritual war, wherein
they feight most valiantly.

Secondly I will consider, the cause of this bloody feelde, for it seems to
me very strange, that Christ the fountain of goodness and peace, the abisse
of mercy and love, who came into this earth, to make the lions like lambs,
the woolues like sheep, and Isa. 11
serpents like dooues, to dallye and play with children; should now proclaim
battle, pitche a field, cause mortal hatred, in^ende death and mortallitie.
Moreover who can resist his power, that houldeth the earth with Isa. 40 Job. 26
his fingers, at whose countenance, the pillars of Heaven do tremble, the
foundations of the world shake: who as he with one word, made all things Psalm.
32
of naught, so with one word he can reduce all things to naught: and yet Mat.
10
he said him self, that he came not to set peace in earth, but the sword,
Non veni mittere pacem in terram, sed gladium. This difficulty may easily be
answered if we understand two points, the causes of this war, and the manner,
the which I will touch brefely.

The majesty of God in that eternal and inscrutable Consistory of the holy
Trinity, having determined, of mere goodness and love, to exalte the base
nature of man, to the hipostaticall union of the son of God, thereby
aduauncing all men, by assuminge their form and substance, preferringe them
before Angels in grace, whom he had framed inferioure by nature: He reueyled
this secrett to all his Angels in the first moment of their creation, and
commanded them, that entering the world, they should adore Heb. 1
him incarnated.

Lucifer ravished with the gorye of his own beauty, deamed this a disgrace,
and too great an affrount to his person, that he being the goodlieste
creature, that ever issued owte of the hands of God, the most exact
similitude, figure, and resemblance of his divinity: a Lucifer, for brightness
shining more clear, then any other star in the spiritual firmament of the
Angelical nature, whose garments were Eze. 28
decked, with the most rare and richest stones that ever god created, he I say
Eleuatus in decore suo, puffed up with the luster of his own glory: conceived
that god had greatly iniuried him, by preferring the nature of man so far
beneth him, to such a dignity so far above him: adiudginge, that it had been
more convenient for him, (supposed he would have communicated his person to
any creature) rather to have assu^pted his nature, so bewtiful, so perfect, and
most suitable thereunto. And therefore as he of pride, despised gods sacred
election: so he disdayned to worship Christ incarnated. And with this
sophistical reason, he seduced the third part of Angels. Traxit secum
tertiam partem stellarum. Apoc. 12
He drew with him the third part of the stars, persuading them, that it
redownded greatly to their ignominy, to adore a man with divine honor, or to
account him superior to them. The reprobate followed his suggestion, the elect
resisted, reuerencinge gods decree, admiring his goodness, and in effect
obeyed his precept, by adoring Christ in carnated. And presently the good and
reprobate Angels, began a mortal war: but Michaell vanquished Ibidem.
the infernal dragon expelled him out of the City of life, cast him down
into the dongeon of hell where he haithe continewed in torments almost these
6000 years.

And though he wander like a Tiger thirsting for the bloodd of man, yet his
hell waits upon him, it never wantethe. Hereupon grew the mortal hatred
that the devil with his companions, conceived against the majesty of God,
our Savior Christ, the blessed Angels, and all mankind, because he thought
god did him wrong by not eleuating his nature to hipostaticall union, because
he banished him owte of the kingdom of heaven, because he confyned him to hell
and earth so baise an element, and indecent a prison for such a noble spirit,
because with flames of fire with the stinge of remorse of conscience, with
perpetual damnation and privation of felicity, he tormenteth him and all his
folowers. For these causes he hates God extremely, and would if he could,
pull him owte of his throne: but for that he knowethe this impossible, he
endeuoreth with all possibility, to iniurye his majesty, as much as lyethe in
his power. And therefore continually, those helhounds never cease, to bark out
blasphemies, and spitt owte fire of imprecations and maledictions against God.
As I my self being present in a place, wheare a woman was exorcyzed, she
uttered such blasphemies against God, that truly it seemed to me, that such
curses, such horrible maledictions, could not but exhale from the venomous
pudle of hell. And he that exorcyzed her, asked the devil how he having
received so many benefytes of God, did so maliciously and spytefully speak of
him: he answered, that this was their continual music in hell, to curse and
blaspheme God, of whom the more they had received, it redownded to their
greater torment.

What hatred he had to Christ and what emulation of that sacred humanity, S.
John witnessith that Christ him self testified to the Jews, that Io. 8
he was homicida ab initio, a murderer from the beginning, because he would
have depryued that blessed humanity of the life of God his person and deity.
And after in effect he showed it, by procuring his death, suggesting the Jews
to persecute him, Judas to sell him, the scribes and pharisees, to bring Et
postbuc cellam introiuit in eum Sathanas. Io. 13
false witness against him, Pylate to condemn him, and finally the damned
ministers to crucify him.

But because the devil did perceive the injuries and blasphemies, that he and
his consortes breathed out against god did nothing impeach his honor, or
derogate from his glory: Therefore saying that god was desyreous to save all
men, and bring them to glory (yet with free will and liberty withowt
co^pulsion, coaction, or necessity) here he bended his forces, first to
dishonor God, by causing men to offend him, and despise his precepts. Secondly
because thaire nature was taken by Christ and his resused. Thirdly for that
those seats of felicity which he and his companions had lost, these eternal
wales of Jerusalem, which they had broken and ruinated, by their
transgression, should be filled and repaired, by men. And lastly to have
company in torments, he accomptethe it some solace.

For which causes, noe sooner had God given a precept to Adam in Paradise, Genesis
3
but he crepte in by stealthe to effectuate his purpose, and there with lyinge
and cogging, deceived our first parents, and brought us all into his bou^dage
and captivity.

This was the first stratageme, and one of the most perniceous, to all
mankind that ever Satan used, and prevailed in against us. Yet hearing
presently after, that the seed of the woman, was to crushe the serpents
head, and in very deed knowing that Apo. 13
this lamb was killed from the beginning of the world, by whose blood, all
Gods elected wear to be saved; hereupon arose an other cause of hatredd of
Christ, and all those who believed in him, or loved him, as one which hindered
him of his intended purpose, and perverse project.

These be the causes of war, betwixt our Savior Christ, and this barbarous
tyrant. Christ intendethe to glorify God: Satan, to dishonor him. Christ
would have men to keep Gods commandments: Satan to preuaricate: Christ
to conducte men to heaven, Satan to cast them down to hell: Christ that one
true God should be worshipped of all me^, Satan that either he him self, the
flesh, or the world, should be adored as gods. For what else pretended Satan
by disgracing all the world almost, with Idolatry, but (as S. Gregorye Orat.
de calamitae. anim. suae
Nazeanzene well teachethe) to enjoy in earth, which he intended in heaven,
that is, to be reverenced of men in those insensible Idols, as god? And
therefore, the Prophet David, Psalm. 95
well called Deos gentium, daemonia, the gods of gentiles, devils. And he
most impudently, was not ashamed, to induce Christ to exhibit unto him divine
woorshipp, Omnia haec dabotihi, Mat. 4
si cadens adoraueris me. All these will I give thee, if fallinge down, thou will adore me. Why temptethe he glottons, with dayntie meats: but to make them
belly gods, Quorum Pbill. 3
deus venture est. Whose god is their belly? Why suggestethe he auaryce: but to
make the possession of riches, an homage to Idols, Quae est Idolorum seruitus,
which is a slauerye to Idols? Collo. 3


By this discourse, plainly it appears, how these two general's display their
flagges, stryke up their dru^mes; they call every man in this world, to this
spiritual battle. Noe man can free him self, every one that lives, must
stand either with Christ, or against him: be his srende, or his foe, there is
no neuters, none may be indifferent.

Therefore my soul, now resolve thy self, whose part thou will take. Christ
offers thee crosses, to give thee glory: Satan transitorye pleasures, to
bring thee to eternal pain: Christ inuiteth thee to war, because he loves
thee, Satan because he hates thee: Christ in this Sacrament will feed thee
with his blood to confirm thee, Satan will poysen thee with sin to destroy
thee: The armoure of Christ are Faith, Hope, Charity, repentance,
mortification, with all the trowpes of virtue and gifts of the holy Ghost, the
armor of Satan are, the flesh and the world, self love, sensuality, the
rabble of inordinate passions, the multitude of vices, and diabolical
suggestions. No doubt but if thou will, the victory lies in thy hands,
Resist the devil, and he will flee from Iac. 4 Ephesians. 6
thee: Put on the armor of Christ, and they will defend thee: But look well
about thee, for the devil is most vigilant, he never slepeth, and thirsts 1
Pet. 5
nothing so much, as the perdition of thy soul. For which cause, if God give
thee a good Angel, to guide Psalm. 90
thee lest thou fall: he haithe thruste upon thee an infernal spirit, to make
thee fall. If God send preachers, to exhort thee to penance and perfection of
life: Satan sends sectaries and worldlinges, to ouersow cockle, darnell,
Mat. 13
and tares of stinkinge heresves, fleshly delights, and baise pleasures, to
bring thee to eternal death. If god with examples of spiritual me^, induce
thee to piety: he with examples of carnal men, will lead thee to vanity. If
God provide his servants to persuade thee with devout books to mortification;
he will stir up some frantic poet, with lascivious rymes to intyce thee
to dissolution. If God stryke terroure into the soul, of death, of the synall
Judgment, or the pains of hell, to move thee to amendment: he will inueigle
thee with false arguments of long life, and presumption of Gods mercy, to
make thee wallow deeper in vice and wickedness. Finally, what means soever he
seethe, God use to save thee, the like he inuenteth so near as he can to damn
thee. And therefore S. Paul forewarned us, that we were not only Ephesians. 6
to feight against flesh and blood, but against these spiritual and ghostlye
enemies, who impugn us with great advantage: they being invisible unto us,
and we being open to them: they spirits, and we compounded of four corporal
elements: they long experienced in tempting, and we little in resisting: they
wonderful wittye, and we very dull and ignorante. But yet the grace of God,
and his good assistance, haithe more force to incyte us to go forward, then
all the fendes of hell to go backward. For, Omnia possum Phil. 4
in eo qui me confortat. I can ouercom all, by virtue of him that comfortethe
me, with this comfortable food, which terrifyeth all the trowps of Madian,
this bread stryketh them Iud. 7
dead. Therefore I would know, how this war of wit and slight passes.
All this battle betwixt our enemies and us, consistethe in impugninge the
fortresses of our free wills: The devil would have us to consent to follow his
vices, and Christ to imitate his virtues. If the devil could necessitate us
to sin, or God would necessitate us to goodness: this battle wear ended. For
then no doubt but a man should stand like a block betwixt them, and he that
wear strongest, should prevail and carry it away.

But the case stands not so: For small glory should it be for a man of
necessity to be moved to love god, or dispraise to hate him: But standing with
free will betwixt them does, neither using constraint, but such means as a man
may accept, and refuse, use or abuse, both knock at the door, and leave it in
our liberty to open it. God inspyreth, and the devil suggesteth: but neither
inforceth. For if that God had not intended to save us with our free will and
liberty; to what purpose, would he have permitted those impious spirits thus
to range amongst us? to tempt us? to seduce us? For it wear ridiculous, to
permit the devil to tempt all men, if some could not resist him, because it
was impossible; and others it wear impossible he should overcome.

Besides, what glory should redownde to God, by forcing us to do well? For
who is so blockish that knows not, that nothing is able to resist his power
and might? But if God leave man to his liberty, and then he move him to
goodness, and Satan to vice: if a man resist Satan and seruc God, then
plainly appearethe how God is glorified, by man's well doing: For of his
free election, he resists flesh and blood, abandoneth pleasures and
delights, only for the love, honor, and glory, of God.

Lastly I will consider the stratage^s of Satan, by what art he impugneth me.
For since this spiritual battle consists especially in the vndermyninge of
our wills, in the deceiptes and pollices of thc devil: therefore as in
wars, to discover the ambushes, plottes, pollices, and stratagemes, of
enemies, is half the victory: Even so to know the craft of the devil, is in
great part, to overcome his temptations. And withal, if Christ our
Captain, have provided us means in this sacrament to frustrate them, we have
almost won the battle.

First the devil in his temptations, and warlye suggestions, extolleth
extremely that synn or pleasure, he will persuade us. He uses all the
rethorick and logic in his bugett, to painte it forth in lively colors; as a
mount bank to praise his wares, his medicynes, his pomainders, in such sort,
as by mere amplifications and lies, he deceyueth the poor simple people.

Ask our mother Eve, if after this sort Genesis 3
he did not seduce her, by tellinge her that her eyes should be opened, she
should become a god, knowing good and evil. The like he daily practices in
his suggestions, for he will cause proud men to conceive such a foolish
paradise in their stately buyldinges, their train of folowers, their rich
atyre, and such like vanities: that in very deed, the very moulde-hilles
seem mountains. How often do riotous yonkardes and glottons, after their
pleasures be past, wonder at their own blyndnes, that they pryzed so much,
spent so much, ladoured so much, for a thing of so small delight? How they
wear deceived in balancing the cost, with that rotten and unworthy marchandyse.

The sacred eucharist, discouerethe this deceyte of the devil, die the increase
of faith: for augmentinge our light, consequently it discovers the ambushes
of Satan, whlollye under ground and in darkness. This light of faith, the
scriptures often inculcate unto us, as a most strong defense against the
devil? S. Peter teachinge 1 Pet 5
us to withstand the devil, he wills us to resist, fortes in fide, strong
in faith. And S. Paul, induamur arma Romans 12
lucis, let us put on armoure of light. And after he had declared, with how
potent and dangerous enemies; we wear to encounter, he exhorts us Ephesians. 6
in all conflictes, to defend our selves wi^h the sheelde of faith: and the
reason is manifest, because if the devil seduce us by lying, faith
discovers his deceyte, by reueyling unto us the truth: for who would ever
hoard up goulde by hook and crook, right or wrong, if with the eyes of
faith, he would but read considerately, that sentence, Fool this night thou
shalt Luc. 12
dye, and haec cuius erunt? who then shall enjoy these riches? The like I say
of all other temptations, if ourfaith be vigilant, they will quickly vanishe:
for which cause I have known many spiritual men, that had always prepared
godly sentenses, taken out of the scriptures, to protecte them against the
temptations of the devil.

The second stratageme of the devil, consists in tempering his tentations
according to every man's taste. He considers men's complexions, their
inclmations and dispositions, and serves every one according to his humor.
Drunkardes he allureth with delicate drinks: ambitious heads, with chimeres of
honor: worldlinges, with treafures: lasciurous spirits, with sensuality. I
think I red once in Casfianus, or Sophronius, that a godly man entering into
the church, he met the devil, coming forth all laden, with bottels and
glasses full of siroppes, and drinks. The good religious man knowing by
revelation it was the devil, commanded him in the virtue of Christ, to tell
him what he did in the church, with so many glasses and bottels? He answered,
to give every one a siroppe, according to his so are: for rarely the devil
will tempt a young man with covetousness, or an oulde man with leachery, except
the vices of his youth, be incorporated into the bones of oulde age. Seldom he
moves a rich man to revenge to kill or slay, or a poor man, to seek for
honor or reputation, except he find their complexions much inclyned
thereunto.

Against this stratagem, the Eucharist affords us a most excellent defense,
for it in contrariwyse, armethe not only the soul, with all sorts of
virtues, but especially with that grace that the soul most desires, and most
needs. For as Manna served every manuestonge, of that taste he wished: so this
celestial Manna, every good soul, of that favor he craves. For as in the
norishment of our bodies, when nature haith gotten the upper hand of any
disease, then most of that purer blood or spirits, which the liver and heart
suck from our meat; they send to resist, expel, and wholly va^quish, the
disease: So the Euchariste norishing our soul, fouldinge our Savior, who not
only with his divinity, but also with his humanity, sees with what deceit
the devil most intends to molest us, there he principally protecteth us, not
unlike a prudent captain, who defending a fort, there principally placethe his
cheifest forces, where he knowethe the wales weakest and easiest to be scaled.

The third deceit, is not presently and at the first assault, to discover his
intention, but to win ground by degrees, to insinuate him self by little and
little: he lays his deceiptes, first to the heel, after intending to crush
Genesis 3
the head, like unto them who pretend to undermine or entrench them selves
about a wall, they begin a far of, and then approach, least if they attempted
too near, their plott should be discovered.

^ In every vice or sin, who well considerethe, shall find certain degrees
or preambles, which by little and little, prepare the way for vice to enter: as
we read of Holofernes whose eyes were ravished even with the pantables of
Judith, and his soul was made captive with her beauty. Sandalia ^ius Iud. 16
rapuerunt oculos eius, and pulchritudo eius, captiuam fecit animam cius. Her
pantables ravished his eyes, and her beutie enthrawled his soul. S. James Iac.
1
declares the same degrees in concupiscence, first by abstractio^, then
conception, then consummation.

The reason why the devil goethe so far of at the beginning, I take to be
for most part, with good souls, who if they did see distinctly, the
deformitye that Satan intendethe, he could hardly prevail against them.
Therefore he blinds their judgment with some inordinate delight, (as many
fishers cast their nets, when the water is troubled, that the fish should
not perceive them) and then enters with more facility.

The way to ouercom this deceipte, is at the entrance of sin, to resist it in
the budding, for tender twigges, are bent with ease, aged trees break ear
they bend. Young desires take not deep houlde, but when they enter once into
full possession, hardly they can be expelled.

The Eucharist helpethe us greatly, to smell these motions of sin, even in
their first rysinge: because the love of God, the fervor of devotion, two
proper effects thereof, so purify the Soul, that every little spot, may quicly
be perceived, as in a white corporal, every stayne presently appears.
Moreover by illuminatinge our understanding, it shows these imperfections,
which before we never marked, as in the beams of the sun, we see flying
thowsandes of little atomies or moates, which before we never perceived.

Fourthly the devil attendethe occasions, he watchethe fit opportunities to
tempt us: he marketh what company we converse with-all, what passions are
aflote, how the heavens inclyne, what alteration the wether works in our
bodies, what exercise or quyetnes preceeded, and according to all these, he
gathers a fit time, to compass his impious intention. So he came not to
tempt Christ, till he found Mat. 4
him so litarie in the deserte, and ahungred with long fasting. Neither did
Genesis 3
he tempt Eve while she was with Adam, but he got her alone owte of his
company. Therefore S. Peter 1 Pet. 5
said, that Satan went circuitinge about, searching whom he might denoure,
whereby he would signify unto us, that he went pryinge about, how to espy
occasions to make us offend God. The way how to resist this encounter, were
best in all tempests and vehement passions or alterations of the soul, not to
resoule any thing about our selves, or determine any thing of moment, till we
receive the blessed Eucharist, whcih will calm the soul and give us better
light to discern truth from falsehoode, God from the devil, natural passions,
from diabolical temptations.

Many more stratagemes of Satan I could hear discover, and also declare by
how many ways God aideth us in this feight, and deliver certain rules, to
know the motions of god and the inspirations of the holy Ghost, but this
would excede the bounds of mine intention, although perhaps not the present
matter. Here only I will conclude, that I mean hereafter for so many good
Causes, never to make peace, league, nor truce, with the devil, for one
moment, but resist him with all force.

AS A SCHOLAR TO HIS MASTER.
CAP. 6.
THe children of fear, durst not 1 Exodus 20 Hab. 12
hear thy voice, O sweet Savior, because with thunders and lightninges, thou
spoke unto them veiled with mistes and clouds, in the mount Sinay. But I know
thou have put of those terrifying garments, and hear clothed thy love with
the rynds of bread and wine. Therefore I will receive thee, that I may hear
Quid loquatur Ps. 84
in me dominus, what my Lord speaks in me, because he will speak peace to
his people.

I will consider first, that my Christ came not only to redeem me, but also
to teach me, not only to be my Savior, but also my master: And therefore the
Prophet Ioell foretold Joel. 2
us, that we should rejoice in our Lord god, because he haithe given us a
Doctor of Justice.

I omit hear, how the very mystery of Christ's incarnation, openethe unto
us many secretts that we never hard of: how all his actions were our
instructions, all his miracles, as well mea^es to direct us, as remedies to cure
us. Only I intend here to consider, by what manner, he teaches me internally,
he speaks to my heart, without any noise of words, and how his inspirations,
may be perceived.

Secondly we can not doubt but that Ducam eum in solitudinem, Ose 2
and loquar ad cor eius. I will lead him into a desert, and will speak to his
heart. Ego sto ad ostium and pulso Apoc. 3
(says Christ) I stand at the door of thy soul and knock, that is, by the
sound of his spiritual speech. The spowse in the Canticles tellethe, that
Cant. 5
she hard the voice of Christ knockinge, and willing her to let him in: all
the Scriptures inculcate this favor of God, this calling, this light, this
doctrine, this knocking, this speakinge, of God to men, and especially to them
who serve him devoutly, and hear his voice attentively: Because the Law of
supernatural frendshippe between God and his servants, requyrethe a natural
conference, that one speak to an other, that there pass a reciprocate
communication, wheare by love is confirmed and increased: and those who have
the eyes of their souls purifyed, well perceive by desisting from prayer and
meditation, that their souls are thickened with a certain miste, they seele not
gods frendshipp so sensibly, as when they converse with him, because they do
not attend Quid loquatur in eis dominus, what our Lord speaks in them.

Moreover, although a man have corporal eyes to see, yet he needs external
light, otherwise his eyes would little avail him: even so little it would
avail a man to have a natural wist, if the light of Gods internal motion
and inspiration, did not prevent us, and cooperate with us.

Thirdly it imports much, that I Audi filia and Psalm. 44
inclina aurem tuam. Here daughter (o soul) and inclyne thine ear, that is,
do not only hear, but attend diligently: as those who would here
distinctly, bend their bodies and their ears to that part, from whence the
sound comes. For questionles God speakethe to me, because he would be hard:
and therefore it were great discurtesie and irreuerence, not to give him
audience, especiially speakinge for my good, not his own interest.

Fourthly I will consider the different manner of the teaching of Christ,
supernatural schole, and the sooner understand the voice of my Savior, when
he readethe unto me his lessons of life, after I have received his body.

1 First other masters use corporal and material words: Christ internal
speech.

2 They beat first at the external cares of our bodies, and so pass forward
to the cares of our souls: Christ immediately as Lord of the heart, needs no
passage by the porters lodge, but enters at the first, the most secrett
chamber of the soul, wheare he speaks immediately unto us.

3 Other masters can not cause their scholars to penetrate the depth of their
doctrine, except they bring a natural capacity and understanding with them
which the master is not able to impart unto them: but Christ can call Prophets
from the plow, Apostles from their nets, and linguas infantum reddere Sap. 10
disertas, make infants eloquent.

4 Men teach in time, they distill their doctrine by drops, and therefore
their scholars grow in learning, as in body, every day addinge somthinge to
their increase: But Christ in one day of Penthecoste, in one hour, in Act. 2
one moment, can rain from heaven, fontes aquae salientes in vitam aeternam.
Io. 4
fountains of water seasoning into life everlasting.

5 Men can not persuade their doctrine, without the evidence of arguments,
the force of reason, perspicuty of palpable demonstrations: Christ can make us
believe the profounde mysteries of our faith, surpassinge all the bounds and
borders of reason, with his mere authority.

6 Men move not our affections, or at most very weakly, to accept their
doctrine: But our Savior moves and compels even rebellious wills, to
embrace his knowledge, and cause the affection to enforce the wit, and humbly
to approve hard mysteries of faith.

7 Men deliver truths mingled with erroures, and never communicate doctrine
pure and entyre: But Christ powers a sacred liquor into the soul without any
dregs of untruths: For as he is truth it self, so he can not teach any
error.

8 The doctrine of men for most part 1 Cor. 8
tendethe to vanitye, Scientia inflat, knowledge puffethe up, but the doctrine
of Christ joined with his Charity, aedificat, edefyeth, because it moves the
best learned, to know best them selves, theit own misery, and godds
majesty: that when they know most, then they begin to learn.

9 Men teach for their own commodity: but Christ for our gain.

10 Men teach the naure of transitory bodies, subject to change, little they
know of God, or life everlasting: but Christ pri^cipally, yea wholly,
inte^deth by his doctrine, to bring us to life everlasting, that the knowledge
thereof once being fixed in our minds, we may runn at the goal most lively to
embrace it.

5 Fifthly because the devil transformeth 2 Cor. 11
him self into an angel of light, masking his ugly shape under a gouldon
veyle, his impietye, under the form of religion. And as fowlers often times
imitate the voices of birds, to deceive the simple things and bring them as a
pray to their nets: in like sort he pretendinge to deceive good souls,
feaneth to speak with the language of heaven, the tongs of Angels, the voice
of god: and except we attend very diligently, it will be hard even for most
spiritual men, to discern his voice, yet these rules may be observed.

The first rule is, that the motions

And thus by examininge our intentions whether the motion aymeth, if the last
scope be devotion, piety, the service of God, then it can not but proceed from
him: If it tend to sin, wickedness, or worldly delight, then questionless
the author thereof is the devil: and by often practicing this rule, we shall
find great facility in discoueringe the motions of the two spirits. So oculus
tuns simplex fuerit, totum corpus Mat. 6
lucidum erit. If thine eye be simple, (that is, thine intention right) all thy
body shall de light.

God moves the soul like a calm Genesis 3
Ambulat ad auram post meridiem. He walks in the calm air after diner, when
commonly all tempests sease. 3 Re. 19
And Elyas found Gods paslage, in a mylde breathinge wind. The Prophet also
said, Fluat sicutros cloquium Deu. 32
meum. Let my speeches flow in their hearts like a sweet dew, which fallethe
and fructifyethe, without force or vyolence. The reason hereof I take to be,
the efficacy and omnipotency of God, who being the author of our souls, can
move them in most convenient manner, and most agreeable to our nature. The
devil moves tempestiously with vyolence, for non inturbine 3 Re. 19
dominus, God is not in whirle wyndes. The reason is, because the devil haith
not force to enter into the soul, in so sweet a manner, as god entrethe, for
that he entrethe to take possession like a tyrant, that is by force: but God
enters quietlye as a lawful king into his kingdom. With this it may well
stand that God som-times Eccl. 43 3 Re. 19 Psa. 104 Act. 2
uses great force in his motions, mouinge mountains, and cleuing hard
rocks, descendinge like a vehement wind, as upon his Apostles at Penthecost:
but these motions rather proceed of the great resistance they find in
obdurated sinners, then their own nature. Even as a river that runs very
calmly, if you stopp it, that it may not enjoy an ordinarye course, you shall
see how it will swell: and if it find but one chinke to enter, with what force
it passes: so god when he can not pass into men's hearts in such sort as
he intends, he of necessity must use some greater implusion, to rowse up
those deadly sins which hindered his passage; and with his omnipotente hand,
cause the very intralles of the soul to tremble. Misit Cant. 5
manum suam per foramen, and contremuerunt omnia viscera mea. My love put his
hand by the hoale of the door, and all my bowels trembled. The which Christ's
Apostles were to accomplish in the conversion of great sinners, and therefore
our Savior to show that effect, sent the holy Ghost upon them, in form of a
vehemente wind, which blowethe down buildinges Act. 2
and rooteth up trees.

This rule you may often times observe in your selves, for good souls feel
their hearts as it were resolved, with the sweetenes of devotion, with desire
to serve God, to keep his commandments, follow virtue, flee vice: and can
find out no reason in the world, from whence such a motion should come, for
God immediately did vouchsaife to visitt them.

The third rule is, all these motions or vain glory: the which may be very
well perceived, if in the former, that is mortification, we follow our
confessoures council: and the other, we practyse them more secretly, then
openly.

Sixthly I will run over a daily lesson dixit, and facta sunt, he spoke, and
Psalm. 32
they were made, can signisy his mind and reed us lessons, as well by visible
creatures, as audible soundes. And so redd David, no doubt, some sweet
doctrine written with planetts and stars, in the parchment of the heavens, when
Psalm. 18
he said, Caeli enarrant gloriam dei, and opera manuum eius, annunciat
firmamentum. The heavens blaze forth the glory of god, and the firmament
shows the works of his hands: and so intend I in this Sacrament.

The circle of the host, represents unto me, the divinity and deity of
Christ, which is a most perfect circle, whose center, is every where, whose
circumference is no where.

It tells me also, that as the circle comprehendethe the center on every
side: so his immensitye, fouldeth all places and spaces: his eternity, all
time paste, present, and future. Moreover this circle signifyethe the eternitye
of glory, the full blessedness that he will communicate, to all those who
receive him condignely.

The color so white and unspotted, teaches me that under them lodges the
only son of a virgin, the flower and favorer of virginity, qui pascitur
inter Cant. 6
lilia, who fedeth among lillies: that who comes to participate this unspotted
Lamb, must come girded with chastity and purity. Besides it inuytethe
chaste souls to eat, because theirby their purity shall be confirmed and
increased.

The vnlcuened taste, commands me, to approach with sinceritye, in truth and
really, for devotion, for the love of God, not with hypocrisy, not as to an
ordinarye meat, but to eat and feed indeed of my God.

When I see the host elevated by the priest, I remember that my Savior was
heaued upon the cross, to eleuate my soul, from sensuality, to
spiritualitie: from earth to heaven.

When he deuydethe it in thtee parts, then I consider how this sacrifyce, is
offered to the glory of godds Saints in heaven, for expiation of those souls
which suffer in purgatory, and for the manifoulde benefit of all Catholics
who live in the Church militant. Moreover how Christ was divided upon the
cross, his soul from his body, and after united again; and likewise with
his blood, which in the chalice is united with the host.

The taste of bread, shows to me that those effects which bread woorketh in
my body: in a more excellent manner, the sacred Eucharist works in my soul,
as was declared in the book of causes.

In the chalice I reed written in that wine, diverse perfections and effects of
Christ and his blood.

The fragrante smell, representethe the odoures of his virtues, the sweet
sent of his Sacrifyce, which surpasses far, all Arabian odoures, and omne
opus Can. 3 Eccl. 49
pigmentarii, all works of the perfumer.

The grateful color, declarethe his comely form of body, who was speciosus
forma prae filiis hominum. Beutifull Psalm. 44
in form, above the sons of men; And the graceous beauty of his soul, which
god had so adorned, that all other graces and favors, compared with his, may
be accounted stains.

The comfort and joy which wine causes in them that drink it, the joy and
heavenly consolation that all those participate, who devoutly receive him.

The sweet taist of wine to the tongue, foretells me, that here I am to begin
the joys of heaven: and therefore I will endeavor so to live, that I may
continue them, and from the proof, pass to the full possession. For
undoubtedly there can be no wine, that laetificat deum and homines
chearetheboth Iudic. 9
God and men, but this which is a Sacrifyce delights God, and as a Sacrament,
comfort man: and as containing the blood of Christ, yeldeth extreme
contentation to them both.

Seauenthly I know that after I have quid loquatur in me dominus what our Lord
speakethe in me: for I am certain, that he borderethe my soul with peace, and
all those who^ he fedeth with the fatt of this croppe: Qui posuit fines tuos
pacem, and adipe Ps. 147
frumenti satiat te. Who haithe made peace thy borders, and does satisfy thee
with the fat of wheat. Therefore loquere, speak sweet Jesus, for thy
servant will hear, sonet vox tua in auri Can. 2
bus meis, Sound thy voice in mine ears, for thy voice is sweet, and thy face
bewtifull. I will shutt my heart to all worldly delihtes: I will attend
nothing but thee, what thou co^maundes me, what thou counsels me, and by thy
grace, I will learn whatsoever thou will vouchsaife to teach me. And because
I know, that thou art pleased to illuminate my soul in those matters, I
convert my mind unto thee, as thou did the sweetenes of Manna, Sap. 16
unto the appetites of the Jews. Therefore I will meditate those matters after
I have received, which most I desire to learn, and would be instructed of
thee, for then I know my Affairs can not but proceed well, when I have asked
council of thee before. Sweet Jesus instruct me, sweet I esu direct me, Amen.

AS THE CREATVRE TO GLORIFY HIS CREATOR.
CAP. 7.
THe ground and baise of all benefytes, is out creation, for grace supposes
nature, as stones and foil, the goulde which they adorn. Therefore because I
know this benefit the most ancient that I ever actually received of god: I
will call it to memory, acknowledge the gift, and thank my benefactor:
especially understanding, that the sacred Euchariste, is a Holocaust or burnt
offering instituted of my Savior Christ, in recogiuscence of our creation,
conservation, and continual favors, which God not only as author of Grace,
but also as Father of nature, powrethe upon his whole Church. And in regard
that for this Title he is my Lord, and houldeth perfect dominion over me:
Therefore I will consider what dependence, I have of him, and whar authority
he rightly and justly haithe over me.

First I will lift up mine eyes to the blessed Eucharist, and with the most
memory was hadd of me in the world: If then it had been possible for me to have
requested of God, that he would make me a man: what gratitude would I have
promised? what service offered? what homage vndemau^ded, presented unto him? Ah
shall I be now more ungrateful, because he bestowed on me the benefyte
unasked, then if he had granted it requested? This demeanor indeed, were too
disloyal, and therefore what then in all wisdom and discretion I would have
promised, now with all zeal and love, Iintende to perform, that is because I
have received all of him, all I will render to him again: and that which he
bestowed on me of mere liberality, with all free liberty I will return, cui
Ps. 118
omnia seruiunt, to whom all things serve and ought to serve.

I will consider my case in my mothers 2 Job. 10
womb, with Job, Sicut lac coagulatum est cor meum, Even as milk is my heart
crudded together. with David, and Ps. 138 2 Mac. 7
that 7 times martyred mother, of the Machabees: how I appeared in that darcke
night which continued so many months, without any spark of light, or appearance
of day.

How was this artificial clock of my body compacted together: this corporal
common weal, so well ordered: this buyldinge, so well contrived, so just a
consort observed, in such distinct parts? Without all doubt this admirable
workmanshippe of bones, flesh, sinowes, veins, cartilages, mussles, senses,
heart, liver, milt, brain, with a number of other parts, stroke The profane
Philosophers, in admiration of the wonderful power and wisdom of God, who
could frame so strange a work, in so secret a manner. And the wyser sort
hereupon gathered, an invincible argument to convince all atheistes, that there
was a God. For who could be so madd to imagine, that such a worthy work,
could come by chance, which yet the profoundest wits, can scarce perfectly
understand. Therefore I will offer this blessed Sacrifice, as a testimony of
my Faith, and a sign of my gratitude to the indeuyded Trinity, in recognition
of this universal and particular gift, wherein shyneth the light of Gods
ineffable wisdom and providence.

Thirdlye, if it had pleased God, Io. 9
many more, who would spend almost what they have, to enjoy the benefyte of
their eyes: he might without contradiction or opposition, have bereued me of a
leg, an arm, or some other principal part, the which many lack, or possess
very deformed, yet of his bounty he haithe granted them wholl and intyer to
me. Therefore the integrity of his gift, exacteth an intyer oblation, and
full use of them to his honor and glory. Wherefore so often as I see any
person deformed, lame, blind, or destitute of any limme: presently I will take
occasion, to convert my soul to God, and bless him, who haith delivered me
from such miseries, not for mine own desert, but upon his mere goodness and
lideralitic.

Fourthly by this title of my creation, I may well account my self as one, who
owethe all that he haith or can to God: That I am his vassal, his possession,
a sheep of his flock, a p^ante of his garden, a subject of his kingdom, and
consequently, that he haith a more complete right and dominion over me, then
any king over his subject: any pastor, over his flock: any Lord, over his
possession. For if a kiug hold right over his kingdom, he needs his
subjects, he can not be without them, neither in wars, nor peace. The
pastor gathers the wool of his flock, he eats the flesh, and in fine,
enjoys diverse co^modties by them, in such sort, that his authority and
right, standethe with a certain servitude, and subjection, in regard of his
indigence and necessity. But god needs not me, Deus meus es tu, quoniam Ps. 15
bonorum meorum non indiges. Thou art my god, and therefore thou needs none of
my goods. But what king enjoys so ample an empire, as to carry in his
crown, the title and style of all the world? And yet if there wear such a
monarch, my Christ should have excelled him, who haith written not in his
crown or scepter, but in the very basest part of his garmente Rex regum, and
Dominus dominantium. Apoc. 19
King of kings, and Lord of Lords.

Moreover Christ's dominion, surmounteth all princes rightes in perfection and
integrity; For when he will, Deponet potentes de sede, and exaltabit Luc. 1
humiles. He will depose the mighty from their seat, and exalte the humble.
But none can depose him, or withstand his right; Kings hold no dominion over
the souls of their subjects, but only over their bodies: Neither can they
lawfully kill any man, of their absolute authority, except he preuaricate
their laws: But Christ who possesses complete authority over life, and
death, can kill or give life as it pleases him: For in ditione 1 Reg. 2 Hest.
13
eius cuncta suntposita, Under his possession, all things are contained: and
his dominion, concernethe the soul no less then the body.

Finally no creature obeys so exactly his Lord and Prince, as it does
Christ, who with a word can chaung their natures, transform water, into Io. 2
Mat. 21 Marc. 11 Luc. 1
wine, cause a barayn tree to florishe, an oulde woman to bear a child, a
Virgin to conceive. Therefore, O blessed Savior, I will call thee my true
Lord, mine only Lord, my most mighty Creator.

Fifthlye I will confound my self with shame, to see all things so obedient
to my Christ, that the very Mat. 8 Marc. 4 Luc. 8
insensible wind, the raging sea, be^d the knees of their natures, to obey
his precepts, and I whom God haith endewed with reason, inspyred so often,
granted so many benefits, should so irreuerentlye transgress his
commandments. I see even in this Sacrament so many effects of his
omnipotency put in practice, brought to effect, and yet noe repugnance, noe
resistance at all appearing: that I may well be ashamed of my disobedience. For
if Christ say the word, his body presently is created, under the form of
bread and wine, the sudstance of bread vanishes, the accidents hang in the
air: in the end after many alterations, a new substance of bread is
substituted, to sustain those accidents.

Hear o Lord I may if I will, read the homage that thy cteatures yield unto
thee, and by their example I inte^d with thy grace, hereafter more obsequiously
to serve thee. But thou good Lord, as thou have vonchsaifed to give me the
nature of a man: so grant me grace to live like a man, the which I shall
perform essectuallye, if I serve and keep thy Law intierly, which none can
accomplish without thy grace, nor obtain grace without thy favor.

AS ONE CHEYNED BY ENEMIES SIGHINGE FOR HIS REDEMER.
CAP. 8.
When I look upon thy cross sweet Jesus, and behoulde those nails pearcing
thy sacred hands and unspotted feet: they seem unto me three hammers,
prepared to break those infernal fetters, wherewith the devil and sin have
cheaned me.

When I look upon this holy Eucharist, I think upon him that said, Dirupisti
vincula mea, tibi sacrificabo Ps. 115
hostiam laudis. Thou haste broken my cheanes, and I will therefore sacrifyce
unto thee an host of praise. Vncheane me this time good Lord, and then I will
praise and glorify thee the next time. I hope those mighty chavnes of mortal
sins, are broken with the force of thy grace, and loosed by the authority of
them, to whom thou gave power to loose, what was bonnde in earth. I am not now
bound Io. 20 Io. 11
like Lazarus hand and foot, that I can not stir. I am not quatr^duanus
mortuns, four days dead, that I need to here thee cry, Lazare, veni for as,
Lazarus, come forth: But I feel certain boultes upon my feet, which hinder
me greatly: I go forward, but still one boulte pullethe me back again. I
may well compare my self to the bird that S. Anselme saw and fighed, when a
Sheparde had In vita Anselmi.
tied her by the leg with a threede, so that as often as she mounted up, to
have enjoyed the liberty of the air, and amplenes of the heavens, a stone
whereunto the threede was fastened, pulled her back again. Ah how often would
my soul tend to heaven, to converse with Angels, to enjoy the company of
that blessed society, but ever I am drawn back again by one stone or other: I
am gyued, I am boulted, I am constrained to stoop, to droupe, to fall even
upon my wings, they must help to sustain me on earth, that should have borne
me up soaring in the air. But thou sweet Jesus, disrumpe Ps. 106
vincula mea, break my bands. I^ I fast, my forces fail, and thus saintnes
with draws me from fasting, lo a boulte. If I pamper my flesh or intend to
feed it conveniently, it pre seutly repyneth, rebellethe, and insulteth
against me: lo an other boulte. How to find out the true measure, to exceed
in neither extremities, who can teach me but thou sweet Jesus? I have often
proved, yet for most part missed. If I pray not, me thinks my soul departs
from God, our frendshipp breaks through my long silence: If I pray, then so
many impertinent thoughts assault me, so many distractions inueigle me, such
ariditie afflicts me, and in fine so many impedimentes disturb me, that
wheare I should enjoy most liberty, there I find my self most chayned in
captivity. Therefore sweet Jesus, disrumpe vincula mea, break with the holy
Eucharist these bands, and grant me the spirit of prayer and devotion. Many
times I pretend to lift up my heart to heaven, and immediatlye the boultes of
inordinate passions and sensual concupiscenses, cause me to retire unto earth
again, the which if I follow, I loose thy grace and favor, I fall into the
thrawldom of Satan and his infernal crew: If I resist them, if I stytle them
within, what an horrible conflict must I abide? O in what an agony I pass my
days? O war of all wars most spightfull, most dangerous, and least of men
accounted.

But thou sweet Jesus, Disrumpe vincula mea, break my bands with the holy
Eucharist: the purity of virgins, purify the internal veins of my heart, that
no drugges of corruption, infect that blood, which must be mingled with thine.
With this food of force Iud. 7
and strength, which in figure ouerthrewe whole armies, enable me to vanquishe
these Iebusites, these molestfull, continual, and domestical enemies.

Many mo bands and fetters, bind me from goodness, and deteine me in sin: For
if I confess not my sins, like a heavy burden, they weigh me down: If I
confess me, then scruples or anxiety of conscience, torme^teth me. If I deal
not with men to convert them, to help them to save their souls, and glorify
god, my Charity seems could, my devotion vanishes: If I converse with them,
their exhalinge breathe, of sins and imperfections by little and little,
enter into me, and stayne my soul more with their faults, then I can profitt
them with my good desires. Thousands more such fetters withould me o sweet Jesus
from thee, but how shall I avoid them? I hear thee answer solue vincula Isa.
52
colli tui. Loose the chains from thy neck. Indeed it is so, thou must loose
them, but I must help, I must lay to my hand, I must not withdraw my self, nor
with thy grace will with draw hereafter. Therefore give me grace at this time,
to begin resolutely, to continue constantly, and finish faithfully.

AS A GARDEN.
CAP. 9.
When I come to this sacred Table, I would gladly inuvte my sweet Savior,
as his louinge spowse, inuyted him in the canticles saying, Veniat dilectus
meus in hortum meum. Cant. 5
Come my love into my Garden. She mente questionles, the garden of her soul,
as now I would wish my heart were set, decked, and adorned as a garden, which
the Monarch of this mighty mass, will vouchsaife to honor with his presence,
and behoulde with his glorious eyes.

The door of this garden, is mine imagination, or the faculty of my
fa^cyinge. At this door my good Angel attends, (quia Angelus ibi est, vbi
operatur, ex commun^ theologorum sententia, Because an Angel is, where it
works, by the common opinion of diuynes) left Satan should enter in. Here
they both stand in presence and person really, in the former part of the
brain, so often as the one inuitethe me to virtue, and the other exhorts me
to vice. And therefore since it lies in my power (as the gardener unto whom
the custody is committed) to let in whom I list: it behouethe me to look
about me, and attend well, who knocks at the gate, for my good Angel commethe
to root owte evil herbs, and plant holsom and odoriferous in steed of
them, mine evil Angel to root owte the good, and to sow darnell and cocle in
their places. I know this false spirit endeuoreth with false keys to open the
door, or by vyolence to break in; and therefore I must crave help of my good
Angel to resist the fury of his force, for otherwise I wear not adle to
encounter with him.

The alleys of this garden, are the virtues of mine understanding, faith
prudence, wirt, kn^owledg, wisdom, counsel. Faith, is a theological virtue,
whereby I give an ineffable assent to all that God haith reueyled, whether it
be written in Scriptures, determined in approved councels, or kept by continual
tradition, in Christ's Church: and this for none other reason, but because God
haith reueyled, for he delivered all we are to believe.

Prudence is a moral virtue, which guydeth and directs me what I ought to
follow. This is the rule, the square, the touch stone, of all other moral
virtues, that is, which concern our good life, and manners.

Wit, called intellectus, is a gift of the holy Ghost, by which the soul is
prepared to receive the inspiratio^s of God, which consist in penetrating the
deep misteryes of our Faith, the incarnation of Christ, the creation of the
world, the ineffacle manner of Christ's presence in this venerable Sacrament.

Knowledge, otherwise scientia, is a gift of the holy Ghost, mouinge a man, by
the help of God, to find out reasons, examples, similitudes, conueniences,
and persuasions: to prove, confirm, declare, and propounde, the mysteries of
our faith: as by Water, to declare the nature of grace; by seed, the wootde of
God, and such like. The which gift, most palpably appears in many servants
of God, who daily read new lessons in his creatures, to establish our faith.

Wisdom, or Sapientia, proceeds from the perfections and attributes of God, to
prove and confirm, all that knowledge performethe by his creatures: so we may
confirm, the mistenes of Christ's incarnation, and the Eucharist: that such
infinite benefytes, favors, and communications, stand with his supreme
goodness, bounty, liberality, mercy, and love.

Council likewise issues from the Holy Ghost, and enableth our
understandings, to follow his inspirations, when they go beyond the common
course of faith, or prudence infused: as that Sampson should kill him self,
Iud. 16
which both faith and prudence forbidd generally: but those general rules,
limitt not the power and authority of the Number. 25 2 Match. 14
holy Ghost. The like we might affirm of Phinees, Razias, S. Appolonia, and
many more, who above all laws, inspired of the law maker, either caused their
own deaths, or the deaths of others, yet warranted by him, in whose hands
lyethe the periodes of life and death. These are the main alleys, by which my
Savior must walk in the garden of my soul, and enter into the beds of my
will, sown with the seeds of virtue: for in every just man's soul, grow the
sweetest flowrs, that ever appeared in Paradise; the seed whereof, our Savior
Christ brought from his imperial heaven, and with his own hands, sowed it in
every good man's heart.

The primrose of the fear of god, which first springs and buddethe in the
soul. Rosemary of repentance, something bitter in taist, but exceeding holsom in
the flowr of forgeuenes of sins, and the virtue of satisfaction.

The Balio^mie of hope, cleaving always to that corner stone Christ Jesus who
never confounded them that trusted in him, nor ever failed to vphould them that
leaned upon him.

The white rose of Charity, embracing with most pure and unspotted love, the
son of the Queen of all virgins.

The redd rose of pains and crosses, which all zealous trendes of Christ,
must tolerate for his sake: and although the thorn do prick, yet little it
imports, compared with the fragrant smell it yeldeth.

The Gelouer of Justice, consumi^g all the substance, in exhaling delicate
odoures to the use of men, for whose cause it was created, repayinge therewith
the just tribute of nature.

The vyolet of humilitye, debacing herself almost to the earth, and guilty of
her own weakness, shrowdeth her head under the broad leaves of gods protection.

The Marigould of mercy, spreadi^g her glorious train and gratfull beams,
when the sun lettethe fall his heavenly influence upon her, that is, in this
life she opens her lap to receive all that stand in need of her: when the
sun sets, she veileth her face, because works of mercy, can not be
showed but in this life, where abounds misery: in the life to com, mercy is
shutt up, for into heaven there enters none that is miserable.

The Lilly of Chastity, and Virginirie, enameled with gould of Christ's love,
in the very heart.

Many more flowers of exquisite odor, no less grateful to behoulde, then
delightful to smell, adorn the beds and bordes of every good soul that
devoutly serves God.

Besides these flo^ures, there lacks nor any sort of pleasante arboures or
trees in this spiritual paradise. Their roots, are habitts of virtues: their
stemmes, divine operations or acts: Their leaves, religious conversation,
grave and modest behavior: Their flowers, talk of god, and speech of spirit:
Their fruit, good works: Their rynde, the custody of our senses: Their sapp,
the grace of God: The dew of heaven, which comfortethe themall, the sacred
Euchariste, that like dew, fell in the desert.

The banks of this garden, are prayer, meditation, contemplation, and devotion:
where the soul sits and considers her state, and speculatethe to practice
the disposition, order, incremente, or decremente of her garden.

The birds that sing continual music, can not want in that orcharde, wheare
virtuous flowers cast such a sent: for hear the peace of a quiet conscience,
causes a heavenly harmony: The consort of grace and nature, of sense and
reason, of wit and will, of passions and affections, God and the soul, a man
and his neighbors, can not but make a most sweet melody, and most grateful
to the ears of all that hear it.

Hearr the Angels singe with sweet inspirations, and cause an incessante
Jubilee in the heart.

In the middeste of the soul, stands a goodly fountain of water upon a
hill, called inherent grace, situated in the higheste and most essential part
thereof, which deuideth it self into four rivers, as the fountain of
Paradise. One passethe through the garden, and carries away all flith and
Genesis 2
trash wherewith filthy worms, myse, and hedghogs, defile it: So grace washes
away sins in justification.

An other river yeldeth a water like

The third river, causethe them to

The fourth river, haithe virtue to

The grateful gale that summeth in one, the fragrant smelles of all these
flowers, is the Sacrifice of the Altar, wherein the just join them selves to
Christ, and both united (the head and the members) offer them selves unto God,
as an incense compounded, of the quintessence of all smells and odoures.

The Eucharist, is the spiritual su^me of this garden, whose presence causes
all roots to spring, budd, blossom, and fructifye. It is the sea, whence from
issues the fountain of grace, which purifyeth, adorneth, fructifyeth, and
repaireth, all the plants, flowers, and herbs of the soul, that is, virtues,
gifts, and good inclinations. Therefore sweet Savior, let abundance of this
water, fall into my soul, that is so dry and barren. Sicut terra sine aqua,
Psa. 106
sic anima mea tibi. As earth without water, so comethe my soul now to thee. I
may rather say, like a baren desert. I appear before thee, in Psa. 62
terra deserta, inuia, and inaquosa, sic in sancto apparut tibi. As one
wandering in a desert country uninhabited and vnwattered, that is, consumed
almost with drought: So appear I in thy holy Church before this blessed
fountain of life: Let me not dye for thirst, let not my soul wither so near
the river of life.

AS AN INFANT TO HIS MOTHERS DVGGE.
CAP. 10
THis Sacrament, affordethe not only wine for men, but also milk for
sucklinges: by encoraginge 1 Cor. 3
the valiant, and enablinge the weak. Wherefore he that did foresee it, and
after prove it, said, that he drunk milk with his wine, Bibi vinum Can. 5
meum cum lacte meo: And thereunto absolutelye inuyteth all to drink and eat
it, Comedite amici, and bibite, and inebriamini charissimi. Eat my friends and
drink, and be drunk my dearest, that is, ravished, with the excess of love,
not out of reason, but above all reason.

Milk in many things agrees with the Eucharist, by woorking in our bodies
corporally, that which the Eucharist works in our souls spiritually.

First milk is both meat and drink, drink it. He that eats Christ's body
drinks it also, and he that drinkethe his blood, eats it likewise. He that
eats his body, together drinks his blood, and he that drinks his blood,
eats his body. For which cause, he that is eaten here, the infinite wisdom of
God, expressly said, Qui edunt me, Eccl. 24
adhuc esurient, and quibibunt me, adhuc sitient. Those that eat me, yet shall
hunger, and those that drink me, yet shall thirst: Wheare we see the same God
that we eat, the same we may drink, the same wisdom is meat and drink, and
consequently, a spiritual milk. The like our Savior said of lustice,
calling it both meat and drink, Beati qui esuriunt and sitiunt iustitiam, Mat.
5
Blessed are they that hunger and thirste after righteousness. The Eucharist
there fore either eaten or drunk, fills the soul with righteousness, and
therefore, quenches the thirst as drink, and susteineth the body as meat.
The Theological reason hereof, may easily be yielded, for all spiritual food,
is as well drink as meat: because as drink it cools the fervent desires in
part, and as meat, it mainteyneth with grace and virtue, the spiritual life
of the soul.

By this we may manifestly perceive the foolish importunity of the Lutherans
and Caluenistes still calling for the cupp, censuring the church of sacriledg
for depriving the laity of the chalice. For if they could penetrate the
manner, nature, and effects of spiritual food: they would never fall into
such an absurdine. For he that eats Christ's body, both eats and dtinketh
his blood, as well as the priest, and he that drinks his blood, eats no
less of his body, then he that receaueth his body. For in the Euchariste under
the rynde of bread, there lies nothing but that lies under the rynde of wine
in the Chalice: nor co^trariwyse, nothing under the rynde of wine in the
Chalice, but the very same is received under the rynde of bread in the host:
In so much as he which participate the both of the bread and wine, and he that
only particrpate the of one: receueth as perfectly and intierly, the body and
blood of Christ, as he that communicates with them both: Yet for a more
sensible and external signification, the priest offers and co^sumeth them
both, but the substance received, and the effects instilled into the soul,
are as intier and complete in one, as in both: in a myte, as a mountain: in a
dropp, as a butte.

By this it appears, that Christ's body in the the Sacrament, as drink
quenches the thuste, by fulfilling the seruent desires of them that love God:
by coolinge the flames of concupiscence, by mitigating the vehemente affections
of worldly delights: As meat, it restores the lost forces of our souls by
sin, augmenteth our grace, increases our spiritual life, and finally
affordethe all those effects of meat, in a more excellent degree to our
souls, then any corporal meat to our bodies: and therefore is meat and
drink, and milk, for sucklinges of God.

Milk, of all meats, is one of the It needs neither baking, boylinge, nor
roastinge, as other meats requite, for in the mothers breast, it is baken,
brewed, boiled, and roasted: and so the infant without any other sauce, simply
and solely, draws it from his mothers dugge.

By which propriety we are admonished, that with four simple words, withowt
any tergiuersation, labor, or pain: the priest drawethe this sacred milk
from the breast of Christ's love. And how like infantes with simplicity not
curiously questioninge how it was made, how conveyed under the forms, how it
lodges under those veyles of bread and wine, how we ought to suck it: for
infantes use noe such interrogatio^s, but simply suck that their mother
gives. So the infantes of Christ begotten with his blood should simply
receive, that their mother the catholic Church, ministrethe unto the^: and
follow that ccu^cell of the Apostle, 1 Pe. 2
Quasimedo geniti, ifantes rationabiles, sine dolo, lac concupiscite, As newborn infantes, desyringe milk without deceit, not without reason: for the
best reason that an infant can have, is to suck that his mother gives. And so
the greatest reason that the wisest children of Christ can yield, is not their
own iudgmente, but the Churches, in interpreting scriptures, in judging of the
conferences of places, in ordevning the manner and use, of this blessed food.

Moreover we may learn, how as this Sacrament is the meat of our souls all
the time of our peregrination: so we should live always like infantes in
life and conversation, simple like Mat. 10 Mat. 18
doves, and innocent like babes, not sinisterly suspectinge, not maliceously
circumuenting, not peruersly dealinge with any man: but simply, really, humbly.
For this simplicity brings great peace to our selves, and makethe us
grateful to others; It wins great favor with God, and therefore is
excedinglye commended in scriptures. For with whom does God most familiarly
talk and converse? with the simple, Cum simplicibus sermocinatio eius Prou. 3
With the simple is his talk. What virtue of Job obiecteth God against
Satan, to declare his piety and virtue, but simplicity? Homo simplex and
rectus, Job. 1
a man simple and right. When Christ propounded to his Disciples the pattern
they should follow to come to heaven, took he not one of these simple babes,
saying, Nisi efficiamini Mat. 18
sicut paruuli, non intrabitis in regnum coelorum. If you become not like
infantes, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven?

Much more might be said of this exiled virtue, but that I think the
commendation of Christ so great, that all I can say, would rather diminish the
glory, then add any luster unto it.

There is noe meats or drinks, among For in life everlasting, at the table
of god, all our provision, meat and drink, shall be the contained in this
Sacramene, for it alone will suffyce. And therefore now that I have the sacred
breast of my Savior filled with this deifyed milk, boiled with the heat of
love: I will imitate theinfantes as S. Chrisostom wills me, Hom. 90 ad popul.
Autioch.
who weep and cry for the dugge, and will not be quiet till they have gotten
it: so soon as they see it, with what promptnes they roll their heads to it?
how hungerly they press it, and thruste their faces unto it? Even so ought I
moved with the want of this divine milk, with sighs of my heart, with tears
from mine eyes: prefer it before all treasures. When I see it I should stir
up all the virtues of my soul, to claspe it in my mouth, and with the
affections of my heart, endeavor to make a most perfect union with the breast
of Christ's divine love. Neither need I to doubt, that when my Savior shall
hearc my cries, that he will deny my request, since he haith inuyted me many
years ago, to this wine and milk, promisinge the sail thereof, without
either gould or money, only he craves our thirste Isa. 55
and coming. Omnes sitientes venite ad aquas, and qui non habetis argentum
properate, emite, comedite: Venite, emite absque Argento, and absque vlla
commutatione, vinum and lac. All you that are thirsty, come to the waters, and
you that have noe money, hasten, buy, and eat: Come and buy without money, or
without any exchange, wine and milk. Who haith wit, and will refuse to
accept so liberal an offer? Who will dye for hunger, having a sea of wine,
water, and milk, runninge before his doare? How can we excuse our selves, if
we want virtue, having prepared, so forcible means, to furnish us of all
virtue?

AS HVNGRY AND NEEDY.
CAP. 11
THe poor Lazarus depryued of Luc. 16
garments, vlcered with soars, staruinge for hunger: laid crauinge the
crummes that fell from the rich man's table. And such a Lazar, sweet Jesus,
lie I before thy mercies gate. How I was naked and wounded before, I have
reueyled, sweet Lord, unto thee: My soul likewise I fear is not free from
the botches and byles of internal concupiscence, for my misery surpasses,
because my spiritual forces, proceed not only from forain foes, my ghostly
enemies: but also from them that seem domestical fre^des, who lodge under the
same roof with me. All this army of calamities, O blessed Jesus, haith
assaulted me: but now hunger and spiritual famine, most oppresses me, and
who will tell me where I shall be releued, but thy louinge and beloved Mother?
Esurtentes impleuit bonis, and diuites dimosit Luc. 1
inanes. The hungry he has filled with good things, and the rich he haith
sent empty away. What good things be these wherewith the hungtye shall be
satiated? Suscepit Israel puerum suum, Israel haith received his child, and
with him, omne bonum, all Sap. 7
goodness. But O blessed virgin, I desire but the crummes which fall from that
indeficiente Table. Here I see thou telleste me, I shall receive the best dish,
the cheifest part, yea the whole banquet: So it is, and otherwise it could not
be, for the crummes, the least bittes of that Table where God is the food, are
as great, as full, as perfect, as the whole: There is no difference in
essense, or quantity: All the perfections of God, all his attributes and
proprieties: all as intierly remain and dwell in the smalest grain of
musterdseede, as in the highest Ceader of Libano, or in the whole vastnes, of
the immensiue heavens. Therefore in geuinge us in this Sacrament his person to
be our food, in the lest moate of bread that fallethe from the Eucharist: he
is as wholly, as in an hundredth loaves: But yet for the external rind, we may
call it a crumm of bread, in regard we see not the beauty of his deity, we
taist not the full effectt of his love, we enjoy not the amplenes of his
deligtes: Therefore we may call this, a crumme of that light, beauty, love, and
joy, which his Saints possess, who sit continually at his table in heaven

Neither fear I here that it should be said, nemo illi dabit, none will
bestow these crummes upon me, for I know, no avarice, no scarstie, can enter
into his house, where all glory and treasure flow, Gloria and diuitiae in domo
Psalm. 111
eius, Glory and riches in his house. And whose glory most shynethe, in
communicatinge him self, and what he haithe, to men. Yet I remember one that
came begginge to his doares as I do, and had the repulse at the beginning,
when it was answered her, that it was not conueniente, to cast the bread of
children to dogs: Yet she replied (and so will I) Etiam domine, catelli
comedunt de micis quae cadunt de mensis Mat. 15 Marc. 7
dominorum suorum, The little dogs O Lord, eat the crummes, which fall from
their masters tables. I am sweet Jesus, for my sins, worse then a dog, for
although he haith no reason, yet he haith noe malice: But alas I know not how
to transform my self, and change my doggish life, and become by loving and
serving thee, like a man: but by eating the sacred cru^ms which fall from thy
spiritual table.

Therefore good Lord, let them fall into the center of my heart, and I will
prefer them before all kingdoms and worlds. I doubt not, but this food can
transform dogs into men, and men into Angels: For we prove by dailye
experience, that the coals as black as ink, by the virtue of fire, become
glowing like goulde, and so long as fire possesses them, so long they keep
their color: But cool them with water, or any way extinguish their heat,
you shall see them return, to their former hellish hew: So sweet Jesus, it
standethe with me, my soul by vice, is become doggish and perverse, my sins
have stained it most filthily: Thy blessed body guildeth it, renews it,
deifyeth it: But if I keep thee not, if I let thee depart, I know it will
return to the former deformity, as b^ack as a coal, that was as white as
snow.

AS THE THREE KINGS CAME TO ADORE CHRIST.
CAP. 12.
THe three Kings, by postinge Mat. 2
night and day, seeming rather to fly then go, guided with a star: found
Christ at last, wrapped in clothes, an insante on his Mothers knee. Here
sweet Jesus, I come a far of, because my soul haith wandered with distractions,
and impertinente affairs, far from thee. The starr that guydeth me, is my
faith, a light sent by thee from heaven. Here upon thine Altar, I find thee,
the very fame that they worshipped, attired with the ryndes of bread and wine.
They being Kings, left their states, labored night and day for almost a
fourthnight: They came into Jerusalem, and like three Apostles, preached thy
kingdom, not fearing to be called in question, for declaring a new heir of
that kingdom: but stoutly and coragiously asked, vbi est quinatus est rex
Iudoeorum? Where is he that is borne king of the Jews? This courage of theires,
this extraordinary diligence, this admirable desyte to find forth Christ,
confounds my base mind, my negligence and remisnes, in searching my Savior,
in preparinge me to this Sacrament. What have I abandoned for Christ's love?
scarce so much as Peter's net. What long Iournaies have I taken, to labor in
his service? to convert wicked sinners to a good life? to mortifye my passions?
Such iournaies and labors, as he that put his hands under his arme-pittes,
and for fear did sit him down saying: Leo Prou. 26
est in via: A Lion lies watching in the way: So I am affrayd with mine own
fancies. Ah I know too well, that if I intend to enter into the land of
promise, flowing with milk and honye, I must depart with Abraham, de vr
Caldeorum, Genesis 11 and 12
the City of the Caldyes: I must leave my country and parents: If I desire
to hear the voice of my Lord god, I must forgeate my house Psa. 44
and friends: If I will find Christ with the three Kings, I must take a long
journey, abandon my state, not regard Jerusalem, the tumulte of the world:
That is, if flesh or blood, kinsman or friend, country or Kingdom, withdraw
me from the service of God, hinder my devotion, impeach my spiritual increment
in grace: I will leave them, I will depart from them. O that I knew in
practice, this point so exactly, as I am assured in speculation, that it is
most necessary, for all spiritual men, and those who desire effectually to
serve God, for intmici heminis, Mat. 10
domestici eius. The enemies of man, his cohabitantes. How easelie do friends
withdraw me from prayer, to keep them company? How often neglect we to serve
the law of God, and so to displease him, to please them? How often feel we our
hearts moved to profess our faith coragiouslye? to proceed to perfection
feruentlye? to exercise works of piety diligently? and presently the very
memory of friends, parents, and country, cast us from the byas? Let us
therefore examine our souls, let us with David swepe our Ps. 76
spirits, and cast out the dust and filthe of these preposterous affections:
and then we may appear, before this blessed babe, this child in body, and man
in soul, this man in flesh, and God in person.

The Kings would not show them selves before the Monarch of all kingdoms,
without their tribute and offeringes of recogniscence. For he that had
commanded, that none should appear before him, without somepresent:
inspired them to offer, three Exo. 23
mystical gifts, of goulde, mirh, and incense: the which contain great
secrets. Cipr. de stella and
By goulde, they consessed his dluinitie, for so his spowse long before magis.
Cant. 5.
had described him, by calling his head, aurum obryzum, most pure gould.

By Incense, his preisthode: to who^ it apperteined to offer.

By Mirh, his manhood and mortality, yet to be preserved from corruption, by
the virtue of his resurrection: Non relinques animam means, in Psalm. 15 Act. 2
inferno: nec dabis sanctum tuum, videre corruptionem. Thou will not leave my
soul in hell, nor give thy holy one to see corruption.

Here with them I confess, that in this Sacrament inhabiteth (sweet Jesus) thy
divinity, the essence and substance of God, common to all the three persons,
besides thy proper person, the second hipostasis of that holy Trinity, united
to the nature of man.

Moreover, that the Father and holy ghost, are not only present with thee by
their essence and power, as they are in all places, nor only by newoperations
and effects, as in justification and glory: but more peculiarly for thy
divine presence: In so much that if it were possible, to separate from the^,
all other sorts of presence, yet for the very connection and dependence, the
issuing and proceeding of one person from an other, both the Father and the holy
Ghost, of necessity should be present with thee: For neither thy Father can
continuallye generate thee, nor you both breath out the holy Ghost, except you
were all three present, and one indistante from an other: as the Mother can
not be absente from the child she bears in the bearing, nor he that
breathethe, distante from the spirit he breaths in the breathing.

I confess likewise, that thine office of preisthoode, here is exercysed,
thine ineruent sacrifyce is offered, thy passion most expressly represented,
that from this oblation ascends to heaven, the sweetest odoures, and most
fragrant smells, that ever our deserte could yield.

Finally I acknowledge thee mistically mortal in this Sacrament, by the
sacrificiall division of the soul from the body, and the blood from them both,
yet without corruption, without death or pain, preserved with the mirh of
immortality, and gift of impassibility.

These three regal oblations, teach likewise, all them that com to Christ
especially by receiving him in the Eucharist, what dispositions or offerings,
they ought to bring.

By gould, they exhort us to present unto him our souls gilded with Charity.
For as gould excels all mettalls, so Charity all virtues: As gould of all
mettalls is most durable, so Charity remains after death, though 1 Cor. 13
faith and hope vanish away. As goulde comes from the fire more glistringe and
bewtifull: so fervent Charity in the fire of temptations and tribulations,
receaueth a more perfect gloss and luster.

As gould buyeth all things, and so in value counteruayleth all the wealth of
the world, so Charity buyeth god him self, and with him, all treasures in
Col. 2
heaven and earth. Therefore this spiritual goulde, I will offer to the king
of my soul, more grateful I know unto him, then all the goulde which Ophir,
or India, can afforde.

By incense, they admonish us of prayer and devotion. For as Incense burned,
ascendethe into the air: So our prayers hett with the fire of Charity,
ascend to heaven. As Incense yeldeth our corporal senses a most delightful
smell: So prayer to the spirituallsente of God, presents a most fragrant
odor. As from a little Ince^se proceeds a mighty odoriferous exhalation: So
from our prayers, proceed most ample effects, as remission of sins,
endowment with grace, the favor of God, and life everlasting.

The incense then of prayer, I will exhale, from the heat of my heart, and
request him as man, our true priest and mediator, to put it into the censer of
his most purifyed love, and so present it before the face of his Fathervpon his
alter, in the Temple of his celestial Jerusalem.

By their Mirh, they advise us of mortification, that we must crucify and kill
our sensuality and inordinate passions. For as Mirh haithe a corrosiue virtue,
apt to eat and consume the moist and putrifyinge humors of the body: So
mortification eats and consumes: the pestilent humors of the soul. As
Mirh preserves men's bodies from corruption: So mortification, the soul and
the body, from death and damnation. And therefore to my Savior dead for me, I
will offer this most affectuall and sweet Mirh of mortification, that by our
union in death, 2 Cor. 1
we may be united in life.

AS A SHIPP TOSSED AMONG SHELVES AND Rocks, in the tempestious sea of this
world.
CAP. 13.
ALthough my feet tread upon the firm and steadfast land, yet my soul
continuallye sailethe upon the mouable and unconstant sea. For what sea can be
more unstable, then the humors of men? what tempest more terrible, then the
temptations of Satan? what billows more boisterous, then swellinge passions?
what thunder and lightninge comparable, with indignation and ire? What gulfes
or whirle wyndes more danngerous, then concupiscences and inordinate
affections? what shelues more perilous, then the alluringe delights of the
world? what rocks can more hardly be passed, then the infinite occasions
ministered by the world, to cast away the vessels of our souls.

Therefore I come to thee, sweet Jesus, to succor me in this important
navigations. This Sacrament must be the mean to conducte my frail 2 Cor. 4
Barck to the haven of life everlasting. For I conceive the carkas or keele of
this shipp, to be the substance of my soul: the cabbans and hatches, her
powers, faculties, or habilityes: The main may, Christ crucified, who
ought to be fixed in the very middeste and center, of every Christians soul:
The pylot, my Faith. The anchor, my hope: the sails, my Charity: The gale,
gods grace: The compass, his law: The card, the Scriptures, counsels,
Traditions, and voice of Christ's Church: The fraighte, merittes and good
works: The master of this ship, my person or substance: The nets and
sauegardes, my body: The hoales and ventes, the multitude of senses: The pole
star, the glory of heaven, the state of all felicity. But if I have nothing
to eat, what will all this furniture do me good? This Sacrament, is the
biscuit brought a far of: for which cause my bark may well be called, Nauis
institoris, Prou. 31,
de long portans panem suum. A passengers shipp, bringing his bread a far
of. Therefore I beseech thee good Lord not to permit that I proceed, in this my
long navigations, without the provision of thy blessed body. For I know the
Eucharist will not only serve me for bread, but like a tree that grows in
the west India, whose woodd, barck, leaves, rynde, fruit, and root: serve for
all things necessary, to the furnishing of a shipp. It planteth more firmly
the cross of Christ in my heart, vnyting that blood he shedd thereupon, with
mine. It confirmethe my faith, strengthnethe my hope, reuyueth my Charity.
Wind and fair wether can not fail in that soul, upon which the Eucharist
breaths: It teaches the pylot, directs the compass, animateth the
Master, discovers the haven, loadeth the vessel, with good works and
grace, and finally waftethe it into the Ports of eternal bliss.

O how happy wear mariners, if they could carry with them at their
pleasure, such a sea-iewell, to have wind and wether, and so conninge a pylott
to conduct them all their voyage. But how much more happy are the good
Christians who often communicate, and carry almost continually in their hearts
this precious treasure?

They may securely pass among the temptations of the devil: They with
facilitye may ride among the shelues of sensuality: They morning and
eueninge, slepinge and wakinge, in prosperity and adversity, in fair wether
and foul, have one that watchethe most vigilantly, and protectethe them most
carefully. Yet I remember once that in thy presence sweet Jesus, the Mat. 8
rebellious seas, had almost drowned thy disciples, and thou notwithstanding
as one that seemed unmindful of the^, did slumber and sleep. Where was
then thy providence and Fatherly care? Ah that sleep covered a most vigilant
heart, for he let them come to some perplexities, to teach them, and by them
us, that when we are plunged into the bothom of seas of temptations and
crosses, we should ever have confidence in him, because he loves us most
faithfully: and faithful frendshipp most appears in succouting a friend at
such pinches. For in prosperity frendshippe is commonly showed, but seldom
known, in adversity, seldom it is showed, but manifestly known.

THE PRODIGAL SON.
CAP. 14
Sometime I will present my soul Luc. 15
before my Savior, as the prodigal Son, who received in baptism and
justification, his portion and Patrimony of grace: yet in process of time,
loathing the service of God, and desireous to enjoy the vanities of the world,
by sin and wickedness: departed from his Fathers house, followed riotous
company, ingulfed himself with transitory pleasures: and at last fell into
such misery, that he neither enjoyed god, nor the delights of the world. For
god permits often yea by his Fatherly providence, withdraws occasions and
means of sin, from them whom he intends to recall from their wicked ways.
Satan asso when he haith haled souls from God, of mere envy and malice,
endeuoreth as much as may be, to molest them. For although he would, that men
should sin, yet he gives them no more bait, then he thinks sufficient to
cover his hooks. For which cause we read in the scriptures, that 4 Reg. 3 Sap.
14 Psa. 105 Acost. li. 5 ca. 19 and 20
he caused his vassals that adored him as a God, to offer their own children
in Sacrifyce. And Acosta, in his story of the Indians recounteth the horrible
butcherie of this infernal tyrant, how sometimes they sacrificed unto him, at
the least 5000. And at the death of any noble man, he caused them to bury all
his deareste friends, servants, and adherentes, to serve him, and bear him
company, in the other life.

The prodigal son then by gods providence, and the devils spyte, was glad
to feed hogs, and fill his belly with husks of pease, that is, desyted the
very dreggs of worldly pleasures, and could not have them. For either they
want money, or opportunity, or ability to accomplish their ungodly and
vicious desires, who leave God and serve the devil. For in fine, the tide of
their iolitye fyndethe an ebb, because either poverty pincheth them, or
sickness crossethe them, o^som indisposition or other, disableth them.

As the prodigal son, after that the light of heaven, haith illuminated the
darkness of my heart, and opened the eyes of my soul, to consider the dignitye
of my Christian state, the abject and unworthy life I have lived in, Quanti
mercenarii, in domo patris mei Luc. 15
abundant panibus. How many of my Fathers hirelings, have abundance of bread:
I will fall before my heavenly Father in this Sacrament contained, and will
cry, Pater, peccani in coelum and coram te, iam non sum dignus vocari filius
tuus. Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am not now
worthy to be called thy son. I know his bowels of mercy, his heart burninge
with love, can not but fall upon mine unworthy neck yea vente his breast that I
may drink of the floodd of his love.

Many more discourses devout souls may here of them selves find owte. For love
is wittye, grace pregnante, Christ vigilante, and the very presence of our
Savior, sufficient to move matter and affections, to all feruente souls,
that desire heartily to return unto him again.

TO HONOVRE GODS SAINTS.
CAP. 15.
BEcause I know this Sacrifyce to be offered dailye to God, in recogniscence
of his divine majesty, supreme dominion, continual providence over the world,
and also to glorifye him in his blessed Saints: Therefore sometime I will
communicate in honor of some of them, at which time, I may run over these
five points.

First thank God most affectually, grace of predestination, vocation,
justification, conservation, fynall perseverance and glorifiication.

Praise God and his Saint, for the

If this Saint did excel, in any one

I will desire this Saint, to vouchsaife distill into my heart, abundance of
grace, that I may use well the manifoulde favors god haith bestowed upon me,
that I may imitate him in that special virtue, by which he gave so clear an
example of gods goodness, to all the world.

When I receive the Euchariste,

AS A HEART THIRSTING THE FOVNTAYNE OF LIFE.
CAP. 16.
FOr that my Savior in this Sacrament, may well be compared to a Fountain
and spring of life, ever swelling with new sourges of lyuelye water, ever
pure, ever sweet, ever fresh, ever open, ever common: Therefore like a
thirstye heart, pursued with the infernal hound, of hell, wounded with the
darts of sin: laden with the mudd and mire of vices, and evil customs:
faintinge and weary with so many temptations, crosses and afflictions: I will
repair to this long wished remedy, for all my calamities: where I may quench
my thirste, cure my soars, wash away my sports and staynes, renew my forces,
and finally in the fountain of life, revive my self again: and therefore till
I com to it, I will not cease to cry with David, Quemadmodum desiderat ceruus
ad fontes Psa. 41
aquarum: ita desiderat anima mea, adte deus. As the heart desires the
fou^taines of water, so desires my soul thee o God.

AS. A PILGRIM.
CAP. 17.
AS long as we carry this living corpse, or dyinge body abowte with us: so
long Peregrinamur a domino, we wander from our Lord. and therefore in this
mine exil^, wandering 2 Cor. 5
like a pirgrime, banished out of my natyue country of paradise, in the
wilderness of this world, in the vast desert of Egypt, where nothing ca^be
found necessary, for maintenance of lyse: with the fervent affections of my
heart, I will call upon God, that he will let fall from heaven, his
consecrated Manna. I will stryke with the force of my love, upon the rock of
my faith, whence-from I know will issue that sacred liquor, which will comfort
my soul and body, all the time of my peregrination: desiring my Savior in
this Sacrament, to succoure his poor pilgrim, in so long, so necessary, so
dangerous, and so profitable a voyage: That he will cover me with the cloak
of repentance: put on my feet, the shoes of diligence: on my head, the hatte
of his heavenly providence: in my hand, the staff of constancye and
perseverance: in my bagg the provision of meat and drink, his sacred flesh and
blod, without which I should be constrained, either to return to Egypt, and
there be slain by Pharo: or dye in the deserte, and there be devoured of
beasts.

AS A FAITHLES SPOWSE TO HER HVSBANDE.
CAP. 18.
THe Prophetts of God inculcate Iosue. 24
nothing so much to the Jews, as the expostulation of their faith vyolated to
God: that they having married their souls to him, as to their only husband,
they brake their promise by following Idols and superstitions.

Therefore they ceased not to exclame against them, calling them strumpets, Ier.
2 and 3
whoares, adulterers, and common harlottes: yet exhorting them to return
again to their former husband, and he would receive them as lovingly as ever
he did before.

My case not being much unlike to theirs, by vowing to God in my baptism, and
promising so often in my confessions, to renownce the devil, the flesh, and the
world, to eschew all sorts of sin, to observe most exactly his law, never
to offend him mortally again: yet so often afterward transgressing his
commandments, when small occasion was offered, and would to God not often
sought.

Truly I may well be called a spiritual harlott, an unchaste spowse, to my
sweet Savior. But now I will demurr noe longer, I will return to the soul
of my soul, to my faithful constant, and inviolable lover. Here. I will
appear before his face, fall prostrate upon the earth, and with the flame of
my heart, the sighs of my breast, the sobbes of my throat, the tears of mine
eyes, the words of my mouth, the submission of my body: Cry for pardon of my
faults, grace of amendment, union of affections, and finally, that by the
virtue of this Sacrament, we may be duo in Ephesians. 5 Genesis 2
carne vna, two in one flesh.

AS A PROPITIATION FOR THE DEAD.
CAP. 19
THe common bound of natural affection, and right order of supernatural
Charity, enforces me to succor my parents, friends or Christian brethren:
who now in Purgatory for the relics of their sins, satisfy the justice
of him, who lets pass no good work without reward, nor sin be it never
so little, without some punishmente.

And therefore since I firmlye believe and undoubtedly ought to believe, that of
all remedies, none can be of more force and efficacy, then this blessed
sacrifice, I will offer it up to god most affectually, to redeem them out of
that misery, the which I shall persorme the better, if I set before the eyes
of my confideration, thief five points.

The horrible torments that those to the received opinion of most learned
doctoures, all the pains that ever were inflicted in this world, may be called
painted, in respect of them which in very deed are real. The which doctrine,
as in some great sinners (who repented not long before their death) I hold
it most certain: yet in other good souls who departed but with some few
venial sins, as idle words, and idle thoughts, I think it not probable
for diverse reasons, and so I doubt not but those learned doctoures, were of the
same opinion. But howsoever it be, the secrett sins of men be many, and
nocman seethe the faults of other menns hearts: Therefore it were wisely,
charitably, and discrectly done, to provide for the worste.

Let us consider, that we by gods vniuscuiusque opus, quale sit, ignis 1. Cor 3
probabit. The fire shall try every man's work what it is. For few there
be who bring so good wheat, Mat. 3
into the barn of God, that there remains not some chafe to be burnt in the
bottom. Therefore if we be careful now of our brethren, the providence of God
will be careful of us: and in like necessities will stir up some good soul
or other, to pray, give alms, or fast for us. For questionles the providence
and justice of God, are most punctual in repayinge good works with
proportioned rewards, as I could largely declare if I intended not brevity.

That this Sacrifice, besides the particular

The very nature of compassion, if we had none other motive to stir us up
hereunto, were sufficient. For who is he, that if he did see any good
Christian in a furnace burning for half an hour, and would not vouchsaife to
hear a mass, or receive the Sacrament, either whollye to deliver him or at
least, to diminishe the greater parts of his pain? Surely I would say, he
had not the heart of a man.

That by delivering such a soul, we

AS A GRATEFVLL OBSEQVIE UNTO GOD FOR all his Saints.
CAP. 20.
AS God flows with goodness, and willinglye communicatethe his treasures: so
he desiteth that men should acknowledge them and be thankful, and especially
for that I know one of the chefest causes of the institution of this Sacrament
to be, for to call to memory, the passion of our Savior, as was declared in
the book of causes.

Therefore sometime I will communicate, with intention to give most hearty
thanks to my loving Lord, for all his benefits: The which I shall be able the
better to perform, if I meditate these points.

1 The multitude of his benefits: of nature and grace allreadie received, and
of glory promised.

2 The manner of geuinge, that is, wiht most affectuall love.

3 For our good, not for any interest.

4 The greatness of his blessed gifts, as Life, Grace, Incarnation: And among
the rest, this blessed Sacrament.

5 Without our deserte.

6 Not demanded. For who ever asked of God, his soul or his body, or to be a
Chtistian?

7 When we were his enemies. And in particular, how often did he call me to
serve him, when I most of all fledd from him.

8 How dear his gifts were to him: They touched him even to the quick. For in
the incarnation; and this Sacrament, he imparted his only Son, his own
essence and substance: and with him, all the riches of heaven and earth. For my
part, to show my self gratfull, I ought first, to acknowledge and confess these
graces to proceed, of gods mere liberality. 2 That I am not able to acquyte
them. 3 That I desire to be grateful as near as I can.

4 To praise and magnify my benefactor with the blessed virgin saying.
Magnificat anima mea Dominum, My soul does magnify our Lord. 5 To Luc. 1
give him thanks most affectually for them. 6 To procure according to mine
abilitye, to show by works, the efficacye of mine intention, by deeds of
Charity, to those that stand in corporal or spiritual necessity: by
endeuoringe so much as lyethe in my power, that all nations and tongues may
bless and glorify him. 7 To inuyte all creatures to praise God for his
benefytes: To request all the quieres of Angels, to singe their sacred
Alleluia in his holy Temple, and supplye my defectes. 8 I will humbly request
my sweet Savior, who haith vouchsaifed to be present with us, and pleased
with his flesh and blood to feed us: that he will condingly praise god and
thank him for all, because I know that he alone can do it sufficiently and with
that infinite perfection, such graces require.

AS MOVING TO PRAYER.
CAP. 21.
LAstly for that no man lives on earth, that depends not of god, and many
times falls into such necessities, either of soul or body, in such
distress of grace, or temporal commodities, that without some particular
favor from heaven, hatdlye he can wade out of the depth, of such extremities.
Therefore understanding that God will give his gifts, but yet he will be
demanded: according to the exigence of my necessity, I will fall down before
my Savior, and require his favor. Neither does this-Decree, preiudicate the
depthe of his bounty, and liberality. For in that he will not grant us
graces and favors ordinarily, without prayer, it is a great grace and favor.
Because a troop of virtues we revive, by praying to god, and so meritt the
more and enable our souls, the better to resist all sorts of vices and
sins. For who prays and exercyseth not his Faith, in beleuinge that God can
grant his request? His hope, that God will hear him? His Charity, in loving
him, of whom he expects good? His humility, in confessing by the very
asking his own in digence? His patience, in expectinge that he demands? His
fortitude, in resisting the difficulties, which occurr in prayer? His religion,
in professing God the author of his good.

Moreover by prayer we come to be familier with God, for mutual conference and
often talking, engenders familiaritye, which is a special treasure.

By prayer also these gifts which we receive of God, are more glorious, and by
meritt, due unto us, which is a worthier title for us, then if they proceeded of
pure liberality: As if a king should give two horses to two captains, who
doubts, but if the one received his for worthy exploytes in war, and the
other of the kings mere affection, that that were more glorious to the former,
then this to the latter. Moreover, as Fathers will have their children, to ask
them what they need, that thereby they may know what bond they have to their
parents, and so love them the better, and join their hearts more affectually.
So god will give us his graces by prayer, that we acknowledge the special
dependence we hold of him, that by knowing it, we link our hearts more surely
unto him of whom we receive daily so many, so great, and so necessary
favors. Finally, that we keep the better, that which we obtained by great
labor: for things sone gotten, are commonly contemned: and purchaced with
difficulty, highly prized.

For the aforesaid causes, I will prostrate my soul before my blessed Savior,
whom I know of excessive charity, to remain in this blessed Sacrament,
expectinge continually, that his people resort unto him, and present their
supplications. Here as a provident master, he will have us to exercise those
virtues that we learn in his school: As a dear friend, increase our
familiarity, by often conuersinge: As a liberal rewarder, bestow his gifts
to our greater glory: As a louinge Father, by often askinge reveal unto us,
how in necessities we ought to have recourse unto him, and consequently louehim
more consta^tly, of whom, we depend continuallye: Finally as a careful
Pastor, who after he haith wandered with his flock a long time through vaste
and barren deserts, entering into a fertile and fruitful meadow, would teach
them not to trample the grass, or make small account of that they came to by
so great labor. The same reasons move me, in all mine important business and
negotiations, not to determine or put in execution, any one, except with the
children of Israel, I communicate my matter with God above his arck: that is,
by receauinge or prayinge, before the blessed Sacrament thereby represented.
Because I doubt not, but he is more ready in this Sacrament, to hear our suits,
grant our petitions, and further us in all goodness, then he was to them in
the old testament. For there appeared but an Angel, a messenger, an
ambassador: Hear rests God, the sender him self, and the king of glory. It
were an injury and disgrace to the King, that any man should think his
embassadoure more liberal and bountiful, then his own person. Therefore
assured that my Savior will prefer my suit to the supreme court of heaven,
where for his cause, I shall be sure of favor, or his divine majesty without
any further mediation: will presently grant my petition.

I mean very often to frequente these places, Chapels, or Churches, where I
may freely converse facie ad faciem, face to face with my Sanioure. And if I
seem to suffer at first a repulse, I know that proceeds not of evil affection
toward me, or that he will not hear me: but to make me more fervent, more
instant, more diligent; To cause me exercise often the multitude of virtues,
which concur toeuerie godly prayer: To say to me as he said to the woman of
Canaan, O Mat. 15
mulier, magna est fides tua, O woman great is thy faith: To give me more then
I demand, rewarding both the demand, and manner of demaundinge.

Many more sorts of coming to the blessed Eucharist, devout souls moved
with the inspirations of the holy Ghost, may find owte dailye, as with Abraham
after the victory of his Genesis 14
enemies, to encounter with Melchisedech, The figure of our Savior Christ,
who offered up in Sacrifyce bread and wine: to lie with Elyas in 3 Reg. 19
any tentation or affliction, under the Juniper tree, desireous to be dissolved
and walk to the mountain of God. To arm ourselves with David against 1 Reg.
17
the mountain of slesh Golias, with the syue pure stones of Chiristes wounds,
to be cast out by the slinge of Faith, wouen with the nett of Charity.

To prepare us with Judith, with the Judith 10
ornaments of virtue, with beauty of the soul and provision of victuals: to
overthrow Holophernes, and all the host of Nabugodonoser: that is, Satan and
all his infernal furies.

These I say and diverse others might be applied to our present purpose: but
because I perceive, the Treatise passes the precinctes I intended; therefore I
must cut of much of that matter, which might be handled: aduertising only the
reader, first in all these light and grace of our Savior, to penetrate and
understand them perfectly, and to receive some spiritual profitt by them.

2 Not to pray or meditate abstractlye, that is, in general alone, but to
apply always generalities, to your own particular estate: as for example. If
I consider how sin haith wounded my soul, I will wey in particular, what
sins I am most addicted unto, and how they especially, have cut and mangled
my soul.

3 I will ever apply my meditation to practice to flee vice, follow virtue,
serve God, flee temptations, etc. For then our Meditations are efectuall, when
good woorks, accompany good thougtes.

4 Meditation, and affection: discourse and devotion, in all good prayers go
linked together: for those meditatio^s are to small effect, which abide only
in the wit, and pass not to the will: and may well be compared to a barren
desert, without well, fountain, fludd, or spring: whereas those that extend
them, to the effects of the heart; are not unlike fair and fat meadows or
fruitful countries, who have their lands whollye interlaced, with rivers of
water: or as our bodies are not compacted whollye of flesh or bones, but have
in all places and parts the norishing veins dispersed: eue^ so meditation,
interlaced with devotion and discourses of the wit, with affectes of the will,
fatten the substance of the soul, and cause abundance of virtues, meritts, and
all goodness.

THE THIRD PART.
WHAT WE OUGHT TO DO After receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
Now we approach near the principal part of all our Discourse, that is, the
very moment when we must receive into our bodies and souls, this bread of
life, our blessed Savior God and man: and all that time the curtain clothes
of bread and wine, are not torn and consumed, with the natural heat of our
bodies. This part we might have adjoined to the second, at least the former
part: but because of distinction, and for that it requirethe the same
disposition that the latter, therefore I thought good to join them both
together, as if it were a complete enterteinement and conversation with Christ.

This pare imports more then both the presedent. For the other two prepared
the woodd, laid it together, blew the sire: but here the flame must issue
forth: The other two scowred the pieces of virtue, charged and put them in a
redines, here must follow a volley of spiritual shot: The other prepared the
palace of the Soul, adorned the chambers, ordered the feast Here the King
must enter, here he must be met, here interteyned, here the banquet must be
served in, here samiliarly, intrinsecally, domestically, Christ and the soul
must converse.

Therefore if ever in this life all virtues ought to appear at once, in their
most glorious a^tyre, in their most amiable countenances, in their sweetest
aspect, especially here, where they must enterteyne the King of all virtue,
the prince of all beauty, the glory of all grace: They must encounter him from
whom they proceeded, and to whom they tend.

Here the soul ought to bend all her faculties to exercise their principal
operations, and virtue to execute her principal office. Therefore here I would
request of my blessed Savior, that I had wit, means, and spirit, to deliver
in this discourse, such matter and conc^iptes, as I conceive to be necessary,
for him that participateth this Sacrament. But being in vetye deed destitute
of them, I must recurre unto thee sweet Jesus, which will not deny thy favor I
know, to so just a petition.

THE DISPOSITION OF Our Imagination, and apprehension, in receiving the
Euchariste.
CAP. 1.
ALL the affections of our soul, follow the apprehension thereof: and according
to the perfections or imperfections of them, these be more or less perfect.
Therefore to moueand inflame our affections, we must direct and inform our
apprehension: the which the book of causes of the institution, haith largely
as I hope, performed. But one point was reserved for this place, as nearest to
motion, and most forcible to stir up devotion: that is, to imprinte in out
minds, a most perfect conceit and image, of the presence of Christ in this
Sacrament of his divinity and humanity. For I doubt not, but if we had a
lively apprehension of the presence of God: our hearts would be much more
moved in receiving, then commonly we find them. And for that we do not only
participate our blessed Savior, as present in the Euchariste: but also in
regard that the whole Trinity is present, as three behoulders, vewing this
heroical act, of all others most excellent: Therefore I will exactly consider
their presence, that by consideration of God received, and God behoulding: mine
attention may be more respective, and mine affections more feruente.

THE PRESENCE OF GOD behouldinge.
CAP. 2.
IT imports so much the exercise of our spirit, to consider deeply, wey
exactly, imprint lively, and renew often, the presence of God: that among all
the Meditations which spiritual The effects of consideri^g Gods presence.
men frequente, I take it to be one of the most profitable and most
necessary. For who attendethe that God presently behouldethe him, and dare be
so impudent as to committ any sin, or expose his soul to the 1 Avoiding of
sin.
danger of sinning? What seruante durst ever transgress his masters
commandment in his presence, and that notoriously with a most heinous
injury, his master marking and behoulding, but one full of all malice and
wickedness? 2 Observation of his commaun dementes.
Who will not observe punctually, intierly, and completly, all the
commandments of god, if he fix the eyes of his soul as carefully upon the
eyes of God, as the diligent maid her eyes upon her Mistress, lest her work
should difplcase her? Sicut oculi Psa. 122
ancillae in manibus Dominae suae, ita oculi nostri ad Dominum deum nostrum. As
the eyes of the handmaid in the hands of her Mistress: so our eyes unto our
Lord God, said he that served God cord perfecto, with a 3 Re. 11 3
Familiaritye with God.
perfect heart.

The often and attentive consideration of Gods presence, remouethe not only
sin from us, by strikinge in our hearts a terror of his majesty, whom we
know so potent and mighty to revenge, and presently to behoulde. but also
engendrethe in the soul, a most sweet conversation, familiarity, and
communication in all affairs. For if the child had a Father most louinge wise,
and able, and always present: what business, what matter of importance, would
he let pass, without communication with his Father? what friend if he had
the like friend, would not reveal unto him all his secrets? What spowse, if she
had the like husband, would not make him partaker of all her affairs?
Therefore God being our Father, our friend, and the husband of our souls, o
how happy were we, if daily, hourly, and as often as our frail life
sufferethe: we did look upon him standing present by us, within us, rownde
about us? But contrariwise how unhappy are we, that having such a treasure so
near us, so rarely remember him, yea let whole days pass, and never mark
him: that we forgeate him that gave us memory, that we neglect to see him who
gave us sight, and without whose help we should not be able to see our
selves? Questionles we ought rather to wonder, why we always remember him not,
then so often to forgeate him.

This familiaritye and conversation, 4 Confidence in God.
will cause an admirable trust and coufidence in God. For he that pondereth in
his heart that god is present, that he behouldeth what occurreth, in what
danger he is plunged, what enemies assaulteth him, what wrongs he suffers,
what crosses he carries: such a man (I say) knowinge by long experience, and
fami^iarity, that God louethe him: will accounte little or nothing, all contrary
encounters and tribulations, having present his defender. wherefore David
said, Prouidebam Psa. 15
Dominum in conspectu meo semper quoniam a dextris est mihi, ne commouear. I
did provide, that god should be always in my sight, because he stands on
my right hand, lest I should be troubled. Hereupon ensues 5 Peace of
conscience.
an admirable peace and tranquillity of mind, and a mirth and iubilye of
heart. For who will not rejoice, to have god present, to protect him from all
evils, whom he is assured will permit noe cross not affliction, to fall upon
him, 1 Cor. 10
but for his profitt and ghostlye good. And therefore he added, Propter hoc
laetatum est cor meum, my heart rejoiced. Psalm. 15 6 Feruoure in gods service.
Hencefrom proceeds diligence and fervor in all our exercyses. For as all
workmen labor more diligently, when he for whom they work, ouerseeth, because
they still consider how henoteth their diligence, mark ethe their negligence,
and with his only presence, by a silente voice, praises the one, and
reprehendeth the other: Even so those that make the presence of god the often
object of their Meditations, by little and little, increasethe feruoure of all
their actions, and consequentlye, effect them more circumspectly, with all
their complementes, circumstances, and perfections, lest he whose eyes are most
pure, should perceive any blott or steyne, in them. Where such fervor,
peace, and familiarity lodge, 7 Abundance of Merittes.
can not but flow abundance of good works, and merittes: and by them the
works deserve in this life, a rich payment of grace, and in the other, an
honorable reward of glory.

By which discourse appears what excellent effects the frequent consideration
of gods presence workethe in our souls. For thereby we avoid sin:
avoiding sin, we keep exactly his commandments: by keeping exactlye his
commandments, we grow in familiaritye: by growinge in familiarity, we
conceive an inexpugnable confidence: by Confidence, peace and tranquillity: by
peace, feruor and diligence: by diligence, abundance of good works and
meritts: by meritts, increase of grace and glory. So that this chain more
precious then goulde, or rychest stones, ascendethe by linkes from hell to
heaven, from sin, to glory, from abandoninge the devil, to the perfect union
with God.

Upon this baise and foundation, well may we build our spiritual edification:
the which, as we may easily lay it, so once well laid, hardlye it can be
overthrown or undermined.

The great Saints of god and his special friends, as they knew the
importance of this point, so they made the presence of god familier unto the^.
From whence proceeded these voices, Deus in cuius conspectu, ambulauerunt Genesis
48
fratres mei Abraham and Isaac: God in whose sight, have walked my Fathers
Abraham and Isaac. Domiuus, in cuius Genesis 24
conspectu ambulo, mittet Augelum suum tecum. Our Lord in whose sight I walk,
will send his Angel with Psalm. 5
thee. Dirige in conspectu tuo, viam meam. Direct my way (that is my Psalm. 5
works) before thy sight. Ambula coram me, and esto perfectus, Walk before
Genesis 17
me, and be perfect: With many more such like, which give us to understand,
that these servants of god, instructed by god him self, in all their actions
considered the presence of god: that they labored and exercysed their virtues
before his face. For they were not ignorant, that wicked men little weigh the
presence of god, they never remember it, they think he scarce marketh their
mischeife: Sed circa cardines Job. 22
caeli ambulat, and nostra non considerat: He walks about the poles of
heaven, and considers not our affairs: But the godly said, Oculi nostri
semper Psa. 24
ad Dominum: Our eyes are always fixed upon our Lord. For as he seaceth not
to behoulde and mark us: so we will not seace to mark and behold him.

Coming then to receive the blessed Sacrament, where the eyes of god are most
opened, who pass and pearce with their subtle beams, into all the secretts
of my soul. If ever I had need to walk in his sight, consider his presence,
observe what there is in me, that may offend him, or in any case dislyke his
divine majesty: Here I ought especially to note it. Moreover, if ever the
presence of god, did cause in one work all these 7 effects, above mentioned: I
doubt not but here particulerly, to be made partaker of them. Therefore though
all my life should be, a continual carryinge of my self before god, and a
consideration of his presence: yet here principally, the very majesty of this
act, enforces me to represent unto my soul, the most lyuelye picture of
godds presence that is possible. But I know that simple people, and some that
think them selves wise, can hardlye frame their imaginatio^s, to conceive the
presence of god in all places: because our corporal organes, or instruments
of our soul, minister unto it none but corporal shapes, forms, and
similitudes. How then may we guide and direct them to frame a conceypt of gods
presence? To the wyser sort it were sufficient to say, that God is immensiue,
and that as by his eternitye he comprehendethe all times: so by his immensitie,
he fillethe all places. They know that where God works, there he is present:
and therefore workinge in all places, conseruing and cooperatinge with his
creatures: of necessity he must be in all places. This proves that notable
induction of David, Si ascendero Psa. 138
in coelum, tu illic es, si descendero in infernum, ades: Si sumpsero pennas
meas diluculo, and habitauero in extremis maris, illuc manus tua dedncet me. If
I ascend into heaven, there thou art, if I descend into hell, I shall find
thee present: If I take my wings in the break of the day, and dwell in the
extreme coasts of the sea, thither thy hand will guide me: so that by his
operation and cooperation with him, he infers his presence.

These theological reasons, would satisfy the more learned sort, but those
that have not studied Divinity, will hardly perceive them. Therefore by some
real and palpable similitudes, I think good to help them in so necessary a
matter.

First let them take a similitude used 1 Mean to conceive gods presence.
by S. Augustine, in his confessic^s, that all this mighty mass of the world
the earth with all thereunto apperteininge, as mettalls, mineralls, stones,
trees, herbs, beasts, men: the water with all thereunto belonging: the sea,
rivers, fountains, lakes, fishes: The air with all birds that inhabit it:
the element of fire: the tenn heavens, with all the army of stars and
planetts: the cmperiall heaven, with all Saints and Angels: and then I
imagine all these as a sponge, cast into an immens^ue ocean sea, where the water
passes through it on every side, enunoneth it all about, yet the infinite
vastnes of the sea, remainethe without it: So god enters into all his
creatures, his substance and essence, pearceth the most secrett corners of them
rewnde about: yet above the highest heaven, the vastnes of his immensity, is
boundles and unmeasurable without all bounds, limittes, or precincts, Quen^
coels coelorum capere non possunt, 2 Par. 6 Job. 11
^xc^ls^or coel^ est: Whom the heavens of heavens, can not conteyne: he is
higher then heaven.

An other similitude we may borow from many places of the Scripture, that
attribute eyes to god: If we conceive his majesty as an infinite clear and
penetrating eye, dispersed abowte the whole world: that what creature soever we
look on, we presently conceive therein the understanding of god by the form
and shape of an eye to encounter with ours. For really Gods understanding
sees us better, and all we do in every creature, then all the eyes that ever
he created if he joined them together all in one. Omnia autem nuda and aperta
sunt oculis eius. Heb. 4 Prou. 15 and 23 Vide Job 10 2 Par. 16 Psa 10 Ier. 16
In omns loco, oculs Domini contemplantur bonos and malos. In every place, the
eyes of our Lord do behold the good and the wicked, Oculi Domins,
contemplantur vniuersam terram. The eyes of our Lord do behoulde the
universal earth.

This example I would wish as familier and 24 23 65 90 138. Eccl. 23 15 17 34.
Ier. 16 Dan. 10 Amos. 9 Abac. 1 Mich. 7 2
among Christians, as I judge it necessary for them to imprinte in their
fowls the presence of god in all things.

And without all doubt, by some small di^igence and practice, this godly
exercise will become so familiar, that if they would, they can not but consider
God almost in every good woork they do.

The words of David the Prophet will open unto us, the way to find out an
other mean to consider gods presence: Apperui os meum and attraxi Ps. 118
spiritum menm, I opened my mouth and drew in my spirit, that is, as when we
breath, we draw into our bodies this vital air, by which our body lives
and is conserved: so let us think that as this air penctrateth, keeps,
refreshes, with the substance and presence our bodies: so god the spirit and
life of our souls, with his substance and presence, penetrateth, conserueth,
refreshes, and in syne cooperatethe, in all things with us, In ipso vinimus,
Act. 17
mouemur, and sumus: In him we live, we are moved, and consist: which Divines
declare in other terms, but to the same effect, that god is in all things
secundum essentiam, potentiam, and presentiam: By his essence, power, and
presence. By the perfection of his immensitie, caelum et terram implet: He Ier.
15
fills heaven and earth, and so thereby is present. His power and virtue
produces, conserueth, and woorkethe, with all things. And therefore where he
woorketh, his power must be.

And because his power and substance, his omnipotency and essence, are all
one: therefore they of necessity must Both lodge in one rowme. By his immensiue
presence, we are in him, as birds in the air, and fishes in the sea: By his
power and essence, we live and are moved, for without their presence, we
could enjoy neither of them, viz. life or motion.

An other mean to consider the presence of God, we may draw from the they hitt
of some truth though corrupted with many errors, the which will serve our
purpose, if we take the pure liquor and leave the dreggs.

They said that God was in all parts corners and secrets of this world; that
he gave life, motion, operation, and understanding to all his creatures: and
informed this world in such sort, as our soul informs the body. In this
they were deceived: but in the formet they hitt the mark a-right. For god is
no form or soul of the world, because the soul nedethe the body to make a
man, and otherwise it is imperfect: But God of him self consists most
perfectlye and completlye. But if we separate from the soul all imperfections,
as to be a part, to stand need of any body, to depend of it in operation,
to enform it as a divine substance: then we may conceive the majesty of God,
as a complete and most excellent spirit, diffused through the whole world, as a
soul through the whole body of a man. 1 For as the soul is a spirit, so God
is a spirit.

2 The soul inhabiteth in every part of the body: and God in every part of
the world. 3 The soul geuethe life and being to all parts of the body,
according to their capacities: and God imparteth life and being to every
creature, according to their natures. 4 The soul concurreth with the body to
all motions and operations: and God with all the world in every action. 5 The
substance of the soul, wholly resydeth in the whole body, and wholly in every
part: and God reigns with his presence, in the whole world, and wholly in
every part. 6 The soul separated from the body subfisteth by it self: and
god without the world in him self.

Many more conueniences might be brought, but these I think sufficient to frame
a most maiesticall conceipte of Godds presence in the world, as of a most
simple, intiere, and perfect soul, in so huge and mighty a body.

When I present my self before the blessed Sacrament, I will conceive the
presence of God, under some one of these similitudes: The which as it impoiteth
much to stir up devotion: so it will not be hard, if in other of my
spiritual Exercises, I was accustomed to put it in practyse. Neither will I
barely weigh and mark, his presence, as a thing that little concernethe me: but
I will note all those reasons and perfections in him, that may stryke terror,
fear, love, reverence, and devotion, to prepare my soul, the better to
participate my blessed Savior: the which are these. 1 That he seethe most
perspicuously, what preparation I was able to make, by the help of his grace.
2 What I ought of necessity, gratitude, and congruence, to have done. 3 What I
have performed and what I have neglected. 4 That a small crroure in so weighty
a matter, is accounted a great offense. 5 That he stands armed with the
sword of his justice in one hand to punish me, and with the other hand
openinge the breaste of his mercy and love, to cherishe me: brandishing the one
to terrisy me, and offeringe the other to animate me. 6 That he desires most
earnestlye, that I receive this Sacrament most feruentlye. 7 That he is most
ready to help me, and to furnish my soul with his grace, to enjoy the
invaluable treasures of the Eucharist. 8 I will meditate how he regestreth in
the book of life (his eternal memory) how I came prepared or unprepared,
what glory I merited, or what torment I deserved.

Disposed with these Meditations, as one environed, with the presence, power,
and substance of God, as Moises Exo. 19
with him in the cloud, or as an immensiue sea of brightness and light: I will
prostrate my soul before the blessed Trinity, acknowledging these three
persons and one God, the life of my soul, the light of mine understanding,
the force of all my good affections. I will confess my self miserable and
unable to prepare me to receive my sweet Savior, except they indew me with
grace, and effect that they command. Here I will request the Father to show
his power in me by giving me strength to overcome all temptations and
difficulties: The son to impart his wisdom, that I may see all the stratagemes
of Satan, and how to carrye my self in and after receiving: The holy Ghost to
inflame me with love, that all the senewes of my soul may be stretched here to
the uttermost of their ability, to love him most faithfully, who bought my
love so dearly.

THE PRESENCE OF CHRIST'S HVMA nitie.
CAP. 3.
IN the last Chapter was declared, that our Savior Christ according to his
Diuinitye, and all the three persons in Trinity, were present in the
Euchariste. 1 By the attribute of their immensitie, where by they fill all
places, and are indistant from all creatures. 2 By the admirable effect of
their omnipotencye, by inserting the nature of man, into the stock of the
seoonde person by incarnation. 3 By the particular work, real presence, and
peculiar union of Christ's body, with the forms and accidents of bread and
wine, not by Hipostaticall connection, but by Sacramental conjunction. 4 By the
admirable dependence that one person haith of an other, that where one is of
necessity. the other two must be with him. All these manners of presence, we
comprehended in the precedent Chapter, of Gods divine presence: Here only we
will consider the presence of Christ's humanitye, and what we may note therein
as mouinge to devotion.

That Christ's humanity, really, sub stantiallye, corporallye, liuinglye, in
sense, flesh, blood, bones, and soul, without extention, or dimention of
place, allodgeth in this Sacrament, was proved in the book of causes of the
institution. And therefore intending here not to deal with protestants but
Catholics: I mean not to pass any further in this point.

As for the other, the consideration of Christ's humanity, may diverse ways
stir up our remissnes in devotion, and reuyue the fervor of Charity:
because not only as God he sees and marketh all things done or to be done in
this world: but also as man, by the manifest contemplation, of his fathers
essence, as in a most clear Crystal glass, he behouldeth all the world,
in universal, and every member, portion, and part, in particular; and
consequently me with all the course of my whole life: The sins committed,
repented, pardoned: his graces imparted, accepted, effectually put in
execution, my preparation to this Sacrament with all cit cumstances thereof, as
time how long or how short: as place in private or in public: in the Church
or my chamber: the manner how, intensiuely or remisly: with what difficulty or
facility: with what helps, or what hindrances: with what intention, for
charity, or for vanity: for gods glory or hypocrisy: to increase in
devotion, or for some sensible consolation.

All these he behouldeth, and a thousand times better in god, then I know them
myself. Therefore evidently it appears, how careful and vigilante, I ought
to appear before so exact, so continual, so zealous, so Ieleous a behoulder.
2 With the corporal ears of his body, with his corporal eyes, he hears
all I speak, and sees all my external carriage and demeanor of my body.
This opinion I know defended of many excellent dinines: how-beit I am not
ignorante, that some houlde the contrary: Yet it semethe to me, most certain
and not to be doubted. Because it is possible, (as easily I could declare, and
none will deny) it is conuenienre for Christ's complete glory in body, it is
a perfection includinge no deformity or indecency: why than shall we imagine
him depryued thereof? This I think the Spowse intended, when speakinge of
Christ her love she said, Enipse stat post pa rietem Cant. 2
nostrum respicieus per fenestras, prospiciens per cancellos. Lo he stan death
behind our wall, looking forh of the windows, behoulding through the grates.
The veyles of bread and wine, are his windows and grates, and through them,
he may well see us, although we can not discern him, but only by Faith believe
his presence.

But o that it were possible for me, to frame in my mind, a perfect
resemblance and purtrate of those chnstail lamps, who for ever would l^ghten
my heart: of those druine flames that S. John see glowing and blazinge: They
Apoc. 1
questionles would inflame my congeled love. O that I might read, in those
books of Charity, what druine affections, possess that sacred breast. O that
I might pearce with mine eles those living windows, to view the secrett thirst
of his heart, of my spiritual perfection. But since my corporal eyes sweet
Jesus, can not encounter thine, as they did his whom they Mat. 26
caused to rain a bitter shower of tears: yet with mine understanding, with
my conceit, I will behoulde them, admyre them, read in them, rest in hem, as
cabinetts of love, and regilters of truth. 3 The glorious body of Christ
gliteriug with light, and adorned with the most exquisite colors that ever
the omnipotent hand of god enriched and bewtifyed his creatures withal that
body before mine eyes, as a most gliteringe Sun, shynethe gloriously under
the clouds of bread and wine. And if it were not that our faith should meritt,
quickly he could dissolve them, and show an other sort of blazinge light in
earth, then all the stars and planetts, cast together in heaven. 4 I will
fix the eyes of my soul upon those five fountains of grace: those five
cataractes of mercy and justice: those five seals of love: those five ensigns
of triumph: those five gates of paradise: those five sacred springs of blood,
whence from issued the redd sea wherein the infernal Pharao, with all his
trowpes, were drowned, and the Children of God defended.

My Savior bewtifyed with these glorious wounds, with more gorgeous
ornaments embrothered, with more rich stones embossed, then ever nature see,
now, now will enter into me. O quis mihi dabit pennas sicut Psalm. 54
columbae, volabo and requiescam. O that I had wings like a dove, I would
fly and rest, in cauerna macerioe in the Cant. 2
hoales of this broken wall. All this glory, all this light, all these
colors, all these ornaments, all these wounds, all these riches: must pass
into my body. O sweet Jesus thou alone can prepare me, worthily to receive
them. For, Consideraui opera tua et expaui. I have weyed thy works and
trembled. Consideraus eum timore Job. 23
solicitor. Consideringe him, I am trobled with fear.

THE PRESENCE OF ANGELS.
CAP. 4.
IF thowsandes of thowsandes Angels Dan. 7
serve him: if tenn times a hundteth thowsande minister unto him: if non Job. 25
sit numerus militum eius, there be noe number, that is, his soldiers are
without number: no doubt but all being administratorii spiritus, serving
spirits Heb. 1
that in what place soever their Lord remains, they resort thither to honor
him with their presence: They attend upon their king, to glorifye his
majesty: They wait upon their Captain, to feight against his enomies. For
although the number of Angels can not preciselye be known which god created
in the beginning: yet most certain it is by the above cyted scriptures, that
he produced them in an exceeding great number, and according to the more
received opinion of Divines, the blessed Angels, who still continue in their
natyue purity, and never stained their natures with sin, now vewinge the
face of God, are more in number, then all men, women, and children, that ever
were created from the beginning of the world, or shall be to the latter end.

This I could prove sufficiently, if I intended not to avoid prolixitie.

But supposing it as certain, noe doubt but many of so infinite a multitude
attend, in all places, that their Lord will vouch saife to bless, with his
divine presence, to accempanie him, to praise him, to glorify him: Less may we
doubt of all the good Angels, to whose custody are committed, those persons
that communicate: because if ever they show them selves vigilante about us, if
ever their prescnce be necessary, if god, mittet angelos suos in Psalm. 33
circuitu timentium cum: Will send his Angels to be in the circuit of them
that fear him: qnestionlesse at this time, we need most their helping
hands, their protections and inspirations. Therefore before I receive my
Savior, I will reverence them and humbly crave their help, to praise God for
me, and particulerly I will require my guardian Angel, to defend the gate of
mine imagination, that none unclean or impure thought, pass that way, by
which my god must walk.

Then I will consider such points in the Angels, as may stir up my
devotion. 1 That if they attend so diligently and reverently upon god, in
regard of his majesty and excellency: what ought I to do, who am to eat
him, to harbor him in my heart.

2 By saying them so pure in nature, so unspotted with any sin or
imperfection, remaininge in their original integritye: I will take occasion to
debase my self even to the abisse of nothing: considering how heynouslye, how
often, I have offended this their souerainge Lord. 3 The great desire that
Angels have of my fervent devotion in receauinge this Sacrameut. because, if
they rejoice so much in the conversion of a sinner to god: what Luc. 15
will they do in the marriage day? If the first wrytinge of my name, in the
Book, of the City of Jerusalem, gave them an occasion of an extra ordinarye
joy: O what will mine advancement in grace, preferment in glory, mine
internal union with god yield unto them? 4 The love of Christ, so boyleth in
those spiritual breasts, that as they bend all the forces of their minds and
hearts, to unite them selves with him: so they would draw all men in the world
to the like union. And for this cause, we see how vigilantly they attend upon
us, bringing us every morning, an universal torch, to call us up to the
sight and love of him, who created both sunn and moon.

Peruse the scriptures, and you shall find, what diligence they used,
inwaiting of Abraham, defending of Jacob, Genesis 18 Genesis 32 Exo. 14 Tob. 5
Judith. 13 Genesis 16
protectinge the children of Israel, conducting young Toby, assisting of
Judith, comfortinge of Agar, and in fine, how continually they endeavor, to
induce all men to vettue, and to withdraw them from vice. Therefore to increase
their love to me: I know no better mean the^ to increase my love to Christ. 5
How beit they confess Apoc. 15
them selves fellow-seruantes to all the^ that serve god, and suffer for his
faith: yet I will acknowledge, my self but a base unworthy drudge, in the
princely palace of Godds Church, and therefore request them as chief courtiers,
attendinge always upon the Kings own person, always before his face, in
high favor and authority, in his heavenly court, to favor my suit unto
their Lord. I ask nothing el^, but that he will vouchsayfe to give me grace
to love and serve him, with that perfection and integrity, he wishethe that I
should love and serve him, and that they will help me to receive him worthily,
and keep his holy spirit diligently, at this present communion.

WHAT IOVGHT TO DO When I receive the blessed Sacrament in my mouth.
CAP. 5.
ALthough in receiving my Savior in my mouth, my tongue keep silence, yet my
heart shall cry, and revive all those fervent thoughts that kindle the flame of
mine affects.

Sometime I will conceive the Eucharist, as a most precious and Sovereign
medicine, prepared, tempered, and qualified, with the infinite wisdom, love,
and power of God, to cure all my soars of sins, inordinate passions,
concupiscences, vices of nature, defects and imperfections.

Sometime as a ball of heavenly sire brought down by Christ, to inflame the
hearts of all men to love God. Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid Luc. 12
volo nisi vt accendatur, I came to cast sire on the earth, and what will I,
but that it be kindled? For most truly deus noster ignis consumens est. Our God
Deuteronomy. 4 Heb. 12
is a consuminge sire. Sometime as a most glisteringe sun, much more
bewtifull and shyning, more pure and bright, then this we daily view to
illuminate my soul and shake of all fogs and mistes, that sin and Satan had
darkened it withal: And though it be veiled with a corporal cloud, yet that
impeacheth nothing the spiritual glory and brightness thereof. Sometime as a
tender infant in body, wrapped in bread and wine, yet perfect god and man, to
endew my soul with simplicity, and stir up a most tender and siliall
affection unto him, as my father.

Sometime as a fountain of life, to cool the furious flames of my rebelli ous
flesh: to watter the feldes of virtue, that God haith sown in my soul: To
wash the staynes and spots of my heart: To quench the burning thirste of my
breast. Sometime I will lay my mouth to the side of my Savior, and suck out the
purisyed spirit, of Charity and love, most perfectlye disgested in the furnace
of his heart. Sometime I will inuyte him to come, by saying in my soul, Veniat
dilectus meus in hortum Can. 5
suum. Let my love come into his own garden. Veni Domine and nolitardare.
Come my Lord, linger not, Relaxa facinora plebi tue, Remitt thy people their
offenses. Veniat desideratus Agg. 2
cunctis gentibus, Come thou desired of all nations. Sometime I will humble my
self with Abraham and say, Loquar ego ad Dominum, cumsim puluis Genesis 18
and cinis. I shall speak to God being but dust and ashes. Domine non sum
Mat. 8
dignus vt tntres sub iectum monm, sed tantum dic verbo, and sanabitur anima
mea. Lord I am not worthy that thou enter into my house, but say the word, and
my soul shall be saved. If the heavens Job. 15
sweet Jesus, be vnpure in thy sight alas how shall I appear before thee? Job.
26 and 41
If thy ne Angels do tremble: why shall not I consume and vanish to nothing?
Vere non est natiotam grandis Deu. 4
quae habeat deos appropinquantes sibi, sicut tu Deus noster. There is noe
nation haith their Godds so near them, as the catholic Church, sweet Jesus,
haith thee.

AFFECTES.
CAP. 6.
AFter I have swallowed all the riches of heaven and earth Christ Jesus, in the
blessed Euchariste, because he remainethe so long with me, as the veyles of
bread and wine are not dissolved with the natural heat of my stomach.
Therefore I will procure to give him that interteyne meant that my spiritual
poverty can afford: for herein I know consists the principal good that I
must receive by this Sacrament, next after the grace imparted, ex opere
operato, that is, sor the only work of receiving.

I knew some godly and religious men, who all this while did nothing else, but
cry both with tongue and heart Diligo te Jesus, I love thee o my Jesus, I love
thee o my Jesus. And this above a hundredth times they reiterated: and truly they
toulde me that they found singular comfort and consolation. And certainly in
those who love God affec tually, and tenderly: I doubt not but as these acts
or affectes of Charity pass all other in worth and meritt: so they pass in
causinge spiritual joy and consolation. Others I knew, who would only attend
to keep their souls from all thoughts, impertinent cogitations and
affections, that they might hear the voice of Christ within them. For doubtless
he that vouchsafed to be eaten, will not disdain to speak unto them who
desire to hear his voice, to execute his will. This devotion can not but
yealde great contentation and delight to all those persons that live retyted,
from the world, and have not their souls pestered with terrene cares and
negotiations: for such men can best discern, the origin of intetnall
thoughts and inspirations, but the common sort or weak capacityes, can
hardly atteine to such perfections.

The manner which I practice and I know many more daily to exercise, I was
taugdt of a most godly and learned religious man, who as he loved me well, so
he was content to deliver me this treasure, the which he for humilitye, would
not diuulgate to others, yet with godds grace for charity I will deliver it.

For a quarter of an hour after he had received, he did meditate nothing but
only break forth into sundry affects exhaling from his heart to heaven, the
swetest incense of virtue, that his fervor could raise, or such a guest would
inflame: The which for memory sake he comprehended in this one word, Agape. By
A, the first letter, he vndeistoode Amor, and with it, Faith, and Hope. By G.
gratiarum actio, thanks geuinge. By A, Animus, courage, bouldnes, resolution.
By P, Petitio, demanding or requestinge any thing at Gods hand. By E,
Exinanitio, Abasing and exinanitinge him self to nothing.

These noble acts of most excellent virtues, he practysed after this manner. O
Jesus I believe in thee, I hope in thee, I love thee. I believe in thee sweet
Jesus, but augment my Faith. I trust in thee, but confirm my hope. I love thee,
but inslame my Charity.

O my Jesus, I believe thou art present now within me; Ah, now I hope thou will
help me. O my Jesus, for this thy coming, I would gladly love thee. He gave
thanks in manner declared, in the last Chapter of the secoude discourse. O
Jesus I give thee infinite thanks, for thy singular favors and benefits, and
this especially in vouch saifing to visitt me thine unworthy servant. O you
Angels give thanks for me. O all you creatures of God, supplye my defect. O
Jesus, thank thou thyself, for I am not sufficient. His courage and resolution
he exercysed thus: O Jesus I know I can not do any thing for thee, without
thy help: but power thy grace upon me, and what would I not do for thee? What
temptations soever assault me, with thy grace I will resist valiantlye: What
adversity soever befall me with thy grace I will bear it patiently: what
crosses soever thou will impose upon me, with thy grace I will carry them with
alacrity. O that I might have that supreme favor of thee, to suffer
imprisonment, to be buried in a close hoale alive: to be cheaned, fettered, and
at last executed for thy faith and religion. Ah my Jesus with thy favor, I
will never hyde my face, I will never be ashamed to profess thee: Si
consistant aduer me castra: non timebit Ps. 26
cor meum. If fortes assault me, my heart shall not fear. If all the furies
of hell invade me, if all the trowpes of heritiques persecute me: yet with thy
grace, I intend to resist them, all they shall not quayle my courage. I will
become like an Oliphante, who looking on blood, is more incensed: So I by
participatinge this thy blood, will be more corragious against thine and mine
enemies. His Petition was either vniuershall, or particular: as O sweet Jesus,
convert all infidils and herityke, that they may glorify thee and participate
this Sacrament. Grant me grace, that I may carry my self conformable to thy
will. Somtymes according to his Meditations before the communion, he demanded
some particular virtue, that he then most of all stood in need of, or was
necessary for his present state: His debasing and abiectinge him self,
proceeded from reverence to the Majesty of Christ, whereby he broake forth into
these affectes. O my Ielu, what am I, and what art thou? I am a miserable
sinner, and thou a most merciful God: I dust and ashes, thou life and
immortality: I by my wickedness less then nothing, thou by thine infinite
perfections, all things. Yet o abisse of all bounty, thou would not
disdain my miserable, corruptible, sinful and contemtible body, for thy
temple, thy palace, thy throne, thy habitation of rest. O my God, what am I
able to do to please thee? All is nothing: Here besore thy heavenly court,
I confess my weakness and impotency, but thou o Lord, Suscipe a terra 1 Re. 2
Psa. 112
iuopem, and destercore erige pauperem, Take vvp from earth the needy and raise
from the dunge hill the poor. This humiliation and abiection, he ^oulde me,
engendered in his soul, a number of most godly respects, or mo tions of
humiliation, of reverence, offeare, of woorshipp, of carefulnes, and
vigilancie, in all matters that co^cerned god. And these effects, he often
repeated and reiterated, yet stayinge theare most, where he felt the holy
Ghost especially to concur. Moreover, now he would bow down his body in sign
of reverence, adoringe Christ in his heart: Now extend his arms abroad in
sign of love and desire to embrace him: Now he crossed the^ to foulde him: Now
he would speak to the Father, now to Son, now to the holy Ghost: And so with
variety of his spiritual repast, he fedd his Soul abundantly. This godly
Exercise, as I know it to be most forcible to stir vvp devotion, cause
consolation, effect peace and tranquillity of conscience: So I am not
ignorant, of how great meritt it is before God, and how sufficient to reform a
man's whole life. Therefore because all ca^ not understand the latin word
Agape, and the others signified by the letters, I thought it not amiss, to
set down an english word to help all those to whom this Treatise may be
serviceable, and that is Faith: By F, I remember, Faith, hope, and Charity. By
A, Abiection, Abasing, Annihilation of my self before God. By T Thanks,
giving. By H, Heart and hard nes, courage and Fortitude, resolution and bouldnes
in all affairs, concerning the glory of God and salvation of my soul. E,
represents unto me, elevation or erection of my soul to god, the which I may
compass, by these three effects, Praieror petition, Oblation, and
resignation. Of prayer we spoke of before, the other two, be reserved for the
next Chapter.

OBLATION AND RESIG NATION.
CAP. 7.
ALL I am and all I can, by better right and dominion, do belong unto God,
then to me: and for many tytles, I must acknowledge them due unto him. Therefore
after I have received my Savior, I will offer my self wholly unto him: for in
all my life I could never perform this oblatio^ at any better time, because the
presence of Christ will enrich and ennoble this emp tie vessel. And since my
God would Sacrifyce him self for me: here I will sacrifice my soul to him, for
so I know he intends I should do, and signified it to S. Peter when he let
fall that Act. 10
misterious sheet with four corners full of unclean beasts, and willed him
to kill and care, therebye signifying the church of gentyles comprehended in
the four parts of the world, wherein were to be killed, by godds word, and
efficacy of his grace, all unclean beasts and made meat apt for the table of
god. For as by death, the soul is separated from the body: so by
mortification, sensuality from the soul: concupiscences, from Charity:
sense, from reason: and oulde Adam, from new Christ. The manner of this
oblation and consumed Sacrifyce, may be in this sort.

O most bountiful maker to whom all things are dew, to whom nothing can be
presented, correspondente in dignitye: yet because I am thine by right, and owe
unto thee all Homage: here before the court of heaven, the Angels and
Archangels: Cherubins and Seraphins, thy devout Confessoures, unspotted
virgins, holy Doctors, valiant Martyrs, glorious Apostles, and above all, the
blessed Virgin: I offer solemply my body and soul, my wit and will, what
habilityes of nature or favors offortune thou have bestowed upon me: all I
consecrate to thy glory: I will use orrefuse them, as it shall please thee:
accept good Lord, this Sacrifyce of thy poor servant, for if I had better,
better would I offer: but he that geuethe him self, gives all. And as thou
have vouchsaifed to impart thy grace unto me to desire thee, and to offer my
self unto thee: so good Lord deny me not thy grace to perform my desyro and
therein to persevere till death: O sweet Jesus say Amen.

My resignatio^ follows consequently to my Oblation, sor by this I will putt
my self in the hands of god like unto soft wax, and request him to form me
after his fashion, as clay in the potrersshopp, to be cast according to his
pleasure: As a table without any letter, desyringe him to write in the
forefronte there of, that I may in all things, do his will. This in
speculation, seems very sweet and easyo to be performed, but the execution
carriethe with it extreme difficultio. For the co^formitie of our will with
godds will, is the main point of all Christian perfection: yet by his grace,
the violence of our perverse nature, may be broken if we understand well in
practice that Regnum coelorum vim patitur, and violenti, Mat. 11
rapiunt illud. The kingdom of heaven sufferethe violence, and the forcible do
enter it. For in very deed as water can not be removed out of the sea, and
lifted upward wihout violence so our heavy and terrestrial flesh, ca^ not be
elevated to heaven, without some force and vyolence. wherefore godds servants,
now with meditations, now with mortifications, now with frequenting the holy
Sacraments, now with spiritual books, now with exhortations, now with one
godly Exercise, now with an other: reuyue their souls, renew their forces,
enable them selves to resist temptations and other encounters dailye and
hourly offered them by their ghostlye enemies.

CIRCVMSPECTION OR CAVTION.
CAP. 8
AFter so many fervent desires, affectes, oblations, resignations, and good
purposes (lest they should seem rather complements and courtlye ceremonies,
then sincere devotions, and real resolutions) either immediately after my
resignation, or atsome other more convenient time that day I will make an
anotomye of my soul, and search out euety corner thereof, to imploye it
whollye and fullye, in the feruice of God, and attehiuemente of Christian
perfection, the which I am assured God will accept most willingly, because he
haith exhorted us thereunto in the scriptures, so often and so earnestly.

Three things for this intent I will provide for most diligently.

First to avoid all sorts of sin most

To procure the honor and glory of God most seruently.

To keep an internal peace in my

Theb. Sacrament affords grace to accomplish these effects: and no doubt but
my Savior will exact them of me, therefore I will endeavor to practyse them
so near as I can: the which I shall be able to perform the better if I follow
these rules or consideratio^s.

For the performance of the first occasion hinder me from virtue, then I know
the same may consequently bring me to sin. 4 I will meditate what means or
remedies, I may use to auoy de such evil neighbors with intention to put
them in execution effectually. 5 I will ask some spiritual men and especially
my ghostly father, how I may ouercom such an evil inclination, and according
to their directions, help myself as well as I can.

Much here might be handled in general, how we should extirpate any vice, or
plant any virtue, but it were not so convenient for this place.

The second point and of noe less vanity in our attire, gestures, or any
actions. 2 By words os edification prudence, and discretion, that they smell
of devotion and piety, and carry the color of that heart wherein they were
dyed. 3 Because I understand Gods glory to consist, in true and humble
subjection of my soul, to his divine majesty, in a severe judgment and rigor
to my self, and in bowels of mercy and compassion, toward my neighbors:
Therefore about these three objects, my discourse shall be occupied: how I may
increase in every one of these, the honor of god by endeavoring to convert
heritykes, confirm catholics, correct sinners, reduce offenders to a better
life, induce the virtuous to more perfection. 4 With the most sincere affection
of my soul, I will demand of my blessed Savior, that he will teach me
wherein I may glorify him most: and by experience I find this petition, by a
common effect of great consolation, to be most aceptable unto God. For in very
deed, how can such a prayer be but grateful, wherein a man venteth the very
center of his heart, to exhale out such heavenly desires, so reasonable, so
affectious, so pure, so worthy of man, so suitable to god?

5 The nature of love, will find out twenty new inventions how to glorify
god, and by sealinge every one with the Image of Charity, relatethe them all
to his honor and glory. Therefore he that loves, lacks not means to glorify
god.

The third point of tranquillity and may serve them that desire it. First
all men try by experience, that there be two sorts of cogitations, some of
virtue, some of vice. Virtuous thoughts leave after their departure, a sugared
taste and sweet contentation: Vicious thoughts thrust in their stinge, and
afterward the soul feels the pain of poysen by temorse of conscience and
unquietness of mind.

He then that intends peace must of necessity avoid all vicious cogitations
so near as he can, and especially those of flesh and blood, the which as they
molest us oftnest, so their stinge is most sensible: yet if we fall into any of
these, the remedy of present rep entance, presents it self: ask pardon of
God, and this pain will be released.

2 After the holy Euchariste is received: a man must be very circumspect in
his words, and in all other actions as eatinge, drinking, conuersing, etc.
That he do not spill and power owte, that water of life, which by
communicating he received. For devotion, and peace of mind, as in an instant,
God distilleth them into the soul: so in an instant they vanish away. And let
him by little and little withdraw him self from sensible delights which nature
affords, and sensuality earnestly affects: For internal delight and
sensual pleasure, though honest and lawful hardly consorte together.
Therefore learned men counsel those that would make progress in spirit, to
use pleasure and play, as medicines: not to satiate, but for necessity: not as
men that live for pleasure, but as they that take pleasure to live. 3 A man
must often renew his purposes, and reserve in the treasory of his memory, some
affectuall iaculatorye prayer, or elevation of his mind to god, which was
distilled in the heat of his feruoure, when he received the Eucharist, as,
Inflame me sweet Jesus with thy love. O my Savior, fortify me against all
temptations. When shall I see thee O Lord? When shall I freely possess thee?
By Effects of dartinge prayers.
experience I find, these prayers most forcible, to collecte and unite the
soul with God, to engender great peace, to be of great efficacy, to make us
to consider the presence of God, to prepare us to prayer, at what time soever.
They are bellows that blow away the ashes from the coals of virtue, and so
reuyue them. They carry away the defects and imperfectio^s, the distractions
and inordinate passions, which cover the bright color of gods grace. They are
darts launshed from the heart of man's love, to the heart of gods love. By them
we may keep our fervor from one sunday we communicate, to another. By them
finally we seem to fly to god, to enjoy in this life, the sweet co^municatio^
of his heavenly delights and familiar conversation in love, the which they
only understand who have proved: howbeit for all men god haith prepared it:
The which I befeche him grant to all those that desire to taist it in this
life, and possess it in the other. Sweet Jesus say, Amen.

LAVS DEO.
A BRIEF TABLE OF ALL the principal matters, contained in this Treatise,
necessary to be committed to memory.
THE Disposition of the Soul, to receive worthily the blessed Sacrament,
confisteth in, 1 Preparation by these acts of virtue. 1 Humilitye, in
acknowledging all preparation too little. 2 Fear, which is either Seruyle
Filial Angelical
3 Faith in beleuinge 1 what was necessary to be believed in all ages. 2 The
articles of Faith. 3 All that the Catholic Church believes.
4 Hope, the which confisteth in 1 Expecting our last end of God, and the
means to attcheeue it 2 Loving God as beneficial unto us.
5 Charity by 1 Union with God in will. 2 Union in affection. 3 Zeal. 4
Ecstasy. 5 Benevolence.
6 Grief for sins paste. 7 Resolution to observe intierly gods
commandments.
Presentation before Christ, as 1 A Beggar naked. 2 A Man wounded. 3 A Son to
his father. 4 A friend to his friend. 5 A Sonldier to his Captain. 6 A Scholar
to his maiseter. 7 A Creature to his Creator. 8 A prisoner to his read mer. 9 A
Garden for him to enter in. 10 An infant to his mothers dugg. 11 Hungry and
needy. 12 The three kings who came to honor Christ. 13 A ship tossed. 14
A prodigal son. 15 One coming to ho nour gods Saints. 16 A heart
thirstinge the fountain. 17 A Pilgrim. 18 A faithless spwose to her
husband. 19 A propitiation for the dead. 20 To offer a grateful obsequy for
all his Sainots. 21 A motion to prayer.
3 Enterteinment, which confisteth in, Consideration of The presence of God
behouldinge. The presence of Christ's humanity. The presence of Angels. The
manner how Christ comes, as A 1 Medicine to cure all maladies. 2 Sun veyled
with clouds. 3 A flame of fire. 4 With his wounds open, to fill my soul with
grace.

2 Practice of affectes. 1 Faith. 2 Hope. 3 Charity. 4 Fortitude. 5
Thanks-geuinge? 6 Demanding some favor. 7 Exinanition and debasinge. 8
Oblation. 9 Resignation. 10 Caution. In 1 Avoiding sins. 2 Glorifyinge God. 3
Conseruing of peace.





A Conclusion, Containing an Admonition to all the reverend and religious
Priests in England.
AT last, the zeal of my affection conuerts my pen to you (my beloved
brethren) ar whose perfection this Treatise leuelleth especially, as them whom
fervent preparation to the sacred tucharist concerns principally. For God
has appointed you his connaturall instruments, and supernatural workers of
these admirable wonders, you consecrate these heavenly hoastes, you offer this
immaculate sacrifice, you separate the soul of Christ from his body after a
divine manner, you draw in crueotly Christ's blood out of his veins, you consume
this sole christian holocaust, you divide it, you distribute it, you
communicate the people. To you belongs to admit or reject all those who
present themlelues before this sacred Altar: you procure that others ascend
prepared, you shut these co^duits of Gods grace to all the^ that bring not
golden vessels of charity, to carry away this divine liquor. O what
preparation requires the majesty of God, the principal agent of this
sacrifice of you his selected instruments? ^ stote sancti, quia ego sanctus
sum, be Leu. 11, and 19, and 20.
you holy (says he) because I am holy, for which cause he commanded, that
in the hie Priests forehead should be graven in a plate of gold, Exodus 28.
Sanctum Demino, holy to our Lord, that all might read how holiness and
sanctity especially concerned the priests of God. For what is holiness and
san^^nie but an abstraction and separation of the soul from earth and al
terrene delights? but an elevation to God and all heavenly exercises? and who
ought to be more void of the former, and endued with the latter than they who
are the peculiar possession of God, who by the sacrament of order have wholly de
dicated themselves to his service, tha^ they that cry, Dominus pars hereditatis
me, God is a part, or rather, Psalm. 15.
the portion os my inheritance, than they that concur with God as sanctified
instruments to so holy a sunction: you then whom God has instituted as second
causes in spiritual affairs, ought to conform your selves as beams in
brightness to their orient sun, as cristall streams in purity to the fountain
of life, as the hands of Christ to so precious a body, as a faculty of God to
so divine a spirit, as secundarie priests to our Savior Christ lesus the
Pastor and universal Bishop of our souls. O sacerdotium 1 Pet. 2.
regale, gens sancts, popul^^ acquisitionis: you has God peculiarly elected as
spiritual kings over the souls of his people, in your hands has he put the
kingdom of heaven, for you keep the keys, you o Math 18.
pen and shut the gates, you exalt the miserable to kingdoms by loosing their
sins, and you cast into perpetual thraldom, by retaining their crimes, you
manage the body and soul of Christ the king of glory, you with your words set
a K. in his throne upon the altar before you, a king is your offering, a king
your sacrifice, a king you eat, a king you dispense unto the people, you
represent the person of a king, you offer your sacrifice unto a king, therefore
most aptly the Apostle calls your vocation particularly, Kingly. therefore
degenerate not from your royal estate, but with courageous victory of your
passions and inordinate affections become kings of your selves. Be not like
many base Princes of the world, who reign over countries and serve their own
concupiscences, who command their vassals, and are ouer-ruled by their own
vices, all stories are full, al ^^tions confesle it, daily experience in many
co^^^^meth it. As you are chosen by God from amongst men populus acquisition
is, so by sanctity and holy ne^^e separate your selves from men. You should
shine in this dark night of heresy, in this firmament of Al bion, like so
many stars, like so many Abraham's in Genesis 11.
Vr of Caldie, like so many Lots in those five infanous Cities, like so many
Iobes in terra itus, in that Genesis 19.
ungodly country, like the appletree among so many barren plants in the desert,
or like our master Can. c. 2.
Christ as lillies among so many thorns, your sunctions are many, and of the
worthiest in dignity, and cheifest in sanctity, all which the Eucharist
perfiteth and enobleth, if your preparation be correspondent to your vocation:
wherefore as the sea sends her abundance of water, venting her veins by
fertelling streams to fatten the land, and the earth returns them again,
that after they may flow with greater excelle, so ought the Priests like the
land, open the concauities of their hearts, and receive the lacred influence of
the Eucharist, and afterward with the fervent course of a continual and
infatigable preparation, return all their graces and fa^ours received from
heaven, as answerable dispositions to the blessed sacrament, that afterward
they may flow into the soul, and fertile the faculties thereof with new virtues
and spiritual increase. God has ordained you as mediators betwixt the people
and him, that your prayers ascend like incense to please Ad Heb. c. 5
his majesty, not only for your own sins, but also for the sins of the
people: therefore you must border on both extremes, participating flesh and Ad
Heb. 2
blood with the people, but spirit and virtue with God: and well remember that
the twelve tribes of I^^^rael were graven in precious stones, embossed in gold,
and by Gods appointment carried upon A arons breast, upon the nearest part to
his heart. So dear brethren, ought you to conceive of the souls committed to
your charge, that they are precious stones, imbossed in bodies that once shall
stune more (...) 15.
glistetingly then gold, Quando mortale hoe iuduet imm^rtalitatem; When this
mortality shall be clothed with immortality. For what can be more preuous,
then that which Christ thought prizable of his own blood? at what rate ought
you estimate those souls whom God has endued with his grace, Christ diued in
his blood, ransomed with his death. I he dea rest Iewelles that our Savior
possesses under the cope of heaven, be has committed to your custody. for
this cause he gave you grace in your orderu for this cause the holy ghost
anointed your hearts with his gifts, when the Bishop anointed your hands:
for this cause at your discretion, he has left the disposition of his body
and blood, that you as good pastors might feed his flock in convenient time
and season. Ah but you must consider that the hie Priest carried, not only the
names of the children of Israel upon his breast, but also upon both his
shoulders, to signify that they were a burden to Luc. 15.
him: You know the pastor of al pastors, after he had wandered long to reclame
the straying sheep unto her fold, he would not lead her in his hand, but cast
her upon his shoulders, to teach all pastors what pain and diligence they
ought to use for the preservation and conservation of their flock. But by what
means shall this burden, even heavy for the shoulders of Angels, be supported
by a fragill and weak man, who at every let faints, and daily falls? What
remedy presently restores lost forces? ^^ely nothing more quickly than wine,
than the blessed Sacrament: for I know not how by a most secret manner, the
vapors of wine almost as soon as it enters into the mouth, comfort the
brain, and the heat thereof, almost in a moment disperseth it self through
the whole body. O what inflamed prayers, what cordial sighs, what effectual
supplications should every Priest present before the majesty of God, when he
offers up this sacred ^oast? How with Moses hold up his hands to heaven,
Exo. 17.
till his people were in fight below against the infernal and worldely
ennemies of their souls? How with Elias by force of prayer open the cararacts
3 Reg. 18.
of Gods grace, that he would power down upon the hearts of their flock that
pluuiam voluntari^m, Psalm. 67.
that voluntary rain (proceeding from a good will, and causing a goodwill) to
refresh and restore them, which effects all goodness in the spiritual
sieldes of Christ's church? O how acceptable will those prayers sound in
Christ's cares, which the Priest offers to him laid upon the altar (as a
lamb killed for the sins of the world) for the sins and offenses of his
people? O that every Priest now in England, from the bottom of his heart, at
the presence of Christ in the holy Mass with tears of compassion and incensed
defires of fervent cha^^^ie would imitate our hie Priest Christ Jesus upon the
cross, in offering up their supplications for the sins of the people, to the
holy Trinity: soon we should exterminate heresy out of the hearts of our
poor brethren, soon we should banish the troops of sins that now swarm in
England, soon with this barley loaf rolling upon their souls, we should
o^erthrow Iudic. 7.
the tents of Madian.

Truly, if these prayers be not heard, I know not, ^^eet lefu, what prayers
thou will hear, for they are offered by thy minister, at thy altar, before thy
preseace, by thy co^mandemet, to thy glory, for ye salvation of many. No man
can deny but that the precept of prayer and devotion touches al sorts of
persons. yet more particularly the Clergy, for their state and vocation, as
the bond of justice and equity appertains to all men, yet especially to
Magistrates, in regard of their office and public authority. For which cause
devout Priests stint their hours daily for their prayers, meditations, and
spiritual exercises, spending their time in devotion, that others either
consume friuolously in transitory pleasures, or anxiously in heaping up
worldly trashe, or idly in impertinent affairs. O what comfort is it to the
laboring husbandman, while he sows his seed with toil, and sweat, to see
his Curate praying with tears for a plentiful Harvest? How rejoices the
Merchant while his ship raungeth in the wild Ocean, to behold the pastor of
his soul by prayer, pacifying the wrath of God, and calming the tempestuous
seas? How boldly marches the soldier to the field, grounded upon a just
cause of watre, knowing that while he fights against his enemies in body,
his ghostly father oppugneth them with his soul finally, all the lay people
put great trust and confidence in all their negotiations, in the devout
prayers of godly Priests.

Your second function not much inferior to the precedent, yet most necessary
for your flock, and greatly furthered by your diligent preparation to the
Eucharist, is to teach the people and instruct them: Labia sace^dotis
custodient scientiam, and leg^m Mal. ^.
requirent, ex are eius, quia angelus domini exercitumn est. The Priests lips
shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law from his mouth, because he
Luke ^^.
is the Angel of our Lord of Hosts. Your mouth must be the treasury of the
seculars knowledge, they must have recourse to you in all their difficulties,
you must expound the scriptures unto them, you must resolve their doubts,
either belonging to faith or good life. This cannot be well performed without
true doctrine, and virtuous examples, by teaching by word and deed: good it
is to teach well, laudable to preach well, but if good life be not annexed,
the preacher destroys with one hand, that he built with the other: and as
our eyes certify us better of that they see, then the cares of that they
hear, and printeth a deeper impression in the mind, so an ill example
disswadeth more, then a good sermon persuades, such corruptnesse carries our
vicious nature. Wherefore God commanded that Moses should cause to be graven
in a plate of gold tied to Aarons breast, Doctrina and Veritas, Exodus 28.
Doctrine and Truth, or as the Hebrew text has, light and perfection: because
the priest ought to teach the people, illuminating their minds with the light
of doctrine, and persuade it effectually by virtue and perfection. I remember
that in the life of Saint Francis is registered, that once he called one of his
brethren to go with him a preaching, the good and obedient religious man went
with him: S Francis passed from one side of the City to another, and almost
compassed the whole, ever observing to go through those streets, where the
multitude was most frequent, yet always inclining his eyes to the ground,
never speaking to his brother who did toe like: when they came home, O father
quoth the good simple brother, when will you preach? Saint Francis answered,
brother, do thou think we have not preached all this while, our modest
behavior, silent tongues, mortified countenances austere attire, retired eyes
from worldly vanities, this day hauo made a good and real sermon; and so in
very deed they did: for I doubt not but many of his brethren preached and
proficed not so much by their sermons, as he did by this example. Therefore
Christ called his Disciples Lux mundi, Math. 5.
the light of the world, the which illuminateth, not only our eyes, but also
heateth our bodies. I know dear brethren, that the state of priests in
England, incurreth daily many dangers, and in hazarding their lives for Gods
true Religion, their merit cannot be but great: yet you must think, that
having opposed your selves against the Devil, he will not permit you to be
quiet, and if he find you disarmed in soul with prayer and meditation, and
unclothed with the garments of gravity and ecclesiastical modesty, and as
secular in soul as in apparel, doubt not but his darts will wound deeply,
therefore vie this external liberty, which necessity ofter ensorceth you, to
disguise your selves withal, rather as a thing counterfeited for a stage, then
to take any pleasure or delight therein. And when you come to the holy Alter,
there excuse your selves with tears, ask of the Father of light, that he
power down from heaven, the beams of his favors: light your lamps at his link,
expel all clouds, that this sun may communicate his rays to you so many
earthly plannets, demand of him who teaches all men, that he teach you, to
whom he has committed the charge to teach others. He illu^inateth Io. 1.
all men that come into this world: he is lux mundi, the universal light, he
imparteth wisdom to Io. 9.
all without expostulation: he makes the tongues of Sap. 10.
infants eloquent: he indueth yongmen that keep his law, with profounder
piudence than hoarie Psalm. 118.
hairs. Ah dear souls, be not obscured with mysty thoughts, having before
you the fountain of eternal light, let not worldly fancies inuegle your wits,
whom Gods veriue feeds, let not sensual delight dazel those eyes which have
beheld so often the life of al purity.

The administration of five sacraments, Baptism, Penance, matrimony, extreme
v^ction, and the Eucharist, is the third flower that adorneth your gatland:
this function comprehends five faculues or abilities, like so many diamonds,
pearls and rubies, that deck your spiritual crown. All these you are bound
for two causes to administer in grace without blot or stain of mortal sin,
otherwise you commit a most heinous crime and horrible sacrilege. The first
reason is, because the instruments of god must have due proportion and
conformity in holiness and sanctity with their principal agent: E. Leu. 11.
and 19. and 20. and 1. Pet. 1.
stote sancti, quia ego sanctus sum: be you holy, for I am holy, that is an
universal precept given to al those that as instruments attend upon the
majesty of God The second reason, natural reason it self yields, for why did
he endue you with grace in your order, but that you should keep it, and
administer his sacraments woorthily? therefore universally he that abuses Gods
sacraments for these two causes, in curreth a most heinous offense. But he
that celebrateth in a mortal sin, commits diverse and most intolerable
sacrileges. I trust in God that none of the zealous priests in England, so well
instructed, so nigh their death, so fortified with gods grace in this
tempestuousdea of persecution, will forget their duty so far, that they dare
but once think deliberately to presume to ascend to his sacred Altar
contaminated with a deadly crime. Yet in all multitudes generally, has been,
is, and will besome defections, the Angels were not so pure, but among them
there remained some dregs, Lucifer and his accomplices to be cast to the
channel of hell. The Apostles trained up by Christ in all virtue and justice,
lacked not a these: the seven Deacons instructed by the Apostles themselves,
Math. 25.
continued not long without an heretic: if the Church have five wise Virgins,
five foolish will thrust into their company: if like a net it be cast Math. 13.
into the sea, it takes all sorts of fish, the good and the badde enter both
together: if like a Barn Math. 3
it receive the Corn, the chafe must not be left behind: If like a fold it
contain the flock Io. 10.
of Christ's Sheep, the Heard of stinking Goats will crowde among them: and
finally, cockle and corn in natures fields, and Christ's Church, must alwyed
grow together. Therefore if among Priests some live not so orderly as their
vocation requires, let not the world wonder, because in all multitudes it has
been usual, Necesse Math. 8.
est vt scandala vinian^, ve tamen homini illi per quem scandalum venit.

Howbeit, I trust in God never such a Judas shall appear among you, yet let
us imagine that such a monster should rise up: and without regard of his duty
to the majesty of God, without consideration o^f his own vocation, without
respect of this venerable sacrifice to be offered, without weighing how he
iniurieth the church which admitted him to this dignity, should presume with a
defiled mouth, a stained soul, a polluted tongue, to ascend to Gods sacred
Altar to consecrate this dreadful Sacrament. O into how many and how horrible
sacrileges this impious wretch plungeth his miserable soul? How dare this
member of satan join himself as a member of god, with god to effect so
divine a mystery? Qua ^. Cor. 6.
societas luci ad tenobras, qua conuentio Christi ad Belial? What consort can
there be betwixt light and dark nes, God and Belial? With what face can he
appear before God, to celebrate this sacrifice flowing with floods of love and
charity, who has renounced Gods friendship, and proclaimed open wars against
him? How can that hellish breath exhale those words of infinite value in
person of Christ, whom al^ttle before he crucified in himself with the nails
of sin upon the wood of his heart? If Saul 1 Reg. 15.
lost his kingdom, because he presumed to sacrifice, which appertained not to
him: If Oza fell down dead for upholding the Arc, which was not his office: 2.
Reg. 6.
If king Ozias was c^st in a leprofie for offering 2. Para. 26.
incense, which belonged to the sons of Aaron, shall not this unworthy wretch
persuade himself, that an other sort of revenge is reserved for him, whose sin
so far exceeds theirs in enormitie and wickedness as the lakes of ^odoma in
filth, the clearest streams of Jorden? How many circumstances here concur,
all aggravating his offense, and rendering it more heinous? The person elected
of God. and chosen to so hie a dignity, whose ingratitude doubleth the crime,
Dilectus men's in domo mea fecit scelera multa, my once beloved (but now
accursed Hier. 11.
) in my house committed many crimes, he that did eat bread with me did lift
up his heel against me, he that was bound for so many reasons to love Psalm. 14
and Io. 13.
me, he thus ungratefully does abuse me.

The circumstance of the sacrifice offered increases the offense, for the
principal function of Priesthood, and most essentially thereunto annexed, is
the act of sacrificing, al other whatsouer give place thereunto: Yet herein this
caitife in the chiefest funtion most vildely transgresses: and specially in
offering so precious a treasure for the sins of all the faithful, he himself
sins therein most unfaithfully al his touching, crossing, dividing, augment
and amplify the defor mitie of his delict. The consecration was sufficient to
damn him to hell, but the consumption will drown him deeper, there he was an
unworthy agent, here an unworthy patient, there he offended in producing
God irreuerently, here he sins in not being deified for his demerite: for if
the Apple Adam ate poisoned him Oen. 3.
and all his posterity, if that poor Prophet seduced by another Prophet for
taking a small repast 3. Reg. 13.
was devoured of a lion, who will not judge but he that eats Christ's body
unworthily, iuditium sibi a Cor. 11.
mandueat, eats that b^dy and soul of him that both shall be his judge, and
the cause of his condemnation? O what indignity is this, that God for love
should lay his son, his only son, his wisdom, his life, al his treasure
in thy hand, to ofter, to eat, to distribute, and thou to cast it into a body,
a den more sit for devils the^ a temple for Christ? Art thou not afraid, that
while he enters into thy mouth he put not forth one of his hands and root out
that accursed tongue that was so presumptuous to breathe upon his body, to utter
the words of consecration, to touch so unspotted an host? the plague of the
Bethsamites 1. Reg. 6.
one day shall condemn thee to death, because thou would not learn by their
harms how to behave thy self in the ha^dling of this sacrfice, for they being
punished so horribly for looking but upon an arc of wood, cry aloude and say,
what shall become of thee in treading Christ's body under thy foot?

The third sacrilege, or rather deilege this ungrateful miser incurreth,
consists in the irreuerent administration of this sacrament, for if he only
come but to the altar, to communicate others, without celebrating, yet by
touching and dispensing the Eucharist in a mortal sin, he sins mortally,
and commits a sacrilege: this we learn by Oza, a Reg. 6.
who unworthily touching the Arc against the precept of God, was punished by
death of the body, a figure, to declare how he that handles this sacrament
irreuerently, incurreth the death of his soul: for the same reason those that
touched any dead body, Leu. 11.
were unclean among the jews, and could not be admitted among the faithful,
til by washing and other ceremonies their uncleanness was taken away, and what
could this type more lively represent then a stained body made unclean, by
touching a soul dead in mortal sin, the which ought not to touch the body
of Christ, or any holy sacrament, without expiation and sacramental washing?
For he that handles the Eucharist with hands bedawbed in dust and mire,
sins mortally for his irreuerence to so sovereign a majesty, without doubt
he sins more hainously, that handles it with hands polluted and defiled
with sin. Besides, the dispensation of the Eucharist, ex officio, and
publicly belongs to holy orders, and therefore he that dispenses it, in
deadly sin offends mortally, because to that effect among the rest god
imparteth his grace unto his ministers. Let us now after Mass, consider with
the internal eyes of our souls, the lamentable state of this miserable and
detestable wretch, he that was elected of God, chosen his peculiar and dear
servant, admitted to the cheifest functions in earth, endued with grace, made a
mediator betwixt god and man, now is become a reprobate, a servant of satan, a
slave of sin, stained with sacrileges, made abominable to god, and almost
vnprositable to his people. Oquomodo obscuratum est aurum, mutatus Ier: 4.
est co^^r dispersi sunt lapides santuarii in capite (...) platearij. O how is
his gold become dark, the finest color changed (the image of God into the
shape of the devil) the stones of the sanctuary dispersed in the head of every
street, the jewels of al virtues trodden under foot, his functio^s despised,
for doubt not but he that uses this trade, shortly will become, not only
disgraced in the sight of God, but also contemptible to men. Some Priests of
the meaner sort I have known relapse into heresy, and afterward to reclame
their error, yet they confessed that the cause of their ruin came not by any
persuasion of diffidence in the Catholic religion, or truth of Protestancie,
but in regard of the lewd behavior in life, and irr^uerent exercising of their
functions, whereby they daily wallowed from one sin to another, and so at last
to warrant their pleasures the better, they plunged into the abyss of heresy
and insidelitie: this I could show, if need were, under their own haudwriting,
diuulgated among their friends, and at this present diverse hue now in
England, in external show, Protestants, who suffered I know, first shipwreck
in life, then in religion, they passed through the gates of sensuality, before
they entered the hell of heresy. Therefore dear brethren, learn by their losses
betimes, to corred your own lives, for we carry this precious treasure of the
Eucharist, as we daily prove, in vasis fiotilibus, 2. Cor. 4.
in earthen vessels that quickly are broken. Beware of emulation and
dissension in agible matters, take heed of gluttony and superfluities in
eating and drinking, but above all, eschew dishonestie and impuritie, for as
this vice impugneth often, and vehemently, so without mortification, fasting,
and praying, and a divine influence from heaven, it can not be ouer-ruled,
continua pugna rara victoria says saint Augustine, the temptation of lust is a
continual fight, yet rarely men win the victory, here many servants of God
most miserably have miscarried, here they who soared above the skies were
caused to stowpe, here I see Gods Priests extremely honored, or extremely
contemned: for those that are known so lead their lives irreprehensibly in
purity and chastity, they are accounted consequently good and religious men,
and the reason is manifest, for that a man cannot observe chastity, except he
live in Gods grace and favor, wherein consists true holiness and sanctity:
and if he overcome the greatest enemy, the lesser will casily be vanquished.
Contrariwise, those Priests that give but any sign of impuritie, I know not
how, but all men abhor them, they dare not commit any secrets unto them,
they resemble persons that the devil rules and possesses, those that see
them at the altar, tremble at such a spectacle. Therefore in gestures words,
deeds, and all occasions, let us avoid all things that may insinuate or give
any light show of propension or inclination of our souls to such a filthy sin,
let not any conceir or imagination thereof make deep impression in our minds,
but let us fly from them as serpents, and poisoned Coccatrices, which infect,
only with looking on us.

And since you are the true Nazarites, elected peculiarly Numb. 6.
of God, severed from the rest, sanctified by him, and consecrated unto him,
let that be verefied in you that Hieremie pronounced of them, Candidiores Lam.
Hie^. 4.
niue, nitidiores lacte, iubicundiores ebore autiquo, sapphir^ pulchriores:
whiter than snow, cleaner than Psalm. 50
milk, redder than old yuorie, more beautiful than saphires. Whiter than
snow, by the washing of your fins with the tears of repentance. Lauabis me,
and super niue dealbabor, thou will wash me, and I shall be made whiter than
snow, clearer or purer than milk, for infantlike simplieitie, sincerity and
purity, redder than read yuotie, colored with the grain of Christ's
vermilian blood, by receiving the Eucharist, more beautiful than saphires,
adorned with all sorts of virtues, by internal grace and external gravity.
Ah take heed that he soretel not you that lamentable theme, which he prophesied
of them. Ibidem.
Denigrate est super carbones facies little, non sunt cogniti in plateys,
adhasit cutis little ossibus. I heir face is become blacker then coals, they
are not known in the streets, their skin oid cleave to their bones. For the
soul leesing the beauty of Gods grace, becomes as black as the Devil: when
the priest lacks the show and color of godliness, the people neither
reverence him as they ought, nor acknowledge his dignity, because the flesh
and fat of virtue is gone, there remains no more but skin and bone, that
is, external attire, and the internal character, and therefore no marvel if
he be deformed. Let this disgrace befall them that cannot live continent, but
must lead a sister, and so immediately leap out of their unchaste beds into
their unholy communion, let them come presently from clipping and embracing
their minions to feed upon their faithless bread: Such ministers are suitable
to such a sacrifice, and such preparation to like oblatio^. But come you with
fasting and praying, with shirts of hair, and loins gided, with fervent
faith, strong hope, and inflamed charity, bathe your eyes with tear, inco^se
your breasts with sighs, adorn your hearts with love. Let him find your
souls a garden with fragrant flowers of virtue, besette with lillies of
chastity: a Temple with prayer, leuotion, and Religion, a heavenly paradise,
with peace of consci. ence and tranquillity.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONtents of this Treatise.
That noe man can prepare him selfworthily to receive the B. Sacrament. 1 That
God requires a certain preparation of them that receive. 7 Two sorts of
preparation. 17 Preparation before we communicate. 25 Of Fear. 32 Of Faith. 37
Of Hope. 40 Of Charity. 45 How to unite our souls to God, in preparing them
to receive him. 51 Union in Affection. 55 Of Zeal. 62 Of Extacie. 63 Of
Benevolence. 67 Greyfe for sins past. 69 Of purpose to observe intierely the
commandments of God. 74
THE SECOND PART.
Of Preparation, when we communicate Naked. 84 Wounded. 96 As a Son to his
Father. 101 As a Friends to his friend. 107 As a Souldyer to his Captain. 124
As a Scholar to his Master. 1^8 As the Creature to glorify his Creator. 163 As
one cheyned by enemies. 173 As a Garden. 178 As an infant to his Mothers dugg.
188 As hungry and needy. 197 As the three Kings. 201 As a shipp cossed. 209
As the prodigal Son. 214 To honor Godds Saints 217 As a heart thirstinge
the fountain of life. 219 As a pilgrim. 220 As a faithless Spowse the her
husband. 222 As a propitiation for the dead. 224 As a grateful obsequy unto
god for all his Saints 227 As moving to prayer. 230
THE THIRD PART.
What we ought to do after receiving of the blessed Sacrament. 239 The
disposition of our Imagination, in receiving the holy Eucharist. 241 The
presence of god behoulding. 243 The presence of Christ's humanity. 260 The
presence of Angels. 266 What we ought to do, when we receive the blessed
Sacrament in mouth. 271 Affects. 274 Oblation and resignation 282
Circumspection or caution. 286
Faults esecaped in the prinringe.
Pol 147 Lin. 9 Offinde god. (Add) and porish. 151 Liu. 4. it natural wit.
(Add) or divine Faith. 210 Lin. 10. delights of the world. (Add) What Siren
more crafty, then our flesh and senses? 253. Lin. 17. then all the eyes,
(Add) and wits.

