THE CHRISTIANS MOVRNING GARMENT.

The third Edition.

AT LONDON

Printed for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop at the entrance into
the Exchange. 1603.

To the right Honorable and virtuous young Gentleman, Henry, Lord Hastings,
Grace and peace.
RIght Noble Impe.
THose little creatures the Silk-wormes, shunning duality of meats, and
betaking themselves wholly to the fresh leasage of the Mulberie tree, frame (by
Natures instinct and virtue of the Plant) so fair, and so sweet a web, that
the greatest personage will not think much to wear it. I am the meanest of
the servants of God, far less than the least of his mercies: yet by the
operation of his blessed spirit (the soul of my soul) and the efficacy of
his holy word (whereon alone I wish to feed) I trust I have shaped such a
garment as the best Christian will not disdain to put on. A Mourning Garment
it is: For lighter colors beseem not Gods Child in this careless Age, where
Lady Faith goes bare-foote (alas) all alone, attended by no good works, which
makes her wash handkerchers in her tears.

I present this vesture to your Lordship, not doubting but you will accept it,
and adorn your self with it. And I desire it may be a token of a dutiful and
thankful mind, for the numberless favors our happy unhappy name has
received from your most noble, and for zeal of religion most worthy Ancestors.

The Lord bless your Honor, that as you grow in stature, and years, so you
may grow in grace and fauouor with God, and men.

Your Honors in all observance, William Worship.

The Christians mourning Garment.
IT is a rule that will abide the tutch-stone, No man comes to heaven with dry
eyes. Our selves are ships launched forth for heaven: our tears must be the
sea, our sighs the gales of wind, while Hope is the anchor, and Grace steares
the helm. Moses, Hezekiah, Peter, Mary Magdalen, and all the Saints of God
were wasted on the rivers that gusht from their own eyes to the kingdom of
glory.

Howbeit, though every penitent sinner weep, yet every one that weeps is not
a penitent sinner. For tears in themselves are but things indifferent, and
never please God, but when they issue from a troubled spirit, suppled with
grace, and wounded with true remorse, and sense of sin. It is not sorrow, 2.
Cor. 7. 10.
but godly sorrow that goes for current.

Some weep for themselves, not for others: some weep for others not for
themselves: some neither weep for themselves, nor others: some both weep for
themselves and others. To weep for thy self, not for others betokens
luke-warmnesse: to weep for others, not for thy self, hypocrisy: neither to
weep for thy self, nor others, deadness of heart: both to weep for thy
self, and others, zealousnesse. The last of these is an effect of holy sorrow,
which who so finds not in himself one time, or other, is no better than a
vessel of wrath.

In the name of God then, good Christian brother, let thine eyes spout out
tears as a Conduite spouteth out waters, for thy grievous, capital, and
enormous vices. Say not thou art Sanguine complexiond and can not weep, of a
manly stomach and wilt not Sam. 1. 16. 12.
weep, for David was both, yet tears were his meat, day and night. Flatter
not thy self: the vain conceit of easy attaining salvation may cast many a
soul away in a year. Thou must upon necessity mortify the flesh: Away with
it, Away with it, crucify it, crucify it. Now ere thou can do this, it will
cost thee many a groan, and many a tear, oh it will go to the heart of thee.

As thou tendrest thy soul, look home: unrip, vnbowell, ransacke thy self
throughout. Mourn for thy original sins, and for thy actual sins, for
thy sins before thy calling, and since thy calling: for thy presumptuous
sins, and for thy sins of infirmity, for thy open sins, and for thy
secret sins, for thy sins of ommission, and for thy sins of commission.
Steep thine eyes in tears, read letters of discomfort on the ground as thou
go, let the streams of thy sighs, and the incense of thy prayers rise up
like mountains before the Lord, and if this will not move him to pity, if it
be possible weep tears of blood.

Above all things beware thou look not sowerly in company to be seen of men,
for then thy reward is sure to be great in hell. Get thee into thy most
retired closet, let no body (by thy good will) know of it, pull the latch into
thee see there be no holes in the door, no cranies nor clifts in the wall, and
then fall groueling to the earth, thump thy breast, strike upon thy thigh, wring
thy hands, and pour out thy soul before the Lord: so he that sees thy true
humiliation in secret, shall one day reward thee openly in the sight of his
glorious Angels.

Unclasp thy Bible, lay the ten commandments before thee, and (bedewing them
with thy tears) make thine humble confession thus before God.

O my God, I am confounded, and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee, my God,
for mine iniquities are increased, and my trespass is grown up into heaven.
Yet Lord remember thy mercies of old, and open mine eyes that I may see the
wonders of thy law, that so sin may be out of measure Romans 7. 12
sinful. Good God, thy commandments are just, and holy, but I am carnal, sold
under sin, and should not lie yelping, and howling in the burning lake of
damned souls, if I had my right. Blessed be thy name for inspiring this good
motion of meditating in thy law, for it is a glass wherein I may behold the
vglye morphew of my soul, and so be forced to flee to my redeemer for his
precious blood, to rinse, and munditie me, that I may be presented a spotless
virgin before thee.

Alas, I should have been thy Nazarite, The 1. commandment.
and have given thee all my heart: but I have given the flesh a piece of it, the
world a piece of it, and the devil a piece of it.

Gal. 3. 1.
thy word preached, and sacraments administered.

Phil. 2. 10.
Jesus in my mouth, at whose blessed name every knee should bow, both of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, yea Lord I have
torn thy holy name, as the Draper rasheth out a piece of linen to the buyer.



Romans 13. 1
powers ordained of thee: I should have honored my parents, thy instruments
for my life and education: and I should have been ready (with the Galathians)
to have plucked Gal. 4 15
out mine eyes to have done the Preachers good: but I (a sinful worm of five
foot long) have spoken evil of the Magistrate, and refused to be the staff of
my Parents age. As for the Ministers, I ever held them for a sort of simple
souls, the very scorn of men, and outcast of the people.



Beauty, have given glory to thy power and wisdom, that could set such
amiablenesse, and sweet favor in a face not a foot compass, the ground
whereof is but dust: but I (such was my corruption) have burnt in lust at the
sight of it, and Satan has made it a stale, and a snare to entangle my soul,
which now would feign flicker thence, and fly it to heaven.

Mat. 6. 15.
God of Moaths, the God of Thieves. Many a time has Christ Jesus (in his
members) stood cold, and naked, and hungry at my door, and cold, and naked,
and hungry, have I sent him away. Yet would I not stick to spend hundreds
upon Luxury, that infernal fire, whose matter is Gluttony, whose flame
Arroganty, whose ashes Obscenitie. whose end eternal misery.

Gretian. Tit. 1. 12.


an house, and such a close of my neighbors were mine, and I ever thought the
Corn on his land was better bladed, and fairer eared than mine own. To
conclude: many an unclean thought, laid by that Cockatrice mine inbred
concupisence have I hatched up, when my conscience aduisd me to kill it in the
shell.

Thus I, the distressedst wight upon the face of the earth, have broken all thy
holy precepts, even from the first unto the last, from the greatest unto the
least. And now, O Lord, whether shall I fly for succor? To thee? Woe is me, I
dare not look up to heaven. To Angels? They grieve, and blush at my rebellion.
To men? alas they are inrould in the same thraldom of sin with me. What
then? shall I finally despair with Caine, and make away my self with Judas?
No Lord, though thou kill me, yet still will I put my trust in thee. Do thou
ouerwhelme me with the tirrible waves of thy judgments? Still will I cry unto
thee even out of the deep, with David, and out of the Psalm. 130. 1 Jonah. 2. 2.
belly of hell with Jonah. Yea, blessed Jesus, though thou should sincke me,
and drown me, yet still would I catch hold on thy clemency, and be taken up
dead with thy mercy fast claspt in my hand.

In this sort, poor sinner, mourn, and droope for the multitude of thine
iniquities, not for a day or two, while the wound presents it self fresh, and
green before the eyes of thy mind, but continually, even so long as thou
feel the enemy pressed to give the onset. Howbeit when the bridegroom Christ
Jesus is taken from thee (and peace of conscience is away) then, then is the
fittest time Math. 9. 15.
for sadness above all other.

Now that thy soul may be cut, and lanced to the quick, I beseech thee by the
mercies of God in the bowels of Jesus Christ, that thou ponder these Motives
that ensue.

Columb. lib. 10.
of the eye with a party colored circle called a Rainbow. Now it is not a
shame for a man to have a Rainbow in his eye, and yet never drizzle one tear
for his sins? Good Christian carry not about thee so tough, so brawnie, and
so steeled an heart: good Christian carry not about thee a pair of such parched
and irrelenting eyes. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding
in all things.

David? And yet those very eyes of David that lay soaked in tears at the time
of his banishment, became afterward traitors, letting lust into his bosom,
when they darted from his roof upon Bath-sheba, and were the occasion that he
committed two heinous sins dyed so deeply in crimson, that time has not yet
worn out color. If thou think thou can bless thee from the evil to come,
and make a covenant with thine eyes as Job did, yet let thy heart be griped,
Job. 31. 1.
and twinged, in regard they have heretofore been rolling and extrauagant
eyes.

Sin is the transgression of the Law. Wherein observe first what this law is
which thou breakest. Secondly who this God is whom thou offendest.

First then let it damp thee, and disquiet thy soul to consider, that in every
loose thought by thee conceived, and in every unsavory word by thee uttered and
in every lewd deed by thee committed, thou have violated Gods law: which law is
far more excellent than the beautiful frame of the whole world, though in
each part it be good, and in all the parts together exceeding good. For (such
is our purblindnesse, that) the great book of Nature is not able of it self
to direct us to the true God, as much resembling that Athenian Altar, wherein
was written Unto the unknown God (but the law written Acts. 1. ^. 23.
points as just to God as the finger to the dyall, and which commends it most
of all) Psalm. 19. 7.
conuerteth the soul.

Go to now, miserable, and wretched sinner, can thou by thy dissolute life,
crack, and disesteeme of this matchless Jewel, and when when thou have done
will thou not enter into a sad, and sober consideration, opening the sluices of
thine eyes, and sending forth a swift current of tears? Would not that fellon
be hanged in chains who having broken most notoriously the wholesome laws of
his Prince, takes no thought at all, but reuiles and plays at Tables all the
while he is in prison, with his heels in yrons, and his neck in suspense? Yes
verily. Well then take heed. For if after thou have lift up thy horn most
insolently and pusht down the incompararable statutes of the Lord, thou be not
ashamed of thy self, and confounded in thy self, but do feast when thou
should fast, sing when thou should sobbe, laugh when thou should weep,
thou art as near in quality to the aforesaid thief, as can be well imagined,
and therefore likely to come to some heavy, and fearful end.

Secondly, take knowledge who he is that enacted this law which thou have
transgressed so shamelesly. It is no earthly Prince, nor Potentate, (a creature
finite, ready to huffe out life at every moment) but it is Jehovah, Esa. 40. 12.
that mighty God, who spannes the heaven, and measures the waters in his fist,
in respect of whom all nations are but as the drop of a bucket, nay nothing,
nay less Nah. 1. 2.
than nothing, even vanity. The God of anger, who has his way in the
whirlewinde, and in the storm, at whose sight the earth is burnt, the
mountains quake, the hills melt, the devils shudder. O my dear brother, how
can thy heart be light, since thou have offended so great a Majesty? Why do
thou not put sackcloth about thy loins, and an halter Kings. 1. 20. 31.
about thy neck (with the servants of Benhadad) and cry out, Mercy good Lord,
good Lord grant mercy, for we have heard that the King of Israel is a
merciful King.

If thou had committed but petit treason against an earthly Prince, I
persuade me, it thou might be admitted to his presence thou would stoop,
and look forlornly with a palish cheek, and vnkeambd beard, and neglected
apparel, using these mutes as vocal spokesmen, and intercessors for thy
pardon, and all because, The fear of the King is like Prou. 20. 2
the roaring of a Lion. And is thy heart so crusted, and rough cast, that thou will not throw thy self even below the earth, for displeasing that glorious
and fearful name The Lord thy God? Shall a Grasse-hopper Deu. 28. 58
outface the omnipotent, Clay the Potter, filth Purity, Darkness Light, A
wispe of stubble a consuming fire, a sinner of sinners the holiest of all
holyes?

Surely if these persuasions make no dint, nor impression, thy heart is harder
than the Smiths Anuile: yet hearken still (I beseech thee) to the nature of
this God, who chiefly joys in getting him honor by his boundles mercy. If
this make thee not beweepe thy personal sins, thou have not so much as a
sparkle of grace truly working in thee.

Will thou not be grieved for offending thy God, who loved thee before thou
wast Ephe. 1. 4.
borne, yea before the first stone of the worlds foundation was laid, who was
thy hope, when thou hungest upon thy mothers breast, who guarded thee with
Angels as thou layest spralling in thy Cradle, and has ever since fed thee,
clothed thee, preserved thee? Did thou deserve the least of these blessings?
If thou say thou did, thou art a liar, and there is no truth in thee. For I
say unto thee, that he might have made thee a Dog, or a toade, or a Serpent,
and have done thee no wrong at all. Even when thou wast a delightful burden to
thy mother, taking thy pastime in her wembe, and having no other mouth but thy
navel, then, even then wast thou odious to God (in thine own nature) because
conceived in sin. Neither must thou think this to be rigor, for thy self
can not abide a young Woolfe, for that he has in him the spawne and cruelty,
and will destroy the flock when he comes to full growth.

Why will thou recompense the Lord evil for good, and not rather pine away
like the Heart that finds no pasture for displeasing so indulgent and loving a
father, whose kindness is stretched out still? Behold this God hanging for thy
sake upon the cross: lo how he stretches out his arines to embrace thee: lo
how he bows down his head to kiss thee, lo how his heart is opened with a
spear to love thee, to love thee an undutiful and graceless child, unworthy
indeed to be called his child. And yet he gives not period 1. Cor. 12. 12.
to his goodness, but lays thee nearer his heart, marrying thee unto him, and
calling thee Christ by his own name, to manifest the wonderful (yet real)
conjunction betwixt him and thee.

O the depth of the riches of the mercy of this God, who has hereto adioined
another singular benefit. What is that? He has decreed that thou should be
borne (not a Turk, or a Jew, but) English, and then there (not when Pharaoh of
hell and Antichrist his vicegerent, made all true Israelites weary of their
lives with all manner of spiritual bondage, which they laid upon them most
cruelly, but) when he set the Diadem on the head of that virgin Queen, who
has given us already three and fortye years of Iubilee, wherein we sit
peaceably under our vines, and go joyfully to the Church to hear ye golden
bell of Aaron ring sweetly in the Pulpit, and to feel the fragrant smell of
his Pomegranats. Be glad, ye heavens, at this, and let the Ravens of the
vallie pick out his eyes that curses this ancient mother in Israel.

I could make more ample rehearsal of Gods special favor to thee, beloved
Christian, but the intended quantity of the book will not suffer me. Wherefore
read on be not weary of well doing, and for thy next task think upon three
principal Effects of sin, that so thy sorrow may be aggrauated.

First ascertaine thy self that so long as thou weltrest in thy wickedness
without remorse and touch of conscience, thou art a servant Romans 6. 23 Luke 15.
15
and a vassal to Sin, whose wages is Death. A prodigal child thou art.
strayed from thy good father into a far country, where being all ragd, and
tottered, and eaten into the flesh with vermin, thou art glad to become the
devils swinheard. Which tyrant has taken thee prisoner to do his will. and mued
2. Tim. 2 26
thee up in a far more noisome dungeon than that wherein poor Jeremy stacke
so fast.

This is thy state O man. Why then do thou not thrust forth tears, and
smoke out sighs, and even break the kall of thine heart with sorrow? Is
sweet liberty so yrkesome, and yrkesome bondage so sweet? Inquire of the Fowls
of the air, and they will tell thee that freedom in the wood is better than
prisonment in a cage of gold. Inquire of the Lions and they will make answer
that they had rather seek their meat at God in the Wilderness, than have it
put into their mouths through the grate. Inquire of the Rivers and they will
resolve thee that they would much sooner lie open to wind and weather at home
in the sea, than crawle never never so calmely by the greenest and best sented
meadows. I beseech thee therefore by the mercies of God that thou bewail thy
miserable vassallage. The Babilonians of hell (the Devil and his Angels) have
led thee away captive, and the cruel Edomits (thy sins) prouoake them
against thee, and both of them, by way of mockage, require a song and melody of
thee: then sit thou down upon the waters bank, weeping, and hanging thy harp
upon the Willowes, for mirth at such time is out of season. Cast not thy self
upon thy Iuory bed, eat not gluttonously, drink not Wine in boules, but
remember thy soul, thine afflicted Joseph, who all this while has his feet in
hell stocks. The blessed father of our Lord Jesus Christ bore thine cares that
thou may hear and suffer these words of exhortation, and plow up thy heart
by his holy spirit, for it is made of a tough, and churlish kind of clay.

I proceed to another Suasiue. During the time of thine impenitencie, all the
Creatures in the world band themselves against thee, and conspire thine
overthrow. And the reason is for that the Lord of Hosts is marching forward,
whose faithful and sworn soldiers they be. Is not here sufficient matter to
cloud, and ouercast thine eyes, and to change thy joy for mourning, thy beauty
for ashes, thy Oil of gladness for the spirit of heaviness? At dead time of
night in thy soundest sleep, the Imbers on thine hearth desire the wind (in
their kind) to leave his natural course of blowing assant, and to whip them
up, that so they may get matter to work upon. The spars, and rafters of thy
house have vowed to be ready to increase the flame at less than an hours
warning. Walk thou in the street? The tiles threaten downfall. In the field?
the air will convey infection, the earth will groan under thy soote as loath
to bear so unprofitable a burden. Nay what will thou say if the silliest and
imperfectest creatures dog thee, and make thee weary of thy life? Are Frogs,
and Lice, and Caterpillars nothing with thee? Does not one poor Gnat (hartning
on her self to battle with her Cornet which she winds so lastingly) waken
thee, and make thee start with her feeble sting? Then what would a legion of
Gnats do? Ah sinful soul, and laden with iniquity, is thy heart made of
rubbish, and thine eye of Marble, that the one will not give again, the other
become dankish? Know thou not what it is to have the stones of the field out
of league with thee, and the beasts of the field out of league with thee? Take
an example of Jonah, and see how he was handled when God mustered up such
forces against him in his displeasure.

After this Prophet had long labored, and toyled in Israel, and could do no
good, the Lord gave him express charge to remove his plow into the Nineuites
field to shame her. He (unmindful of his commission) paies the fare, and is
shipped. For Tharshish he, he is resolud. While he thus strugled with divine
providence, the Winds (at their Creators command) brake loose, and bad the
Mariners Jonah. 1. 4.
deliver Jonah. The Sea saw that, and was wroth, and bad the Mariners deliver
Jonah. The Whale lay watching all this while, and bad the Mariners deliver
Jonah. The ship (poor winged vessel) lay swooning upon the billows, and bad
the Mariners vnballase her of Jonah. Nay Jonah stood up against Jonah, and
besought the Mariners to tumble him into the large Sepulcher of the sea. How
now merry sinner, does not the senere usage of the man of God appall thee? If so
righteous a man be thus harshly entreated by the creatures, where will thou an
ungodly and unrepentant man appear? O Sampson, why suffer thou lady
Pleasure to play the Delilah, dandling thee on her knee, til she have shaued of
all thy goodness, and made thee wretched, and feeble, and impotent? what
Samplon, Sampson, fend for thy self, the Philistnes are upon thee Sampson.

There remains a third effect of sin, sufficient to split thy heart, be thou
not insensibly blockish, wilfully nefarious, extremely impious. It is this. All
creatures in ye world groan under the heavy burden of thy sins yea the
Creator himself. S. Paul affirms this (in part) most excellently. For we know
Romans 8. 11.
(says he) that every creature groaneth with us also, and trauaileth in pain
together unto this present, because it is subject to vanity, and under the
bondage of corruption. The world left being a world, when Adam left being
obedient, it was never beautiful, nor cheerful, since it waxed old in youth
through manifold ataxies and disorders, and at this day lies bedridden, waiting
with a seruent desire for the glorious coming of the son of God.

When Israelits sins were ripe, and calde for the sickle, rotten, and cried
for the corastue, what followde? The harmless creatures must pay for it. The
beasts of the field, and the fowls of the heaven must be cut off, and Hose. 4.
2. 3
the Fishes of the sea must be taken away. The Prophet Jeremy (bewailing the
pitious Lam. 2. 4.
estate of Jerusalem) testifies, that the very ways of Sion, and the rampart,
and wall did lament for the iniquity of the Jews. See, see, my beloved, how
the dumb creatures complain under the intolerable weight of thy sins,
while thou iettest up and down with a Cammels proud neck, and bear no part
in their song of sorrow. Thy corn which thou hopedst would grow plumpe in the
ear, is blasted in the prime, and it thanks thee for it. Thy close is pesterd
with thorns and thistles, and other cursed and untimely fruit, and it thanks
thee for it. Thy fishes are frozen to thy pond, and they silently thank thee
for it. O what a rack, what a gybbet would this be to thy soul, if thou had
any grace? But thou (more senseless then sencelesnesse) even when fit
opportunity is offered to cast dust upon thy head, and that thine eye, even
thine eye should shoure forth tears day and night, go metily away,
regardlesse of so lamentable spectacles. What is this but a clear
demonstration that so continuing thou art within an inch of hell? Water is an
heavy substance, and yet if a man lay close to the bottom of the sea, he
should feel no weight, because No Element is heavy in it proper place. The
whole world is crushed with the ponderousness of thy sins, and thou feel
it not: A shrewd token that sin is where it would be. Alas for pity, why
will thou dye? why will thou strangle thy soul with so full resolution? If
thou love God, who loved thee first, be no longer an Heafer of three years
old (ever living in pleasure, and never feeling sorrow) but let thy bowels
sound like an Harp, or Shawme, for thy transgressions, and now at length sigh
out this exclamation, Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for my manifold and
bloody sins.

And that thy heart may yet wax colder within thy body, know further that thy
sins lie so sore upon thy sweet Saniours back, that he can take no rest.
Hark how he complains. Behold I am pressed under Amo. 2. 13
thy sins even as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues. Pity O pity
thy self, if not take pity upon thy Redeemer, who is pressed down to hell with
the heavy sheaues of sin which thou have picked upon him most cruelly, more
like a Jew than a Christian. It was thou, O wretch, that did cast him into
his agony, where he swet such a sweat, that the drops of blood trickled down
apace, and the Angels were feign to comfort him. It was thou, O wretch, that
betraiedst him with a kiss, and soldst him for a little pleasure of sin, not
worth thirty pieces of silver. It was thou, O wretch, that came unto him
with swords and staves, as if he had been a thief, who indeed thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. It was thou, O wretch that did whip him, and
clap a crown of thorns upon his head, mocking him, and spitting in his face.
O cruelty? If thou have occasion to spit, thou gettest thee to the Chimney, or
behind the door for manners sake, and yet thou make no bones of spitting in
the face of the God of Angels. It was thou, O wretch, that did strip him
naked, and riuet his hands and feet to the cross, flouting him even when he
endured for thy sake the incomprehensible wrath of God his Father.

Behold thy Redceemer, offering up prayers with strong crying, and tears, and
art thou srolicking? The daughters of Jerusalem weep, the Virgin Mary is
pierced through with the sword of sorrow, and do thou run riot, and chop
away thy soul for a mite of pleasure? The Sun lends night in midst of day,
the veil of the Temple is rent from the top to the bottom, the earth quaketh,
the Mat. 27. 51.
stones cleeue, the graves open, and art thou fatting thy self with merriment?
And meanest thou for all this to sail to heaven by heaven? Can there be two
heavens? If thou still play the Epicure, letting these reasons which the
scripture yields so bounteously rebound from thine eye, ear, and heart, like
a Tennise from the ground, I (even plunged in a gulf of sorrow, to see thee
like a frantic smile when you dingest thy knuckles against what is next thee,
till the blood spin out) must leave thee to the secret council of God, and if
thou needs wilt perish, thy blood will be upon thine own soul. But I trust
these words shall prove unto thee the sweet savor of life unto life, and not
of death unto death: wherefore be dilligent in waighing two reasons more, so will
I betake me to the remainder.

The first is the blessedness of this godly sorrow. Do thou molest the air
with sighs, and the earth with tears, not countersaite, and forced, but
sincere and penirent? Rejoice, and be glad. Thou art in the kingdom of Grace,
the forerunner of the kingdom of heaven. Before the conversion, and Zeph: 1. 12
new spiritual birth, thou was frozen in the dregs of thy sin, and there was
such a thick Ice upon thy soul, that the evil Angels, shot at pricks (as
it were) and drove carts upon it: but since the Holy Ghost (which the Math. 3.
12
Gospel compared to fire) has caught hold on thee, thy congealed nature is
dissolved, and thawed into a flood of tears.

Would thou think it? There is not a Psalm: 56. 8.
tear shed for sin, but God catches it before it falls to the ground, and
treasureth it up in his bottle. Not a tear spent in this sort, which thou
shall not find upon record in heaven, so soon as ever thy soul is vnhousde.
In sum: the Lamb in the midst of the Thorn, will (with his own hand) wipe
away al tears from thine eyes. Thus they that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy. Blessed art thou if thou now weep, for thou Reave. 7. 17
shall laugh, blessed art thou if thou now mourn, for thou shall be comforted.
Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, Luck. 6. 21
will come, and will not tarry.

The last Motive is the consideration of their deplored estate, who aiming at
nothing but the bodies corrupt satisfaction, bury the excellent designs of the
soul in muddy sensual pleasure, terming sorrow for sin nothing else but a
sullen passion be got between Fear, and Melancholy, the silly effect of the
foolishnes of Prenching. Whereunto shall I liken this generation? They are like
unto the fat Kine of Bashan that are in the mountain of Samaria, appointed for
ye slaughter. They are like unto Thieves that go through a fair sloured field
to the gallows. They are like unto Rivers that run sweet, and fresh into the
salt sea. They are like unto Passengers laid along to sleep under shady
trees, who wakning since themselves swelted with the heat of the removed sun.

These Riotours that never came where true sorrow grew, first are base. For
themselves affirm that pleasure is for the body, and all men know the body is
for the soul: so become they servants to their servants servant. Secondly
their estate is damnable in life, in death, after death. In life, for their
consciences are bereft of sense and motion, by that gangrene sin, and
thoroughly burnt with a searing Iron. If a man should cut them up he should
find no heart in them, for Whoredom, and Wine, and new Wine, have taken Hose.
4. 11.
away their heart. This is a plague of all plagues. The stone in the bladder is
a grievous disease, so is the stone in the back, but there is no disease to
the stone in the heart. Some read the Bible, and finding the wrath of God to
smoke against sinners in the old Testament, sometime with stoning, sometime
with the earth swallowing her inhabitants, sometime with fire and brimstone from
heaven, they wonder why God is so gentle now a days as to let sin alone,
which grows so rank in all places. Alas it is true (wretches that we are) we
are all of one language (quite contrary to the good language of Canaan) and we
build Towers of Babel (Towers of sin and confusion) whose pinacles spire up
to heaven, and cry out in the ears of the Lord, Thou God to whom vengeance
belongs, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self. And verily if
we go on as we do, out-sinning all the regions about us, and turning unto our
own race as a horse rusheth into the battle, we shall drive the Lord in his
anger to exclaim, O, they have put out my eyes, as the Philistines did Sampsons
my type, they multiply abhominatio^s, as if I had no providence: lead me lead
me to the maine pillars of the land, the posts whereon the house stands, that
so I may bring the realm upon their heads, and be at once avenged of them for
my two eyes. But (to answer the question) I avouch i^ confidently that the
Lord does plague the impenitent of this land more sharply and severely now in
these days of peace, then he did malefactors in former ages. And I prove it
thus. Then he punished the body, now he punishes the soul, delivering these
men up into a reprobate sense, and giving the Devil liberty to eare-marke
them. It is the fearefullest judgment in the world, when sin is punished with
sin, and this is the judgment of these times. Woe, woe, woe unto us, for we are
sick of sin unto death, and yet feel it not, nay like Gadarens, we drive
away the Lord of life the dear Physician of our souls.

If any man be desirous to know the cause of so universal a desertion, and
embrawning of the heart, I must tell him that we are poor with riches, pale
with beauty, sick with health, evil with good. Peace, and Plenty (the mother,
and daughter) have so led and pampred us, that we are waxen wantonings, and
kick against the Lord, Search the Scripture who will, he shall ever find that
leanness of soul has been sent amongst Quails, and that excessive mirth,
gluttony, and chambering, make men pursie, vnweildsome, and to God
unserviceable.

By this dear Christian brother, may thou take a scantling of their
wretched estate in this life who do nothing else but fulfill their sensual
lusts and appetites. Surely me thinks this one judgment that vsunlly
befalls Belly-gods on earth, should make our Lusty bloods afraid. But (alas)
they have eyes, and see not, ears and hear not, hearts and understand not.

They drink till they be drounde in fire, and shoot chaineshot of roaring
oaths that make the windows of heaven to totter, (in my conscience they made
the earth quake so lately.) Tell them of it, they break jests, and like the
profane Isralits, rebuke the Priest. Hosea. 4. 4.
Yet when they lie upon their death beds, tumbling, and tossing, and telling
the clock: when the flashes of hell fire present themselves to their
consciences, and the bloody wounds appear which they gave their own souls in
the days of their iollitye: when that wild beast Sin that has so long slept
at the door of their hearts, and stird not, is suddenly awaked, and flies in
their bosom, ready to pull out their throats: when swarms of iniquities
humme like flies about them, and like Frogs scrall upon them, and croke
vengeance against them: then tell me if they descend not from the treble keys
of mirth to the grave keys of sorrow: tell me then if they tremble not like an
Aspine leaf, or like the hartlesse Dear at the noise of the thunder-cracke.
Then send for Moses, send for the Preacher, then good people pray for me, O
whither shall I fly from the Arrows of the Almighty, that part my ribs,
and wound me incurably: Alas I thought I could have repented at the last gasp,
even when I was fetching my soul sighs, but now I find to my pain, that
repentance is the gift of God. O that I might dye the death of the righteous.
This will be the out-crye of every one of them, dye not their hearts like stones
within 1. Sam. 25. 37.
them, as Nabals did.

But when the date of their life is out, and their souls unbodied, then is
that truly brought to pass which our Savior pronounces, Woe be to you that
now laugh, Luke 6. 25.
for ye shall weep, and wail. When they once put their heads within hell
gates, and hear the fearful yelling of damned spirits, that feel no comfort,
no release, no ease, nor any thing but amaze and horror, then will they wish,
and wish that they had wept their eyes out, and sighed their lungs in pieces,
but it will be too late. Then will each of them cry out, Cursed be the day
wherein I was borne, cursed be the paps that gave me suck, cursed be the knees
that prevented me, for damned I was, damned I am, damned I shall be for ever
more. O whether (poor forsaken) shall I go from distress, since no remove
can lessen my sorrows, and every place presents like face of misery? Alas what
comfort ca^ I have when the God of all comfort is away? Alas it is a long night
that is never day, an unmerciful fire that is never quenched, a dreadful torment
that has never end, but lasts for a time, and times, and no time, even for
ever. O hell, hell, thy fire is intolerable hot, (yet without any light to
give a soul comfort) the breath of the Lord like a River of Brimstone does
kindle it. O that some mountain would Isai. 30. 33.
fall on me, and hide me from the presence of the Lamb, whom if I had kissed, he
had not been angry, and I had never come to this. O that I had been borne a
Katte, or a Spider, or a Load, for so should my soul have vanished to nothing,
whereas now it is substantive, always dying, yet never dead. Worm of
conscience, when, oh when will thou dye? will thou never leave tugging and
tearing my soul? Father Abraham, one drop of water to cool my tongue, good
father Abraham.

Alas, why go I about to blazon the arms of hell, since they pass the power
of any pencils expressing, or minds imagination? Suppose a man laid his limbs
on a choice fetherbed, having before him all sightly prospects for the eye, and
all toothsome meats for the taste, and the sweetest accord in music for the
ear, and were bound to remain so without stirring a joint but for twenty
years: Oh how often would he look up to heaven pitifully, and long for death
as for a treasure, rather than endure so soft a pnnishment? What then will
become of that unhappy soul, who having sported out his life must be hurried
by Devils into hell, where his bed shall be a red-hot gridyron, legions of
damned ghosts his best sightes, his diet Despair, his Music Gnashing of
Teeth, assisted with dreadful shriekes, and Clamorous lamentations, not for
twenty or forty years, but for as many thousands of years as there be drops
in the Sea, and Sands on the shore, and then to begin fresh again
everlastingly.

These motives well respected, and not ouerly suruaide, what flintie heart will
not riue, and what sinful soul will not houle after the manner of Dragons? My
most loving, and most dear Christian brother, let me become not a suter, but a
beggar unto thee: For Jesus Christ's sake I ask it, humble thy self with
fasting, weeping and mourning: humble thy self with fasting, weeping, and
mourning, For Jesus Christ's sake I ask it. If the nature of thine eye cannot
move thee, then let the excellency of Gods law which thou have broken,
persuade thee. If the excellency of Gods law which thou have broken cannot
persuade thee, let the mighty Majesty of the Lord rouse thee. If the mighty
Majesty of the Lord cannot rouse thee, let the mercifulness of the same God
allure thee. If the mercifulness of God cannot allure thee, let the pestilent
effects of sin curb thee If the pestilent effects of sin cannot curb
thee, then let the insupportable torments of hell kill thee dead, and rent thee
in pieces.

As for thee, O young man, rejoice in thy Eccle. 10. 9
youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thine heart, and in ye sight of thine eyes, but know that for all
this God will bring thee to judgment.

Brutish Epicure, that postest to the Playhouse at the sound of the Trumpet,
and give money to behold their vanities, who set up the Flag of defiance to
virtue, but wilt in no wise be brought to the Church to mourn though the
Preacher lift up his voice like a trumpet, and cry alowd, Ho, come, and buy
Wine and Milk without silver: persist Isaia. 55. 1.
in thy merriment, do: but know that for all this God will bring thee to
judgment.

Theeuish adulterer, that feloniously take away thy poor neighbors little
sheep, that eats of his own morsels, drinks of his own cup, and sleeps in
his bosom: laugh on, swear on, whore on: but know that for all this God will
bring thee to judgment.

To return to thee (brother mine) whose salvation I desire in my heart: those
Instigations and Induceme^ts which the Lord has put into my mind, have I
imparted to thee: And yet I find not my self satisfied, till I acquaint thee
with certain rubbes which Satan will cast in thy way, to stop thee from
running smoothly to this godly sorrow.

John Baptist mourn not to thee, or call thy place Bochim (that is by
interpretation) Weeping, Iud. 2. 4. 5.
unless Phineas, or some zealous Prophet forbear Incarnatiue salues, and give
thee corasiues, rebuke thee sharply, and sounding thy sins to the bottom?
Peter must not bawke thy wickedness, but tax Acts. 2. 36.
thee roundly, and point out Jesus whom thou have crucified, else will thou
not be pricked in thy heart, nor demand what thou shall do to be saved. O then,
my brother, beloved, and longed for, my joy and my crown (I hope) as ever thou
meanest to have a grudging in thy conscience for thy manyfolde corruptions, be
a diligent frequenter of powerful Sermons.

Luke 12. 19
ease. Why so? Thou have much goods laid up for many years. Take heed,
take heed of this fault, for it is inbred. The Adulterer will grant that
Adulterye ingenerall, is naught: but when he descends to this, or that special
Adultrye, then he varnisheth it over with some vain show of reason and
approves it. Right so thou will confess by words of course (especially when
thou art craving a bond for security) that man is mortal, man is mortal: but
when it comes to this, that thou, thou in particular, must shortly be borne on
four men's shoulders to the place of dead men's sculs, then thou soothest thy
self, and art fondly incredulous, as if thy life were thine own fee-simple.
Hark in thine ear. Thou art a Dyue-dapper, peering up, and down again in a
moment, thou came by the womb, and must go by the grave. Hark in thine
ear. Thou dwell in an house Job. 4. 19
of clay, in a tent, pitched to day, removed to morrow, and Corruption is thy
father, the worm thy mother, and thy sister, Where is 2. Cor. 5. 1
lovely Absolon? Where is strong Og, wonted to streake himself on his bed of
iron? Dead. All, all go naked out of the world, thou boughtest life, and must
pay for it with death. Assure thy self, whosoever read this book, that ere
many years, or decades of months be past, Death (mounted on his Revel. 6. 8.
pale horse) will rap at thy door, and alight, and carry thee away (bound head
and foot) to a land dark as darkness it self. What then remains, but that
thou presently make Ioh. 19. 41
thy grave with Joseph of Arimathea in thy Garden (the place of thy delight)
mourning each day amidst thy most tickling pleasures, as if the Sun of thy
life were sure to set at night? When shall I pray for thee, says Moses to
Pharaoh? To morrow, answers Exodus 8. 9.
Pharaoh. He should have said To day. Be not a kin to Pharaoh. For if thou
play the ignamous and sloathfull servant, beginning to eat, and drink with
the drunken, Math. 24. 49. 50.
thy Master Christ will come in a day when thou look not for him, and in an
hour that thou art not aware of, and will cut thee off, and give thee thy
portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

David Psalm. 4. 4.
would have us examine our selves (quietly) on our Beds. It is storyed by the
Evangelists that Peter went out (from the Luke 22. 62
concourse of people in the high Priests hall) and then he wept bitterly. It is
better to go to the house of mourning than of feasting, Eccles. 7. 4.
says Solomon. The king of glory sometime so dignifieth the Gentleman, that
he knockes at his heart by his holy spirit, and bids him open the door that he
may enter in. Here begins he to sighe at the view of his sins. Presently
comes me in a Ruffian (whom God sends to prove him, whom the Devil sends to
spoil him) and he with a pair of Cards, and a Cup of neat Claret, thrusts
Jesus out into the Stable, because there is no room for him in the Inn. Thus
be the good motions of the holy Ghost extinguished by the access of a
Gamester, that Schools his young master in the Art of Driving away time.
Drive away time? Is Time so slow-footed that it needs driving? My friend: if a
sinner entice thee to sport when the Fever of thy sins begins to shake thee,
consent not to him, Rather go aside (as a man thrown from the world) and then
let thy belly tremble, let thy lips shake, let rottenuesse enter into thy
bones. Learn of the Nightingale who when she is robbed of her yonglings, gets
her to some solitary tree, where she bewailes her unhappy marriage. Abstract,
and sequester thy self, flee resort, say unto laughter thou art mad, haunt
untrodden paths, desire the Lillies of the field to cloth themselves in
black, and accompany thee in thy doleful passions.

A joyful heart (says the Wiseman) causes good health, but a sorrowful mind
Pro. 17. 22
dries up the bones. Let not this dismay thee, better go sickly to heaven,
than healthful to hell. Be not all for thy body, nothing for thy soul, but
like the Lapidarie, esteem the Jewel far above the rind or bark: Moreover
I affirm that it is the care of this world that brings a Calender into the
bones, and snowes upon men's heads so timely, and not this sorrow which we
magnify. For as the Sea at high water, if angered with a boystrous wind,
threatens present deluge to the earth, and yet suddenly it gives back, and
runs away like a coward: so the panges, and greeuances of the righteous,
stird up by the justice of God, even when they seem to devour, are devoured
of his mercy. They are as sorrowing and yet always rejoicing by reason of
spiritual comfort which puts life into them. Heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy will be sure to be with them in the morning.

Galen. A man might have cast his water and found filthy sediments of Athisme.
But he is dead long ago, and I would this sin had died with him. Good
Christian, never come thou nere those Carrions that maintain the soul to be a
vapor, unless thou have the wind of them. That thou may be assured of the
souls immortality, harken to these pregnant, and unanswerable proofs.

Our fathers are the fathers of our bodies Heb. 12. 9. Eccle. 12. 7.
(not of our souls) says the Apostle. The spirit returns to God that gave
it, says the Preacher. The Lord breathed the soul into Genesis 2. 7.
man's body, says Moses: Therefore is it not elementary, therefore is it
everlasting. But because the disputer of this world renounces Christian
principles, we will enter the listes of reason with him (a little) and foil
him in his proper element. The sense is so corrupted by a great object, that it
cannot endure the less. For example. The eye is so dazeled with the beams of
the Sun, that it cannot iudicially discern colors in an obscurer light. It is
contrary with the understanding. For the more vehement the object is whereabout
it is conversant, the more forcible is it in comprehending the inferior. An
evident demonstration of the souls divinity I omit the horror of conscience,
which cannot possibly light upon the body (it being a spiritual punishment)
nor yet upon the soul, were it not a subsisting essence. And I will but tutch
the most admirable gradation of the creatures, some whereof are only bodily,
as beasts: some spiritual as Angels: some both spiritual, and sensible, as
man: the one in respect of his soul, the other of his body. Therefore, my
beloved, be thou steadfast, immooueable, and abundant in mourning for thine
iniquities, for as much as thou know thy sorrow shall not be in vain in the
Lord.

If thou find thy soul at od times unwilling to think of flitting, impute
that to her illness: for naturally she is estranged from the father of lights,
and lodging so warmely and peaceably in the body, she is not so forward to
remove as she ought. The Infant is at harts-case in the mothers womb, and
would not change it for a palace: yet when it is borne, and comes to
discretion, it cannot endure to think of the closet where it lay enwrapped.
The soul delights now to inhabit the body, but when death has brought it to
a joyful birth after a long travail, O then it would not be imprisoned again
in the body for a thousand worlds. And thus by Gods goodness have I gone
through the Impediments.

And now, good brother, that I have given thee a potion, the virtue whereof I
trust has had full course to run throughout all thy veins: I am for a
farewell to leave thee a sweet Electuary, or Iulep for thy comfort. It is a
Moderation in sorrowing. For the tempter will covet to besnare thy soul with
intolerable anguishe, that so (with Cain) thou may complain that thy
sins are greater than can be forgiven. O pray, pray, pray for patience, and
comfort of the holy Ghost, for a wounded spirit who can bear? Job, and David
(a blessed pare of Saints) mourned like Doves, and Pellicans, when the Lord
caused them to possess Pro. 18. 14.
the sins of their youth, Surely no wisdom can counsel, no counsel can
advise, no advise can assuage a perplexed conscience, nor any thing else, but
only the heart blood of Jesus Christ, which blood he has powered out so
plenteously for all true penitent sinners that they may bath themselves
therein. Then cry incessantly, and importunately, O son of David have mercy
on me, open mine eyes, heal my wounds, cure my Maladies, even for thy goodness
sake, O Lord. Remember the heavenly words Christ uttered in the extreme agony
of his soul; My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? Behold how he calls
his father his God twice, what time his wrath ceazed upon him in an
incomprehensible manner. Sorrow not too much when the Lord opens the book of
thy conscience (all blurd, and blotted with sin) but be of good cheer, and
kiss his holy hand even when he strikes thee. The father of mercies, and God
of al consolation, be thy Castle of defense in all thy tribulations, and
spiritual conflicts, that thou may be able to comfort others in the like
distress by the same comfort wherewith thou thy self art comforted of him.
Amen.

FINIS.
A Morning prayer to bevsed in private families.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, we thy unworthy children do here come
into thy most holy and heavenly presence to give thee praise and glory, for all
thy great mercies and manifold blessings toward us: especially for that thou
have preserved us this night past, from all the dangers and fears thereof,
have given us quiet rest to our bodies, and brought us now safely to the
beginning of this day, and do now a fresh renew all thy mercies upon us as
the Eagle renews her bill, giving us all things abundantly to enjoy: as
food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, and freedom from many miseries,
diseases, casualties, and calamities which we are subject unto in this life
every minute of an hour: and not only so, but also for vouchsafing unto us
many good things, not only for necessity, but even for delight also. But
above all (dear father) we praise thy name for the blessings of a better life,
specially for thy most holy word and sacraments, and all the good we enjoy
thereby: for the continuance of the Gospel amongst us: for the death of thy
son and all that happiness which we have thereby. Also because thou have
chosen us to life before we were, and that of thy mere goodness, and
undeserved favor toward us, and have called us in thine appointed time,
justified by thy grace, sanctified us by thy spirit, and adopted us to be thine
own children, and heirs apparent to the great crown. O Lord open our eyes
every day more and more to see and consider of thy great and maruailous love to
us in all these things: that by the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be
drawn yet nearer unto thee, even more to love thee, fear thee, and obey thee:
that as thou art enlarged toward us in mercy, so we may be enlarged toward
thee in thanksgiving: and as thou do abound toward us in goodness, so we
may abound toward thee in obedience and love. And since (dear father) thou art
never weary of doing us good, not withstanding all our unworthiness and
naughtiness, therefore let the consideration of thy great mercy and fatherly
kindness toward us, even as it were force our hearts, and compel us to come
into thy most glorious presence with new songs of thanksgiving in our mouths.
We pray thee (O most merciful God) to forgive us all our unthankfulness,
unkindness, prophanes, and great abusing of all thy mercies, and specially our
abuse and contempt of thy Gospel, together with all other the sins of our life
which we confess are inumerable, and mo then can be reckoned up both in omission
of good things, and commission of evil. We most humbly entreat thee to set
them al over to that reckoning which thy son Christ has made up for them upon
his cross, and never to lay any of them to our charge, but freely forget all
and forgive all. Nail down all our sins and iniquities to the Cross of
Christ bury them in his death, bath them in his blood, hide them in his
wounds, let them never rise up in judgment against us. Set us free of the
miseries that are upon us for sin, and keep back the judgments to come, both
of soul and body, goods and good name. Be reconciled unto us in thy dear
son, concerning all matters past, not once remembering or repeating unto us
our old and abominable iniquities: but accept us as righteous in him,
imputing his righteousness to us, and our sins to him. Let his righteousness
satisfy thy justice for all our unrighteousness, his obedience for our
disobedience, his perfection for our imperfection. Moreover we humbly beseech
thy good majesty to give us the true sight and feeling of our manifold sins,
that we may not be blinded in them through delight, or hardened in them through
custom, as the reprobates are, but that we may be even weary of them, and much
grieved for them, laboring and striving by all possible means to get out of
them. Good Father touch our hearts with true repentance for all sin. Let us
not take any delight or pleasure in any sin: but howsoever we fall through
frailty (as we fall often) yet let us never fall finally, let us never lie
down in sin, nor continue in sin: but let us get upon our feet again,
and turn to thee with all our hearts, and seek thee whilst thou may be
found, and whilst thou do offer grace and mercy unto us. O Lord increase in
us that true and lively faith whereby we may lay sure hold on thy son Christ,
and rest upon his merits altogether. Give us faith assuredly to believe all
the great and precious promises made in the Gospel, and strengthen us from
above to walk and abound in all the true and sound fruits of fayt^* (...) us
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Let us feel the power of thy
sons death killing sin in our mortal bodies, and the power of his
resurrection, raising us up to newness of life. Let us grow daily in the
sanctification of the spirit, and the mortification of the flesh. Let us live
holily, justly, and soberly in this present evil world, showing forth the
virtues of thee in all our particular actions: that we may adorn our most holy
prafession, and shine as lights in the midst of a crootied, and froward
generation amongst whom we live, being gainefull to all by our lives and
conuersations, and offensive to none. To this end we pray thee fill us with thy
spirit and al spiritual graces: as love, wisdom, patience, contentment,
meekenes, humility, temperancy, chastity, kindenes, and affability, and stir us
up to use prayer and watchfulnes, reading and meditation in thy law, and al
other good means whereby we may grow and abound in all heavenly virtues.
Bless us in the use of the means, from day to day: make us such as thou
would have us to be, and such as we desire to be, working in us both will
and deed, purpose and power. For thou, O Lord, art all in all, thou will have
mercy upon whom thou will have mercy, and whom thou will thou hardnest. Have
mercy upon us therefore (dear Father) and never leave us to our selves, nor
to our own wills, lusts, and desires, but assist us with thy good spirit, that
we may continue to the end in a righteous course: that so at length we may be
received into glory, and be pertakers of that immortal crown which thou have
laid up for all that love thee, and truly call upon thee.

Further, we entreat thee, O heavenly father, to give us all things necessary
for this life: as food, raimcut, health, peace, liberty, and such freedom
from those many fold miseries which we lie open unto every day, as thou see
meet. Bless unto us all the means which thou have put into our hands for the
sustenance of this frail life. Bless our stock, and store, corn, and cattle,
trades, and occupations, and all the works of our hands: for thy blessing
only makes rich, and it brings no sorrows with it. Give us therefore such a
competencie and sufficiency of these outward blessings, as thou in thy
heavenly wisdom see most needful for us. Grant these things good father to us
here present, and to al thine absent: praying thee in special favor to
remember our frinds, and kinsfolks in the flesh, al our good neighbors, and
welwillers, and al those for who^ we are bound to pray by nature, by deserts,
or any duty whatsoever, for Jesus Christ's sake our only mediator, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost, be given al praise and glory, both now, and for
evermore, Amen.

An Evening prayer, to be used in private families.
O Eternal God, and our most loving, and dear Father, we thy unworthy
children do here fall down at the foot of thy great majesty, acknowledging
from our hearts, that we are altogether unworthy to come near thee, or to look
toward thee, because thou art a God of infinite glory, and we are most vile,
and abominable sinners, such as were conceived, and borne in sin and
corruption, fuch as have inherited our fathers corruptions, and also have
actually transgressed all thy holy statutes, and laws, both in thoughts,
words, and deeds, before we knew thee: and since, secretly and openly, with
our selves, and with others, our particular sins are more then can be numbered:
for who knows how often times he offends. But this we must needs confess
against our selves, that our hearts are full of pride, covetousness, and the
love of this world, full of wrath, anger, and impatiencie, full of lying,
dissembling, and deceiving, full of vanity, hardness, and profaneness, full
of infidelity, distrust and self-love, full of lust, uncleanness, and al
abominable desires, yea our hearts are the very sinks of sin, and dunghils of
all filthynesse. And besides all this, we do omit the good things we should
do: for there are in us great wantes of faith, of love, of zeal of patience,
of contentment, and of every good grace: so as thou have just cause to proceed
to sentence of judgment against us, as most damnable transgressors of all thy
holy commandments; yea such as are sunk in our rebellions, and have many
times, and often committed high treason against thy majesty, and therefore
thou may justly cast us all down into hell fire, there to be tormented with
Satan, and his angels for ever. And we have nothing to except against thy
majesty for so doing, since therein thou should deal with us but according
to equity, and our just deserts. Wherefore dear Father, we do appeal from
thy justice to thy mercy, most humbly entreating thee to have mercy upon us,
and freely to forgive us all our sins past whatsoever, both new, and old,
secret, and open, known and unknown, and that for Jesus Christ's sake our
only Mediator. And we pray thee touch our hearts with true grief, and unfeigned
repentance for them, that they may be a matter of continual sorrow, and heart
smart unto us, so as nothing may grieve us more than this, that we have
offended thee being our special friend and father. Give us therefore (dear
Father) every day more and more sight and feeling of our sins, with true
humiliation under the same. Give us also that true and lively faith, whereby we
may lay sure hold on thy Son Christ, and all his merits, applying the same
to our own souls; so as we may stand fully persuaded that whatsoever he has
done upon the cross, he has done for us particularly, as well as for others.
Give us faith (good father) constantly to believe all the sweet promises of
the Gospel, touching remission of sin, and eternal life, made in thy son
Christ. O Lord increase our faith, that we may altogether rest upon thy
promises which are all yea, and Amen. Yea, that we may settle our selves and
all that we have wholly upon them: both our souls, bodies, goods, name, wives,
children and our whole estate: knowing that all things depend upon thy
promises, power, and providence, and that thy word does support, and bear up
the whole order of nature. Moreover, we entreat thee, O Lord, to strengthen us
from above to walk in every good way, and to bring forth the fruits of true
faith in all our particular actions, studying to please thee in all things and
to be fruitful in all good works; that we may show forth unto all men by our
good conversation whose children we are: and that we may adorn and beautify
our most holy profession by walking in a Christian course, and in all the sound
fruits, and practice of godliness, and true religion. To this end we pray thee
sanctify our hearts by thy spirit yet more, and more: sanctify our souls and
bodies and all our corrupt natural faculties, as reason, understanding, will,
and affections, so as they may be fitted for thy worship, and service, taking a
delight and pleasure therein. Stir us up so use prayer, watchfulnes, reading
and meditation in thy law, and all other good means, whereby we may profit in
grace and goodness from day to day. Bless us in the use of the means, that we
may daily die to sin, and live to righteousness. Draw us yet nearer unto thee:
help us against our manifold wants. Amend our great imperfections, renew us
inwardly more and more, repair the ruins of our hearts: aid us against the
remnants of sin. Enlarge our hearts to run the way of thy commandments.
Direct all our steps in thy word: let none iniquity have dominion over us.
Assist us against our special infirmities, and master sins, that we may get
the victory over them all, to thy glory, and the great peace and comfort of
our own consciences. Strengthen us good father by thy grace and holy spirit
against the common corruptions of the world, as pride, whoredom, covetousness,
contempt of thy Gospel, swearing, lying, dissembling, and deceiving. O dear
father, let us not be overcome of these filthy vices, nor any other sinful
pleasures, and fond delights, wherewith thousands are carried headlong to
destruction. Arm our souls against all the temptations of this world, the
flesh, and the devil, that we may overcome them all through thy help, and
keep on the right way to life, that we may live in thy fear, and die in thy
favor, that our last days may be our best days, and that we may end in great
peace of conscience. Grant these things good Father, and all other needful
graces for our souls, or bodies, or any of thine throughout the whole world,
for Jesus Christ's sake. In whose name we further call upon thee as he has
taught us in his Gospel, saying: Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A prayer to be used at any time, by one alone privately.
OLord my God, and heavenly Father, I thy most unworthy child, do here in thy
sight freely confess that I am a most sinful creature, and damnable
transgressor of all thy holy laws and commandments: that as I was borne and
bred in sin, and stained in ye womb, so have I continually brought sorth the
corrupt and ugly fruits of that infection, and contagion, wherein I was first
conceived both in thoughts, words, and works. If I should go about to reckon
up my particular offenses, I know not where to begin, or where to make an end.
For they are more then the hairs of my head, yea far mo then I can possibly
feel or know. For who knows the height, and depth of his corruption? who
knows how ofthe offends? Thou only O Lord know my sins, who know my
heart: nothing is hid from thee: thou know what I have been, and what I am;
yea my conscience does accuse me of many, and grievous euilles, I do daily
feel by woeful experiene how frail I am, how prone to evil, and how untoward
to all goodness. My mind is full of vainity, my heart full of profaneness,
mine affections full of deadness, dullness, and drowsinesse in matters of thy
worship and service. Yea, my whole soul is full of spiritual blindness,
hardness, unprofitableness, coldness, and security. And in very deed I am
altogether a lump of sin, and a mass of all misery: and therefore I have
forfeited thy favor, and incurred thy high displeasure, and have given thee
just cause to frown upon me, to give me over, and leave me to mine own
corrupt will and affections. But (O my dear Father) I have learned from thy
mouth that thou art a God full of mercy, slow to wrath, and of great
compassion, and kindness, toward all such as groan under the burden of
their sins. Therefore extend thy great mercy toward me poor sinner, and
give me a general pardon for all mine offenses whatsoever: seal it in the
blood of thy son, and seal it to my conscience by thy spirit, assuring me
more and more, of thy love and favor toward me, and that thou art a
reconciled father unto me. Grant that I may in all time to come, love thee
much, because much is given: and of very love fear thee, and obey thee. O Lord
increase my faith, that I may steadfastly believe all the promises of the
Gospel made in thy son Christ, and rest upon them altogether: enable me to
bring forth the sound fruits of faith and repentance in all my particular
actions. Fill my soul full of joy, and peace in believing. Fill me full of
inward comfort and spiritual strength against al temptations: give me yet a
greater feeling of thy love and many fold mercies toward me, work in my
soul a love of thy Majesty, a zeal of thy glory, an hatred of evil, and a
desire of all good things. Give me victory over those sins which thou know
are strongest in me. Let me once at last make a conquest of the world, and the
flesh. Mortify in me whatsoever is carnal, sanctify me throughout by thy
spirit, knit my heart to thee for ever that I may fear thy name, renew in me
the image of thy son Christ daily more and more. Give me a delight in the
reading and meditation of thy word. Let me rejoice in the public ministry
thereof. Let me love and reverence all the faithful ministers of thy Gospel.
Sanctify their doctrines to my conscience, seal them in my soul, write them
in my heart, give me a soft and melting heart, that I may tremble at thy
words, and be always much affected with Godly sermons. Let not my sins hold
back thy mercies from me, nor mine unworthiness stop the passage of thy
grace. Open mine eyes to see that great wonders of thy Law. Reveal thy secrets
unto me, be open hearted toward me thy unworthy servant. Hide nothing from me
that may make for thy glory, and the good of my soul. Bless all means unto
me which thou use for my good. Bless all holy instructions to my soul.
Bless me at all times both in hearing and reading thy word: Give me the right
use of all thy mercies, and corrections, that I may be the better for them. Let
me abound in love to thy children. Let my heart be very nearly knit unto the^,
that where thou love most there I may love most also. Let me watch and pray,
that I enter not into temptation: give me patience and contentment in all
things. Let me love thee more and more, and the world less and less. So draw
my mind upward, that I may despise all transitory things. Let me be so wrapped
and ravished with the sight and feeling of heavenly things, that I may make a
base reckoning of all carthly things. Let me use this world as though I used it
not. Let me use it but for necessity, as meat and drink. Let me not be
carried away with the vain pleasures and fond delights thereof. Good father
work thy good work in me, and never leave me, nor forsake me, till thou have
brought me to true happiness. Oh dear Father make me faithful in my calling,
that I may serve thee in it, and be always careful to do what good I may in
any thing. Bless me in my outward estate. Bless my soul, body, goods, and
name. Bless all that belongs unto me. Bless my goings out, and commings in.
Let thy countenance be lifted up upon me, now and always: cheer me up with
the joys and comforts of thy spirit, make me thankful for all thy mercies.
For I must needs confess that thou art very kind unto me in all things. For
in thee I live, move, and have my being: of thee I have my welfare and good
being, thou art a daily friend, and special good Benefactor unto me. I live at
thy cost and charges. I hold all of thee in Chief, and I find that thou art
never weary of doing me good: thy goodness toward me is vnstanchable. Oh I
can never be thankful enough unto thee for all thy mercies both spiritual and
corporal. But in such measure as I am able I praise thy name for all,
beseeching thee to accept of my thanksgiving in thy Son Christ, and to give
me a profitable use of all thy favors, that thereby my heart may be fully
drawn unto thee: give me O Father to be of such a good nature, and
disposition, that I may be won by gentleness, and fair means, as much as
if thou gave me many lashes. Pardon all mine unthankfulness, unkindness,
and great abusing of thy mercies, and give me grace to use them more to thy
glory in all time to come. Strengthen me dear Father thus to continue praising
and glorifying thy name here upon earth, that after this life I may be crowned
of thee for ever in thy kingdom. Grant these petitions most merciful God,
not only to me, but to all thy dear children throughout the whole world, for
Jesus Christ's sake in whose name I do further call upon thee, saying as he
has taught me. O our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

FINIS.

