THE PASSIONS OF THE mind in general.

Corrected, enlarged, and with sundry new discourses augmented.

By Thomas Wright.

With a treatise thereto adjoining of the Clymatericall year, occasioned by
the death of Queen ELIZABETH.

Si ignoraste, o pulcherima inter mulieres, egredere, and abi post vestegia
gregum, and pasce haedos tuos iuxta tabernacula pastorum. Cant. 1. If thou know
not thy self, O fairest among women, go forth and follow the steps of thy
flocks, and feed thy Kiddes by the tabernacles of Shepherds. Cant. 1. LONDON
Printed by Valentine Simmes for Walter Burre, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Crane. Anno. 1604.

TO The right Honorable my very good Lord the Earl of Southampton.
SOme seven years ago (right Honorable) I was requested by diverse worthy
Gentlemen, to write briefly some pithie discourse about the passions of the
mind: because (as they said) they were things ever in use, and seldom without
abuse: they were daily, yea and almost hourly felt no less crafty, then
dangerous, much talked of, and as yet never well taught. Their demand seemed to
me so reasonable, honest, profitable, and delightful, as I deemed it
discourtesie, and incivilitie, not to condescend to satisfy their suit. A
treatise hereupon I penned, but I know not how in the inundation of my crosses
it suffered shipwreck with the rest of my writings: and at what time I supposed
it had bin lying rotting in the bottom of the sea, a favorable gale brought it
ashoare, where being found (belike by some that liked it well) was taken up,
entertained, and dispersed abroad. When I beheld it, I wondered, and could not
tell whether to rejoice to see mine aborted infant revived, or fear whether it
had bin maimed and corrupted: for I doubted it had passed by some hands, which
might have cavsed me speak in a language I never understood. At last I fell a
perusing of it, and in deed found, it had not bin hardly used, but kindly
dealt withal, and what escapes were overslipped, proceeded rather from the
uncorrected copy (for of three this was most vnpersit) then from any uncivil
entertaynement. After that the whole impression was dispersed, the Printer made
means to have me add what I thought wanting, and to amend that I judged
amiss. And so I have augmented this edition with as much more as the first
copy contained. The which after I had absolved, it seemed of it self by a
connaturall sympathy to present it self unto your Honor. For literal
labors are usually offered to such personages, with whom they particularly
consort: and how could any passions find out a person more proportionate then
your Honor? They concern Gentlemen and Noblemen, to guide them in the way of
civil conversation: Your Gentry is well known: they appertain to soldiers
to stir them up to courage, and magnanimity: your martial prowess are
patent at home, and famous abroad. They belong to Magistrates and officers, for
discovery and manage of subjects: your place, and evident hopes of further
preserment presage, that this part cannot but agree to you. For me thinks as
often as I consider your presence about his Majesty, it seems to me, with
mine eyes to behold an other matchless Parmenio, for trust and fidelity about
our invincible Alexander of the North. Wherefore my passions being provided for
Courts, Fields, and Senates, find in you united, that they sought for
dispersed: for as it is di^^icill to determine which of them has chiefest part
in you, so it is easy for me to resolve how fit this discourse is for you,
which levelleth at all three. I doubt not but I might say to you as Plotinus a
famous Philosopher in Rome said to Origin, when he entered into his School to
hear him read, who presently at Origens aspect rubore suffusus, blushing,
ceased to speak: Origin Porphyr. in vita Plot.
requested him to proceed, Plotinus replied, that it was time for a professor
to hold his peace, when his auditors beforehand knew what he intended to
teach. You need not learn of me those things, which both by study and
practice you have attained unto: yet it is no small comfort for a man to see,
either that he knows, confirmed, or that he does, approved. If these silly
labors shall content your Honor, I wish no other recompense: for that which
likes you in this kind, I know will not dislike the best: and that which
pleases the best, by right reason, should be a good inducement, to content
all. If these blasted leaves be acceptable to your Lordship, when the fruits
are ripe, you shall receive a fatter crop: in the mean time Christ Jesus
preserve you in his grace, protect you from your enemies, and deliver you from
inordinate Passions.

Your Honors devoted servant, Thomas Wright.

THE PREFACE unto the Reader.
I Have diverse times weighed with my self, whencefrom it should proceed that
Italians, and Spaniardes, with other inhabitants ^eyond the Alps, should
account ^ lemings, Englishmen, Scots, and other Nations, Tramontani sem^^^.
dwelling on this side, simple, uncircumspect, unwary, easy to be deceyved,
and circumvented by them. And the cause of my doubting was, for that I had
perceived, by long experience in Schools, both in Spain, Italy, France, and
Flaunders; that ^emings, Scots, and Englishmen were ever equal, and rather
deeper Scholars, than either Italians or Spaniards, so many for so many:
Whereunto we may add the proof of former ages, wherein all the world will
confess, that our Nation has yielded as profound and learned Schoolmen as
any Nation under the Sun, in like quantity and pr^portion. For, what Country
in any age did ever represent unto the world, such venerable w^ttes, as
England, by yielding our venerable Bede, who, borne in a corner of the world,
comprehended the whole world in his boundiesse apprehension and judgment* what
age ever see before our Alexander de Hales, a Divine more ^rrefragable in all
his doctrine and opinions, the chief master of Schoolmen, before that
England sent him into ^rance? In what Country ever appeared such a mirror of
learning, of subtilitie, of brevitie, of perspicuitie, (in deepest matters, and
unto worthy spirits) as when Scotus showed himself in the chair at Oxford?
whom, for his worth, some other Countries with no less untruth, than
ambition, have challenged for theirs, and would have bereaved England of one of
the worthies of the world, What might I not say of O cams, of Bacons, of
Middletons, in foreign Nations more accounted of, than prized at home, whose
doctrine, the best highly esteem, whose wits the wisest admire, and whose
opinions innumerable Doctors do follow? Wherefore we may well glory in this,
that our Country has affoorded most of the masters, and of the chiefest Wits,
which at this time both Scotists, Reals, and Nominals do follow, either in
Philosophy, or Divinity. And yet for all this, our Nation is accounted simple
and unwise, among diverse others.

Moreover, let us cast our eyes upon all sorts of Arts and Trades, from the
very shoe unto the hatte, from the shirte to the cloak, from the kitchen to
the Court, and we shall see our Nation as well furnished, as complete, and
artificial as any other: and as all travelers can well affirm, far
superior to the Spantards, and nothing inferior unto the Italians. I must
confess, that in some one or other trade, the Italians surpass us, but they
be such, as either England regards not at all, or prizeth not very much: but,
in such as our Country esteems, we may, either equal or prefer our
selves before them. And yet for all this, a hie-minded companion doubted not,
within these few years, to call our Nation, uncivil, and barbarous* and
others, to repute us as simple and unwary. After some consideration and
reflection upon our selves, with reference unto other Nations, I found out three
causes, why those which inhabit these Northern Climates, are accounted simple
and unwise.

The first is, a natural inclination to Virtue and honesty, much more
palpable and easy to be perceyved in these colder Countries, than in those
hotter Climates: this we may prove by common experience, for both Spamards and
Italians, if they can have a I lemming, or an Englishman for their servant, if
he be alike qualified with those Countrymen, they will prefer him before
their own, for fidelity, sincerity and diligence. The very blushing also of
our people, shows a better ground, whereupon Virtue may build, than certain
brazen faces, who never change themselves, although they commit, yea, and be
deprehended in enormious crimes; for the shame of vice, is a good commencement
of Virtue, because it proceeds from a judgment disliking of evil, which is
an apt beginning of good. Wherefore Aristotle calls shamefastness a virtue,
not Arist. 3. mora. Nico. cap. 8^
for that it is a true virtue indeed, (for it most of all reigns in children,
who are not capable subjects of moral Virtues) but because it is the seed of
Virtue, or a spur to Virtue, or a bridle from vice: or a way, preparation or
disposition unto an honest virtuous life. And therefore Plato said that justice
and shame fastnes were Plato in protagor.
the gifts of Jupiter. This natural foundation of honesty, other Nations
baptize with the Name of Simplicity, which they understand, not in such sort
as it resembles a Virtue, and bordereth upon sincerity and upright dealing,
but rather as a vice bending to stupiditie, and lack of knowledge. The common
sort of Spaniards and Italians, censuring our inclinations, with an erroneous
judgment, account that a passion of ignorance, which in very deed, is the
first step unto prudence, esteeming them foolishly unwary, whom they ought to
have reputed rather virtuously wi^e.

The second cause is, Education, for prudence and policy are won by
experience, experience by practice, practice by conversation, conversation by
communication with people, the which in Cities is better attained unto then in
Villages, and in Cities of greater commerce and resort, than in Cities of
lesser repair. This we try by common consent of all men, who acknowledge the
inhabitants of Seatownes to be more crafty than the rural colonies, and
therefore Ilanders are judged most crafty of all, yet my meaning is always,
caeteris paribus, because, as some Ilanders have little trade, so some Cities
no great resort. The nature of men's wits is such, that one whetteth and
pollisheth greatly another, for as their faces are various, so their inventions
setches, sleights and judgments are diverse.

Wherefore those that have great commerce with men, either they themselves; or
else see the various dealings and practices of others, cannot but in time
greatly perfect their own judgments and understandings: this we may daily
perceyve in our own Country, wherein our Northern and Welchmen, when they
come to London, are very simple, and unwary, but afterward, by conversing a
while, and by the experience of other men's behaviors, they become wonderful
wise and judicious. The Italians therefore and Spaniards, disdayning greatly to
dwell long in the Country, and betaking themselves almost wholly unto Cities,
by a continual conversation, even from their youth, become very nimble in the
managing all affairs, and consequently, very politic and craeftie. For great
Cities (specially Emporiall) afford unto them all sorts of positique
prudenc^, either for universal government of the State, or particular
regiment of the City, or private oeconomie for a family, or common
conversation with men: all which Cities, as open Schools, teach abundantly;
villages and towns, either nothing, or very sparingly. The most of our
Englishmen contrariwise, either dwell in the Country, or in Cities not so
populous, wherein they may enjoy such means, as enable other Nations unto the
attainement of w^t* po^i^y, and prudence, wherefore this defect of conversation
impeacheth greatly the warines of our Countriemen with other Nations: whereby
sundry of our rural Gentlemen, are as well acquainted with the civil dealing,
conversing, and practice of Cities, as many Kockneis, with the manuring of
lands, and affairs of the country. Our English youth also, for most part, are
brought up, with too much fear and terror: for either their Parents or
Schoolmasters pass the borders of mediocritie in this part: because they
either punish them too extremely, or threaten them too severely: whereby the
passions of pusillanimitie and fear specially when any matter of moment is to
be attempted, so distract their present attention, that they cannot almost
possibly upon a sudden consider the circumstances, weigh the matter, and
resolve aright: for these restraining Passions witharaw a great part of their
souls consideration. The Italians and Spaniards contrariwise, by bringing up
their children with more liberty, enlarge their hearts with boldness and
audacitie, in such sort, as usually you shall see them at sixteen or
seventeene years of age, as bold and audacious as ours at thirty: and
contrariwise ours at sixeteene or seventeene, drooping with fear and
timiditie, as if they were so many chickens drawn out of a Well.

The third cause is, a certain natural complexion and constitution of body,
the which in very deed inclines and bends them of hotter Countries more unto
craftiness and wariness, than them of colder Climates; This we may perceyve
in Italy it self, where the L^mbards are more simple than the Romans, and
these not so crafty as the Neapolitanes, not these comparable to the
Sicilians. The like we find in Spain, where the Biskains are not so subtle as
the Castilians, nor these so crafty as the Andalusians. Wherefore, as we
prove in beasts, that some, by their natural instinct, are more wil^e than
others, as Foxes, Monckies, and Apes, so we find in men, that some surpass
others in aptnes to deceyve, and in craftiness to circumvent. And in this we
may confess that Spaniards and Italians go before us, for commonly they can
better conceal their own Passions, and discover others, than we. Our people,
for most part, reveal and disclose themselves very familiarly and easily; the
Spaniard and Italian demurreth much, and sells his secrets and his friendship
by drammes, you shall converse very long with him, before you shall know what
is in him: he will show a countenance of friendship, although he intends
revenge: he can train his purposes afar off, to undermine where he
pleases: he will praise where he spiteth, and disprayse where he loves for a
further project: he can observe his times better than we for his plots, and
mark fitter occasions to effectuate his i^tent: he can win ground in a man's
affection by some small conversation, and after prevail in what he list, when
he has got the advantage. In sine, he can dissemble better his own passions,
and use himself therein more circumspectly, than we can do. Wherefore I
thought good to try if a little direction would help ^ur Countriemen to
counterpoise their native wariness, and open the way, not to become crafty
and deceitful, which is vicious, but how to discover other men's passions, and
how to behave our selves when such affections extraordinarily possess us, the
which is the chiefest point of prudence, and fittest mean* to attain unto
religious, civil, and gentlemanlike conversation, which is virtuous. Whereunto
especially this discourse of Affections aymeth, albeit for more complete
doctrine, I have handled almost all those questions, which concern the
Passions in general.

But for all this, I would not have any man to think that I am of opinion,
that all Italians and Spaniards go beyond all Englishmen in subtlety and
wariness, for I have found diverse of our Nation, whom I believe, neither
Italian, nor Spanyard c^uld overreach, in what negotiation soever: but only I
mean that for the most part, those Nations surpass ours in a certain
politic craftiness, the which Nature first bred in them, Education per^ited,
Virtue amendeth, and Art discovers. The which I have endeavored first of all
(as I think) to draw into form and method, according to the principles of
Sciences, hoping that some other will hereby take occasion, either to perfect
mine, or to attempt a better; my desire is, the good of my Country; the
effect, every man's prudent carriage; the last end, the glory of God; whereunto
all our labors must tend, and all our actions be directect: and therefore, to
him let these little sparks be consecrated, to kindle the ^ire in his most
holy Temple.

and in tremore. sperando.
To the ternall, and aeternall Unity.
FLame of bright love and beauty, thou (whose beams*
Reflected here, have so ^^bellished
All Creatures) finding how my fancy fed
Upon this earthy circles glimmering gleames,
Not else reclaimable from those extremes,
Centrally drewst my heart to one fair head,
Enamelled with brown, blew, white and red;
So to allure it to those heavenly Reames.
Purify all the Passions of my Mind,
And light my understanding: So may I
Reed forth, and heed what Passions here I find.
Kindle my will and heave it up, for why
Even as thy love, like fire, draws up my love,
Right so my love, like fire, will mount above.
To the Author.
IN Picture, they which truly understand,
Require (besides the likeness of the thing)
Light, Posture, Height'ning, Shadow, Culloring,
All which are parts commend the cunning hand;
And all your Book (when it is thoroughly scanned)
Will well confess; presenting, limiting,
Each subt'lest Passion, with her source, and spring,
So bold, as shows your Art you can command.
But now, your Work is done, if they that view
The several figures, languish in suspense,
To judge which Passion's false, and which is true,
Between the doubtful sway of Reason', and sense;
It Is not your fault, if they shall sense prefer,
Being told there, Reason cannot, Sense may err.
B. I.

The first Book of the PASSIONS of the MIND: wherein is declared, the essence
of Passions.
The end and profit of this Discourse, wherein are declared the Passions and
Affections of our Souls. CHAP. I.
THERE can be no man, who works by right reason, but when he first intendes his
work, he aymeth at some end, he levels at some good; viz. either to instruct
the wit with doctrine, move the will to virtue, delight the mind with
pleasure; or in fine, direct the Reader to do some thing that may be, either
commodious to himself, or profitable to the common weal. This Treatise
therefore of the Passions of the Mind, cannot but carry with it, a goodly and
fair gloss of profit and commodity, not only because it concerns every
man's particular, but also, for that there be few estates or conditions of men,
that have not interest in this matter; the Divine, the Philosopher, the curers
both of the body and the soul, I mean the Preacher and Physician; the good
Christian that attends to mortification, and the prudent civil Gentleman
that procures a grateful conversation, may reap some commodity touching
their professions; and in sine, every man may, by this, conse to a knowledge of
himself, which ought to be preferred before all treasures and riches.

The Divine herein may first challenge his part, because the inordinate
motions of Passions, their preventing of reason, their rebellion to virtue are
thornie briars sprung from the infected root of original sin (the which
Treatise wholly concerns Divines, and all the deformed brood thereby
engendered:) the Passions likewise augment or diminish the deformity of actual
sins, they blind reason, they seduce the will, and therefore are special
causes of sin: whereupon among Divines grew that common distinction of sins,
that some are of Passion, others proceed from ignorance, (...)
others from malice and wilfulness; Finally, Passions are means to help us,
and impediments to withdraw us from our end: the Divine therefore, who
specially entreats of our last end, and of the means to atchieve it, and
difficulties to obtain it, mu^^ of necessity extend the sphere of his
knowledge to this subject of our Passions; and for this respect of Divines they
are See Thom. cum Scholasticis in 12 q. 22. and alios in 1. part. vbi de h^mine.
divinely handled.

The Philosopher, as well natural as mo^^ll, the one for Speculation, the
other for Practice, wade most profoundly in the matter of our Passions. The
natural See the Philosophers in the second and third de Anima.
Philosopher contemplating the natures of men and beasts sensitive souls (for
Passions are common to both) consequently enter into discourse about the
actions and operations thereof; for, without the knowledge of them it were
impossible to attain unto the perfect understanding of either of them. The
moral Philosopher, describing manners, inviting to virtue, dissuading from
vice, shows how our inordinate appetites must be brideled with fortitude and
temperance, he declares their natures, their craft and deceit, in what sort of
persons they are most vehement, and in whom more moderate; and to be brief,
he spends well nie in this disputation, all his moral Philosophy, in
teaching how they may be used, or abused.

The christian Orator (I mean the godly Preacher) perfitely understanding the
natures and proprieties of men's passions, questionless may effectuate strange
matters in the minds of his Auditors. I remember a Preacher in Italy, who had
such power over his Auditors affections, that when it pleased him he could
cause them shead abundance of tears, yea and with tears dropping down their
che^ks, presently turn their sorrow into laughter; and the reason was, because
he himself being extremely passionate, knowing moreover, the Art of mooving
the affections of those Auditors; and besides that, the most part were women
that heard him, (whose passions are most vehement and mutable) therefore he
might have persuaded them what he listed. The same commodity may be gathered
by all other Orators, as Ambassadors, Lawyers, Magistrates, See Aristotle*
Rhetorikes.
Captains, and whatsoever would persuade a multitude, because, if once they
can stir a Passion or Affection in their Hearers, then they have almost half
persuaded them, for that the forces of strong Passions, marvellously allure and
draw the wit and will to judge and consent unto that they are moved. Many
things more might be said concerning this matter, but in all the other
Chapters following, except this first, I mean to touch this point very largely.

As this Treatise affords great riches to the Physician of the soul, so it
imports much the Physician of the body, for that there is no Passion very
vehement, but that it alters extremely some of the four humors of the body;
and all Physicians commonly agree, that among diverse other extrinsecall causes
of diseases, one, and not the least, is, the excess of some inordinate
Passion: for although it busieth their brains, as also the natural
Philosophers, to explicate the manner how an operation that lodges in the
soul can alter the body, and moove the humors from one place to another, (as
for example, recall most of the blood in the face, or other parts, to the
heart, as we see by daily experience to chance in fear and anger) yet they
consent that it See Fracastoriu^ libr. de sympathia and lib. 2. de
intellectione circa medium.
may proceed from a certain sympathy of nature, a subordination of one part
to another, and that the spirits and humors wait upon the Passions, as their
Lords and Masters. The Physicians therefore knowing by what Passion the
malady was caused, may well infer what humor abounds, and consequently
what ought to be purged, what remedy to be applied; and after, how it may be
prevented.

If all the aforesaid Professions may challenge each one a part in this
Discourse; surely the good Christian, whose life is a warrefare upon earth; he,
who if he love his soul, kills it; he, whose study principally stands Job
7. 1.
in rooting outvice, and planting of virtue; he, Mar. 8. 35.
whose endeavor specially is employed in crucifying old Adam, and in refining
the image of Christ: he, who pretends to be ruled by reason, and not
tyrannized by preposterous affection, this man (I say) may best peruse this
matter, he may best meditate it; he may best know where lies the cave of those
Serpents and Basiliskes, who suck out the sweet blood of his soul; he may
see where the thorn sticks that stingeth his heart: finally, he may view his
domestical enemy, which never Matt. 10. 36.
permits him to be quiet, but molesteth in prosperity, deiecteth in
adversity; in pleasure makes him dissolute, in sadness desperate, to rage in
anger, to tremble in fear, in hope to faint, in love to languish. These were
those temptations of the flesh that S. Paul did punish, 1. Corint. 9. 27
saying; Castigo corpus meum, and in servitutem redigo, I chasten my body, and
bring it into servitude: these were those members the same Apostle exhorted us
to mortify upon earth, Mortificate membra vestra quae Coloss. 3. 5.
sunt super terram. Seeing then how all the life of a spiritual man ought to
be employed in the expugnation of these molestfull Iebusites, without all
doubt it importes him much to know the nature of his enemies, their
stratagems, and continual incursions, even unto the gates of the chiefest
castle of his soul, I mean the very wit and will.

Not only the mortified Christian had need to know well his passions, because,
by brideling them he winnes a great quietness of mind, and enableth himself
better to the service of God, but also the civil Gentleman, and prudent
Politician, by penetrating the nature and qualities of his affections, by
restraining their inordinate motions, wins a gracious carriage of himself,
and rendereth his conversation most grateful to men: for I my self have seen
some, Gentlemen by blood, and Noblemen by birth, yet so appassionate in
affections, that their company was to most men intolerable: for true is that
Solomon said, Vir iracundus provocat Prover. 15. 18.
rixas, qui patiens est mitigat suscitatas, An angry man raises brawles, but a
patient man appeaseth them after they be raised. And therefore how ungrateful
must his company seem, whose passions overruled him? and men had need of an
Astrolabe always, to see in what height or elevation his affections are, lest,
by casting forth a spark of fire, his gun-powdred mind of a sudden be
inslamed. I omit how he may insinuate himself into other men's love and
affections, how in traveling in strange countries he may discover, to what
passion the people are most inclined; for as I have seen by experience, there
is no Nation in Europe that has not some extraordinary affection, either in
pride, anger, lust, inconstancy, gluttony, drunkenness, sloth, or such like
passion: much it imports in good conversation, to know exactly the companies
inclination; and his society cannot but be grateful, whose passions are
moderate, and behavior circumspect. I say nothing of Magistrates, who may by
this matter understand the inclinations and dispositions of their inferiors and
subjects. But finally I will conclude, that this subject I entreat of,
comprehends the chief object that all the ancient Philosophers aimed at,
wherein they placed the most of their felicity, that was, Nosce teipsum, know
thy self: the which knowledge principally consists of a perfect experience
every man has of himself in particular, and an universal knowledge of men's
inclinations in common; the former is helped by the latter, the which knowledge
is delivered in this Treatise.

What we understand by Passions and Affections. CHAP. II.
THree sorts of actions proceed from men's souls, some are internal and
immateriall, as the acts of our wits and wills; others be mere external
and material, as the acts of our senses, seeing, hearing, moving, etc. others
stand betwixt these two extremes, and border upon them both; the which we may
best discover in children, because they lack the use of reason, and are guided
by an internal imagination, following nothing else but that pleases their
senses, even after the same manner as brute beasts do: for, as we see beasts
hate, love, fear and hope, so do children. Those actions then which are
common with us, and beasts, we call Passions, and Affections, or
pertu^bations of the mind, Motus (says saint Augustine) animae quos Graeci
(...) appellant ex Latinis quidam vt Cicero 3. Tuscul perturbationes dixerunt,
alii affectiones, alii affectus, alii expressas passiones vocav runt. The
motions of the soul, called of the Greeks (...), some Latins, as Cicero,
called them perturbations, others affections, others affectes, others more
expressly name them Passions. They are called Passions (although indeed they be
acts of the sensitive power, or faculty of our soul, and are defined of
Damascene: Motio sensualis appetitivae virtutis, ob boni vel mali Damasc. 2 de
fide orth. ca. 22.
imaginationem: a sensual motion of our appetitive faculty, through
imagination of some good or ill thing) because when these affections are
stirring in our minds, they alter the humors of our bodies, causing some
passion or alteration in them. They are called perturbations, Cic. in 3. Tusc.
for that (as afterward shall be declared) they trouble wonderfully the soul,
corrupting the judgment, and seducing the will, inducing (for the most part)
to vice, and commonly withdrawing from virtue, and therefore some call them
maladies, or sores of the soul. They be also named affections, because the
soul by them, either affects some good, or for the affection of some good,
detesteth some ill. These passions then be The definition of Passions Zeno apud
Cic. 4 Tusc. it^ definit. perturbatio ceu (...) aversa a recta ratione contra
naturam animi commotio.
certain internal acts or operations of the soul, bordering upon reason and
sense, prosecuting some good thing, or flying some ill thing, causing
therewithal some alteration in the body.

Here must be noted, that albeit these passions inhabit the confines both of
sense and reason, yet they keep not equal friendship with both; for passions
and sense are like two naughty servants, who oft-times bear more love one to
an other, than they are obedient to their Master: and the reason of this
amity betwixt the passions and sense, I take to be, the greater conformity
and likeness betwixt them, than there is betwixt passions and reason: for
passions are drowned in corporal organs and instruments, as well as sense;
reason depends of no corporal subject, but as a Princess in Why passions
follow rather Sense tha^ Reason.
her throne, considers the state of her kingdom. Passions and sense are
determined to one thing, and as soon as they perceyve their object, sense
presently receives it, and the passions love or hate it: but reason, after she
perceives her object, she stands in deliberation, whether it be convenient
she should accept it, or refuse it. Besides, sense and passions, as they have
had a league Cic. vbi supra. Aristotle insinuates 3. Eth. ca. 2.
the longer, so their friendship is stronger, for all the time of our infancy
and childhood, our senses were iointfriendes in such sort with passions, that
whatsoever delighted sense, pleased the passions; and whatsoever was hurtful
to the one, was an enemy to the other; and so, by long agreement and
familiarity, the passions had so engaged themselves to sense, and with such
bonds and seals of sensual habites confirmed their friendship, that as soon
as reason came to possession of her kingdom, they began presently to make
rebellion; for right reason oftentimes deprived sense of those pleasures he had
of long time enjoyed, as by commanding continency, and fasting, which sense
most abhorred: then passions repugned, and very often haled her by force, to
condescend to that they demanded, which combat and Romans 7. 23.
captivity was well perceived by him, who said, Video aliam legem in membris
meis repugnantem legi mentis meae and captivantem me in lege peccati: I see an
other law in my members, repugning to the law of my mind, and leading me
captive in the law of sin. Whereupon Saint Cyprian said, Cum Avaritia, etc.
We must contend Cypr. in lib d^ mortalitate.
with avarice, with uncleanness, with anger, with ambition: we have a
continual and molestfull battle with carnal vices, and worldly inticements.

Moreover, after that men, by reason, take possession over their souls and
bodies, feeling this war so mighty, so continual, so near, so domestical,
that either they must consent to do their enemies will, or still be in
conflict: and withal, foreseeing by making peace with them, they were to
receive great pleasures and delights, the most part of men resolve themselves,
never to displease their sense or passions, but to grant them whatsoever they
demand; what curiosity the ^ies will see, they yield unto them; what dainty
meats the tongue will taste, they never deny it; what savours the nose will
smell, they never resist it; what music the ears will hear, they accept it;
and finally, whatsoever by importunity, prayer, or suggestion, sensuality
requesteth; no sooner to reason the supplication is presented, but the petition
is granted. Yet if the matter here were ended, and reason yielded but only
to the suites of sensuality, it were without doubt, a great disorder to see
the Lord attend so basely upon his servants: but reason once being entered
into league with passions and sense, becomes a better friend to sensuality
than the passions were before: for reason straightwaies inventeth ten
thousand sorts of new delights, which the passions never could have imagined.
And therefore if you ask now, who procured such exquisite arts of Cookerie,
so many sawces, so many broths, so many dishes? No better answer can be
given, than Reason, to please sensuality: who found first such gorge^^s
attire, such variety of garments, such decking, trimming, and adorning of the
body, that Tailors must every year learn a new trade? but Reason to please
s^n^ualitie: who d^uised such stately Palaces, such delicious gardens, such
precious canopies, and embroidred beds? but Reason to feed sensuality. In
fine, discourse over all arts and occupations, and you shall find men
laboring night and day, spending their wit and reason to excogitate some
new invention to delight our sensuality: In such sort, as a religious man
once lamenting this ignominious industry of reason, employed in the service of
sense, wished with all his heart, that godly men were but half so industrious
to please God, as worldly men to please their inordinate appetites. By this we
may gather how passions stand so confined with sense and reason, that for the
friendship they bear to the one, they draw the other to be their mate and
companion.

Of Self-love (...), or Amor proprius. CHAP. III.
ALthough in the precedent Chapter we touched, in part, the root from whence
did spring those spinie branches of briarie passions, that was the league and
confederacy made with senses; yet for more exact intelligence of their nature,
or rather nativitie, I thought good to entreat of self-love the nurse,
mother, or rather stepdame of all inordinate affections.

God, the author of nature, and imparter of all goodness has printed in every
creature, according to his divine providence, an inclination, faculty, or
power to conserve it self, procure what it needs, to resist and impugn
whatsoever hinders it of that appertains unto his good and conservation. So
we see fire continually ascends upward, because the coldenesse of the water,
earth, and air much impeacheth the virtue of his heat: heavy substances
descend to their center for their preservation: the hare flies from the
hounds: the partridge hides her self from the tallent of the hawke; and in
fine, God has enabled every thing to eschew his ennemy, and enjoy his friend.
Whereupon grew that protrite distinction of a triple appetite, natural,
sensitive, and reasonable: the first we find in elements and plants, the
second in beasts and men; the third in men and angels: the first,
Philosophers call, a natural inclination: the second, a sensitive appetite:
the third, a reasonable or voluntary affection: nevertheless the natural
inclinations of inanimate creatures, and the sensitive appetites of living
things, dissent in some points; because they with one motion eschew their
contraries, procure their own good, and obtain that they need; as for
example, the fire by the same motion ascends to heaven, gets his place,
and flies from earth and water, as contraries: the boiling water set from the
fire, cools it self, and withal, expels the unnatural heat. Men and
beasts with one appetite prosecute the good they desire, and with an other
they sly the evil they abhor: as for example, with one appetite a man
desires good wine, and with another detesteth ill wine. An other difference
(besides) there is, because men and beasts, in their appetites, have a certain
pleasure and delectation, pain or grief, the which affections can not be
found in any inanimate creatures. This delight or pain God imparted unto us,
that we might thereby be stirred up to attempt those actions which were
necessary for us, or fly those inconveniences or harms which might annoy us:
for who would attend to eating or drincking, to the act of generation, if
Nature had not joined thereunto some delectation? A pregnant proof of this may
be seen in sick men, who having lost their appetites, loathe nothing so much
as meat.

Here we may begin, to discover the coasts of Self-love, for God having so
bountifully granted us means to provide for such things as were needful,
and to avoyde such things as were harmefull, adjoining pleasure to the one, and
pain to the other: whereupon ensued, that having a reasonable soul, the
which, like an Empress was to govern the body, direct the senses, guide the
passions as subjects and vassalles, by the square of prudence, and rule of
reason, the inferior parts were bound to yield homage, and obey. Then
Self-love vpstarts, and for the affinity with sense, for the causes alleged
in the precedent chapter, will in no case obey reason, but allured with the
bait of pleasure and sensuality, proclaymeth wars and rebellion against
prudence, against the love of GOD; in so much this tyrant prevails, that if
reason command a temperate diet, she will have exquisite and superfluous
dishes: if reason will be contented with a mean and decent attire, she will
have gorgeous, and above her state and condition: In sum, from this infected
love, sprung all the evils, welnie, that pester the world, the which Saint
Augustine Aug. lib. 22. deciv. cap. 2^. With saint Augustine consents Plato
5. de legibus, And Arist. 9. Eth. c. 8.
does gather together, yet leaves out many, Mordaces cur^, etc. griping cares,
perturbations, moanes, fears, mad joys, dissensions, strifes, wars,
stratagems, angers, enmities, falsehood, flattery, theft, rapine, and a number
more which there he reckneth; and I, to avoid tediousnes, omit. Yet by this may
also be understood that famous distinction, more practiced than known of many,
I mean of two loves, the one, that builds the city of Jerusalem, the other,
the city of Babylon; Aug, super psalm. 64.
that is, the love of God builds the city of the predestinate; Self-love
the city of the reprobate, that repaireth the ruins of Angels, this
fills the infe^^all dens with Devils: for charity, and the love of God,
being the base and foundation of all goodness, without which all virtues are
dead, and not availing to life everlasting, renders a spiritual life,
animating the just to serve God, fly vice, follow virtue; with which virtues
and good works, Gods church is replenished, and Satan's synagogue emptied.

Contrariwise, Self-love following inordinate affections, inticeth the
citizens of Jerusalem, to prosecute pleasures, unbridle their senses, enjoy
the roses till they flourish, not to let wither the Mayie flowers of their
flesh, haleth the poor souls from the liberty of Jerusalem, to the
captivity of Babylon, thereby casting the children of God into the thraldom
of Satan. By this it appears, how God gave every man an inclination to love
himself; yet subordinated to reason: and how, by the pleasure of sensuality,
it is grown to such a head, that rather it rules reason, than reason rules
it. Self-love then may be defined, an inordinate inclination of the soul,
affecting too much the pleasures of the body against the prescript of right
reason: this may well be called (...), old Adam, the law of the flesh,
sensuality, the enemy of God, the spring of vice, the root of impiety, the
bane of godly conversation, the object of mortification, the sincke of sin,
ever craving, never concent, tyrannizing over the greatest, and overthrowing
the least.

How the Passions may be well directed and made profitable. CHAP. III.
IT has been declared (I think) sufficiently, how most men inordinately
follow the unbridled appetite of their sensual passions; yet no doubt but
they may, by virtue be guided, and many good men so moderate and mortify them,
that they rather serve them for instruments of virtue, than foments of vice,
and as an occasion of victory, than a cause of foil: For Christ our Savior,
in whom neither sin, nor inordinate affection could fall, no doubt, was
subject to these passions, Tristis est anima Matthew. 26. Luke 22. Mark 14.
mea, says he, vsque ad mortem, My soul is sad even until death: And,
Coepit pavere and toedere, He began to be afraid and heavy. Fear and
heavynesse, no doubt, are passions of the mind: yet, because in Christ they
were prevented with reason, and guided by virtue, neither alluring him to
sin, nor ingendring vicious Hieron. ep. 22. ad Eustoch. quem sequuntur
scolastici. Psalm 4. Philip. 2.
habites: therefore of Divines, they rather were called propassions, than
passions. Moreover, the Scriptures exhort us to these passions, Irascimini, and
nolite peccare, Be angry, and sin not. Cum metu and tremore salutem
operamini, with fear and trembling work your salvation: And therefore it were
blasphemous to say, that absolutely all passions were ill, for so the
Scriptures should exhort us to ill. The reason also commonly allowed of
Philosophers and Divines, most pregnantly prooveth this verity: for if the
motions of our wills be virtuous, directed with the square of Gods law, and
prudence, if the inferior appetite or passions obey and concur with the will,
then with much more ease, pleasure, and delight, virtuous actions are
accomplished and performed. Yea, oftentimes they take away the molestations and
tediousness that occur in the practice of good woorks. For example, often in
prayer men feel arridity, lothsomnesse, and pain; yet if the sensible
appetite get a little delight therein, if Cor and caro exultant in Deum, that
is, our hearts and flesh rejoice in God, then pain is turned into pleasure,
and a molesting service into a delightful obsequie. Hereupon the Philosophers
and Fathers perceyving what commodities these passions afforded to a virtuous
soul, with diverse similitudes declared their service: Some say, they were Cic.
3. Tusc.
sparks of fire apt to kindle virtue; others, that they Basil. hom. cont.
ir^sc. Basil. de virgi^^tate.
were soldiers, armed to attend their captain: They be like water, says
Basil, that sustayneth oil above, that it may swim purely, and not be
infected with earth: others compare them with horses which draw a coach;
Lactant. lib. 6. c. 17.
so the passions draw the soul to the fruition of her virtuous objects. Cicero
in 4 Tusc^lan* calls anger, cotem, the whetstone of fortitude. And indeed
me thinks the passions of our mind, are not unlike the four humors of our
bodies, whereto Cicero well compares them in the aforesaid Book: for if blood,
fleugme, choler, or melancholy exceed the due proportion required to the
constitution and health of our bodies, presently we fall into some disease:
even so, if the passions of the Mind be not moderated according to reason
(and that temperature virtue requires) immediately the soul is molested with
some malady. But if the humors be kept in a due proportion; they are the
preservatives of health, and perhaps, health it self.

By this Discourse may be gathered, that Passions, are not only, not wholly to
be extinguished (as the Stoics seemed to affirm) but sometimes to be moved,
and stirred up for the service of virtue, as learnedly Plutarch teaches:
Plutarch* in libro de virt^. a^^r.
for mercy and compassion will move us often to pity, as it did Job, Quia ab
infantia mea mecum crevit miseratio, Compassion grew with me from my infancy,
and it came with me out of my mothers womb: therefore he declares what
succor he gave to the poor, Job 31. 18. Ire, and indignation will prick
forward the friends of God, to take his quarrel in hand, and revenge him of
his enemies. So Christ, moved with zeal (which is a passion of love,
bordering upon anger) cast the buyers and sellers out of the Temple of
Jerusalem, because, Zelus domus tuae commedit me, the John 2.
zeal of thy house did eat me. The passion of shamefastness brideleth us of
many loose affections, which would otherwise be ranging abroad. The appetite
of honor, which follows, yea and is due unto virtue, encourages often noble
spirits to attempt most dangerous exploytes for the benefit of their
countries: fear Eccle. 1. 27. 2. Cor. 7. 9.
expels sin, sadness brings repentance, delight pricketh forward to
keep Gods commandments: and Psalm. 118. 32.
to be brief, passions are spurs that stir up sluggish and idle souls,
from slothfulness to diligence, from carelessness to consideration. Some
questionless they (almost by force) draw to goodness, and others withdraw
from vice: For if that many noble Captains had not possessed by nature, such
vehement passions of glory and honor, they would never have achieved such
excellent victories for the good of the Commonweal. If many rare wits had
not been pressed with the same affections, we should never have seen Homers
Poetry, nor Platoes Divinity, nor Aristotle's Philosophy, nor Plinies
History, nor Tullies Eloquence; for Honor they aimed at; and although perhaps
they took their aim too high, affecting more glory than their labor
deserved; or compleasing themselves more in the opinions and fancies of men,
than reason required; yet no doubt, but if they had levelled right, and at no
more than their works merited, nor more prized the opinions and honors given
by men, then they in very deed had been to be esteemed; without all
question, they had obtained more renown, and their passions had bin occasions
of great good to all their posterity, as now they profit them, although they
proceeded from their Authors vanity. I take it, that shamefastnes in women
restrayneth them from many shameful offenses, and fear of punishment
retains from theft, and the remorce of conscience calls many sinners to the
grace of God.

Hereby we may conclude, that Passions well used, may consist with wisdom
against the Stoickes; and if they be moderated, to be very serviceable to
virtue; if they be abused, and overruled by sin, to be the nurcery of vices,
and pathway to all wickedness. And as I think, the Stoickes were of this
opinion, for they said, that fear and heaviness was, Aegritudo quaedam, or,
animi Cic. 4. Tus^ul.
adversanteratione contractio.

An explication of the division of our sensitive appetite into Concupiscibile
and Irascibile, that is, Coveting and Invading. CHAP. V.
BEfore we do declare the number of passions that issue out of our souls, it
is necessary to premitte a common division of our sensual appetite, found out
by experience, allowed of by Philosophers, and Arist. lib. 1. Rhetor. c. 10.
Damasc, li. 2. fid^i orthod. cap. 12. Thom. 1^. q. 23. a. 1. and scolastici
ibidem.
approved by Divines; that is, in concupiscibile, which in English may be
termed, Coveting, Desiring, Wishing; and, irascibile, that is, Anger, Invading,
or Impugning, (for so I think it may better be called.) These coveting and
invading appetites, are not two faculties or powers of the soul, but one only
power and faculty, which has two inclinations; as we have but one power or
faculty of seeing, but two eyes, one power of hearing with two ears; so we
have one sensual appetite, with two inclinations; the one to covet, the other
to invade.

In the manner of explicating these two inclinations, both Divines and
Philosophers dissent: yet two explications there are, as more common, so more
probable, and more conform to reason. The first may be declared after this
manner: We see by experience, that beasts sometimes have great facility to
prosecute, or obtain those objects they covet; as for example, a horse, the
grass which grows in the pasture where he feeds, sometimes they have great
difficulty; as for the Lion to eat a Bear: sometimes they have great facility
to eschew that evil they hate; as a Woolfe or a Fox to escape with his prey
from a little Curre: other times we prove they have extreme difficulty to
avoyde it; as a Bull to fly from a Lion. Now the authors of this explication
conclude, that the coveting appetite, inclines only to the obtaining of those
objects which may easily be come by, and to the eschewing of those that may
easily be escaped: the invading appetite only inclines to the possessing of
those objects which may hardly be gotten, and hardly escaped.

This explication (in my opinion) as it is more common, so it is more vnture:
for who doubts but many both love and desire (which according to all Doctors
are operations of the coveting appetite) diverse things hard to be compassed;
as, the two unchaste Judges, the chaste Susanna: and in beasts we see they
often affect, love, and desire, that they hardly can purchase. It were folly,
to think the fox affected, loved, or desired not a goose, because she were
surely penned up, hardly to be come by: or the wolf desired not the sheep
when she is defended with the shepherds dogs.

Besides, many be angry (which is a passion of the invading appetite) for
things they may easily avoyde, as the Lady which child her maid, because the
floor of her chamber was defiled with a drop of a candle. Finally, we know
God himself to be affected with anger, to whom nothing can be hard or
difficile. Many things more might be said concerning this matter; as how the
difference, of hardly, or easily obtaining a thing can not cause such
diversities of inclinations; for so we might say our seeing might be divided;
for some things we see with facility, others with difficulty; some sounds we
hear easily, others hardely. Moreover, the difficulty of obtaining an object,
rather deterreth a man from procuring it, than inciteth to prosecute it, and
therefore consequently it cannot be a cause of distinction. But these
arguments, and many more, for brevities sake I omit, pretending after another
manner to explicate this division.

The other explication, and as easy to be perceived as the precedent, is this.
First, as we have insinnuated before, God and Nature gave men and beasts these
natural instincts or inclinations, to provide for themselves all those things
that are profitable, and to avoyde all those things which are damnifieable: and
this inclination may be called, concupiscibilis, coveting; yet because that
GOD did foresee, that oftentimes there should occur impediments to hinder
them from the execution of such inclinations, therefore he gave them an other
inclination, to help themselves to overcome or avoid those impediments, and
to invade or impugn whatsoever resists: for the better execution whereof, he
has armed all beasts, either with force, craft, or slight, to eschew all
obstacles that may detayne them from those things which they conceive as
convenient. Wherefore, to the Bull he has imparted horns, to the Boar his
tuskes, to the Lion claws, to the Hare her heels, to the Fox craft, to Men
their hands and wit: And for this cause we see the very little children,
when any would deprive them of their victualles, for lack of strength to
fight, they arm themselves with tears. To this explication it seems that
the names of Irascibilis and Concupiscibilis more aptly agree, than to the
other, because here only Irascibilis invadeth and impugneth, and not
affects or desires, as in the other. And thus much concerning this division.
How many Passions there are coveting, and how many invading, in the next
Chapter shall be declared.

The division and number of Passions of the Mind. CHAP. VI.
THomas Aquinas, with the troop of Thomists affirms, that all the Passions
of our Mind be no more than eleaven: Six he places in the coveting appetite;
and five in the invading: The first six are, love, desire, or concupiscence;
delight, or pleasure; and three opposite to these, hatred, abomination,
sadness, or pain. The latter five are, hope, and despair, fear, and
audacitie, the fifth is ire. This number may be declared by experience, and
approoved with reason: the experience is common (welnie) in all beasts, but
most evident in the wolf, and the sheep: First, the wolf loves the flesh of
the sheep, then he desires to have it, thirdly, he rejoices in his prey when
he has gotten it: Contrariwise, the sheep hates the woolfe, as an evil
thing in himself, and thereupon detesteth him, as hurtful to herself; and
finally, if the woolfe seize upon her, she paineth and grieveth to become his
prey: thus we have love, desire, delight, hatred, abomination, grief, or
heaviness, the six passions of our coveting appetite.

But now, put case the Woolfe should see the shepherd about his flock, armed
with a guard of dogs, then the Woolfe fearing the difficulty of purchasing
his prey, yet thinking the event, though doubtful, not impossible, then he
erecteth himself with the passion of Hope, persuading him the sheep shall be
his future Hope.
spoil after the conquest: and thereupon contemning the dogs, despising the
shepherd, not weighing his hook, crook, stones, or rural instruments of
war, with a bold and audacious courage, not regarding Boldness.
any danger, he sets upon the flock; where, in the first assault,
presently a mastife pincheth him by the leg; the injury he imagines ought
not to be tolerated: but immediately inflamed with the passion of Ire, Ire.
procures by all means possible to revenge it: the shepherd protecteth his
dog, and basteth the woolfe (as his presumption deserved.) The woolfe
perceiving himself weaker than he imagined, and his enemies stronger than he
conceyved, falls suddenly into the passion of Fear, (as braggers do, who
vaunt much at the beginning, Fear.
but quail commonly in the middle of the fray) yet not abandoned of all hope of
the victory; therefore he stirs up himself, and proceeds forward; but in
fine, receyving more blows of the shepherd, more wounds of the dogs,
awearied with fighting, fearing his life, thinking the enterprise impossible,
oppressed with the passion of Desperation, resolves himself, Desperation.
that his heels are a surer defense, than his teeth, and so runs away. By
this example we may collect the other five passions of the invading appetite,
hope, boldness or presumption, anger or ire, fear and desperation.

Aristotle reduces all passions to pleasure and pain: Arist. 2. E^h. cap. 3.
for as we see (says he) there is no wickedness men will not attempt for
pleasures; so we try many to be deterred from the study of virtue, only for
the fear of pain. Some other modern Philosophers aiming (almost at the same
mark) distinguish in general, all Passions into two members, that is, some
consist in prosecuting, procuring, or getting of some good thing profitable
unto them: others, in flying, or eschewing some ill thing that might annoy
them. I said they aimed, almost both at one mark, because, who prosecuteth
any object that conduces to his nature, receyveth thereby pleasure, as the
thirsty desires drink, and drink affords pleasure, so he that shunneth
any thing disconvenient to nature, shunneth consequently pain, which
concomitateth such disagreeing objects, as a dog that flies from a stone cast
at him. With these two divisions consents the third, that all Passions may be
distinguished by the dilatation, enlargement, or diffusion of the heart: and
the contraction, collection, or compression of the same: for (as afterward
shall be declared in all Passions) the heart is dilated or coarcted more or
less. Many more ways they may be distinguished, but the best, and most easy
division I take this to be, these which I will set down, explicated after this
manner: First, all our Passions either tend to some good, or fly some evil; if
they tend to good, and prosecute it, then the good prosecuted may be
considered in three manners; absolutely in it self, and so we have the passion
of love; or as of us to be possessed and enjoyed, and so we have the passions
of Desire and Hope: and if it be vehement, it incourageth men to attempt many
difficulties, and often to be more bold than wise. Thirdly, if the thing
desired be present, and possessed, then rises up the passion of Pleasure and
Delight: so that our affections are carried to good things, either absolutely,
future, or present; for good things passed, although they often stir in a
man, pleasure, yet they are conceyved, after a sort, of presence; either,
because they were acceptfull to God then, and so please him yet; or for the
present testimony of a good conscience, for the precedent virtuous actions; or
finally, for the credit, honor, and glory, which remains with those who
were witnesses of our good behavior and godly proceedings.

If our Passions eschew evil, either absolutely, by hatred, or some future
evil by fear, or some present evil, by pensiveness and sadness. And unto
these six, love, desire, pleasure, hatred, fear and sadness, all ordinate and
inordinate Passions may easily be reduced, as in every particular Treatise shall
be declared. Nevertheless, I can not but allow that common division of Thomas
Aquinas, admitted by schol^sticall Doctors as very convenient, because in very
deed, we prove some notable differences in so many passions; howbeit, not
essential, but accidental: yet (in my judgment) this I have betaken me to,
ought to be preferred, as more easy to be perceived, more expedient to be
declared, and more methodicall to be remembered. Besides, if every diversity or
change we find in passions, were a sufficient reason to increase their number,
without doubt I could add welnie eleven more; as, Mercy, Shamefastness,
Excandescencie, Envy, Emulation, Anxitie, Confidence, Slothfulness,
Zelotypia, Exanimation, Iactation or Boasting, with many more. And if you
answer, that these may be included in those eleaven, as inferior Species in
their superiors; even so say I, those five that Thomas Aquinas puts in the
invading appetite, I can reduce to those six I have set down as members
thereunto belonging.

The seat, place, and subject of the Passions of the Mind. CHAP. VII.
FIrst, it cannot be doubted of, but that the passions of our minds work
diverse effects in our faces; wherefore a Poet said wisely:

O quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu! How hard is it, a fault with
face not to bewray.

And to the same effect said Solomon, In facie prudentis Proverb. 17.
lucet sapientia, oculi stultorum in finibus terrae: In the face of a wise man
Wisdom shines: the eyes of fools in the limittes of the land. And in
another place, Cor hominis immutat faciem, sive in bona, sive in mala: Eccles.
13. 26.
The heart of a man changes his countenance, whether it be in good or evil:
for in anger and fear we see men, either extreme pale, or high colored; in
melancholy and sadness, the eyes are heavy; in joy and pleasure, the motions
of the eyes are lively and pleasant, according to the old proverb, Cor
gaudens exhilerat Proverb. ^.
faciem, a rejoicing heart makes merry the face. And questionless wise men
often, through the windows of the face, behold the secrets of the heart,
according to that saying of Solomon, Quomodo in aquis Prou. 27. 1^.
resplendent vultus prospicientium, sic corda hominum manifesta sunt
prudentibus: as the faces of those which look into waters shine unto them, so
the hearts of men are manifest unto the wise: not that they can exactly
understand the hearts which be inscrutable, and only open unto God, but that
by conjectures they may aim well at them: for as he which beholds his face
in the water, does not discern it exactly, but rather a shadow, than a face;
even so he, that by external phisiognomy and operations, will divine what
lies hidden in the heart, may rather conceive an image of that affection that
does reign in the mind, than a perfect and resolute knowledge: yet doubtless
this small shadow may help much Superiors or Examiners to trace out diverse
matters, and get light of the secrets of men's affections, as Alexander the
great, endued with this experience once prooved, who after he had won the
city of Tarson, belonging to Darius, entering upon a hot summers day, naked
into the river Cydmus, and Qu^ntu^ Curtius lib. 3.
thereby catching a vehement ag^w, insomuch that he could not proceed against
his enemies, which then were very near: wherefore he resolved himself to take
some vehement medicine, that presently should either amend him, or end him. An
ancient Physician, which from his youth had always attended upon him, called
Philip of Acarnon, promised that he would prepare him such a potion: the matter
was concluded; but whilst the Physician prepared the medicine, Parmenio a
captain, whom Alexander of all others loved, and trusted most, understanding
Alexanders determination, sent him a letter; dissuading him, by all means, not
to deal with the potion of Philip, because he understood he was corrupted by
Darius, Alexanders enemy, with promise of a thousand talents, and his sister in
marriage, that he should kill him: Alexander astonished with these news, was
cast into a wonderful perplexity; Shall I adventure, thought he, to drink
this medicine? What if it be poison? Shall I not then be accounted the cause of
mine own death? Shall I suspect the fidelity of my Physician? Or shall I
suffer my enemy to kill me in my bed? While he was in this deliberation, the
Physician brought him the potion. When the King saw him, he raised himself
upon his elbow, and taking his letter in his left hand, with the other hand he
took the cup, and strait supped it off: when he had done so, he delivered
the letter to Philip to read, and whilst he was reading, he beheld him
continually in the face, supposing that if he had bin faulty, some token would
have appeared in his countenance: when Philip had read the letter, he showed
more tokens of displeasantnesse, than of fear: the which, with the loving
words of the Physician, assured Alexander of his servants fidelity, and caused
him, not only to reject all fear of death, but also to conceyve an
extrarodinary hope of amendment, as indeed not long after it proved. By this
example, superiors may learn to conjecture the affections of their subjects
minds, by a silent speech pronounced in their very countenances. And this
point especially may be observed in women, whose passions may easily be
discovered; sor as harlots by the light and wanton motions of their eyes and
gestures may quickly be marked, so honest matrons, by their grave and chaste
looks, may soon be discerned. To which effect the Spose said unto his Spouse,
Vulnerasti cor meum in vno oculorum tuorum, Cantic. 4. 9.
Thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes: because, through the window
of her eye, he beheld the chastity of her heart. By this we may know the
cause, why children, and epsecially women, cannot abide to look in their
fathers, masters, or betters faces, because, even nature it self seems to
teach them, that through their eyes they see their hearts; neither do we
hold it for good manners, that the inferior should fix his eyes upon his
superiors countenance; and the reason is, because it were presumption for him
to attempt the entrance or privy passage into his superiors mind, as
contrariwise it is lawful for the superior to attempt the knowledge of his
inferior. The Scriptures also teach us, in the face of a harlot, to read the
impuritie of her heart. Mulieris fornicati^ in extollentia oculorum, Eccles. 26.
and in palpebris illius agnoscetur. The fornication of a woman shall be known
by the lifting up of her eyes, and in her eye-bries.

Hereby also we may perceyve the cause of blushing, for that those that have
committed a fault, and are therein deprehended, or at least imagine they are
thought to have committed it; presently, if they be, Candidae naturae, that is,
of an honest behavior, and yet not much grounded in virtue, they blush,
because nature being afraid* lest in the face the fault should be discovered,
sends the purest blood, to be a defense and succor, the which effect,
commonly, is judged to proceed from a good and virtuous nature, because no man
can but allow, that it is good to be ashamed of a fault. And thus to
conclude, we must confess, that Passions have certain effects in our faces;
howbeit some do show them more evidently than others. Yet we may not say,
that this face is the root and kore where the Passions reside, but only the
rhinde and leaves, which show the nature and goodness of both the root and
the kore.

That there are Passions in the reasonable soul. CHAP. VIII.
NOw that we have determined how the Passions must dwell in an other soil than
the face; the order of method requires we should wade deeper into the soul,
to view, if in the reasonable part, we might find out their habitation. And to
be brief in this point, I think it cannot Three causes why there be
affections in the will, like those which reside in the sensitive appetite.
be douted upon, but that there are some affections in the highest and chiefest
part of the soul, not unlike to the Passions of the Mind: for to God the
Scriptures ascribe love, hate, ire, zeal, who cannot be subject to any
sensitive operations: And therefore, as in him they are perfections, and we are
commanded, and may imitate him in them, there is no reason why they should be
denied unto us, in such sort as they be perfect, and that is principally in the
Will.

Besides, we know most certaynely, that our sensitive appetite cannot love,
hate, fear, hope, etc. but that by imagination; or our sensitive apprehension
we may conceyve; for, Malum amare possumus, incognitum vero amare non possumus:
we may love an ill thing, but we cannot love an unknown thing: now
experience teaches us, that men do fear the judgments of God, they love
him, and hope in him, they hate sin, and finally, exercise many notable
affections, which reason prescribes, and whereunto the sensitive apprehension
ascends not: Furthermore, as beneath shall be declared, the sensitive
appetite often, yea and (for the most part) traleth and haleth the will to
consent and follow her pleasures and delights, even for the same reason that
she pretends the: as for example, (I would to God it were not true) how often
yields the will to the appetite, in procuring sensual pleasures and
pastimes, for no other end, than to pleasure the vnpleasable appetites, and
lusts of the flesh? this, experience more pregnantly prooveth it, than any
reason can confirm it: finally, as our wit understands whatsoever our
senses perceive, even so our will may affect whatsoever out passions do
follow: for as the object of the wit is all truth, teall, or apparent, so the
object of our will is all goodness indeed, or carrying the gloss thereof.
Nevertheless I must confess that these affections which reside in the will,
differ much in nature and quality from those that inhabit the inferior parts
of the soul, because, these being bredde and borne in the highest part of the
soul, are immateriall, spiritual, independent of any corporal subject; but
those of the sensitive appetite, are material, corporal, and depending upon
some bodily instruments, as beneath shall be delivered.

That the heart isc the peuliar place where that Passions allodge. CHAP. IX.
NO Philosopher can deny, but that our Passions are certain accidents and
qualities, whose immediate subject, house, and lodging is the very faculty and
power of the soul, because all vital operations (of which sort Passions are)
challenge, by right, that the mother which hatched them, should also sustain
them, and harbor them in her own house. But a question may be demanded, and
not easily resolved, whether the faculty of our sensitive appetite has
allotted unto it some peculiar part of the body, where she exercises her
proper functions and operations: for, as we see by experience, the faculty of
seeing, the power of hearing, the sense of smelling, tasting, and touching,
have assigned unto them diverse corporal instruments, habitations or seats,
wherein they see, hear, smell, taste and touch; as eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
flesh and sinews: now the question propounded is thus to be understood,
whether may there be determined any Part of the body, wherein peculiarly the
passions of the mind are effected. To which question I answer, that the very
seat of all Passions, is the heart, both of men and beasts: diverse reasons
move me to this opinion. First, the very common experience, men try daily and
hourly in themselves, for who loves extremely, and feels not that passion
to dissolve his heart? who rejoices, and proves not his heart dilated? who
is moyled with heaviness, or plunged with pain, and perceives not his heart
to be coarcted? whom inflameth ire, and has not heart-burning? By these
experiences, we prove in our hearts the working of Passions, and by the noise
of their tumult, we understand the work of their presence. The second
reason is, because as our sensitive apprehension has her seat in the brain
(for we all prove, that in understanding, we especially bend the force of our
soul to the former part thereof) so the affections and passions, in
proportionate manner, must have some corporal organ and instrument, and what
more convenient than the heart? for, as the brain fitteth best, for the
softness and moisture, to receyve the forms and prints of objects for
understanding; even so the heart endued with most fiery spirits, fitteth best
for affecting. Lastly, for what other reason, in fear and anger become men so
pale and wanne, but that the blood runs to the heart, to succor it?

I saw once in Genoa, a Bandite condemned to death, and going to Execution, to
tremble so extraordinarily, that he needed two to support him all the way, and
for all that he shivered extremely. Besides, whence-from proceeds laughter,
dancing, singing, and many such external singes of joy, but (as we say) from
a merry heart? therefore joy and fear dwell in the heart. Howbeit, I think
this most true, and especially in those passions, which are about obiectes
absent, as love, hatred, hope, flight, ire, and such like; yet I cannot but
confess, that when the obiectes are present, and possessed by sense, then the
passions inhabit, not only the heart, but also are stirred up in every part
of the body, whereas any sensitive operation is exercised; for if we taste
delicate meats, smell musk, or hear music, we perceyve, notonely that the
heart is affected, but that also the passion of joy delights those parts of
our senses: the like we prove in pain and grief, for which cause commonly
we say, our teeth ache, our fingers, toes, or legs pain us: Pain therefore,
and Pleasure, being Passions of the Mind, and evermore felt in that part of
the body, where Sense exercises her operations: therefore, as touching is
dispersed through the whole body, even so the Passions of pleasure and pain;
for in every part, if it be cherished, it rejoices, if be hurt, it payneth.

Yet supposing the Passions principally reside in the heart, as we perceyve
by the concourse of humors thereunto, we may demand two curious questions.
The former is, for what end has Nature given this alteration or flocking of
humors to the heart? It seems, questionless, for some good end; for God
and Nature work not by chance, or without respecting some benefit of the
subject.

To the which question it may be answered; First, Why humors flock to the
heart in passions.
that the humors concur to help, dispose, and enable the heart to work
such operations: for as we prove by experience, if a man sleep with open eyes,
although his sight be mavelous excellent, yet he sees nothing, because in
sleep, the purer spirits are recalled into the inner parts of the body,
leaving the eyes destitute of spirits, and abandoned of force, which presently
in waking return again: even so I conceive, the heart, prepared by nature to
digest the blood sent from the liver, yet for diverse respects, not to have the
temperature which all Passions require; for love will have heat, and sadness
cold, fear constringeth, and pleasure dilateth; the heart therefore which was
to be subject to such diversities of Passions, by Nature was deprived of all
such contrary dispositions, as the Philosophers say, that Materia prima caret
omni forma, quia omnes formas recipere debet. And, although the heart has
more excess of heat than cold, yet a little melancholy blood may quickly
change the temperature, and render it more apt for a melancholy Passion; The
second reason may be, for that these humors affecting the heart, cause pain
or pleasure, thereby inviting Nature, to prosecute the good that pleases, and
to fly the evil that annoyeth: as in the Commonwealth, Virtue ought to be
rewarded with preferment, and vice to be corrected with punishment; even so in
this little commonwealth of our bodies, actions conformable to Nature, are
repayde with pleasure, and passions disconsorting nature, punished with pain.

The other question concerns the efficient cause of these humors, what
causes their motions to the heart; they themselves, as it were, fly unto the
heart? or the part where they soiourned, sends or expels them from her,
and so for common refuge they run to the heart? or finally, the heart draws
them unto it? This difficultye requires an answer, whereby many such like
questions may be resolved: as for example, when the meat in our stomachs is
sufficiently disgested, the chile which there remains, prepared to be sent to
the liver for a further concoction; does it ascend thither by it self, as
vapors to the head? or does the stomach expel it? or the liver draw and
suck it?

To this demand I answer, that (in mine opinion) the parts from whence these
humors come, use their expulsive virtue, sending the spirits choler, or
blood, to serve the heart in such necessity, as the hand lifts up it self to
defend the head: howbeit, I doubt not, but the heart also affected a little
with the passion, draws more humors, and so increases. Many more curious
objections here I omit, which perhaps would delight the more subtle wits, but
hardly of many to be conceived.

What sort of persons be most passionate. CHAP. X.
OVt of the precedent Chapter we may gather, how that the heart is the seat of
our passions, that spirits and humors concur with them: here we may deduce
a conclusion most certain and profitable, that according to the disposition of
the heart, humors, and body, diverse sorts of persons be subject to diverse
sorts of passions, and the same passion affects diverse persons in diverse
manners: for, as we see fire applied to dry wood, to iron, to flax, and
gunpowder, works diverse ways; for in wood it kindles with some difficulty,
and with some difficulty is quenched; but in flax soon it kindles, and
quenches; in iron with great difficulty is it kindled, and with as great
extinguished; but in gunpowder it is kindled in a moment, and never can be
quenched till the powder be consumed. Some men you shall see, not so soon
angry, nor yet soon pleased, and such be commonly fleugmatike persons; others
you have, soon angry, soon friended, as those of a sanguine complexion, and
therefore commonly they are called good fellows: others be hardly offended,
and afterward, with extreme difficulty reconciled, as melancholy men: others
are all fiery, and in a moment, at every trifle they are inflamed, and, till
their hearts be consumed (almost) with choler, they never cease, except they
be revenged. By this we may confirm that old saying to be true, Animi mores
corporis temperaturam sequ^ntur, the manners of the soul follow the
temperature of the body. And, as in maladies of the body, every wise man
feels best his own grief; even so, in the diseases of the soul, every one
knows best his own inclination: nevertheless, as Physicians commonly
affirm, how there be certain universal causes which incline our bodies to
diverse infirmities; so there are certain general causes, which move our
souls to sundry passions. First, young men generally are arrogant, proud,
prodigal, incontinent, given to all sorts of pleasure. Their pride proceeds
from lack of experience; for they will vaunt of their strength, beauty, and
wits, because they have not yet tried sufficiently, how far they reach, how
frail they are; therefore they make more account of them, than in very deed
they ought to be esteemed. Their prodigality is caused by confidence they have
in their own strength and ability, whereby they think they shall be able to
get more; contrariwise, both old men, and women are consecrated to
covetousnes, because the weakness of their bodies promises them no such
force, as they may be enabled to gather much more: and therefore you shall
find, that old women, where both weakness of sex, and feebleness of body
concur together, to be most addicted to avarice.

Young men's incontinencie, boldness, and confidence proceeds of heat which
abounds in them, and those, whose complexions are hotest, are most subject to
these affections. They extremely affect pleasures, because they spent (as
boys) almost the time of growth in getting of habites, alluring and haling to
pleasure; for commonly we see all sorts of boys, till they come to the use
of reason and discretion, most addicted to pastimes and plays. Besides, heat
would be easily extinguished in youth, if they did not moderately exercise it
in time of growth, for that the moystnesse of their bodies, and superfluous
humors would otherwise hardly be consumed: And I have seen diverse youths too
much brideled, and therefore broken: yet immoderat pastimes inflameth their
blood, and causes agews, and death. Youth also are inconstant, and rarely
persist long in one purpose, partly occasioned (as I think) by many
alterations of their bodies, which easily will change their minds; and
partly helped with the lack of a ripe resolution, and firm judgment,
because, as daily they vary in opinions, so daily they alter their
determinations.

Old men are subject to sadness, caused by coldness of bood: to suspect ill,
by reason of long experience, wherein they have often been deceived; to
lament, to be fastidious, teastie, froward, and never contented, for that ipsa
senectus morbus est, Old age is a perpetual sickness: wherefore, as sick
men are ever wrining, so old men are never satisfied. They are accustomed to
be obstinate in their own opinions, because many of them condemn young men of
lack of experience and practice, imagining that learning and wisdom should
harbor under a night-cappe. Hereupon grows a certain spirit of contempt,
whereby they despise the younger sort: and as travelers, for the most part,
relate mountains of marvelles, that they have seen and heard in foreign
countries, so old men recount wonders they see and heard in passed ages.
Anolde verse also is too well verified in many old men.

Sordities, irae, nummorum copia mira
His natura senis tribus est infectu venenis.
Filth, avarice, and pettish rage,
These poisons three infect old age.
Women, by nature, are inclined more to mercy and pity than men, because the
tenderness of their complexion moves them more to compassion. They surpass
men also in piety and devotion; or as they acknowledge their weakness, and
unableness to resist adversities, or any other injury offered, so they have
occasion to recurre unto God, by whose goodness they may be protected. Neither
are they so prone to incontinency as men, for lack of heat, and for a native
shamefastness: yet four passions greatly possess them; pride, for beauty,
or some final spark of wit, ^ix est mulier it a turpu, aut senio consecta;
quae non gaudet and libenter audiat, si dicatur esse pulchra. Hieron. in epist.
which indeed, for lack of wit, they prize more then right reason
requires, but self-love makes a little to be much esteemed, where no better
can be had. Envy also the daughter of pride, for the most part, carries the
trains of women, whereby they are greeved at their equalles good proceeding:
Whencefrom springs an other passion to them too natural, but to many
pernicious; for envy causes them to whet their tongues to kill their neighbors
same with detraction. The fourth most protrite and manifest unto the world, is
their Inconstancy, according to that ancient verse:

Quid levius fumo? flamen,
quid flamine? ventus,
Quid vento? mulier,
quid muliere? nihil.
The which in English may thus be translated:

What lighter is than smoke? the flame,
then flame? the wind:
Then wind? a woman, more
than her nothing I find.
This Inconstancy principally springs from the same root, that the
instabilitie of young men issues from, that is, lack of prudence and
judgment in their determinations; for wise men do not resolve themselves
very quickly, but with great consideration and deliberation, and therefore
they expend well the circumstances and impediments, which may occur and
hinder that they resolved to do. But young men and women, for the most part,
resolve rashly and perform rarely, because that they concluded without
maturity, and in the execution find some impediments; for which of necessity
they must miscary: from this same vnpure fountain descendes that endless
talk daily frequented by women; for in half an hour five men will be weary
with conference, and barren in matter, but three women will jangle, and never
lack new subjects to discourse upon.

Many things more might be said of this matter, but I find all books and
common places, so stuffed with these discourses, that I thought it superfluous
to write any more, especially, for that I know, that women will be easily
offended with those that dispraise them, as they will be woonderfully well
pleased with those that commend them: yet they must pardon me, if with their
good inclinations I show the ill; if I say, commonly they be inclined to such
passions, yet every rule admits some exception; yea, if they be ill
inclined, and refrain those affections, questionless, the greater is their
commendation: for as the husbandman deserves more praise, if he manure well a
thornie soil than a fertile field; so that women ought more to be prized,
which is worst inclined, and best mortified.

Therefore to conclude, I am not of Senecaes opinion, that Mulier amat, aut
odit, nihil est tertium, that a woman loves, or hates, and nothing is third;
for although in some sort of women, I hold it very probable, yet I cannot
allow it to be common to all; for, only women that be of a hot complexion,
and for the most part, those that be black or brown, I take to be of that
constitution, and indeed those have their affections most vehement, and
perhaps, little women have a smacke thereof, according to our English
Proverb:

Fair and foolish, little and loud,
Long and lazy, black and proud.
Fat, and merry, lean, and sad:
Pale, and pettish, read and badde.
By which saying we may gather, that howbeit women, commonly, be subject to
the aforesaid passions, yet because diverse women have sundry complexions, so
they be subject to sundry Passions. Even as in like sort, I could say of men;
for some are more proane to one Passion than an other, according to the Italian
Proverb:

Se l'huomini piccoli fussero patienti
Et l'huomini grandi fussero valenti
Et lirossi leali
Tutto il mondo sarebbe uquale.
That is,

If little men were patient,
And great men were valiant,
And red men were loyal,
All the world would be equal.
To this seems not unlike an other old saying of theirs.

From a white Spaniard,
A black German,
And a red Italian,
Liber^nos Domine.
And we in English.

To a red man, read thy reed:
With a brown man break thy bread:
At a pale man draw thy knife:
From a black man keep thy wife.
The which we explicate after this sort.

The red is wise,
The brown trusty,
The pale peevish,
The black lusty.
By which ancient Proverbes may be collected the verity of the assertion set
down, that diverse complexions are inclined to diverse passions, and in general
I take them to be very true, and verified in the most part, for that the same
causes which concur to the framing of such a constitution, serve also to the
stirring up of such a passion: as for example, a little man having his heat so
united and compacted together, and not dispersed into so vast a carcass as the
great man, therefore he, by temperature, possesses more spirits, and by them
becomes more nimble, lively, chollericke, hasty and impatient.

Many more discourses I could deliver about this subject, but indeed it
requires a whole book; for I might declare, what Passions they are subject
unto, whom Nature monstrously has signed, what affectious rule Rustickes,
possess Citizens, tyrannize over Gentlemen; which are most frequented in
adversity, and which in prosperity: I might discourse over Flemmings,
Frenchmen, Spaniardes, Italians, Polans, Germans, Scottishmen, Irishmen,
Welchmen, and Englishmen, explicating their national inclinations good or bad:
but every one of these exacteth a whole Chapter; and perhaps some of them more
proud, than wise, would be offended with the truth; for this passion of Pride
over-ruleth all the children of Adam: for we see very few will confess their
own faults, and then they think their reputation disgraced, when they are
singled from the rest, and condemned of some vice: therefore See Ler^nu^
Lem^ius de complexion lui
they must of force have it, although they will not hear it. Thus I will end
this matter, referring the Reader to the next books, where handling the
passions in particular, I shall have occasion more in particular to touch this
universal subject.

The manner how Passions are moved. CHAP. XI.
AS the motions of our Passions are hid from our eyes, so they are hard to
be perceived; yet for the speculation of this matter, I think it most
necessary, to declare the way and manner of them; the which will give light, not
only to all the Discourses following, but also to all the Chapters preceding,:
First then, to our imagination comes, by sense or memory, some object to be
known, convenient or disconvenient to Nature, the which being known (for
Ignoti nulla cupido) in the imagination which resideth in the former part of
the brain, (as we prove) when we imagine any thing, presently the purer
spirits flock from the brain, by certain secret channels to the heart,
where they pitch at the door, signifying what an object was presented,
convenient or disconvenient for it. The heart immediately bends, either to
prosecute it, or to eschew it: and the better to effect that affection,
draws other humors to help him, and so in pleasure concur great store of
pure spirits; in pain and sadness, much melancholy blood, in ire, blood and
choler; and not only (as I said) the heart draws, but also the same soul
that informs the heart residing in other parts, sends the humors unto the
heart, to perform their service in such a worthy place: In like manner as
when we feel hunger (caused by the sucking of the liver and defect of
nourishment in the stomach) the same soul which informs the stomach,
resideth in the hand, eyes, and mouth; and in case of hunger, subordinateth
them all to serve the stomach, and satisfy the appetite thereof: Even so, in
the hunger of the heart, the spleen, the liver, the blood spirits, choler,
and melancholy, attend and serve it most diligently.

By this manifestly appears, that we insinnuated in the last Chapter, how
the diversities of complexions wonderfully increase or diminish Passions: for,
if the imagination be very apprehensive, it sends greater store of spirits
to the heart, and makes greater impression: likewise, if the heart be very
hot, cold, moist, tender, choleric; sooner, and more vehemently it is
stirred to Passions thereunto proportionated; finally, if one abound more with
one humor than another, he sends more fuel to nourish the Passion, and so
it continues the longer, and the stronger.

The second Book wherein are declared four effects of inordinate Passions.
AFter the declaration of the four causes of our Passions, formal, material,
efficient, and final; the order of method requires we should entreat of
their effects and proprieties. And here I must speak specially of inordinate
passions, because, although those which be ordinate, participate in part, some
of those effects, yet for that the inordinate principally cause them,
therefore I thought good to set them down, as more necessary, and that by
them conjecture be made of the rest.

There be four proprieties consequent to inordinate Passions; blindness of
understanding, perversion of will, alteration of humors; and by them, maladies
and diseases, and troublesomnesse or disquietnesse of the soul. The first
propriety I mean to handle in this Chapter, the other, in the three next
following.

Passions blind the Judgment. CHAP. 1.
WIse men confess, and ignorant men prove, that Passions blind their
judgments and reason: for (as Saint Basil said) Quemadmodum oculis turbatis,
Basil psalm etc. 23. 1.
etc. As when the eyes are troubled, we can not perceive exactly the objects
of our sight; even so, when the heart is troubled, no man can come by the
knowledge of truth: the which similitude Saint Chrysostom declares more
aptly, Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Johan.
Sicat oculorum acies, etc. As the faculty of our eyes, being pure and bright,
it labors nothing to deprehend the least moaths, but if an evil humor
descend from the head, or some darkness fall upon the eyes, a dim cloud
is cast before the pearls thereof, which permits them not to see, even
gross blocks: So it befalls to the soul, when every inordinate affection
is purged that might offend her, she sees all things convenient most aptly,
but being troubled with many affections, all that virtue she leeseth; neither
can she behold any high thing. To the authority of these Fathers, experience
agrees, for I never knew any man troubled with a vehement passion of hatred,
ire, or love, who would not bring many reasons to confirm his purpose,
although after he had performed his pleasure, and the tempestuous passion was
past, he condemned himself, and thought his fact vicious, and his reasons
frivolous. The which experience teaches us, that men (for the most part) are
not very good judges in their own causes, specially for the Passion of Love,
which blinds their judgment; for which, Nathan propounded to David his own
fault, as another man's case; how the rich man, by force, bereaved the poor man
of his sheep, having so many of his own, because he knew, that David's
judgment, in his own cause, might easily be corrupted: the selfsame did the
good woman Thecuites to David, for the recalling of Absolon: And indeed the
Passions, not vnfittely may be compared to green spectacles, which make all
things resemble the color of green; even so, he that loves, hates, or by
any other passion is vehemently possessed, judges all things that occur in
favor of that passion, to be good and agreeable with reason, so there scarce
can be found any man that hates, or is angry with an other, but he thinks
his hatred and ire to be most just and reasonable: for in very deed, while the
Passion is afloate, the execution and performance thereof, is conformable and
very convenient unto our beastly sensual appetite, and therefore all beasts
stinged by such passions, presently proceed unto execution, but men having
united in the same sensitive soul, reason and discourse, are bound, both by
the law of Nature, and commandment of God, diverse times to repress and
resist such unreasonable and beastly motions. Yet I know some subtle wit
would gladly understand how it comes to pass, that vehement passions so
undermine the judgment, and suborne it to give sentence in favor of them:
for, why may not the passion, being in the heart, and inferior part of the
soul, permit the higher portion, the tribunal seat of Reason alone,
without trouble or molestation; as we see by experience, that fire being dry
and hot by nature, although it heateth, yet that hinders not the drying;
so, why may not the wit judge aright, howbeit the passion affects a wrong?

To this objection three reasons may be rendered. The first I have largely
delivered in my third Book of the Joys of heaven: and in sum, this is the
substance. Our soul being of a determinate power and activitie, cannot attend
exactly to two vehement and intensive operations together: as for example, we
cannot attend perfectly to sweet music, perceive dainty smelles, or taste
delicate meat, all three, or two of them at one time, either for lack of
spirits, or in regard of the limited influence of the soul, which cannot
impart sufficient activitie to such intensive operations: wherefore the soul
being possessed of a vehement passion, her force is so exhausted in that
action, that if she will continue therein, she can not exactly consider the
reasons which may dissuade her from attending or following such affections: the
passion therefore which hinders and stopp^th the eyes of the understanding
from the consideration of those means which might moove the mind to withdraw
it self from that action, may well be said to blind the wit, as he which
shuts another man's eyes, makes him blindefolde, not by taking away the
power of seeing, but only by hindering it from action.

The second reason is, not only a privation of consideration of those things,
which may extinguish the passion, but also an inforcement or constraint, only
to consider those motives or reasons which tend in favor of that passion: for
although the main part of the souls activitie be haled away with the
passion, yet there remains some sparks of light in the understanding, to
perceive what is represented unto it, as when we hear sweet excellent
music, we may perceyve some dainety smelles, howebeit, not in that perfection
we might, if our souls were not distracted with hearing; even so, some life
is left to be employed to understanding, albeit not so great, because the soul
is distracted with a Passion, the which inforceth the wit only to consider,
what may conduce to the continuation and preservation thereof: the manner may
thus be declared; for whatsoever we understand, passes by the gates of our
imagination, the cousin germane to our sensitive appetite, the gates of our
imagination being prevented, yea, and welnie shut up with the consideration
of that object which feeds the passion, and pleases the appetite; the
understanding looking into the imagination, finds nothing almost but the
mother and nurse of his passion for consideration, where you may well see how
the imagination puts green spectacles before the eyes of our wit, to make
it see nothing but green, that is, serving for the consideration of the
Passion.

Furthermore, the imagination represents to the understanding, not only
reasons that may favor the passion, but also it shows them very intensively,
with more show and appearance than they are indeed; for as the Moon, when she
rises or sets; seems greater unto us, than indeed she is, (because the
vapors or clouds are interposed betwixt our eyes and her) even so, the beauty
and goodness of the object represented to our understanding, appears fayrer
and goodlier than it is, because a clowdy imagination interposeth a miste. And
here it falls forth, as he which is most studious, is best learned; and
commonly, he that is best learned, is most studious: so, he that once
apprehends the pleasure of the passion, ordinarily follows it, and the
passion increases the imagination thereof, and the stronger imagination
renders the passion more vehement, so that oftentimes they enter but with an
inch, and increase an ell: whereupon ensues, that a false imagination
corrupts the understanding, making it believe that things are better than
they are in very deed. And by this means, the wit two ways is troubled;
first, in that the vehemence of the imagination causes a vehement apprehension
and judgment of the wit; secondarily, the false representation breeds a
false conceit in the mind: and by these we prove the imagination and
passions to prevail so mightily, that men, in great pain, or exceeding
pleasure, can scarce speak, see, hear, or think of any thing, which
concerns not their passion.

And for this same cause, when wise men deal with any person wonderfully
pensive, commonly they endeavor with reasons to diminish the cause of their
grief: as if a woman has lost her only son in wars; then to mittigate her
sorrow, they will show her, that death apprehends all men sooner or later;
it is a tribute must be paid; this world yields nothing but misery;
happier are they that depart from it, than those that enjoy it; his death was
glorious, for his Country, for his Prince, the which among valiant captains,
and noble minds, has always been prized above ten thousand lives; if he
had dyed an infarnous death, for treason, for rapine, for injustice, then she
might have justly lamented; but in dying for justice, for obedience, for
virtue, with glory, she has rather an exceeding occasion of joy, than a motive
of grief. All which persuasions (as you see) tend to no other end, but to
rectify her judgment, and to represent unto the understanding, those reasons
which might rebate the passion of sorrow, concealed from it, by the strong
imagination of all those things which might increase her grief. Besides, the
vehemency of the passion continues the force of our imagination, because,
whatsoever passes by the gates of our senses, presently enters into the court
of our imagination, where the sensitive appetite does entertain it: therefore,
seeing all passions cause some sense or feeling, more or less in the body, so
long as they endure, the imagination likewise represents to the
understanding, so long the object of the passion, and as a deceitful
Counselor, corrupts his Judge.

The last reason, which imports more then both the other, proceeds from a
naughty will, for that the soul, having rooted in it, these two parts,
sensitive and reasonable: the will perceiving that the soul rejoices, she
also contenteth herself, that the inferior appetite should enjoy her pleasure,
or eschew her grief, with reason, or against reason, she cares not, so she
may be made partaker: as the great Turk permits every one to live in his
Religion, so they pay him tribute. And for this cause she commands the wit
to employ all the power and force, to find out reasons and persuasions that
all the appetite demands, stands with reason and is lawful; the which
collusion, I take to be one of the roots of all mischiefs, that now cover
the face of the world, that is, a wicked will commanding the wit, to find out
reasons to plead for Passions: for this corrupts, yea wholly destroys the
remorce of conscience, the careful guardian of the soul: this makes men
obstinate in all enormious vices; for when the wit is once persuaded, and no
further appellation can be admitted, then the soul is confirmed almost in
malice; this makes so many Atheists, for vinum and mulieres apostatare Eccles.
19.
faciunt sapientes, wine and women make men leave Religion: for as wine makes
men drunk, and robs the use of reason; so inordinate love and affection
make drunk the soul, and deprive it of judgment; this, in fine, robs
souls from God, and carries them to the devil. For if we examine exactly the
grounds and origens of Apostasy from true faith, and the causes of heresies,
we shall find them, to be some one or other wicked vice of the will, or
vehement Passion which perverteth the judgment, specially when the Religion
forbids or punishes those vices, whereunto the wicked will or Passions
tend. S. Augustine relates diverse, who denied the torments of hell, and their
Eternity, thereby to flatter their vicious affections Aug. lib. 1. de ^^^.
cap. 18.
with a pretended assurance of impunitie. S. Chrysostom reports, that the
arch-heretike Paulus Samosetanus, for Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Johan.
the love of a woman forsook his faith and religion. S. Gregory the great
imputes it to avarice and covetousness, that many fall from their faith, or
not admit a true faith: for the Jew that thirsts after Usury, will hardly
admit Christianity, which shuts from the Gregor. lib 20. moral. cap. 12.
holy mount of Gods eternal blessedness, all those that lend their money to
Usury, as in the 14. Psalm is manifest. Furthermore we may aptly
remonstrate, how inordinate Passions cause and ingenerate in the soul, all
those vices which are opposite to prudence. The first is Precipitation, or
Rashness, which is nothing else, but Precipitation.
an uncircumspect, or unripe resolution or determination in affairs or
negotiations: for the judgment being blinded with the Passion, considers not
exactly, for the importance of the business, those circumstances, which may
withdraw it from the prosecution of such a vicious action. I remember that when
I was in Italy, there was a Scottish Gentleman, of most rare and singular
parts, who was a Retainer to a Duke of that Country, he was a singular good
Scholar, and as good a Soldier; it chanced one night, the young Prince, either
upon some spleen, or false suggestion, or to try the Scots valor, met him
in a place where he was wont to haunt, resolving either to kill, wound, or
beat him, and for this effect, conducted with him, two of the best Fencers he
could find, the Scot had but one friend with him; in fine, a quarrel is
picked, they all draw, the Scot presently ran one of the Fencers through, and
killed him in a trice, with that he bended his forces to the Prince, who
fearing, least that which was befallen his Fencer, might happen upon himself,
he exclaimed out instantly, that he was the Prince, and therefore willed him,
to look about him what he did: the Scot perceyving well what he was, fell
down upon his knees, demanding pardon at his hands, and gave the Prince his
naked rapier, who no sooner had receyved it, but with the same sword he ran
him through to death: the which barbarous fact, as it was condemned of all men,
so it shows the Precipitation of his passionate irefull heart: for if he had
considered the humble submission of his servant, and loyalty of his subject,
and valor of his soldier; if he had weighed the cowardlinesse of his fact,
the infamy that he should thereby incur, he would never have precipitated
into so savage an offense. But if with overmuch rashness a man contemn or
despise any Law, preferring his passionate judgment before the prescript of
law and reason, then his headdinesse is termed Temeritie.

The second vice is Inconstancy, which is a change Inconstancy.
or alteration of that purpose or resolution, which a man had prudently
determined before. And this we may daily try in all incontinent persons, who
resolutely determine in the calm of their passions never to fall into their
former filthiness, but presently, when the Passion arises, all the good
resolutions are forgotten, and that which an unpassionate mind detested, a
passionate soul most effectually pursues. Not much unlike that which David
once writ of himself, Ego dixi in abundantia Psalm 29.
mea, non movebor in aeternum: I said once in my abundance, or as the Calde
text has, in my tranquillity, I will not be moved eternally: Avertisti nanum
tuum, and factus sum conturbatus: Thou turnedst away thy hand, and I was
troubled: as if he had said, thou permittedst me to be troubled with a
Passion, and then my confident determination was changed.

The third vice against Prudence, grows upon excess of wicked consideration,
as precipitation and inconstancy Astutia or craftiness.
upon the want or defect of circumspection. For the Passion delighting or
afflicting the mind, causes the judgment to think, invent, devise all
means possible, either to enjoy the Passion of delight, or to avoyde the
molestation of sadness and fear. Wherefore Love is said to be
Ingeniosissimus, most witty; for the thought of such matters as concerns
love, continually delighting the mind, and rolling daily and hourly in the
fancy, suggesteth a world of conceits and inventions, to find out means
and ways, to nourish, preserve, and increase the Passion, insomuch, as they
which love vehemently, are never well, but either with them whom they love, or
solitary by themselves, coining some new practices, to execute their inordinate
love and affections. No better proof we need of this matter, then the
infinite experiences in every Country are tried. The same I may say of Ire,
Ambition, etc. All which Passions consisting in prosecution of some thing
desired, and bringing with them a certain sense of delight, enforce the mind^
(for fostering and continuing that pleasure) to excogitate new means and ways
for the performance thereof.

How Passions seduce the Will. CHAP. II.
WIthout any great difficulty may be declared, how Passions seduce the Will:
because the wit being the guide, the The first reason why passions seduce the
will.
eye the stirrer, and directer of the Will, which of it self, being blind,
and without knowledge, follows that the wit represents, propounds, and
approves as good: and as the sensitive appetite follows the direction of
imagination; so the Will affects, for the most part, that, the understanding
persuades to be best. Wherefore the waves and billows of apparent reasons,
so shake the sandye shealfe of a weak Will, that they The second reason.
mingle it with them, and make all one. Besides, the sensitive appetite being
rooted in the same soul with the Will, if it be drawn, or flies from any
object, consequently, the other must follow; even so, the object that haleth
the sensitive appetite, draws withal, the Will; and inclining her more to
one part than another, diminishes her liberty and freedom.

Moreover, the Will, by yielding to the Passion, receyveth some little bribe of
pleasure, the which moves her, to let the bridle loose, unto inordinate
appetites, because she has ingrafted in her, two inclinations; the one to
follow Reason, the other to content the Senses: and this inclination (the other
being blinded by the corrupt judgment, caused by inordinate Passions) here
she feels satisfied. Finally, the Will, being the governesse The third reason.
of the Soul, and loathing to be troubled with much dissension among her
subjects, as an vncarefull Magistrate neglects the good of the Commonweal,
to avoyde some particular men's displeasure; so the Will, being afraid to
displease sense, neglects the care she ought to have over it; especially
perceyving that the Soul thereby receyveth some interest of pleasure, or
escheweth some pain.

By this alteration which Passions work in the Wit and the Will, we may
understand the admirable Metamorphosis and change of a man from himself, when
his affectes are pacified, and when they are troubled. Plutarch said they
changed them like Circes potions, Plutarch in moralib.
from men into beasts. Or we may compare the Soul without Passions, to a
calm Sea, with sweet, pleasant, and crispling streams; but the Passionate,
to the raging Gulf, swelling with waves, surging by tempests, minacing the
stony rocks, and endeavoring to overthrowe Mountains: even so, Passions make
the Soul to swell with pride and pleasure; they threaten wounds, death and
destruction, by audacious boldness and ire: they undermine the mountains of
Virtue, with hope and fear; and in sum, never let the Soul be in quietness,
but ever, either flowing with Pleasure, or ebbing with Pain.

How Passions alter the Body. CHAP. III.
ALthough in the ninth Chapter sufficiently was declared, how the Passions of
the mind alter the humors of the body, yet some peculiar discourses,
concerning that matter, were reserved for this place.

Two sorts of Passions affect all men, some (as we said before) dilate, and
some compresse and restringe the heart: Of the first was said, Vita carninum
est cordis Proverb. 14. 3^
sanitas, the life of flesh, is the health of heart; for indeed, a joyful and
quiet heart reviveth all the parts of the body: Of the other was written,
Spiritus tristis exsiccat prb. 17.
ossa: a sad Spirit dries the bones. And for that all Passions bring with
them joy or pain, dilate or coarct the heart; therefore I think it not
amiss, to declare the reason, why these two Passions work such alterations in
the body, to the end, that by the knowledge of them, we may attain to the
understanding of the rest.

Pleasure and Delight, if it be moderate, brings health, because the purer
spirits retire unto the heart, and they help marvellously the digestion of
blood, so that thereby the heart engenders great abundance, and most purified
spirits, which after being dispersed through the body, cause a good concoction
to be made in all parts, helping them to expel the superfluities; they also
clear the brain, and consequently, the understanding: For although while the
Passion endures, it blinds a little the indifferent judgment, yet after
that it is past, it rendereth the brain better disposed, and apter to
represent, whatsoever occurreth for speculation. From good concoction,
expulsion of supersluities, and abundance of spirits, proceeds a good
color, a clear countenance, and an universal health of the body. But if the
Passion of pleasure be too vehement, questionless it causes great
infirmity: for the heart being continually environed with great abundance of
spibecommeth too hot and inflamed, and consequently engendereth much
choleric and burned blood: Besides, it dilateth and resolves the substance
of the heart too much, in such sort, as the virtue and force thereof is greatly
weakened. Wherefore Socrates was wont to say, that those men, which live
continently and frugally, had more pleasure, and less pain, than those, who
with great care procured inticements to pleasure; because intemperate
pleasures, besides the remorce of mind, infamy, and poverty, which waits
upon them, for the most part, hurt more the body, than delight it. And some,
with too vehement laughter have ended their days; as Philemon did. Plutarch
recounteth also, how Erasm. lib. 6. Apotheg. Plutarch. in Hannib.
the Romans, leesing to Hannibal, news was brought to Rome, and specially to
two women, that their sons were slain: afterward, a remnant of the
soldiers returning, these two afflicted, ran with many more, to know the
manner of their sons deaths, and amongst the rest, found them both alive, who
for joy, gave up their ghosts. And universally, after much pleasure and
laughter, men feel themselves both to languish, and to be melancholy.

Yet the Passions which coarct the heart, as fear, sadness, and despair, as
they bring more pain to the mind, so they are more dangerous to the body; and
commonly, men prove less harm in those, than in these: and many have lost
their lives with sadness and fear; but few, with love and hope, except they
changed themselves into heaviness and despair. The cause why sadness does so
moove the forces of the body, I take to be, the gathering together of much
melancholy blood about the heart, which collection extinguisheth the good
spirits, or at least dulleth them; besides, the heart being possessed by such
an humor, cannot digest well the blood and spirits, which ought to be
dispersed through the whole body, but converteth them into melancholy, the which
humor being cold and dry, dries the whole body, and makes it wither away;
for cold extinguisheth heat, and dryness moisture, which two qualities
principally concern life.

These Passions prevayle often so much with men, that they languish away and
die: as it befell to the Marquess of Santa Cruz in Spain, the General to the
Kings Navy against the Frenchmen, who had taken the Azores; and D. Diego di
Padiglia, the Governor of the Castle of Millan, who receyving certain words
of disgrace from the King of Spain, they permitted themselves to be so
ore-ruled with the melancoly Passion, that they scarce could chawe their meat
and swallowe it down; at least, they never made good digestion, and so with an
ungracious death, they ended their disgraced life.

Questionless, this vehement sort of Passions, proceeds from an high,
proud, and ambitious mind, and without all doubt, extraordinary self-love*
the which, although by Gods Law they are prohibited, yet by the vain humors
of men, such spirits are highly prized. I remember that in Italy, after the
year, one thousand five hundred eighty and eight, I heard diverse Italian
Captains, greatly condemning the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the King of Spaines
General in his Navy against England, because he dyed not of Melancholy, for
that his Fleet miscarried so basely, and was foiled by the English Forces so
easily. What Maladies grow by cares and heaviness, many can testify, and
few men there be, which are not subject to some melancholy humor, that often
assaulteth them, troubling their minds, and hurting their bodies; the old
Physicians can witness this verity, confirmed by long experience, and
registered in verse, as a Medicine to all Posterity.

Si vis incolumem, si te vis reddere sanum, Schola salerna.

Curas toll graves, irasci creed prophanum.
If thou will live in health,
devoyde of grief and pain,
Set carking cares aloof,
and choler think profane.
And Euripides,

(...)
Sorrows to men diseases bring.
And Solomon, Tristitiam long expelle a te: Multos Eccles. 30. 25
enim etc. Expel sadness far from thee; For sadness has killed many,
neither is there any profit in it. Zeal (that is, envy, emulation or
indignation) and anger shorten thy days, and Thought (that is, superfluous
care and solicitude) bring old Age before her time.

To conclude, I am of opinion, that Passions cause many Maladies, and welnie
all are increased by them, for that all pain engenders melancholy; which, for
the most part, nourishes all diseases: for many we read of that were cured by
mirth, but never any by sorrow or heaviness. When Alfonsus King of Naples was
abandoned of his Physicians, as in a desperate case, then he called for Quintus
Curtius, and took such delight to hear him read, that he recovered his
health again, and presently rejected his Physicians, as not able to cure (by
Physic) that he obtained by alittle delight. This fact I cannot greatly
commend, for Physicians and Medicines were ordained by God, and a wise man will
not despise them; it may be, Quintus Curtius pacified the Kings melancholy
mind, which no medicine could do.

Yet there occurreth one point in this matter, not to be omitted, that Passions
engender Humors, and Humors breed Passions: how Passions cause Humors, we have
hitherto sufficiently declared; but how Humors stir up Passions, must now be
delivered. We read in the Machabees, how, before they led the Elephants to
fight in wars, they accustomed to mingle juice of grapes and mulberies
together, to sharpen and incense them more to battle, and it seems a thing
frequented in many Nations, to stir up beasts to fight, by showing them some
read color, for thereby they imagine, that the sight of blood inflameth them
to the shedding of blood: as in Spain they use, when they chase their wild
Bulls, and in Italy their Bufaloes. The true cause, why beasts are incensed
with a red color, Valesius an excellent Physician renders: for (says he)
the sight of read things (according to the common opinion of Galen, and other
Physicians) stirs and inflameth the blood, therefore they prohibit those
which are much given to bleeding, to behold any read color. And I my self in
Italy have heard Physicians command, that read clothes, coveringes, and
hangings should be taken from before the patients, which were laboring in a
tertian Agew; because they affirmed, that red colors moved and inflamed the
blood. Now if the blood of Elephants, being incensed with a red color, had
force to stir in them the Passion of Ire in battle; how much more may we
say, that if much hot blood abound in the body, that subject, by the force of
that Humor, shall easily, and often be moved to anger; if temperate blood
abound, or be mingled with fleugme, to mirth; if melancholy exceed, to grief
and heaviness? And in effect we prove in dreams, and Physicians
prognosticate by them, what humor abounds, for Choler causes fighting, blood
and wounds; Melancholy, disgrace, fears, affrightments, ill success, and such
like: these dreams are caused by the spirits, which ascend into the
imagination, the which being purer or grosser, hotter or colder, more or less,
(which diversity depends upon the humors of the body) moove diverse
Passions according to their Nature. And for this cause we may resolve another
difficulty, why some men are always, almost merry; others, for the most part,
melancholy; others, ever angry: this diversity must come from the natural
constitution of the body, wherein, one or other humor does predominate. The
self same cause may be alleged, why sometimes we feel our selves; we know
not why, moved to Mi^th, Melancholy, or Anger: insomuch that any little
occasion were sufficient to incense that Passion: for, as these humors depend
upon the heavens, air, sleep and waking, meat and drink, exercise and rest,
according to the alterations of these external causes; one or other Humor does
more or less overruled the body, and so causes alteration of Passions.

Out of this discourse, and the 9. Chapter, we may resolve some pretty curious
Questions, more talked of and practiced, then well understood.

The first is, how can possibly a man's conceit work strange effects in his
body? As for example, Hypocrates exhorts Physicians, if two kinds of meat
were to be ministered to a Patient, the one healthful, and the other a little
hurtful, or not so good as the other, that they should prefer this being much
desired, before that not so well liked: and generally, both Philosophers and
Physicians maintain, that the opinion of the Patient, of the Physicians
knowledge, and goodness of the Physic, imports much for the curing of any
malady. The reason is plain (for these and such like experiences) for the
Imagination herein (though erroneously conceaving things better then indeed
and really they are) causes a vehement Passion of Hope, wherewith follows an
extraordinary Pleasure in the things; which two Passions awake, or rowze up the
pu^er Spirits, and unite them together, qualifying and resining them in the
best manner; which thus combined, do most effectually cooperate with Nature,
and strengthen her in the performance of any corporal action or vital
operation.

Secondly, how S. Austens opinion may be verified, who thinks, that the
Bulls with white spots, which continued ever among the Egyptians, and were
adored for their god Apis, was ever engendered by the act of Aug. de ^ir. c. 5
the Devil, to deceive the Egyptians, who caused in the brain of the Cow,
while she was in conceaving, the imaginations of such a colored Bull, which
imagination wrought so mightily, that she conceaved the like, and so they never
wanted spotted Bulls. Galen also reports, Galen. de Theriaca ad Pison. Genesis 30.
that a woman beholding a most beautiful picture, conceaved and brought forth
a most beautiful child, by a most deformed father, we have also in the
scriptures the like experience in Jacob, who to cause his Ewes conceave
speckled lambs, put sundry white rods in the channels where the beasts were
watered, and thereby the lambs were yeaned party-colored. These prooved
experiments, by the censure of Aristotle a sage Philosopher, and Galen a sound
Physician, proceeded from a vehement imagination in the time of conception. And
for this cause says Aristotle, we see the yonglings of brute beasts, for
most part to resemble in colors, figures, temper, greatness, proprieties and
conditions, their siers and dammes: but in men we observe far otherwise, for
wise parents beget foolish children, and virtuous vicious; and contrariwise,
foolish parents wise children, and vicious virtuous: fair parents procreate
foul children, and deformed parents fair children: and among the children of
the same parents, one will be wise, another foolish, one fair, another foul.
The cause of this variety, are the various imaginations of the Parents, at the
time of their Conception: Beasts therefore not being distracted with these
various Imaginations, conceave not with such diversity. I am not ignorant that
Huartes in his trial of Wits, derideth this reason, and says that this
answer of Aristotle savoureth of great simplicity: for he resolves all this
variety into the multiplicity and diversity of nourishment, which men receive,
far different from beasts, which is uniform, and for most part the same: as
also for that generation is an operation of the vegetative and not of the
sensitive soul. But by his leave, Aristotle's opinion is as probable as his,
and both joined together, make one complete and perfect. For albeit generation
be an action of our vegetive soul, yet it is subordinate and greatly qualified
by the sensitive, for diverse imaginations of more or less pleasure in that
act, inciteth more or less thereunto, and so causes a perfitter or more
vnperfitte generation. The variety also of nourishment and qualities or
tempers of the seed, more or less concur therewithal.

The fourth effect of Passions, which is, disquietnesse of the Mind. CHAP.
IIII.
He that should see Hercules raging, Orestes trembling, Cain ranging, Amon
pining, Dido consuming, Archimedes running naked, would little doubt, that
Passions mightily change and alter the quiet temper and disposition of the
Mind: for if peace be a concord, or consort of our sensual soul with
reason; if then the Mind be quiet, when the Will ruled by Prudence overruleth,
moderateth and governs Passions: questionless, then the soul is troubled,
when Passions arise up and oppose themselves against Reason: Inordinate
affections (as experience teaches) many ways disquiet the Mind, and trouble
the peaceable state of this petty commonweal of our soul: but specially by
five: by Contradiction, by Contrariety, by Insatiabilitie, by Importunity, by
Impossibility.

Contradiction. I.
BY two ways the Subjects of every Commonweal, usually disturb the State,
and breed civil broils therein: the first is, when they rise up and rebel
against their King: the second is, when they brawle one with another, and so
cause riots and tumults: the former is called Rebellion, the latter Sedition.
After the same manner, Passions either rebel against Reason their Lord and
King, or oppose themselves one against another, that I call Contradiction, this
Contrariety. The former he well understood, that said Spiritus concupiscit
Gal. 5.
adversus carnem, and caro adversus Spiritum: The Spirit affects against the
Flesh, and the Flesh against the Spirit. This internal Combat and spiritual
Contradiction, every spiritual man daily perceyveth, for inordinate Passions,
will he, nill he, cease not almost hourly to rise up against Reason, and so
molest him, troubling the rest and quietness of his Soul. It is related in
the life of S. Anselme, our Archbishop of Canterbury, that walking In vita
Ansel^^.
into the fields, he saw a Shepheardes little boy, who had caught a Bird,
and tied a stone to her leg with a thread, and ever as the Bird mounted up to
soar aloft, the stone drew her down again. The venerable old man, much
moved at this sight, fell presently a weeping, lamenting thereby, the
miserable condition of men, who no sooner did endeavor to ascend to Heaven by
contemplation, but the Flesh and Passions haled the heart back again, and
drew it down to earth, enforcing the Soul to lie there like a beast, which
should have soared in the Heavens like an Angel. For these rebellious Passions
are like crafty Pioners, who, while Soldiers live carelessly within their
Castle, or at least not much suspect, they undermine it, and break in so upon
them, that they can hardly escape: in like manner, these Affections undermine
the understandings of men, for while the wits are either careless, or
employed in other affairs, there creeps up into their hearts, some one or
other perverse Passion, which transporteth the Soul clean another way, in so
much as that with extreme difficulty she can recall her self again, and
reduce her Affections unto their former quietness and peaceable temper. Who
sees and ^eeleth not, that often times while Reason attends to
Contemplation, a villainous Passion of Love withdraws the attention, and with
an attoxicated delight imprisoneth the Affection? who perceyveth not, that
diverse times Reason would pardon all iniu^ies, and Ire opposes it self,
importuning revenge? who experimenteth not, that Reason would willingly fast
and abstain from delicacies, but inordinate Delight will feast, and endure no
austerities? who knows not, that Reason often prescribes, yea, urges to
labor and pain, for the service of God, or to perform the affairs of the
world, and Sensuality would pass her time idly? And after this sort almost
continually inordinate Passions contradict right Reason.

Contrariety of Passions.. II.
THe Egyptians fought against the Egyptians, the East wind rises often
against the West, the South against the North, the Wind against the Tide, and
one Passion fights with an other. The choleric Cavalliere would with death
revenge an injury, but fear of killing or hanging opposes it self against
this Passion. G^^ttonie would have dainties, but Covetousness prescribes
parsimonie. Lechery would reign and dominier, but dreadfulnesse of infamy,
and fear of diseases draw in the raynes of this inordinate Affection. By which
opposition we may easily perceive, how unquiet is the heart of a passionate
man, tossed like the Sea with contrary winds, even at the same time and
moment. An other Disquietnesse there is also, which to many happens, and that
welnie upon a sudden: For some times a man will be in the prime of his joy,
and presently a sea of grief overwhelmeth him. In what a world of joy lived
Baltazar, when sitting at his Supper Dan. 5.
with his Minions and Concubines, he caused in a Triumph to be set before him,
for a glympse of his glory, the golden Vessel which his Father had by
Conquest brought from the Temple of Jerusalem? and yet the Hand which appeared
writing upon the wall, drowned all his pleasure in a gulf of fear and woe.
Putiphars wife ws inflamed with love, when she allured Genes. 10.
chaste Joseph to violate both her and his fidelity unto her husband: and
presently the Passion of hatred as vehemently vexed her, as the Passion of love
had formerly tormented her.

Insatiabilitie of Passions.. III.
HEll, earth, and a woman's womb, says Solomon, are Prou. 30. 15.
insatiable; and with these he might have numbered a number of Passions. How
insatiable was the lust of Solomon, who had no less Queens and Concubines
then a thousand? How increases the Passion of covetousness 3. Regs 3.
with the increase of riches? Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
As riches flow, so love does grow. And herein we may resemble our Passions to
men affected with the dropsy, who the more they drink, the more they thirst:
for drink caufeth such a desire and increases it, even so a
vehementinordinate Passion inclines vohemently the soul to embrace or fly
the object propounded; and a stronger Passion causes a stronger propension and
inclination, and consequently an insatiable desire of pleasure, or an
exorbitant abomination of pain. It is well known in Scotland how insatiable
is the passion of Ire, and the appetite of Revenge, for their deadly will never
be quenched, but with the blood of all their enemies and their adherents. In
the City of Naples not many years since the base passionate people wanting
corn, and imputing the dearth, either to the negligence or avarice of a
certain Magistrate, came and beset his house, killed diverse of his servantes,
and finally caught the master, and by maine force brought him into the market
place, ripped his belly, pulled out his heart, and there in presence of all the
City eat it with salt. How the Passions of Pride and Ambition, how
insatiable they be in women and courtiers, all the world knows, and no man is
ignorant but he that knows nothing.

Importunity of Passions. IIII.
INordinate Passions either prevent reason, or are stirred up by a corupt
judgment, and therefore neither observe time nor place: but upon every
occasion would be leaping into action, importuning execution. Let a man fall a
praying or studying, or be busy in any negotiation* importance, and very often
he shall feel a head^esse Passion to rush in upon him, importuning him even
then to leave all, and prosecute revenge, lust, gluttony, or some other
unbridled desire. It is well known how in the sack of sundry Cities, when
the unruly and passionate soldiers should have attended and employed all their
forces to keep the gates, or win the Market places, or defend the common
passages; contrariwise by the importunity of Passions, either distracted with
desire of spoil and riches, or drawn with appetite of private revenge, or
haled with lust to violate Virgins or honest Matrons, leese in a moment all
they won with extreme loss and labor, and perhaps also their lives
withal* Sometimes you shall have a number of greedy Passions like so many young
Crows half starved gaping and crying for food, every one more earnest than
another to be satiated; to content them all is impossible, to content none is
intolerable, to prosecute one, and abandon the rest, is to carry so many
hungry vipers gnawing upon the heart strings of the soul.

Saint Basil says, that inordinate Passions rise up in a Basil. hom.
inebrietat and luxnr.
drunkard like a swarm of Bees, buzzing on every side: or like wild horses
drawing a coach, running with it headlong shaking, herrying and herling their
Master at their pleasure: for in such men a multitude of Passions most
apparently discover themselves, and in regard that Reason in them is buried,
and cannot hold the raines of such savage and unreasonable beasts, therefore
they break out debostly, and never cease to range and revell, till Reason rise
out of her cymerian darkness, grave of oblivion, and puddle of ignorance and
senseless beastliness.

Impossibility of Passions. V.
THere is no man in this life which follows the stream of his Passions, but
expects and verily believes to get at last a firm rest, contentation, and
full satiety of all his appetites: the which is as possible, as to quench fire
with fuel, extinguish a burning agew with hot wines, drown an Eele with
water. Rachel well declared Genesis 30. 1.
the impossible petitions of her Passions, when so importunely she demanded
children of Jacob, or else that she would die: as though it lay in his power
to have children at his pleasure. That epicure who wished his throat as long as
a Crane (yet rather deserved a nose as long as a Woodcocke) that his dainty
fare might longer feed his gluttonous taste, and not pass away almost in a
moment, well declared that Passions suits were not only senseless, but also
impossible to be granted. It is wonderful what passionate appetites reign
in women when they be with child; I have heard it credibly reported, that
there was a woman in Spain, which longed almost till death, to have a mouth
full of flesh out of an extreme fat man's neck. I will not here condemn
all women, who labor with such frantike fittes; yet I can not but approove a
sage Philosophers sentence (who was my master in Philosophy) that most of
these appetites proceeded from women extremely addicted to follow their own
desires, and of such a froward disposition, as in very deed, if they were
crossed of their wills, their Passions were so strong, as they undoubtedly
would miscarry of their children; for vehement Passions alter vehemently the
temper and constitution of the body, which can not but greatly prejudice the
tender infant lying in the womb. And the rather I am persuaded to this opinion,
for that I never knew any woman very virtuous, or well mortified subject to
these fancies. Nevertheless, by these preposterous desires, and sundry
appetites for things impossible, or almost impossible to be accomplished, we
may well conclude, that Passions desires keep neither sense, order, nor
measure.

The third Book of the Passions of the Mind: wherein are delivered the means
to know, and mortify Passions, what prudence and Policy may be practiced in
them.
Means for every man to know his own Passions. CHAP. I.
LIttle it would avayle the Physician to speculate the causes and effects of
infirmities, if he could not find forth some remedies: so small profit the
knowledge of our Passions would affoorde us, if we could not attain unto some
good means to direct them. And albeit in every particular treatise of
particular Passions, I pretend to touch this string, yet I could not omit to
set down some general rules, as both method and matter require.

Before all other things, it is most necessary for hi^ that will moderate or
mortify his Passions, to know his own Inclination, and to what Passions his
Soul most bends: for you shall have no man, but he is inclined more to one
Passion than another, the means to come to this knowledge, may be these: To
expend thy natural Augustus being at a Combat, where was present an infinite
number of people; and among the rest, as principal, his two daughters, Iulia
and Livia: Sueton.
he marked what company courted them, and perceyved that grave Senators talked
with Livia, and loose yonkers, and riotous persons with Iulia; whereby he came
to discern his Daughters inclinations and manners; for he well knew, that
customs and company, are cousin germans; and manners, and meetings, for the
most part, sympatize together.

Hereunto add thoughts, and words: if one speak ex abundantia cordis os
loquitur, from the abundance of heart, the tongue speaks: for as a River
abounding with water, must make an inundation, and run over the banks; even
so, when the heart is overflowen with affections, it must find some passage by
the mouth, mind, or actions. And for this cause, I have diverse times heard
some persons very passionate affirm, that they thought their hearts would have
broken, if they had not vented them in some sort, either with spiteful words,
or revenging deeds: and that they could do no otherwise than their Passions
enforced them.

Another remedy to know thy self, more palpable to

It is good also to have a wise and discreet friend, to admonish would not have
this Scindicke to be molestfull, and to make of a moale-hill, a Mountain, but
to show the Passion, and the reason why such words and actions were indecent:
Truly, if a man might have such a friend, I would think he had no small
treasure. And especially this ought to be practiced by great Persons, who
never (almost) hear the truth concerning their own actions: for Flattery
fayneth falsehood: and hope of gain and preferment, mooveth them to praise
vices for virtues. This Truth might largely be prooved, but that it is more
palpable, by experience, than can be denied.

It chances sometimes, by Gods permission, that our enemies (who pry into our
actions and examine more narrowly our intentions then we our selves) discover
unto us better our Passions, and reveal our imperfections, then ever we our
selves. As befell unto S. Augustines mother, the holy Monica, who, (as he
relates in his Confessions) being from her youth accustomed to drink only
water, was after some time by her friends and parents, caused to sippe a
little wine, and so by sipping little and little, she came to such a delight of
drinking wine, that she would sip off a pretty cup: It happened one day,
that the Maid of the house and she fell at some words, and the Maid
(according to women's fashions) vpbrayded her with all the faults she knew,
and among the rest expostulated this, calling her meribibulam, a tos-pot, or
tippler of pure wine: the godly Monica conceyved such an aversion from wine,
and such a shame by this expostulation, that she never drunk any more all the
days of her life.

Lastly, a good way to know the inclinations of the mind, is like the manner we
come by the knowledge of the inclinations of our bodies, that is, by long
experience. For as we say, if a man, before forty years of age be not a good
physician of his own body, that is, if he know not whether his inclination
bends, what does him good, what brings harm, he deserves to be registered
for a fool; even so, he that in many years by continual practice of his own
soul perceives not where his passions lie, in my judgment, he scarce
deserves the name of a wise man: for as he may be begd for an idiot, who
riding a horse for ten years, every day from morning to night, and yet
knows not the qualities of his horse, and the vices whereunto he is subject;
so he which every day manageth his own soul, if after ten years labor he
cannot find whither the inclinations tend, he may well be thought either very
vicious, or very simple.

Means to mortify Passions. CHAP. II.
AFter thou have attained the knowledge of thy inclinations, thou must then
consider, whether they be extraordinarily vehement, or no: For, as to greater
griefs stronger remedies are applied, so to furious and outrageous passions,
more forcible means are to be ministered. If thou thoroughly perceive thy
passions to exceed the common course, then look to the end of the 16. chapter,
where thou shall see how hard they are to be reyned, and what great, yea and
extreme difficulty they cast upon thee against virtue and goodness, and then
thou may accept these few rules.

Every moderat passion bordureth betwixt two extremes, as liberality betwixt
avarice and prodigality; temperat diet betwixt gluttony and scarcity;
fortitude betwixt desperate boldness and superfluous fear, called timiditie.
Men commonly by nature are more inclined to one of these extremes than
another, as most men are given to covetousness, few to prodigality; more to
eat too much, than to eat too little; more to be afraid when they need not,
than to be too bold when they ought to be afraid. If then thou try thy self,
not vehemently inclined to any of these passions, yet sometimes to exceed in
one extreme, sometime in another; commonly the securest way to be practiced,
is to incline thy self to that extreme which men by nature most vehemently
abhor, as prodigality, scarceuesle in diet, boldness in dangers. But if
thou perceive a vehement inclination to the one extreme, procure to bend thy
self as far to the other; for so thou shall with more facility come to the
midst: as commonly the Philosophers declare, by the example of a crooked
staff, the which to make straight, we bend to the other side, and make it as
crooked contrariwise as it was before.

The second rule to moderate passions, we may learn Solus in illicitis non
cadit, qui se aliquando and a licitis caute restringit. Gregor. lib. 5. moral.
and hom. 35. super Euan.
of Socrates, who to bridle extraordinary and unlawful pleasures, was
accustomed to abstain from lawful and not prohibited: For if one be addicted
to drunkenness, he shall with more facility overcome this passion, if he
abstain from strong drinks, he most affects, even at such times as lawfully
he may use them.

The third rule to fly occasions, which may incense the passion whereunto we
are inclined: for occasiones factunt latrones, a commodious and fit occasion to
steal, makes oftentimes thieves, which otherwise would have been honest men:
wherefore he that commits himself to sea in a boisterous tempest, deserves
to suffer shipwreck, and he that willingly without necessity deals with
infected persons, may blame himself if he fall into their diseases: so he
that is given to lasciviousness, and uses riotous company, may condemn his
own wilfulness, if his passions rebel and overcome him. For this cause God
commanded that the Nazarites which were consecrated to him, should drink no
Wine, not any thing that might cause drunkenness; and least they should, by
eating grapes or great reisins be allured to the Number 6.
drinking of wine, he commanded them, they should neither eat grapes nor
reisins: So, he that will not be guided by affections, must diligently avoid
occasions. Yet this rule ought not to be understood universally, for it is
convenient to find out occasions to exercise some passions, as to seek the
poor, to practice the passion of pity; to visit the sick, to show compassion;
to exercise learning, to overcome fear. But in such passions as Nature more
than willingly would follow, best it were to fly occasions: as he that will
live chaste, must eschew much familiarity with suspected persons, and
universally with all women; not looking upon them, nor touching, except
necessity, or good manners, in some few cases requires. The same may be said
of gluttony, pride, and such like, whereunto our corrupt nature is much
inclined: yet if some man by experience have proved such passions not to be
very rebellious, and that for most part he has ouerruled them, he may be
something the bolder: yet let him not be too confident, for the Fox often
seems to be dead, to seize more assuredly upon his prey.

The fourth remedy, for noble spirits singular; of baser minds abhorred, yet
of both worthy to be practiced, may be drawn out of the very poison of
passions, that is, when a most vehement and rebellious motion assaulteth thee,
when the fierceness and tyranny thereof welnigh possesses thee, when thou
art almost yielding consent unto it: then turn the force of thy soul with as
much endeavor as thou can to the contrary, and with one nail drive out
another; make of tentations 1. Cor. 10. 11. 2. Cor. 8. 9.
a benefit, let virtue in infirmity and weakness of resistance be more
perfect, and ennobled: For as in wars the valiantest soldiers in greatest
incounters are best tried, so in most vehement passions, the resolutest minds
are best proved. For Joseph's chastity had never been so glorious, if his
unchaste lady had not so vehemently allured him to defile the bed of his lord.
Jobs patience had never been so conspicuous, if the passion of grief and
sadness had not so violently seized upon him. Abraham's fortitude had never
been so heroical, if the death of his only son had not cut in a manner his
heart strings asunder.

This mean, to mortify passions, I take to be one of the most forcible and
important remedies that men can use, especially for two causes: the first, for
that by these contrary acts are bred in the souls, certain habites, helps,
stays, or inclinations most opposite unto our passions; and therefore the
passions being strong, they cannot be ouercommed, but by the might of excellent
virtue: for as the deeper a tree is rooted in the ground, it requires greater
force to pull it up; even so, the greater possession the passion has taken of
the soul, the greater virtue it needs to supplant it. It seems that Job,
after Job. 13. 15.
so many temptations, practiced this remedy, when he said, Etiamsi occideret
me, in ipso sperabo. Although God kill me, yet I will hope in him: For
questionless, those pains and pangs did incite him to desperation; the which,
with contrary trust in God he most valiantly suppressed. Another cause may be
yielded, for that many passions proceed, not only from the inclinations of
nature, alterations of humors, but by the very suggestion of the devil, who
watches his opportunity, to take men at an advantage, and to induce them to
sundry inordinat affections; for which cause, they are called very often in
Scriptures, unclean spirits, because they lead men into unclean passions and
actions. The devil therefore seeing his temptations so valiantly resisted, his
poisoned darts rebounding into his own breast, I mean his illusions redound
to his own shame and confusion, dares not be so bold another time to invade
so strong a sort, but with all his troop will fly from it, as a swarm of
filthy flies dare not approach near unto a boiling pot, Resistite diabolo, and
fugiet a vobis, resist the devil, and he James 4. 7.
will fly from you.

The fifth remedy, not inferior to the precedent, is to resist passions at the
beginning: use the remedy for virtue, that Pharaoh practiced for tyranny, in
killing all the infants of the Jews, least they should increase too much, and
so ouerrun his country: While the sore is green, seldom surgeons despair,
but festred once, they hardly cure it: so passions, while they knock at the
door of our minds, whilst they are a little entertained, if you expel them
not quickly, they will allodge longer with you than you would have them. And
the most easy way of all, and by spiritual men daily put in ure, is to divert
the thoughts to some other object: for as we use in common conversation, when
two be brawling about any thing, to divert their talk to another matter; (for,
as long as they continue about the same subject, they are in danger to fall
into the same inconvenience) so the best way to expel an inordinate passion,
is, to transport the attention to some other matter; as he that will be rid of
an ill guest, the worse he entertaineth him, the sooner he shall be dispatched
of him: and for this cause, when any passion oppresses a man, those who are
addicted to study, have great advantage of others, because they may divert
their minds easily with their Books.

The sixth remedy to mortify passions, is, to bridle the body, that is, to
chastise it, according to that saying of Saint Paul: Castigo corpus meum, and
in seruitutem redigo 1. Corin. 9. 27.
ne, cum alijs praedicauero ipse reprobus efficiar. I chastise my body, and
bring it into s^ruitude, least I that preach to others, become reprobat. For
questionless, he that pampereth his body, seedeth his enemy, and he that
will feed it with dainties, cannot but find it rebellious; for this we see in
wild beasts, That the best way to tame them, is by ill usage: pamper a horse,
and you shall have him too wanton; pamper your flesh, and it will ouerrule you.
And he that will mortify his passions, and let his body flow with delicacies,
does like him which will extinguish fire by adding more fuel. Therefore
fasting, praying, lying hard, course shirts, pinching cold, much study, and
such austerities, are foements of virtue, and bane of passions: and in fine,
how much the more with reason and prudence we afflict this rebellious flesh, we
make it so much the more a fitter instrument for mortification, virtue, and all
goodness.

The seventh remedy, requires a resolute good will and endeavor to attain
unto this perfect government of a man's self: whence from will follow a diligent
execution of mortification; for such a man will not cease daily and incessantly
to demand grace and favor of God to overcome his rebellious nature, resist
temptations, withstand all false allurements of this enticing world: Such an
one will examine daily his conscience, and note what thoughts, words, or deeds,
against God himself, and his neighbor, he has committed, whereby either
virtue is extinguished, or vice increased: Such an one will determine in the
morning when he rises, not to let pass that day, without the extirpating of
some stinking and poisoned thorn, and planting some sweet and pleasant flower,
within the garden of his soul: Such an one will not only prevent occasions,
but also arm himself as well as he can to resist such tentations as he
knows especially shall be offered in certain places and company, which he
cannot conveniently avoid.

To this helps greatly the consideration of that small pleasure passions do
yield; for, almost, in a moment they are commenced, practiced, and past;
wherefore much better it were to cross them a little, and win a crown of
glory, than to please them a moment, to be condemned to hell.

Lastly, but chiefly, when thy passions are most vehement, then seek for
succor from Heaven, fly under the wings of Christ, as the chickens under
their hen, when the kite seeks to devour them: beat at the gates of his
mercy, crave grace to overcome thy misery. He is thy Father, and will not
give thee a serpent, if thou ask him a fish: humble thy self before him, open
thy sores and wounds unto him, and the good Samaritane will pour in both wine
and oil; and then thou shall see thy passions melt and fall away as clouds are
consumed by the Sun.

Prudence to be used in Passions. CHAP. III.
AS the Physician of the body ordains not only medicines for his patients
maladies, but also prescribes his diet, rest, or exercise, sleep, or waking,
what he ought to do in the accession of his agu^, what in declination: even so
about the passions of the mind, which are certain diseases of the soul, like
care and diligence must be used. The remedies were delivered in the precedent
chapter, the carriage and demeanor in them shall be set down in the present.

Two sorts of prudence we may use concerning passions, the one how to behave
and carry our selves when we are troubled with them; the other, how to deal
with others, when we perceive they are possessed of them: the first I will call
prudence in passions; the second, policy. The former I mean to handle here,
the latter, in the next chapter.

The first point of prudence which all prudent men confess and observe, is to
persuade our selves when we are moved with a vehement passion, that our souls
are then, as it were, infected with a pestilent ague, which both hinders the
sight of our eyes, and the taste of our tongues, that is, corrupts the
judgment, and peruerteth the will; that as certain spectacles make mountains
seem mole-hils, and others, mole-hils like mountains; even so, passions make
the passionate to judge all those things which tend to the favor of his
passion, reasonable, great, and worthy, and all that stands against it, base,
vile, and naughty, as in the twelfth chapter was declared.

Hereupon follows, that at what time the passion is aflote, and reigns, it
were not good to make any resolution or determination of change: for some I
have seen so vehement in their passions, that whatsoever was suggested them,
either by the devil, or their passions, they presently would put it in
execution: I do think there be few men living, which have not ouershot
themselves in this point, and repented when their souls were calmed, that they
committed, when they were tempested.

The most part of the world is bewitched with this sorcerie; for what wicked
resolutions attempt the choleric in the very dregs of their anger? What
desperate words fly? What fields are pitched in the heat of ire? How many kill,
drown, and hang themselves in melancholy and desperations? What fornications,
adulteries, incests, and other beastialities are effected in the furious flame
of fleshly lust? All the world can witness, which I think to be too too
sufficient proof; wherefore Architas did wisely, when he found his servants in
the field, to have committed once a fault, and perceiving himself to be
greatly moved therewithal, he would not beat them in his ire, but said:
Fortunati estis quod irascor vobis, Happy are you that I am angry with you,
for otherwise he would have beaten them. Cicero 4. Tuscul.

And Athenedorus, a wise Philosopher, departing from Augustus Caesar, and
bidding him farewell, he left this lesson with him, most worthy to be printed
in an Emperors breast, That when he was angry, he should neither speak nor
do any thing, before he had recited the four and twenty names of the Greek
Alphabet: The which lesson Caesar received as a most precious jewel. Plutarch
in Apoph. Romans

The second point of prudence in passions, is, to conceal, as much as thou
can, thy inclinations, o^ that passion thou know thy self most prone to
follow; and this for two causes: first, for credit: secondarily, for many
inconveniences that may thereby ensue. It impeacheth questionless greatly, a
grave man's credit, a great man's authority, and a civil man's good
conversation, to be subject to some one only inordinate passion: for such a
corrupt judgment has now so much prevailed with men, yea, and ever has been,
that they will contemn the whole, for some one notable defect: as for example,
if we see a picture of a man or woman, drawn with exquisit colors, great
proportion, and art; yet, if there be but one eye, one arm, yea or one finger
out of square, men will say, the image is spoiled, for that one defect; yea,
the first thing almost we mark, is the improportion or disquaring of that part.

How many prize, almost nothing, their geldings, because they lack their
tails, ears, mane, or good colors? Even so, we try by daily talk, that
commonly men descant upon other men's doings; they will say, such a nobleman is
resolute in wars, goodly in person; but subject to choler, too much addicted
unto his own judgment* such a man excels in learning, yea but pride
ouerruleth him; such a Senator judges profoundly, but is impatient in hearing
of causes; such a man reigns in the Pulpit, but blinded with covetousness;
such a man passes in Music, but is buried, for the most part, in the
tavern; such a man gives great alms, but attends too much to good cheer;
and in fine, there is no man so well qualified, but always the world will
condemn him, because they judge him stained with some passion: therefore great
prudence wisemen account it, for grave and great persons, not to lay their
passions open to the censure of the world. Many inconveniences may follow, if
others know what passions men are subject unto; for if thy enemies would be
revenged of thee, no fitter means they might slightly use, than to procure
some way whereby thy passions should be stirred and put in execution; for by
often ministering matter, thy passions would easily subdue thee: as a Spanish
soldier and a Dutchman, after many bragges of their valor and feats of arms
aptly insinuated: for (said the Spanish soldier) with one Spaniard, and a
hundred buttes of wine, I would kill a whole army of Dutchmen; because I would
set my wine at night, in such a place, where I knew the Dutch troops should
lodge, and then I know they would never leave drinking while there remained any
wit in their brains; and so buried with drink, it were no great masterie to
despatch them all. Nay, quoth the Dutchman, without any man, I would destroy a
troop of Spaniards, only by sending against them a multitude of women, for
they might easily make of them a massacre like Paris, or an euensong of Sicilie
at midnight in their beds. These two knew well the inclinations of both
Countries, and consequenly perceived the way how one might ouerthow the other;
yet although they were simple and souldierlike discourses (for many things may
be in common avoided, which in particular may be hardly escaped) nevertheless
they knew how easy a thing it was, by ministering matter to passions, to cast a
bait with a hook to draw them into their own ruin.

But some would be glad to know, how a man might well conceal his passions, so
that the world should not judge him passionat^. I answer, that this question
yields some difficulty, for hardly can a passionate man bridle so his
affections that they appear not. But yet if he be never so passionat, and
would but follow a little direction, I think he might, albeit not wholly, yet in
great part, avoid the infamy of a passionate person. The way may be thus: in
great assemblies, or at such times as most men mark our actions, words, and
gestures, then if a man have an occasion of choler, indignation, lust, pride,
fear, or such like passion, if he refrain but a little, all those will at
least suspect that he permits not his passions wholly to ouerrunne him. For
all historiographers which Basil. in hom. de legend. lib. Gent.
write of Alexander the great, highly commend his continency; and especially
moved with the carriage of himself, when Darius wife and her daughters were
taken prisoners, and subject to his power, they being beautiful, he in the
prime of years; yet because he would but scarcely look on them, he won for
ever the name of Continency.

Besides, it were good to dispraise in words before others, that passion thou
art most addicted unto; for by so doing thou shall make men believe in deed,
that thou abhorrest much that ^ice; and questionless, if the passion be not
too pregnantly known, such words will blemish a great part of men's conceits;
for, according to the Italian Proverb:

Buone parole and cattiui fatti
Ingannano li sauij and li matti.
That is,

Words good, and works ill,
Makes fools and wisemen leese their skill.
I say not this, because I would have a man to do one thing, and speak
another, but that if he cannot but sometime of fragilitie slide, it may be a
good way to recall him again, and not to fall so often, if he speak in
dispraise of his own fault; for men will be ashamed to commit often, that they
themselves dispraise eagerly: and besides, it repaireth anew his credit, almost
cracked with the former passion.

The third point may be, Not to vex and trouble thy self too much when a
passion seizes upon thee, but diuerting thy mind from it, and restraining thy
consent as well as thou can from yielding unto it; and in short time thou
shall see it vannish away: as we prove in daily temptations of ire, sadness,
love, lust, and such like, which fall and consume away even by themselves:
either because the humor which was moved, returns to his former seat, or
the impression made in the imagination deminisheth, or the attention of the
soul destracted with other matters, fails, or some other passion expels
it, or the devil cease to tempt; either (I say) all these, or most of them
mittigat, consume, and wholly subvert that passion which before so troubled us,
and seemed insuperable.

The fourth point which ought principally to be considered, and well waighed
of those whose passions are most vehement and inordinate, is this, that they
which perceive in themselves such disordered affections, ought first to know
the root of them to be self-love, and the greater they find the boughs of
their passions, the greater and deeper root let them be assured lies hidden
under the bottom of their soul: for which cause such men must persuade
themselves to have great difficulty to virtue, and extreme facility to vice:
that as they love pleasures of the body exceedingly, so they hate all that may
hinder or oppose it self thereunto mightily. That they be blinded as battes
in their own conceits, apprehending that they love or hate, far differently
from that it is in very deed; that they be commonly too rash, attempting
greater enterprises than their forces are able to perform, and for the most
part more bold than wise, guiding their actions, (...) not by reason and
judgment, but by harebraine affections: and as they are headlong and obstinat
when strong passions possess them, so are they irresolute and inconstant when
a weak affection does move them: for being accustomed to follow their
appetites, as long as they continue they persist in one mood; but after the
week passion is appeased, their judgments and determinations are changed.

These men ought to be wonderful wary in their words, and circumspect in
their actions, always having themselves suspected: wherefore I would persuade
them, first to crave of God help and grace, to overcome so hard a nature:
secondly, to confer with wise and discreet men about their own affairs and
determinations, rather relying upon them, than their own judgments: which
counsel Solomon gave, saying, Fili, ne innitaris prudentiae tuae. Son, be
not married to thy Prou. 3. 5.
own wisdom. Thirdly, that every day they use some mean to overcome their
perverse nature: for as we prove by experience, such men have many crosses
and griefs of mind, their company (commonly) all eschew; and to be short, they
are a burden to themselves and others; whereas if they would but with a little
diligence moderat their passions, as such men be witty and high spirited, so
they would be humble and affable; there is no sort of men, whose conversation
would be more grateful than theirs: for they be like unto a fa^ soil that
yields great abundance of what is sown, good or evil, corn or darnell,
flowers or weeds.

Policy in Passion. CHAP. IIII.
SInce men by nature are addicted to conversation, and one depends upon
another, therefore it imports much, to know how to second or cross other
men's affections, how we may please or displease them, make them our friends or
foes. But because this subject is infinite, I will only set down certain
general rules, whereby some small light may be had, how to live and deal with
men, to the intent, that love, peace, and charity be conserved: for good
Christians ought not only to procure an union with God, but also an amity
with men: and the world being green in malice, and withered in goodness, men
more guided by passions, than ruled by reason, therefore the wiser ought to
provide a salve proportionated to the sore, and means to prevent malice;
least the children of darkness in prudence surpass the children of light,
seeing our Master taught us, how the cic of a dove adorneth best the serpents
head.

The first rule may be this. All men (commonly) are pleased with them, whom
they see affected with those passions whereunto they are subject and inclined.
This rule, both experience teaches, and reason proves. We see that lions,
tygres, and leopards, whose inclinations are most cruel, whose passions most
fierce, yet one affects another and lives in quiet society, for the
similitude of inclinations, and likelinesse of passions. Alexander asked a
pyrat that was taken and brought before him, How he durst be so bold to infest
the seas, and spoil the commerceries? he answered, That he played the pyrat
but with one ship, and his Majesty with a huge navy: the which saying so
pleased Alexander, that he pardoned his life, and granted him liberty: so
much could the similitude of action transport the kings affection. The reason
also of this rule may easily be delivered: because all likelinesse causes
love, and as every one judges, he does the best, or at least, approoueth well;
even so, he cannot disprooue, but allow the same in others. Hereupon follows,
that if thou will please thy master or friend, thou must apparel thy self
with his affections, and love where he loves, and hate where he hates: and
universally, to sooth other men's humors, plaineth the way to friendship and
amity: and as this mean fostereth flattery, if it be abused, so it
nourishes charity, if it be well used.

Out of this rule we may deduce the second, which ought no less to be observed
in conversation than the former, That men commonly hate those whom they know
to be of contrary passions: whereupon proceeds that common Proverb, He that
hates whom I love, how can he love me? for as fire with fire do never jar,
so fire and water can never agree. But in the next Book, which shall be of
Love, I pretend to discuss better this rule, because, as similitude causes
love, so dissimilitude breeds hatred. Therefore I omit to declare how
sometimes likelinesse of passions engenders contention, as we say, Figulus
figulum odit, one potter hates another; and, Inter superbos semper sunt
iurgia; among proud men there are ever brawlings: for if similitude of passions
preiudicateth profit, then likelinesse of affections causes dissension.

The third rule. Be not too credulous to men in their own causes: for as
self-love for the most part conceiues what appertains to our selves, with a
greater show of good and honesty, than indeed the thing carries with it; so,
men moved therewith, declare the matter as they conceive it: for words spring
from conceits, these are the tree, those the flowers and leaves, which do
follow by just proportion. Wherefore Alexander did Plutarch in Alexand^o.
wisely (as Plutarch recounteth) at the beginning of his reign, by shutting
one of his ears with his hand, when he heard any accuser in criminal causes,
thereby reserving (as he said) audience for the defendant. Contrariwise, others
men's matters, which hinder our profit or cross our designs, for the most part
we extenuat and abase. As in Italy once befell to a number of wise men, who
heard an Oration, wherein they were all welnigh persuaded: but the next day
came up another Orator, and told a contrary tale, and changed their minds,
persuading them all to the other part; for which cause we may adioyne the
fourth rule.

The fourth rule. When you are induced to any thing by act, that is, by a tale
well told in Rhetorical manner, flexibilitie of voice, gestures, action, or
other oratoricall persuasions; good I hold it a while, for a man to suspend his
judgment, and not to permit his will follow too far his motion, more
artificial than natural, grounded upon affection rather than reason: For that
saying of Isocrates ought well to be weighed, who being demanded, what was
Rhetorike; answered, to make great things little, and little, great: wherefore,
after Aeschines was Erasm. libr. 8. Ap^ph.
banished from Athens, coming to Rhodes he made an Oration to the people in
declaration of his cause of exile; they wondered at the Athenians, who had
banished him so undeservedly: O quoth he, you did not hear what Demosthenes
answered to my reasons; ascribing wholly the cause of his exile, to the force
and eloquence of Demosthenes oration. By this example we see proved, that
commonly wise Rhetoricians affirm, that Rhetorike in an ill cause, is a two
edged sword in the hand of a furious man. Yet I would not by this condemn the
faculty of eloquence, which I confess, if it be well used, to be most
profitable for the Church and commonweal: but because at this present it is
sophisticated, by many, who cover stinking matters with fragrant flowers, and
with a few sugared words temper the gall of their pernicious objects; therefore
every wise man ought rather to examine the Orators reasons, than to follow his
intent with a seduced affection.

The fifth rule. When men are possessed of a vehement passion, deal not with
them by reprehension or indignation, especially in vehement manner, except it
be some person that is superior, or in authority, but rather by a mild and
soft sort of persuasion. The reason of this rule may well be gathered out of
that we have hitherto delivered: for contrary passions breed hatred and
dissension, wherefore he that is passionat, will hardly be persuaded by him
whom he conceiueth contrary to him: yea often those that at other times were
good friends, in time of passions for some such opposition, fall into endless
contention; for as we see, when a house in the midst of the street is
vehemently inflamed, it were bootlesse to quench the flame with water, but the
best remedy, and commonly practiced, is to pull down the next houses, that
thereby the lack of foement might diminish the flame^so, him that rages with
anger, hardly you shall appease by wrangling or chiding; but either answer
mildly, for Mollis responsio mitigat iram, a soft answer mittigateth anger:
or, answer nothing, withdrawing the matter of anger from sight: the same in
vehement lust or sadness may be practiced, as in the particular Treatises shall
be delivered.

This rule holds universally in all those which be our equalles, or at the
least do not much exceed us in estate, or we them. But if a superior, or a
magistrate see his inferior, or subject, vehemently carried in any passion, he
may threaten, or reprehend him, because one passion often cures another: so
here the passion of fear may expel the passion of anger, lust, or what else
soever tempts, either to the passionats evil, or any disorder in the
commonweal: albeit, if the passion tend not presently to some sin or great
offense, better I hold it to defer such reprehensions till the subject be
more capable of them.

The sixth rule. No man ought to be employed to any office, act, or exercise,
contrary to his natural passions and inclination. This rule concerns all
sorts of superiors in the employments of their subjects, all parents for the
education of their children, schoolemaisters for the training up of their
scholars. The ground of this rule depends of long experience, and reason.
For by experience we learn, that men be oftentimes employed to one trade, and
never can profit therein: contrariwise, when either they of themselves, or
others, do change that course to another, whereunto they were inclined, they
become very excellent men. I knew one in Flaunders employed of his friends to
be a merchant against his inclination, but he never scarce could abide to deal
in merchandise: and so at last therewith awearied, left them, and turned his
course to study, wherein he excelled, and became one of the rarest preachers
there; I my self heard him preach after, very godly and learnedly: a hundred
such examples I could bring you. Reason also proves the same most manifestly:
for three things are required of necessity, to attain to the perfection of
any science, cunning, or office; Nature, Art, and practice: Nature affords
capacity of wit, strength of body, and inclination of mind; the which
inclination, if it be lacking, the subject strives against the stream, and
although by force and constraint, nolens, volens, he follow such a trade
against his mind, he may peradventure do some thing with great difficulty,
the which labor if he had bestowed in that thing whereunto he was inclined, he
would have become a most excellent man.

This rule may not be understood so absolutely, but that it admits some
limitation; for some contrary inclination or passion proceeds not from
defect of nature, or ability of mind, but from an ill and vicious selfewill,
or wilfulness: and then it were good with sweetness and inticements to allure
such a person to follow that science, art, or trade, whereunto nature most
inclines him. Another exception is, if the impediments of Nature be but
small, and the habiliments otherwise great, then the one ought to ouerrule the
other; and after a little labor in ouercomming the impediment, will follow a
great facility in the atchieuement of the rest.

The seventh rule serves for great persons, who commonly never resist their
passions: therefore if a man understand once their inordinat affections, he may
be very well assured to have gained much ground in prevailing with them. And
therefore we see usually, that if men see such persons addicted to this or
that affection, to win their good wills, they will foster up such fancies; if
they be delighted in music, they present them with instruments, if in riding
with horses, if in hunting with dogs, if in study with literal labors, etc.
for by thus feeding their fancies, they win their friendship.

Finally, there be general hindrances, common to all, or most men, to get
virtue and learning, and those ought by diligence and labor to be cut off; for
the sweet fruits of virtue spring from bitter roots of mortification, and the
praise of learning proceeds from industry and labor: therefore let no man
persuade himself to attain unto any singular cunning, except his labor be
singular.

Many more rules might be here delivered, as that proud men be pleased with
praises, honor, and account; discontented with comparisons, with commending
their equals, in not yielding them honor, in disparaging their actions. Mild,
modest, humble, meek, are beloved universally, because we think them
virtuous, who will honor or not contemn us. If thou would obtain any
favor, or inuit any man to pleasure, it were good to take him at such times
as he is merrily disposed, as after meat. If thou will induce him to
pensiveness, sorrow for his sins, the fear of God, or any sad passion, take
him at such times as melancholy most oppresses him; in dark and cloudie
days, in the morning, in Winter, or in fine, at such seasons as that passion
reigns over him. These and many more I could set down, but the order of
method requires they should be allotted to particular Treatises. Wherefore I
will conclude this Chapter with this sentence: That as he is imprudent which
has strong passions, and endeavors not to conceal them from others, so he
may be accounted vnpolliticke, who knows another man's passions, and cannot
prevail against them.

THE FOVRTH BOOK, Wherein is explaned, how Passions may be discovered.
CHAP. I.
AS by experience men may discover the inclinations of dogs and horses, and
other beasts, even so by certain signs wise men may gather the inclinations
whereunto other men are subject. I omit here what passions every country
inclines unto: like wise, to what sort melancholy, sanguine, flegmaticke and
choleric persons are addicted: for this was insinuated sufficiently above:
neither will I handle what sorts of men, passions most overrule; for in the
same place this was sufficiently entreated, only I will briefly deliver some
means, whereby in particular conversation, every one may discover his fellows
natural inclinations, not by philosophical demonstrations, but only by
natural conjectures and probabilities, because that wise men mortify their
passions, and crafty men dissemble: yet we may for the most part attain unto
the knowledge of them, for that most men follow the instinct of Nature, and
few, either the precepts of reason, or exquisit craftiness, by which two
means passions are concealed. He therefore that desires to discover an others
passions or inclinations, after he has considered from what country he came;
if he be some of those mentioned heretofore, then he may discourse upon him,
and withal mark what passions are common to such persons, and after descend
to these notes. For that we cannot enter into a man's heart, and view the
passions or inclinations which there reside and lie hidden; therefore, as
Philosophers by effects find out causes, by proprieties essences, by rivers
fountains, by boughs and flowers the kore and roots; even so we must trace
out passions and inclinations by some effects and external operations. And
these be no more than two, words and deeds, speech and action: of which two,
knowledge may be gathered of those affections we carry in our minds: therefore
first I will entreat of words, and then of deeds. Words represent most exactly
the very image of the mind and soul: wherefore Democritus called speech (...),
the Lacitius.
image of life; for in words, as in a glass may be seen, a man's life and
inclination. Wherefore Diogenes Idem lib. 6.
wondered that men would not buy earthen pottes before they proved by the sound
whether they were whole or broken, yet they would be contented to buy men by
sight before they proved their speech: Whereupon grew that old proverb,
frequented of Socrates and approved of ancient Philosophers, Loquere vt te
videam, speak that I may know thee: for passions so swell within the soul,
that they must needs have some vent, as Elihu said of himself; Lo, my belly is
like to new wine lacking Job. 32.
a vent, the which breaks new vessels. Sometimes I have enquired of sundry
persons, what they thought of certain men's inclinations; and I found that
almost whatsoever they had noted in others, commonly to proceed from one sort
of speech or other. Plainly you may perceive, if men's words openly tend to
their own commendations, if they brag or boast of their valor in wars,
learning, qualities given by nature, or purchased by labor, that they are of a
proud disposition: if they discourse lasciuiously or shamelesly, questionless
what the tongue speaks, the heart affects: if men talk of meat and drink,
of ^^^ling and feasting, wishing for this meat, lamenting of that meat, such
persons, for most part, addict themselves to gluttony: if they rage with
furious words, braull or wrangle, such carry the conscience of choleric. Thus
you may conjecture by words, the passions of the mind, when the speech
manifestly carries the coat of pride, choler, lust, or gluttony. But many
there be more wise than to commit such notorius errors, and blaze their
imperfections to the eyes of the world: therefore we must sound out a little
further, and wade something deeper into a certain secret survey of men's
speeches, to see if we may discover some more hidden passions. And this, either
in the manner, or matter of speech.

Much talk.
He that talks and pratleth too much, both by profane and holy Writers, is
accounted unwise or rather foolish. Hereupon came those voices, Totum spiritum
suum profert stultus, The fool puts Pro. 29. 11.
forth all his spirit: but Sapiens differt, and reseruat in posterum, A wise
man deferreth and reserueth it for afterward. And beneath, Vidisti hominem
velocem ad loquendum? stultitia magis speranda est quam illius correptio. Have
thou seen a man prone to speak? foolishness is Verse. 20.
rather to be expected than his amendment. Wherefore fools carry their hearts
in their mouths, wise men their mouths in their hearts: for fools speak,
and then deliberat; but wisemen first deliberat with reason, and then speak
with circumspection. By this may be gathered the reason why ianglers and
praters deserve to be registered in the catalogue of fools, because many
fancies come into men's minds, and he that will pour forth all he conceiueth,
delivers dregs with drink; and as for the most part, presently men
apprehend more folly than wisdom, so he that suddenly utters all he
understands, blabbeth forth more froath than good liquor: and thus, much
speech and hasty, proceeds from rash foolishness: the which passion
reigns, for the most part, in young men, women, and doting proud old age.
Therefore Theocritus said, that Anaximines had a flood of words Stob. sermon. 34.
and a drop of reason: For if you descant upon some long tale or discourse of
theirs, you shall find them as void of matter, as prodigal in words. The cause
hereof I take to be their lack of judgment; for whatsoever occurreth to their
minds concerning any matter, they think such conceits, as they are new to
them, so they should be to others; whereas in very deed other better wits
reject and contemn them: wherefore the leaves of loquacitie spring from the
root of small capacity.

Taciturnitie.
SOme contrariwise be of too little speech, the which taciturnitie, although
it repugneth to modesty, which stands betwixt these two extremes, yet
commonly wise men account this extreme more secure; for many words almost ever
offend, but silence very rarely: and therefore the Philosophers say, that he
which will learn to speak, ought first to learn to hold his peace. This
silence may proceed sometimes of sottishness, because a man knows not how to
reason, and so you see clownes, or dull persons, not able to speak in a wise
company. Sometimes of fear, as I have known a most excellent Rhetoritian in
writing, yet most unable in speaking, for the presence of his auditors did
exceedingly affright him. Others use it for prudence and policy, because in
conservation, when men either would conceal their own affections, or discover
others; prudence and policy require a space of silence, because the wisest
man in the world, if he talk long and much, without premeditation, will
hardilie keep close his passions from discreet hearers.

Slownesse in speech.
SOme sorts of men speak very slowly, and so leisurely, that a cart of hay
might pass almost betwixt one word and another; the which manner of speech, is
very loathsome and tedious to their auditors, and especially to some quick
spirits intolerable. This lingering may proceed from some impediment of the
instruments of speaking, a slownesse of conceiving, or a certain vain conceit
that men have of their own wisdom, the which they would distill into other
men, drop by drop, as water falls from the Limbecke; for they think, if they
do utter their words faster, they should spill some of their prudence. And
indeed, among dull persons of slow capacity, I think it not far amiss;
except they linger so long, that before their ending, they forget their
beginning: but amongst persons of good understanding, it argues, either
slownesse of wit, or contempt of their understanding, and it cannot be but
marvelous molestfull unto them, like as if a man were extremely thirsty, and
one should give him drink by drops, which manner of delivery cannot but grieve
him, although the drink be never so excellent: even so, men of quick
capacity have a sharp appetite, and would be presently satisfied, wherefore
long lingering in speech hinders greatly their natural inclination and
desire. Yet for all this I must confess, that in some maiesticall and very
grave persons, whose prudence and wisdom men much admire, few words pithie
and leisurely spoken, argue both wisdom, gravity, and magnanimity, as
afterward in the passion of boldness shall be declared.

Rashness in speech.
AS some men slide into slothfulness, and lingering too much in their words,
so others fall into a greater extreamitie of rashness and precipitation. These
Job. 32.
may well be compared to new wine, that by venting bursteth the bottle? these
be foolish mouths which Prouer. 15.
ever bluster forth follies: these bear words in their mouths, as dogs
arrows shot in their thighs, the which Ecclesi. 19.
so trouble, toss and turmoile them, that they never can be quiet till they be
drawn forth: even so rash men in speech, have an arrow in their tongues, they
never rest till they have uttered their minds. Such commonly are with child
with their own conceits, and either they must be delivered of them, or they
must die in childbed. I have seen some of these men of very fine wits, but
not settled judgments, they excel in apprehension, but fail in discretion; if
they could stay themselves, and moderat a little their natural fury and
hastiness, these would become very rare men: but for the most part, those I
dealt withal of this constitution, I have found to follow their own
inclination, and so with many good things they utter many follies, yea many
pernicious conceits, and often dangerous; because, as they apprehend in every
matter, many things, and pass beyond the common reach of ordinary wits, so
they without discretion, blab out good or bad, right or wrong, dangerous or
not dangerous, and utter what they conceive, without judgment, discourse, or
reason: wherefore such men may well be called witty, but not wise. These also
easily contemn others, they are very hot in what they apprehend, and
self-love adioyneth an account of their credit, and so rendereth (them
obstinat in their own opinions. This effect, in fine, proceeds from lack of
judgment, a proud conceit of their own conceits, a bold, hot and rash
affection: and in fine, they often change their purposes, and alter their
determinations.

Affectation in speech.
SOme have a peculiar manner of parley, they speak in print, hunt after
metaphors, coin phrases, and labor extremely that their words may smell of
subtilitie, elegancie, and neat delivery, in such affected sort, that for the
most part, they leave nothing behind them, but a sent of foolish affectation
and verbal pride. These may well be compared to certain birds which sing
well, yet carry no flesh upon their backs, but are as lean as carrion: they
are not unlike strumpets, who veil diseased carcasses under rich attire.
Amongst a thousand you shall scarce find one ripe in judgment, or sound in
conceit: these men do spend their time and studies, to find out new phrases,
and that which they conceived with great labor they utter with extreme
difficulty, they stammer often, and commit many discords, if they continue
long in discourse; for the most part, their Epilogue consorteth not with their
Exordium. If they pen any thing to be presented unto the view of the world,
you shall ever have one new coined word or other which never saw light before it
issued out of the mint of their imagination, and it will beseem them as well
as a peacoks fether a fools cap. I heard once one of these worthy parolists
who had got by the end the word intricat; he coming among as wise men as him
self, told them, that such a gentleman and he did bear most intricat love
one to another: he would have said intier. Another had got the word expostulat,
and he imagined it was to require, and so he requested a friend of his, to
expostulat a certain favor at his lords hands in his behalf. This
affectation in speech proceeds from a most vain and notorious pride; the
which no man (almost) will deny that conuerseth with such sorts of persons: for
if you demand any of their acquaintance, what opinion they hold of such men;
no other answer they can yield you, than that their words smell of
presumption and arrogance. I cannot moreover excuse most of these persons from
certain effeminat affections, because such speeches especially were invented
to tickle women and gallants ears, that by alluring words they might win the
credit of witty, and so beguile the weaker minds. These inameld speakers, for
the most part, condemn others as barbarous and ignorant, because they frame
not their speeches according to their humors: yea they will pass further, and
despise all Authors who affect not in writing, that they frequent in prating.
And I my self have heard some of them, as presumtuously as ignorantly, censure
most profound Doctors, yea and call them dunces and dolts, because they either
could not, or would not deliver their conceits after the others customarie
follies.

Scoffing speeches.
Certain men entertain their company with scoffing, nipping, gibing, and
quipping: they think to have won a great victory, if in discovering some
others defect, they can make the company laugh merrily: they will seem to make
much of you, but the embracements of scorpions follow stinging tails. This
scoffing proceeds from some, of mere simplicity and foolishness, as common
iesters, and therefore wise men weigh not such follies: others jest for
recreation without harm, with no other intention, but only to be merry: but
those which especially ought to be marked, and their company eschewed, so quip
and nip, that they principally pretend to discredit, or shame those persons at
whom they jest: and this scoffing manner is most malicious, and it proceeds
from pride and envy, because, either they would contemn others, or else make
men not have so good a conceit as they had before. And thus much concerning the
manner of speech: As for the matter and object of talk, much might be said,
but I will abridge the matter as briefly as I can.

Discovery of passions in the matter of talk.
IF (as I said in the beginning of this chapter) men talk openly of such
subjects as manifestly show the excess of some passion; no man can call in
question, but that such men are addicted to such passions: yet for that some
(as I there set down) carry themselves more wisely, we must look into their
demeanor more narrowly.

Disputation above the speakers capacity.
SOme men will dispute, or rather wrangle about matters exceeding their
capacity, as a Cobbler of Chivalry, a Tailor of Divinity, a Farmer of
Physic, a Merchant of Martial affairs: and in fine, a number of men will
meddle with those matters, which either surpass their capacity, or at the
least, they understand not, for lack of exercise, study, or practice.
Sometimes I have heard these batchellors hold talk so wilfully and obstinatly,
in matters of Philosophy and Divinity, with such gross errors and
absurdities, that any wise man would either have despised them for malapert and
contentious, or else have registered them in the predicament of fools.

And without all question, this manner of speech, or wrangling, or let us call
it disputation, cannot but proceed from great ignorance and arrogancy: for no
wise man will contend in such matters as he knows not. Whereupon came that
saying of Aristotle; Every man ought to be credited in his Art: and that other
common proverb; Let not the cobbler pass his pantofle. For confirmation
hereof, I will bring no better argument than every man's common experience.
There is no man (I think) but commonly he applies himself to one thing or
other, this trade or that, some study or art: as for example, a Printer, or a
Goldsmith; if another man ignorant of his art, should come and dispute with
him, and condemn him, because he uses such and such instruments, this or that
manner of working; he would laugh, and account him ignorant, as one that
speaks rather by chance than cunning, and hold him for more bold than wise:
so questionless let these men assure themselves, that if they dispute of that
they know not, they must be accounted presumptuous, although they would not.
Neither for this I disallow some good wits, to propound their difficulties
which occur in matters wherein they are not practiced; as for Lawyers in
Divinity, Physicians in Law, and Divines in Physic, especially to such men
as commonly are accounted learned in those faculties; yet not to contend much,
because the further they pass forward, the harder it will be for them to wind
out again. This rule admits some exception; for I have known Divines very
good Physicians, and Lawyers not altogether ignorant of Divinity, yea and
Physicians practiced in them both; in such cases oftentimes those of one
profession may excel those of another: but this I hold for very rare, because,
he that employeth his wit to many sciences, commonly cannot be excellent in
any. Wherefore men that be unlearned, but discreet, either will not move any
questions in such matters as pass beyond the sphere of their capacities, or
else in such sort, as they rather intend to learn than to contend. But what
shall a man do when he falls in company with these wranglers, who neither
are able to propound a difficulty; nor capable of a good and solid answer?
Questionless, it is a most molestfull life to live in conversation with such
idiots: yet the best course I can find with them is by some palpable absurdity
to reduce them to an open ignorance, as once befell a friend of mine, that
talked with a vain puritan (who vaunted he understood all the word of God:)
well then quoth the other, I will prove by Gods word you may not eat a black
pudding; for we have commanded by the holy Ghost and the Apostles in the 15.
of the Acts, that we should abstain from eating of blood and strangled
meats, now sir this precept is here set down and commanded to be kept, where
have you in all the scripture a warrant to transgress it? The silly fellow
was brought to such an extremity, as I think this argument was the best
lesson that ever he learned in his life, to curb his own presumptuous
ignorance.

Spirit of Contradiction.
SOme men in speech are possessed with the spirit of Contradiction, and
opposition; for they will show themselves in company, able to control, and
gainesay other men's opinions: because then they suppose the victory gotten,
when they crow over their companions. Such conversation cannot but displease
the company, those persons being a burden to their fellows: for as every man
likes his own opinion, and desires it should be approved, so all men
mislike those that contradict them, and hold for false that they delivered for
true. This contradictious speech lies rooted in vaineglory, which spreads
her branches in other men's minds, by despising that they approve: and I
think no better remedy can be used, to amend such a sort of people, than that
a gentleman used in Spain to a gentlewoman that did malapertly chide with him,
Go your ways (said he) whether you have right or wrong, I know you must have
the last word: and so I hold him wise, who can smooth up his talk, and leave
such quarreling and contentious spirits with the last word. Howbeit sometimes
they are tamed with as froward fellows as they are themselves, who will as
fast contradict them as they contradicted others. I would also advise this sort
of contradictors to eschew this defect, in regard of their own credit, lest
accustoming themselves so often to contradictions, they fall not into defense of
many absurdities, and so, for lack of reason, and too much pertinacie, they
leese their reputation. True it is, that among civil gentlemen and elevated
spirits, it will often chance that there will arise in conversation, a certain
diversity of opinion, and one must consequently oppose his judgment against
another: Wherefore in such a case, the opposer ought so to propound his reason,
that he rather seems to desire to know the truth, than to triumph or insult
over the other. The which he may the better perform, if he utter no word of
contempt, if he be not very violent in vehemency of voice or action, if he
make good the others reason as far as it will extend and bring the matter in
conclusion to a certain reconciliation, or manner of speech, or some such
qualification.

Special matters.
TO discover a man's passions, much helps the manner of his speech, but I
think, more the matter: for affection to any thing, if it be vehement, must
break forth. Men that be unwise, commonly speak of frivolous and base
matters; vicious men of one or other sort of vice; grave and wise men of
serious and profound matters; and if they descend to some lower subject, either
they pass it over very slightly, or therein touch some point so wittily, that
ex vnguibus, you may know him a lion. Some men talk much of themselves, and as
it were glancing at their own commendation, and by little and little
insinuating their own praises: or if they be commended, presently you shall
see them puffed up, and swelling with a vain pleasure and delight they have
conceived of themselves. But you will perhaps demand of me by the way, What if
a man should commend me, or any thing appertaining unto me, how ought I carry
my self? If I accept the praise, I shall be accounted proud; if I deny it,
not to be so, I shall seem to reprehend the praiser, and condemn him for a
liar or a flatterer. In such a case, because it occurreth daily, therefore good
it were, to foresee and provide an answer presently. As Alfonsus king of
Arragon answered an Orator, who had recited a long panigericall Oration of his
praises; the king said Panorm. lib. 1. de reb. gest. Alfons.
to him: If that thou have said consents with truth, I thank God for it; if
not, I pray God grant me grace that I may do it. Or else a wise man may say,
This praise I deserve not, but your affection bettereth my actions: or, You by
good nature and love rather mark the little good I do, than many defects
therein committed: or, The spectacles of love forces you to censure all my
imperfections in good part. By this means you shall avoid a certain vain
complacence in your own doings, which offends much those who are given to
censure your actions, neither shall you rudely deny that, your friend of
courtesy affirms to be true.

Concealing and revealing of secrets.
AS some are so secret, that they never will open any thing, almost, touching
their own affairs; so others contrarily are so simple and blabbish, that they
discover many of their conceits and matters, especially concerning themselves,
to any man, almost at the first meeting. The former, commonly, are crafty,
because friendship requires some communication in secrets, principally, if he
be an especial friend: yet this offense may well be tolerated in this
mischievous world, and declining age, wherein profit is prized, and friendship
despised; or at least, men love men more for their own interest, than for
virtue. Therefore, if thou be wise, trust no man with that thou would not
have publickely known, except he be a tried friend by long experience, yea,
although he be thy friend: but vicious (if amongst vicious persons there may be
true friendship) assure thy self, that by opening to him thy mind, thou have
half revealed publicly thine own secret: for such persons usually (if they
be young men, women, or of a very ill behavior) be unwise, blabbish, and most
indiscreet in their speeches: besides, their love being grounded in proper
interest of pleasure and gain, when these by chance or displeasure shall
fail, then persuade thy self, that all they know shall be revealed, because
such imprudent persons suppose that friendship once being dissolved, they are
not bound any more, either to keep secret, or conserve thy credit, and so with
one breath they blow all away. Wherefore I take it for a general rule, that a
man should reserve his secrets of importance, either to himself; or not to
manifest the^, but only to honest and virtuous friends, least it befall unto
him as happened to three students in a college where I lived some years. It
chanced a person of some authority there, wrote to the superior of the
College, a letter in disco^mendation of those three students, all being me^ in
age, and good Scholars: this letter was shown by the superior, to one of these
three; yet because it concerned not so much himself, as the other two, he
marked not well the contents thereof: the superior gave him strait order, that
he should in no case reveal it to the other two; he promised, but performed it
not, for presently he signified to them both as much as he remembered: the one
of them being touched something to the quick, presently devised a way how to
come by the letter; and in fine, secretly got a sight of it by a certain
deceit: he signified to both the others the contents thereof, yet being sharply
pricked therewith, he fell into a chase with the person that had written the
letter, and spared not to signify as much to the superior, who wondered how
he came by the contents thereof. After a little while, he which wrote the
letter, came to the College, and hearing how the person which chafed in that
extreme manner, had gotten intelligence of the letter, (because he was one of
some authority) he called him which first had revealed the matter; who swore,
that he never had uttered any such words, but indeed that the other had by a
stratageme gotten knowledge of the letter: then the person which wrote the
letter called him that so wililie had found it forth, and (although he had
sworn, never to discover that the other had revealed unto him) presently he
signified all the matter unto him, and he then against his promise, revealed
the sum unto the person in authority, of the other; and thus all three
broake their promises and their oaths, by revealing of secrets. Who that knew
these men, would scarcely have believed, that any such errors could by them
have been committed; but by this experience (because I was privy to all their
dealings) I got occasion, to suspect falsehood in fellowship, to try ere I
trusted; and finally, thought none more secret than a man to himself: for many
hearts must have many breathings; and few can conceal from their friends any
secret, when their friends reveal some secrets unto them: and for that almost
there lives none so barren of friendship, but he has ^^me whom he trusts,
therefore hardly from him he can keep secret his own heart, and what his
friends revealed unto him.

Fained secrets.
YOu have another sort of men, whom you may call, cousining friends: for in
show they pretend friendship, but in effect, cousonage or flattery. They will
come to you very seriously, and deliver a smooth tale in secret, and conjure
you, that in no case you should reveal it: you promise and perform it, but
your friend will not keep that secret, for he presently, when your back is
turned, will do as much to another, the second, and third; and so in fine, you
shall have that public which was conceived for secret. This cousonage
proceeds from craftiness, and dissembling friendship, because true
friendship admits not many to communication in secrets. It may also spring
from a lauishing and too open a mind, for that indeed such a person cannot
conceal any thing in his heart from such as do seem (in some sort) to be
addicted to his friendship. I have known diverse great persons subject to this
passion, but afterward greatly crossed thereby, for those which once perceived
their humors, would never keep close any of their secrets, and so by their
policy they gained a reward like unto liars, who though they say truth are
not believed; even so, such coyners of secrets have not their secrets
concealed, although they speak secrets indeed: and one speaking of such a
person said, he revealed secrets to the whole city: as who should say, he sold
his secrets publicly and the wiser sort would laugh in their sleeves to hear
him speak of secrecy.

Sowers of dissension.
OTher men more maliciously pretend friendship, and use strange dealing, either
to make friends, or to breed dissension: some I have found of such an humor,
that if they see two converse familiarly together and one to affect much
another, they, under color of amity, will go secretly and reveal to the one
of them, what they know, or hear, or that the other person his friend,
secretly spoke or wrought to his discredit; yea, diverse things they will
relate, by their own malice invented, as by his friend discovered: yet this
they will not deliver, but under an oath, that he should not detect them to the
other, whereby he of simplicity often reuealeth all he knew of his friend,
because he believed his friend in very deed had betrayed him; whereas, for the
most part, all was but a bait, forged to catch the seely simple soul.
Presently after, they convent the other, whom in secret they tell all they had
fished out of his friend, in his dispraise, and so learn what they can of the
other, charging him withal, in no case to manifest that he heard to the other.
This stratageme I know many politic superiors to have frequented, and some
persons of great policy, but of most small conscience. Because this wicked
invention proceeds from a most malicious uncharitable, and envious mind,
which hates the peace and concord of friends; it argues also, a crafty
politic wit, apt to sift out other men's actions: for he casts the poor man
into an inextricable labyrinth: for forcing him to swear, he cannot examine
whether his friend spoke so ill of him, or no; lest by the notice thereof he
should incur the crime of perjury: neither can he tollerat in his mind, that
his friend should so notoriously abuse him: wherefore he resolves himself,
either wholly to break friendship, or at least, not to use his friend so
familiarly as before.

But how shall a man behave himself in such a case? At the beginning when he
tells thee thy friends defects, excuse them, supposing the relatour to be ill
informed, or that he mistook thy friend; for true friendship requires, that a
friend should in all cases (when evidently the concrary is not convinced)
defend the good name and estimation of his friend; and thereby the sower of
dissension, shall be frustrated of his intention.

Much more I could deliver about this subject, but to wise men it suffices to
show the way, and they will follow further than I can direct them: simple men,
for as much as I can see, must first try and then trust; for their rule lies
in experience and practice, more than in reading and speculation: because their
own harms, or their neighbors must school them, for few are capable for
practical rules in universal, or at least, they can not apply them to
particular subjects.

The discovery of passions by external actions. CHAP. II.
THe internal conceits and affections of our minds, are not only expressed
with words, but also declared with actions: as it appears in Comedies, where
dumb shows often express the whole matter, and by gestures in dancing some
can give to understand most mechanical arts and Calius Rhodiginus lib. 5. c. 3.
trades. The Rhetoritians likewise do not content themselves with the simple
pronuntiation of their Orations, but also prescribe many rules of action, the
which they hold so much the better, how much more lively it represents the
conceits and affections of the mind, because that both through the ears and the
eyes of their auditors, they intend to imprint them in their souls the deeper:
for indeed, words and actions spring from the same root, that is, understanding
and affections: and as leaves, flowers, and fruit declare the virtues of trees,
so words and actions the qualities of minds. And as if the fruit or flowers be
corrupted or vicious, we know the root must be infected: so if men's words or
actions be disconsorted, doubtless the soul cannot be well disposed; for, as
one said well, A troubled Fountain yeedeth vnpure water, and an infected
soul, vicious actions, Plutarch in Moralib.

In many external actions may be discovered internal passions, as in playing,
feasting, going, drinking, praising, apparelling, conuersing, and writing.
Somewhat I will note of each one in particular, remitting the rest to the
Readers diligent consideration: for to entreat of all, would exceed the sphere
of my project; and by discoursing of these few, wise men may pass forward with
the rest.

I. Discovery of Passions in play.
PLay pregnantly proves passions: for pride, choler, and covetousness,
commonly wait upon great gamsters. Some, when they leese, are so inflamed with
ire and choler, that you would take them rather for bedlams than reasonable
creatures; they swear, curse, and cry; every word spoken against them,
suffices to pick a quarrel, or deserves (in their judgments) a buffet.
This inordinat behavior argues, first blindness and folly; for if you ask
them with whom they are offended, they themselves cannot show you: not with
themselves, for that were madness; with the dice? and that were as great
folly; with fortune? but that is nothing: therefore we must conclude, that
they (in such fits) are fools, and brawle with the very air.

Besides, these chafing players, play not for recreation, but for gain; they
use company, more for covetousness than for honesty; because, they would not
fret so much at their loosing, if they affected not too much the winning: and
in very deed they abuse the nature of play, the which was given as a medicine
to recreat men's afflicted minds: but these, preposterously rather afflict the
mind, and make it a poison: for they are so anxious in themselves, and many
fear so much to leese, that as soon as a little sum is drawn from them,
you could hardely discern whether the heart were more vexed with grief, or
the tongue defiled with oaths. I would truly that in every commonweal
princes should punish all persons, that play greater games than their ability
does afford; for I take such sorts of exercises to be most pernicious, for
many reasons, to the state; and I think the punishment meetest for them,
should be, that it were lawful to beg them for Wards, and give them tutors,
because they lack discretion to use their money. Rarely you find great
players, that carry not proud minds, who if they win, they vaunt of gain, if
they leese, they do brag of loss: as a Spaniard in a brauado, thought he
deserved great commendation, because he was able one night to leese ten
thousand crowns at dice.

Others, in play show likewise their passions, albeit they exceed not much the
lawful quantity requisite to recreation, yet they carry a secret pride, and
vehement desire to win, because they would not be inferior to others, even so
much as in play: wherefore, if any cast come cross unto them, they will chafe
as much for a penny, as another man for a pound. These men questionless have
some little shrubs of pride and vanity: for although the most pleasure in play
consists in the victory; yet to affect it too much, to wrangle, to chafe, to
fret therefore, argues an unmortified affection, the which wise men ought to
overcome, because such passions are in very deed childish, and indecent for
grave persons.

Some men wholly consecrat themselves to play, either you shall have them at
dice, cards, bowls, or some such game. These, as unprofitable members, deserve
to be cut from the body of every good commonweal; for what wise man would
tollerat a servant in his house, which did nothing but eat, drink, and play?
They weigh little their souls, for if they did, doubtless they would spend
better their time, because it seems that they were rather created to play
than to labor, addicting themselves more to the pleasures of the body, than
to the service of the soul, and most like bruit beasts follow the inordinat
appetite of sense, more than the right rule of reason. These actions proceed
from a soul altogether deprived of virtue, and replenished with vice, which
better may be named brutish than reasonable.

By this it appears, that those that are addicted much to play, are sensual,
chafers in play are covetous, great gamesters are foolish: the first gets
base pleasure, the second gains great vexation, the last wins poverty:
all seem to love themselves; but doubtless, all hate their souls: I say,
they seem to love their bodies, but indeed they are most cruel enemies, for
they are butchers which feed their calves for slaughter; they are fishers, who
cast a golden hook with a little alluring bait, to catch the fishes for the
frying pan; they cherish their bodies with a moment of pleasure, after to be
punished with an eternity of pain. To play too earnestly does argue pride,
covetousness, choler, or folly: to play too carelessly, troubles good
company, and carries some spark of contempt: not to play at all, proceeds
either from extreme holiness, gravity, hypocrisy, or insensibilitie.
Therefore in game use the golden mean, play not too much, nor too seriously,
nor to great game; take it as medicines, use some attention, play for a trifle.

II. Discovery of Passions in feasting.
GReat feasters and gullars cannot but be subject to many vices: First,
leacherie springs from gluttony, because, as their seats are near by
situation, so they are subordinat in operation; gluttony is the forechamber
of lust, and lust the inner room of gluttony; therefore all disorders and
tumults raised in the former, presently are perceived in the latter. The
superfluities of gluttony are norishments to leacherie, and great repasts swim
under the froath of lust: wherefore, not without reason said some, Sine Cerere
and Baccho friget Venus: Lust fails where good cheer wants: and (almost)
it is impossible that he should be continent in mind, that accustometh to
gormandize his belly. But I know some will demand, In what consists this
gluttony? whereunto I answer, That gluttons think, talk, and earnestly
procure to have great cheer, dainty dishes; they eat more than nature
requires; at the table they will have the best; and in fine, the easiest rule
to perceive them, is to note their care and anxity to fare daintily, to feast
often, and therein to delight much.

Gluttouie causes, not only lechery, but also blockishnesse, and dullness of
wit. Pingui^ venture non generat subtilem sensu, say the Graecians; A fat belly
engenders not a subtle wit* for as if a man were drowned in a puddle of mire,
he could not perceive the light of the Sun; even so, a soul drowned in meat,
fat, and blood, cannot behold the light of God: because, as Saint Basil notes,
Basil. in ser. de Ie^unio.
when a cloud is interposed betwixt our eyes and the Sun, it hinders the
light from us: even so there rises from a gluttonous stomach, a multitude of
vapors to the brain, which causes such a mist before the eyes of the soul,
that she cannot possibly speculate any spiritual matters, concerning her
self, or the glory God. Hereupon follows a rule to be marked, That such
men, in the heat of their gulling feasts ouershoot themselves extremely, and
the excess of feeding venteth forth in superfluous speaking: for the wit
being a little distempered with fumes, the tongue breaks forth into
indiscreet words, and often they utter so much in that foolish vain, that
afterward costeth them both grief and pain: whereas a discreet man,
observing them in such humors, might get great advantage, and reap no small
commodity.

Many more crooked branches spring from this stem of gluttony and feasting:
for hardly at such times they can conceal secrets: upon a full paunch commonly
waits slothfulness, sleep, and ease, and except his stock be good, it
will soon be spent: besides, great fare breeds many diseases, for as
abundance of doung ingendreth abundance of vermin; so, abundance of meat,
abundance of filthy thoughts, and pernicious maladies: forgluttonie must be
the nursse of Physicians, since, Plures occidit gula quam gladius.

III. Discovery of Passions in drinking.
SVperfluitie of meat, causes dullness of mind; but superfluity of drink,
bereaueth men of wit: for as I have seen in some hospitals of mad men, sundry
differences of mandnesse, so I have found not unlike humors of drunkenness;
for some are merry mad, some melancholy mad, some furious, others fainting: so
in drunkenness, some you shall have merry drunk, others dead drunk, others
raging, others casting.

The Passions from whence this vice proceeds, and whereunto it leads, are
many: Drunkenness grows of intemperance, and causes lust and unclean
talk: Nolite (says the Scripture) inebriari vino in quo est luxuria, Ehes. 5.
18.
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is lechery. Drunkenness bereaueth men of
reason, and for the present time makes mad.

To drunkards commit no secrets, for experience has taught us, that many have
revealed most secret matters when they were drunk; for hardly he can keep
thy secret, who cannot keep his own wit. I hear in high Germany, that
parents will see men drunk before they marry their daughters unto them,
because they will know to what kind of drunkenness they are subject; and
according to the good or ill qualities (if a drunkard can have good qualities)
they judge him convenient or not for their marriages. There is (almost) no
passion in these men that you shall not discover in their drunkenness, because
that reason being buried in them, they rule themselves wholly by inordinat
appetites and sensitive apprehension, which cannot conceal at such time, the
very dregs of their passions. And therefore to conclude, drunkards have
little fear of God, they hurt their bodies, they dull their wits, they clog
the soul with vices, they spend their substance, they spoil the commonweal,
one devouring more than would suffice for three or four: and finally, they are
never to be trusted with any secret matter; for I hold him for a simple man,
that cannot sound a drunkards soul, even to the bottom.

IIII. Discovery of Passions in gesture.
THis subject is very ample, and would require almost a whole book: but I will
only touch superficially some chief points. The gestures of the body may be
reduced unto these heads; motions of the eyes, pronuntiation, managing of the
hands and body, manner of going.

A rolling eye, quick in moving, this way, and that way, argues a quick, but
a light wit, a hot choleric complexion, with an unconstant and impatient
mind: in a woman, it is a sign of great immodesty and wantonness. The reason
hereof I take to be, for that such quickness proceeds from abundance of hot
spirits, which cause good apprehension, but because they are not corrected by
modesty, and virtue, it seems the subject lets them range, according to
their natural inclination, which tends to quickness and lightness.

Heavy dull eyes proceed from a dull mind and hard of conceit, for the
contrary reason: therefore we see all old persons, sick men, and
flegmaticke, slow in turning their eyes.

Eyes much given to winking, descend from a soul subject to fear, because it
argues a weakness of spirits, and a feeble disposition of the eyelids.

To stare fixly upon one, either comes from blockishnesse, as in rustickes;
impudency, as in malicious persons; prudence, when from those in authority;
incontinencie in women.

Who open their eyes, and extend them much, commonly be simple men, but of a
good nature.

Eyes inflamed and fiery, are the native brood of choler and ire: quiet and
peaceable, with a certain secret grace and mirth, are children of love and
friendship.

In Voice.
THere came a man to Demosthenes, desiring his help to defend his cause, and
told him how one had beaten him: Demosthenes answered him again, saying, I do
not believe this to be true thou tellest Plutar^. in De^ost.
me, for surely the other did never beat thee. The plaintiff then thrusting out
his voice aloud, said; What, has he not beaten me? Yes indeed, quoth
Demosthenes, I believe it now, for I hear the voice of a man that was beaten
indeed: whereby we may see how he coniectured, by the lowdnesse of his voice,
the just indignation of his mind: For indeed, men in ire and wrath, show, by
their pronuntiation, the flame which lodges in their breasts. Wherefore Cato
gave counsel, That soldiers in the war should terrify their enemies with
vehement voices and cries. A small trembling voice proceeds from fear, and
such an one commonly have Plutarc. in To. Apoph.
great Orators, or at least, it were good they should have, in the beginning
of their Orations, for thereby they win a certain compassion and loving
affection of their auditors. Much more might be said of this subject, but for
that it concerns specially physiognomie, and natural constitution of the
organs and humors of the body, therefore I will omit it.

Managing of the hands and body.
IN discoursing, to use no gestures, argues slownesse; too much gesticulation
comes of lightness: mediocritie proceeds from wisdom and gravity; and
if it be not too quick, it notes magnanimity. Some men you have always
fidling about their garments, either prying for moaths, binding of garters,
pulling up their stockings, that scarcely when they go to bed they are
apparelled: this proceeds from a childish mind, and void of conceits: and if
you deal with men in company, it also shows a little contempt of those with
whom you converse, because it seems you little attend what they say.

Some cast their heads, now hither, now thither, as wantonly as lightly, which
springs from folly and inconstancy. Others scarce think they do pray,
except they wrie and wrest their necks; which, either comes of hypocrisy,
superstition, or foolishness. Some gaze upon themselves, how proper bodies
they bear, how neat and proportioned legs sustain them, and in fine, almost
are inamored of themselves; so they are pleased with their own persons: but
this gesture displeases commonly, and proceeds from pride and vain
complacence in going.

To walk maiestically (that is, by extending thy legs forth, and drawing thy
body back, with a slow and stately motion) in all men's judgment usually
issues from a proud mind, and therefore deserves dispraise, except in a
Prince, a General of an army, or a Soldier in in the sight of his enemies;
because this manner of pasing shows an ostentation of the mind, and that a
man would set forth himself above others: which sort of vaunting, few can
tollerat, because they can hardly suffer, that men should so far inhance
themselves above others.

To trip, to iet, or any such light pase, comes of lightness and pride,
because such persons seem to take delight, that others should behold their
singular sort of going. Fast going becomes not grave men; for as philosophers
hold, a slow pase shows a magnanimous mind: and if necessity requires not,
a light pase argues a light mind, because thereby we know how the spirits are
not sufficiently tempered and brideled; whereupon follows lightness of body
and inconstancy of mind.

V. Discovery of passion in Praising.
I (Almost) never knew man discontented to hear his own praise, and few there
be who can tollerat to be dispraised: wise men doubt with Antisthenes the
Philosopher, that when wicked men praise them, they have committed some error;
and rejoice with Hector to be praised of virtuous men for their good endeavors.
It were wisdom, not to praise any man exceedingly, but especially before a
multitude, for that good men change their estates. What Emperor, in the
beginning, was better than Nero? and who, in the end, more vicious? Solomon
surpassed all his predecessors in wisdom, yet afterward fell into extreme
folly. Wherefore it were wisdom to use superlatiues very rarely, and say,
such a man is virtuous, but not most virtuous. So therefore praise good men,
that thou reserve a caveat for their errors. Besides, commonly proud men
cannot abide their equals should much be commended, for the praise of the one
obscureth the glory of the other; and as I have observed by experience, they
either openly, or secretly will seek to disgrace him and discover some
defects, the which impeacheth more his credit than your commendation aduanceth
his reputation, because that men be more prone to conceive ill than good of
others: therefore one said wisely, Calumniare semper aliquid haeret, speak
evil, for ever some thing remains: that is, either a full persuasion, or a
sinister suspicion. Some men, when they have done any thing worthy of praise,
they either like hens go cackling in regard of their new laid egg, that is,
blazing their own works; or endeavor by secret insinuation, or gross
industry, that others should commend them: as the Italian Poet did, who having
made an Epigram which much pleased his fancy, showed it to some of his friends,
praising it about the Skies: they presently demanded, who was the Author? then
he for very shame of pride, would not tell them that it was his, but with a
fliering countenance well gave them to understand, that the verses and the
laughter were coosin germans, and both issued from the same proud heart. In
those Nations I have dealt with all this secret passion: an itching humor of
affecting praise, especially reigns among the Spaniards; for if a man will
not publicly praise their doings, they hold him to make little account of
them, to be uncivil, or perhaps their enemy. ^^ this we may gather a very good
rule to discover passion^ ^or if that you see one much to please himself with
others praises, and (as it were) to feed upon the wind of men's words; doubt not
but self-love and vanity possess the best tenement of his heart: And this
you may know, if the person praised, either openly confess it, underhand
insinuat it, or as it were with a smiling countenance silently approve it: for
as gold is tried by fire, so a man by the mouth of a prayser.

VI. Discovery of Passions in Apparel.
EXtraordinary apparel of the body, declares well the apparel of the
mind: for some you have so inconstant in their at tire, that the variety of
their garments pregnantly proves the sicklenesse of their heads: for they are
not much unlike to Stage Players, who adorn themselves gloriously like
Gentlemen, then like clownes, after, as women, then like fools, because the
fashion of their garments makes them resemble these persons. And truly the
Frenchmen and Englishmen, of all Nations, are (not without some good cause)
noted and condemned of this lightness, the one for inuenting, the other for
imitating; in other things we think them our inferiors, and herein we make
them our masters: and some I have heard very contemptuously say, That scarcely
a new form of breeches appeared in the French kings kitchen, but they were
presently translated over into the Court of England. This newfanglenesse
proceeds from an inconstant mind, a proud heart, and an effeminate affection.
Augustus Caesar had always in hatred, rich and gorgeous garments, because he
said they were Sueton.
banners blasing our pride, and neasts to breed leachery. Wherefore Saint
Gregory plainly proves that glorious Gregon in hom.
attire proceeds from pride, because that men or women will not use their
gallant garments, but in such places where they may be seen: and he that could
sound the hearts of many vain persons, should find the root of this gay
apparel an unchaste heart, and an arrogant mind. Whereunto well alluded
Diogenes, being asked a question of a young man, very neatly and finly
appareled; he said he would not answer him before he put off Laer. lib. 6.
his apparel, that he might know whether he was a man or a woman: declaring by
his effeminat attire, his womanish wantonness.

As some offend in too much niceness, so others in too much carlesnesse and
slouenry, not regarding in what manner and fashion they show themselves abroad:
which, in some, may come of a certain contempt they have of themselves, of
pride, and the world; but this manner of mortification (howbeit I will not
condemn all those that use it, of hypocrisy) yet I hold, that for the most
part, it carries a smell thereof: I know a man that some hold very godly and
religious, yet when he was to appear before a prince, he would always have
the barest cloak he could get, to the intent the king might account him godly,
mortified, and a despiser of the world: and perhaps Antisthenes went not far
awry when he saw Socrates in a torn coat, showing a hole thereof to the
people; Lo, quoth he, through this I see Socrates vanity: for mortification
stands well with modesty and decent attire. Wherefore I take it universally,
that unseemly garments, and neglect of apparel, for the most part, proceeds
from sloth, or hypocrisy; for true and sound Virtue requires gravity and
decency.

Much might be said here concerning the newfangle madness, or lascivious
pride, or vain superfluities, of women's pointing, painting, adorning, and
fantastical disguising: but I must say this vice in them to be remediless,
because it has been in every age, ever cried against, and never amended: and
for my part, I am half persuaded this sin carries with it a final
impenitence, which women never intend to change as long as they live, but to
carry it to the grave: for every one will excuse her self, because she only
follows the fashion and custom: if others would change, she would be
contented to immitate; but if you ask another, she will say as much, but none
will begin, and so their pride must be endless, and therefore incorrigible in
this world, to be punished in another.

VII. Discovery of passion in Conversation.
COmmonly by conversation you may discover men's affections, for he that
frequenteth good company, for most part is honest; and he that uses ill
company, can hardly be virtuous: who ever saw a man very conversant with
drunkards, to be sober? who knew an individual companion of harlots, chaste? I
am not ignorant that a physician may converse with sick men without infection,
and cure them: but many physicians will scarce adventure to deal with plaguie
patients, lest in curing others, they kill themselves. Vices are plagues, and
vicious persons infected: therefore it were good to deal with them a far off,
and not in such places where their vices are strongest, as with gl^^ters in
banquets, drunkards in tauernes, riotous persons in suspected houses, lest thou
discredit thy self, and be infected with the others vice: as a gentleman I
knew, who walking by Thames, and seeing his boy in watring his gelding to pass
too far, so that he was in danger of drowning, presently leapt in, thinking
by swimming to deliver them both, the boy caught hold of his masters foot, and
pulled him over head and ears, and so they were drowned all three for company.

Who talks much before his betters, cannot but be condemned of arrogancy,
contempt, and lack of prudence. To converse much with inferiors, as it
breeds contempt so it argues a base mind, as though his conceits were no
better than such persons deserved to be acquainted withal. Except inferiors be
endued with some excellent Continuus aspectus minus verendos magnes homines
ipsa satietate facit. Liu. lib. 35. Et maiestati mayor ex longinquo reuerentia
Taci. 1. An.
qualities: wherefore noblemen or princes may confer with inferiors or
subjects, if they be learned, military men, or wise politicians: wherefore, to
keep, or win gravity, great prudence it were, never to talk with those that
be far beneath us in estate, and condition, but of serious matters: for such
men, by sporting, will account better of themselves, and in time, despise their
superiors; for familiarity aspireth to equality.

To enter into company, although of equals, without some civil courtesy, or
affable speech, comes of rusticitie: to depart without taking of leave, or
salutation, argues inciuilitie and contempt.

Too much familiarity, with scoffing, and gibing, proceeds from lightness,
and rarely continues without dissension; because that men are not at all times
apt to receive jests: wherefore friendly jests ever carry with them a certain
respect: this fault I find more common among Frenchmen, and English, than any
other Nation. Some, in conversation can discourse well for some two or three
days, but after that time their oil is spent, they thrust out all they have
of a sudden, and after become very barren. These men be not commonly witty,
nor humble; for witty men seldom are drawn dry in conceits, and humble men
destill their knowledge according to their talents. Much more might be handled
in this point, but because it rather concerns civil conversation, than
inuestigation of passions, I will omit it.

VIII. Discovery of Passions in Writing.
WHo of purpose writes obscurely, peruetteth the natural communication of
men; because we write to declare our minds, and he that affects obscurity,
seems, not to be willing that men should conceive his meaning. The holy
Scriptures I always except, which for many causes admit some obscurity. But
for men, in their writing to follow such a phrase as hardly you can understand
what they say, cannot but proceed either from confused understanding, because a
clear conceit breeds perspicuous delivery, or affectation of learning,
which springs from pride; for I have known most excellent men endeavor to
speak and write the greatest mysteries of our faith, in such plain manner,
that very deep divinity seemed very easy. And I truly am of opinion, that
he is the greatest Divine, and most profitable to the commonweal, which can
make his learning to be best conceived.

To use many Metaphors, Poetical phrases in prose, or incke-pot terms,
smells of affectation, and argues a proud childish wit. To be peremptory
and singular in opinions, to censure ill, or condemn rashly, without rendering
some sound and strong reason, for the most part proceeds from singular self
love, and a defectuous judgment.

Some will condemn others for writing, because they think there be Books
written more than sufficient: This censure comes, either from a sluggish
mind, or envious, to see others good endeavors commended; or else from gross
ignorance, because they neither know the nature of men's wits, nor the limits of
humane vnderderstanding: for if we see the art of sailing with the Compass,
the exercise of Artillery, the manner of Printing, of late years invented,
augmented, and perfitted; Why may not diverse Sciences already invented, be
increased with new conceits, amplified with better Demonstrations, explaned in
a more perspicuous manner, delivered in a more ordinat method?

Contrary to these be certain itching spirits, who put every toy in print,
they prize their own works exceedingly, and censure others injuriously: these
may well be compared to certain wild vines, which bring forth many grapes, but
never mature them: some do it for same, and some for gain, and both without
discretion, and against their own credit. Therefore great wisdom it were, to
write something discreetly, that men's labors may, not only profit themselves,
but also be derived to others: for what do we account good in it self, if it
be not communicatiue of goodness, to others? Bonum est sui diffusinum. Yet
would I have men not to blab out their conceits without meditation, or good
digestion; because, if in all actions it concerns greatly a man's demeanor,
to effectuat them with deliberation and ripeness; so, much more in writing,
which no man hastes, being distilled drop by drop from the pen, and of it
self permanent, not as words communicatiue to some few present auditors, but
blazed to the world, and sent to all posterity.

Some men, in writing, flow with phrases, but are barren in substance of
matter, and such are neither witty nor wise: others have good conceits, but
delivered after an affected manner; they put a little liquor into too great a
vessel. Others are so concise, that you need a commentary to understand them;
the former be not without all folly, and the latter lack not some pride: yet
those are more commendable than these, for those only are tedious through their
prolixitie, but these are molestfull, because they require too great attention,
and make a man often spend many spirits, to win a slender knowledge.

Many write confusedly, without method and order, and such comprehend not their
matter: others are too precise in divisions, in such sort, that ere you come to
the last part, you have forgotten the first members: and this defect I find in
many postils of scriptures. Good distinctions breed perspicuitie: but a
multitude engenders obscurity; and best I hold it so to distinguish, that
distinctions may rather be noted in matter than in words.

With this I think good to conclude the discovery of Passions in humane
actions, omitting much more that might be said in this matter; as what
passions may be discovered in laughing, in disputing, in crossing, in
negotiating, and such like external operations: and especially two discourses
I have omitted, or rather not printed though penned; the one is a discovery of
passions in censuring books, a matter not unnecessary for this critical age,
wherein every man's labors are araigned at the tribunal seat of every
pedanticall censurious Aristarchs understanding. The other, is discovery of
passions in taking Tobacco. The former treatise was violently kept from me, and
therefore not in my power to print: the latter, upon some good considerations
was for a time suspended: but lest my labor should be too long, and the
Discourse too tedious, I will leave these, and many more, to the Readers witty
observation and deliberat judgment.

Order or conference of Passions. CHAP. III.
We may confer passions together in diverse manners: First in knowledge;
secondly, in generation; thirdly, in intention; and fourthly, in degree of
perfection or dignity.

What passion is first and best known unto us.

1 THomas affirms, that no passion is more sensibly Thom. in 1. 2. q. 26. ^.
1. ad primum.
known unto us, than desire or concupiscence; for rendering a reason why our
coveting appetite is commonly called concupiscibilis, he says the cause is,
for that we name things, as we conceive them: and therefore, because we
perceive our desire most manifestly, we call it, our coveting or desiring
appetite: for, as he proves out of Saint Augustine, Love then most is felt
when it is absent from the object beloved. But I cannot herein consent with
Thomas, because I think there is no man that ever perceived in himself so
vehement a desire of any thing he loved, as sadness and grief when he was
afflicted with that he hated. In fear also who perceives not most sensibly
that passion wherein men do tremble, shake, and shiuer, yea sweat blood for
very fear? as Maldonatus relates, he heard of those which saw a Maldo. in
26. ca. 1. Mat. Arist. lib. 7. de histor. arumal. ca. 16. and lib. 3. de part.
any. ca, 5.
strong man at Paris, condemned to death, sweat blood for very fear. And he
proves out of Aristotle, that this effect may be natural. Neither Caietanes
shift upon Thomas serves any thing to the purpose, that we perceive better
our desires of the soul, without any corporal alteration of the body, than
either love, pleasure, or hatred: for this comment spoyleth the text, because
hardly we conceive any actions of the soul, but by these corporal
alterations, the which induce us to name them according to Thomas his meaning:
neither is it true that we prove by experience, without the motions of the
body more sensibly concupiscence, than joy or sadness: and this assumption was
admitted of Caietane, without any probation. Wherefore I think we may best
say, that of all passions we prove pain, grief, sadness, pleasure, fear,
and delectation are most notoriously known: yet because these vehement
passions do not affect us so commonly, but at certain times, and desires of
those things we love, continue the longest, and fall forth oftenest; therefore
men called our sensitive appetite Concupiscibilis, coveting. First of all then,
sadness most manifestly is known to us, because we suffer often, and feel
most sensible pain; then pleasure, then fear: the other are not so open, but
sometimes they may exceed, and so more show themselves, as ire, desperation,
etc.

Order of Passions in generation or production.
2 Divines and Philosophers commonly affirm, that all other passions
acknowledge love to be their fountain, root, and mother; the reason I take to
be for that al passions, either prosecut some good, or fly some evil: those
which fly evil, as hatred, fear, sadness, presuppose the love of some good,
the which that evil depriueth, as for example; who hates death, but he which
loves life? who fears adversity, but he that loves prosperity? who is
pensive in his sickness, but he that loves health? Love then goes before
all those passions which eschew evil. Amongst them which prosecute good, love
likewise proceeds, for the passions of our minds are not unlike the motions
of our bodies: For as things naturally moved, have an appetite or natural
inclination to the place whereunto they are moved, move, and rest therein; as
the water which runs so fast down the mountains, has an instinct of
Nature to be united with the Sea, for which cause we see brooks and floods
run with such a maine force to attain thereunto, when they come to the Sea;
presently they join in friendship, and live in concord, joining together as
loving friends: even so, we see in beasts, the horse loves water when he is
thirsty, and therefore by desire he seeks out some river or fountain; when
he has found it, he drinks, pleases himself therewith, and so rests
contented. This ordinary course keep passions: but sometimes this
subordination is changed, for if a man be wounded, upon a sudden, the present
passion of grief and ire invade him: and so per accidens, in many other cases,
the foresaid order may be broken.

Order of Passions in Intention.
3 IF we discourse of those Passions which reside in the sensitive appetite, it
ever first intends pleasure and delight, because therewith Nature is most
contented: from which intention follows love, hatred, ire, and such like:
this passion beasts most desire, yea children and sensual persons wholly seek
after, and direct almost their whole actions thereunto, for pleasure is the
polestare of all inordinat passions: and if a man examine himself thoroughly, he
shall find that riches, glory, health, learning, and what else most men desire,
aim commonly at pleasure and delight of the body, because these pleasures are
easily perceived, and in them the soul seems to purchase a quiet rest.
Nevertheless, virtuous men, whose passions are ruled by reason, leuel at a
higher mark, and subordinate pleasure to honesty, and delight to virtue;
because (as we say) Glory waits on Virtue, as the shadow follows the body:
even so, unto good actions follows a certain pleasure and sweetness;
howbeit a good man gives alms, yet does he not give it with intention men
should commend him, as hypocrites do, and so be repayd with the pleasure of a
good reputation, but with the testimony of a good conscience that he does it
for the glory of God.

Order of Passions in Dignity.
4 IF we compare our passions in dignity or perfection, then those wherewith
we prosecute good, are more excellent than those wherewith we esteem ill: and
among these, love holds the principal place, and as a queen in dignity
preceadeth the rest: because that love unites the lover in affection with the
object beloved: love is the root of other affections, love finally makes us
friends with God and man.

All we have said of passions residing in our sensitive appetite, the same we
find in the reasonable passion, of our will, because the will has such like
acts, specified of the same objects, directed to the same end: for as a
Rhetoritian will make an Epistle according to the rules of Grammar, as well as
a Grammarian; even so what our sensatiue appetite follows or abhors, the
same our will may prosecute or detest.

THE FIFTH BOOK of the Passions of the Mind: Wherein are delivered the means
to move Passions.
THe water which we find in every City, by three ways passes into it;
either by fountains or springs, by rivers or conduits, or by rain, snow, or
halestones: that is, some water arises, some passes, some descends: so in
like manner our imaginations or internal senses, and consequently our
Passions, by three ways are moved; by humors arising in our bodies, by
external senses and secret passage of sensual objects, by the descent or
commandment of reason. How passions are stirred up by humors was above
delivered, here only remains to declare how they are provoked by senses, and
incited by the wit and will. And first of all we will begin with the motions of
senses, as most known, obuious, and ordinary.

How senses move Passions, and specially our sight. 1.
GEnerally they love and affect vanity, for what is that they love or can love
in the world, and worldly, but vanity? that is, neither before it is had,
contenteth, nor when it is possessed, fully pleases, nor after it is departed,
satisfies: For such things are vain, which vanish away, and are resolved into
nothing. They search after lies, not only because all worldly allurements
yield no felicity and contentation as they bear us in hand, but also for that
in very deed and really they be lies, showing one thing in the rind and
external appearance, and an other in the coare and internal essence: for
cousining arts falsify and sophisticat nature, causing copper seem gold,
hypocrisy sanctity, and senses surfeits the souls solaces.

All senses no doubt are the first gates whereby pass and repasse all messages
sent to passions: but yet the scriptures in particular wonderfully exhort,
command, and admonish us to attend unto the custody and vigilance over our
eyes. David who had once unwarily glaunced awry, and let go the raines of his
eyes, at his passions importunity, thought himself unable without Gods
special grace to guide, direct, and withdraw them from vanity: and therefore
requested him to auert them. Auerte Psalm. 11. 8.
oculos meos ne videant vanitate^. Solomon his son, inspired by Gods eternal
wisdom, exhorts us to observe 2. Reg. 11. 1.
(wherein he himself most grossly offended) and attend well our eyes, and
therefore not to look upon a woman trimmed and decked up. Auerte faciem tuam a
muliere Sap. 9.
compta.

Jeremy putting on the person of many of his careless people, lamented the
loss which was befallen them for not keeping diligently the gates of their
eyes. Oculus meus depredatus est anima^ meam, my eye has sacked my soul: how
O holy Prophet can the eye an external sense, rob thy soul of her riches? ah
it is easy to answer: The sense cannot be free from theft and sin, which
opens the gates and lets the thief in. Wherefore Job thought to prevent
such harms and damages, and therefore cut off the occasions, couenanting with
his Job. 31.
eyes, that he would not so much as think of a virgin, Pepigi faedus cum
oculis meis, vt ne cogitarem guidem de virgin. And Solomon renders a reason
hereof, Because perhaps he might have been scandalized, or induced to offend
God, allured by her beauty, Virginem ne conspilias, Sap. 9.
ne forte scandalizaris in decore illius.

Questionless the holy Ghost in sacred writ, would never have so often, and so
seriously councelled us unto a careful watchfulness over this sense
specially, but for some important and weighty reasons. For he well knew, that
of all senses, sight was the surest and certainest of his object and sensation;
no sense rangeth abroad and pierces the skies like unto this; no sense has
such variety of objects to feed and delight it, as this; no sense imprinteth
so firmly his forms in the imagination, as this; no sense serves the soul
so much for knowledge, as this; no sense is put so often in action, as this; no
sense sooner moves, than this; and consequently, no sense well guided, more
profitable to the soul than this, nor no sense peruerteth more perilous than
this: for if the guide be corrupted, the followers will hardly escape
vninfected. Wherefore I would persuade all them that fear God, and would avoid
occasions of sins, either not to behold at all such things as may induce them
easily to offend; or so perfunctorily pass over them, as they leave no sting
behind them: and therefore we are willed not to behold wine when it glistereth,
and as it were, glories in the glass; for such alluring sights, dart
presently into the heart inordinat delights: his meaning is, we should not demur
in sensual beholding, least perhaps ensue too much affection, or drinking.

Epiphanius gives a very apt moral reason, why in the old law when a dead
course passed by any house, they were commanded to shut their doors and
windows: For says he, by this thou art taught: Si audieris vocem Epiphan.
lib. 1. here is. tom. 1. he^^s. 9. p. q.
peccati, aut speciem delicti videris, claude oculos those a concupiscentia, and
os a vanitate verborum, and aurem a prauo sono vt ne mortisicetur tota domus,
hoc est anima and corpus. If thou hear the voice of sin, or see the face of
offense, shut thine eyes from concupiscence, and thy mouth from sinful sounds,
least all thy house die, that is, thy body and thy soul. For as he adds
after out of the Prophet, Mors per fenestras ascendit: death ascends into the
house of our hearts, by the windows of our senses. He therefore that intends
to keep death from his heart, must shut the gates of his senses in the face of
sin. For the better performance hereof, it is to be considered, that passions
are not only moved by their principal objects and directly, but also by
certain appurtenances, apappendices, or (let me call them for lack of a
better word) scraps of the principal object, indirectly the which appertain
and have some reference thereunto. When Jacob saw the garment of Joseph
sprinkled Genesis 37.
with blood, it stirred up in him extremely the passion Judith. 16. 11.
of sorrow. The sandals or pantofles of Judith, ravished the eyes of
Holophernes, Sandalia eius repuerunt oculos eius, and hailed his heart to lust.
The Antiochians were so vexed with certain extraordinary exactions the
emperor Theodosius imposed upon them, that they for extreme Chry. in variis
homil. ad populum Antioch^u^.
spite and anger, which the sight of his arms and statues stirred up in them,
would no longer endure them in their city, but broke the one, and rased the
other. We see a dog when he cannot, or dare not assault him that throws the
stone with whom he is angry, runs to bite the stone and so in part to
revenge his spite. David agreeued with the death of Saul and Ionathas cursed
the senseless mountains of Gelboe which vpheld their enemies till the
Israelits were slain. Montes Gelboe nec 2. Reg. 1. 21.
ros nec pluuiae veniant super vos. And Job execrated the day that gave light
when he was borne, after he was plunged into so many miseries. Pereat dies in
qua natus Job. 3. 3.
sum and noxin qua dictu^ est: conceptus est homo. Raguel when he heard Raphael
the Angel tell him, how young Tobie was old Tobies son; could not abstain
from tears, the sight of the son so moved and stirred up the affection he
bore to his father: the like did Sara his wife, and Tob. 7.
Anne the daughter. And the reason of this enlarged and extensiue affection in
passions, I think proceeds from the very heart and nature of every passion:
For when we love God, our parents, or friends, we are well pleased and
contented with all those treasures of goodness, honesty, wealth and all other
perfections they have, and wish them such as beseem them, which they want; and
this we desire to see performed, and rejoice when it is accomplished: and
therefore since that a man has many good things of nature, as children, wife,
kinsfolk, etc. and many additions by fortune, as servants, horses,
possessions, etc. and many prised ornaments, as credit, glory, fame, images,
statues, etc. and diverse other things which have reference and relation unto
him as their master, lord, and owner: and therefore he that loves entirely his
friend, loves all that belongs unto his friend, and valueth them at that
rate it deserves and his friend priseth them. In hatred and envy
contratiwise, every one detesteth not only the person, but also all that
appertains unto him, for the contrary reason; neither can he abide to see
any thing prosper which concerns him. Wherefore David offering his prayer to
God, requesteth him to defend his innocence and punish his enemy: and not
only his person, but also wishes his children should become orphans, Fiant
filij eius orphani: Psalm. 108.
and his wife a widow, and vxor etus vidua: That his children should be cast
out a doors, range like vagabonds, and go a begging, Nutantes transferantur
filij eius, and mendicent and eijctantur de habitationibus suis. And yet not
contented: Let the usurer sack him of all his substance, and strangers
dispoile him of all his labors, Scrutetur foenerator omnem substantiam eius,
and deripiant alieni labores eius. Yet more, Let no man help him, nor take
commiseration upon his infants, Non sit illi adiutor, nec sit qui misereatur
pupillis eius: and all this is not enough, but, Let his children die, and in
one generation cause his name to be buried in oblivion, Fiant nati eius in
interitum, in generatione vna deleatur nomen eius. And many more such
imprecations he powers forth against them, which I for brevity sake omit:
only this will suffice, that the hater cannot endure to see or suffer the
person hated to prosper and enjoy any good thing, or any thing belongs him. I
have known some men so passionat, that it was a most bitter corrosiue unto
their hearts to see the children of their enemies but well apparelled: and it
is held for a good point in policy and apt to move compassion, when the prince
is offended with any person, that he appear not before him in gorgious but
mourning attire: and so Saint Chrysostom recounteth that diverse noble women
deposed all their pomp and Chrisost. hom. ad populi.
pride, and after a most mean manner and with poor apparel presented
themselves before the judges to sue for their husbands in that lamentable
commotion at Antioch: and as much the scriptures insinuat, that a man should
do to God, as Baruch testifies: Anima quae tristis Baruch. 2.
est super magnitudinem mali, and incedit curua, dat tibi gloriam domine, The
soul which is sorry for the mightiness of her evil, and goes crooked, O
Lord glorifieth thee. His meaning is, the contrite heart, and humble
submission, and abject conceit a sinner has of himself, caused by true
repentance, exalt Gods greatness and extol his majesty, the which his
mortal enemies so grieve to have offended.

Out of this discourse we may collect some practical points very profitable,
and know a reason how men commonly carry themselves toward appassionat
persons. First, for that we say sight stirs up passions, and not only the
persons we love, but also whatsoever releaseth any thing of them. Therefore
generally among friends which be absent and out of sight, affections are colder
and rarer: for although true friends have always a secret cabinet in their
memories to talk in their minds with them whom they love, although absent; yet
except the memory be revived by some external object, oblivion enters,
thoughts are more remiss, and friendship fails: Wherefore, messages,
letters, tokens, friends, kinsfolks, and such things as concern us, are to
be sent to our friends to renouat and revive our former amity.

Secondly, if we would not exasperat our enemies, it were expedient not only
we our selves, but also all these things which any way belong us, appear not
in their sights: yea, and that is more, we must take heed as much as in us
lies, that they understand not any prosperity or good befallen unto us:
because in all these sights hatred is stirred up and revived anew, which lay
smothered before under the embers of forgetfulness: and so with silence
perhaps enmity of it self will consume and pine away.

Thirdly, to persuade any matter we intend, or to stir up any passion in a
multitude, if we can aptly confirm our opinion or intention with any visible
object, no doubt but the persuasion would be more forcible, and the passion
more potent. Cato was determined to strike the Senate and Romans, with fear of
the Carthaginian forces; and least they should object against him, that
Carthage was far from them, and therefore not so dangerous, he presently
showed them green figs, at that instant brought from Carthage; and so they
all conceived that the country was not far distant, for otherwise the figs
would have been dried or corrupted.

Galba intending to excite the principal men of Spain Tacitus lib. 1.
against Nero; and to move them the more to wage war against him, placed of
purpose before his tribunal a many of images of great personages executed or
banished in Neroes time, and fetched from exile a young noble man, out of the
next Island, to stand by his seat, while he spoke to his army.

Licurgus brought two dogs the one savage the other trained up, to let the
people see the difference betwixt men well brought up and badly, and withal to
let them understand the great good of keeping good laws.

The Macedonians being once overcome in battle by their adjacent enemies,
thought the only remedy that remained to inanimate their soldiers to
battle, was to carry their young king Philip the first in his cradle to the
field, thereby stirring up the zeal of faithful subjects to defend their
innocent prince: and this little wherstone so sharpened their swords, that
indeed they won the battle.

The people of Tangia in America in their wars carried always in their camp
the corpse and bones of their ancient famous warriers, thereby intending to
encourage their soldiers with the worthy memory and valor of their
predecessors. Agria a city in Hungaria, being besieged the year 1562 by
Mahomet Bassa with an army of 60000 Turks, and battered with 50 cannons; in
the city were only 2000 Hungarians, who with incredible valor had repelled
thirteen most terrible assaults: and albeit they were most valiant, yet to
increase their valor, they (expecting another fresh assault) swear themselves,
that upon peril of death no man should talk or speak of peace, or yielding,
nor give other answer to these insatiable suckers of Christian blood, but with
cannons, muskets, and caliuers: and in case the siege endured longer than their
victuals lasted, then rather to die of hunger, than submit themselves unto the
Turkish slavery. And at last when the Bassa had offered them diverse fair and
favorable conditions, if they would yield, they with a visible sign to move
him to despair of his intent, hanged over the wall a coffin covered with
black betwixt two spears, thereby representing unto him, that in that city
they would be buried: and so prevailed.

Among the Jews the ark of God as a visible sign was borne by the Leuits in
the battle, as with a present object to deliver them from all fear of
enemies, thereby conceiving the infallible assistauce and protection of God
over them, whose cause they handled and defended. I have seen some preachers
bring a dead man's scull into the pulpit, therewith the better to move their
auditors to contemn the transsitorie pleasures of this world, to beat into
them a terror of death, to the intent that for the rest of their days, they
might lead a better life.

Last of all it ought seriously to be considered, that the presence of any
visible object, moves much more vehemently. the passion, than the imagination
or conceit thereof in the absence: for the imagination in absence, represents
the pleasure as far off and not prepared; but the thing being present,
nothing seems to want but execution. And therefore we see beasts in the
presence of the sensual objects scarce possibly to be with held from them.

How Passions are moved with music and instrumeuts.. 2.
HOw music songs and sounds stir up passions, we may discover in little
sucklings, who with their nurses songs are brought to rest; the mules without
belles will scarcely travel; the carman with whistling causes his sturdie
iades to walk more merrily. The Arcadian signorie considering that in regard of
the situation of their country, the inhabitants for most part were barbarous,
savage, and wild; to molifie more their minds, and to render them more mild,
gentle, and humane, judged no means more effectual than to introduct music
among them: For in very deed a certain kind of tickling symphonie makes men
effeminat and delicat. The Spaniards play their Zarabanda upon the Gittern,
which moves them (as I hear reported) to dance, and do worse. Pithagoras
once chanced to fall into the Basil. hom. de legen lib. Genesis tilium.
company of drunkards, where a musician ruled their lascivious banquet: he
presently commanded him to change his harmony and sing a Dorion, and so with
this manner of melody brought them to sobriety, and casting their garlands
from their heads were ashamed of all they had done. Saul being possessed or at
least much vexed with 1. Reg. 16.
the devil, David played upon his Citheran, and he was comforted and the evil
spirit departed.

The devil being a spirit, cannot be expelled from a body naturally by the
virtue of music, but as we may conceive and infer out of the scriptures,
either Saul was really possessed by the devil, and then not the natural
forces of David's songs and sounds, but the assistance of God and his help
expelled the devil, at what time David sung his sacred hymns. Or the devil
was not really in Saul, but only molested him with the vehemency of some
melancholy humor, as the falling sickness* or some other sort of melancholy
madness: and then as this perverse malignant humor causes fears, sadness,
and such like melancholy passions; so music causes mirth, joy, and delight,
the which abate, expel, and quite destroy their contrary affections, and
withal, rectify the blood and spirits, and consequently digest melancholy,
and bring the body into a good temper. Whether of these two was in Saul,
Divines doubt, and Physicians are not able to resolve. Reasons may be brought
for both parts; some Divines attribute it to God, some Physicians ascribe the
cure to the natural virtue of music. The reason for the Physicians, is
grounded upon the text; for it seems that the disease or wicked spirit that
possessed Saul was a thing usual in the country, because his servants
councelled him to procure a musician, to the intent that when his malady
molested him, the music might comfort him. It never was usual in any
country, nor in all the scripture practiced to cast out devils by the playing
upon instruments: therefore it was a melancholy humor, by the devil
introducted, and by music causing mirth expelled.

The Divines have a more solid argument for their opinion, because the
scriptures ought to be understood in their proper sense as the words sound,
when no absurdity necessarily thereupon ensues, as in this exposion is
evident; for, ascribing it to God what absurdity can follow? now the scripture
evermore calls this affection of Saul, the spirit, and the wicked spirit,
verse. 14. Spiritus aute^ Domini rec^ssit a Saul, and exagitabat eum spiritus
nequam a Domino, The spirit of our Lord departed from Saul, and the wicked
spirit from God (that is, by Gods permission) vexed him. The same we have in
the verse 16. 17. and twice in the 23.

Again I would gladly know when these Physicians ever see with a fit of mirth
either these melancholy madnesses notoriously remitted, or when the paroxime
was upon them quite taken away, let it be either Lycanthropia, that is, a
woolfish madness; or Epilepsia the falling sickness? if they could show me
such a minstrell, I doubt not but in short time he would be able to buy all the
Physicians that dwell within an hundred miles of him. For the scripture says
expressly, David tollebat and percutiebat manu sua and refocillabatur Saul and
leuius habebat, recedebat enim ab eo spiritus malus, If the devil personally
had not afflicted him, the humor had ceased from molestation but not departed
away: and the scripture yields a reason (as appears by the word enim) why
he was comforted, because the devil was gone away.

The argument which I objected in favor of the Physicians may be answered two
ways: first, that the servants of Saul no otherwise intended to cure his
disease by music, than commonly in the maladies or vexation of great
personages, their friends procure music to recreate them; whence from soever
the maladies proceed, they neither know, nor generally regard. Secondly, it
might be that God extraordinarily was accustomed to 4. Reg. 3.
work in those days wonders by the means of music, as afterward we read
of Elizeus, who desiring to prophetise, called for a musician, at whose song,
the spirit of God fell upon him. And it is a thing usual with God, to work
miraculous effects by creatures which have either no virtue at all to work
such an effect, or only a weak resemblance. What natural virtue had the dirt
Ioh. 9. Iud. 16.
and spit of Christ, to cure the blind borne beggar? What virtue had Samsons
hairs, to afford him such strength and forces? What natural virtue lurked in
the asses Iud. 16.
iaw, to yield him water unto satietie? What virtue had Exodus 14. Act. 5.
Moses rod, to divide the red sea? What natural virtues lay hid in St Peter's
shadow, St Paul's handkirchifes and Act. 19.
girdles, to cure so many and maruailously tormenting diseases? The water of
Jordan had virtue to wash, but 4. Reg. 5. 4. Reg. 20.
not to wash away the leprosy of Naaman Sirus: the cataplasme of Esaias had some
natural proportion to cure an aposteme, but not such a desperate mortal
malady as that of Ezekias. The gall of the fish which Tobie caught Tob. 6.
in the river Tigris, had virtue to cure the eyes; but who can deny, but
miraculously, by Gods special providence laid upon Tobie stark blind, it was
augmented? So I say, music naturally expels melancholy; and God either
miraculously by David's music, or at his music delivered Saul from the
devil, who afflicted him in a melancholy manner: For, that music causes
mirth, besides the daily experience which proves it, we have Gods word to
confirm it, Vinum and musica laetisicant Eccles. 40. 20.
cor, Wine and music makes merry the heart.

Some men wonder (and not without reason) how it comes to pass, that out of
the same mouth should issue a cold wind to cool the hot pottage, and a hot
breath to warm the cold hands. But music is much more miraculous, for it
moves a man to mirth and pleasure, and affects him with sorrow and sadness;
it inciteth to devotion, and inticeth to dissolution: it stirs up soldiers
to war, and allureth citizens to peace. Take away music from marriages, and
half the mirth Music causes mirth.
is mard: deprive great bankets of music, and the feast is not entire: there
is but sorry dancing, where music is wanting: dispoile tradesmen and
laborers of natural music, and take from them a sovereign preservative
Music causes melancholy.
from pain. Music therefore moves men to mirth and abateth the heavy
humor of melancholy. But how causes music sorrow and sadness? What are
Hieremies lamentable threens, but a sorrowful song breathed over the city of
Jerusalem? What are David's penitential Psalms, but monefull anthemes
inclining the soul to sorrow for sin? What are funebriall accents, but
ruthful lamentations for our friends eclipsed? What else are those doleful
tunes which issue from languishing lovers, but offsprings of pensive furies,
and origens of more vehement melancholy fits? All poetical fained fables, or
sophisticated histories, are laden with these wailing verses and swanlike, or
rather swinelike voices, occasioned by mournful despair, and feeding the
same. A sword serves to defend right, and is also an instrument Music
stirs up devotion.
to work wrongs: music in like manner eleuateth the mind to devotion and
piety, and abaseth the soul with effusion and leuitie. Elizeus (as above I
insinuated) prepared 4. ^eg. 3.
his spirit to receive the influence of prophecy by the means of music.
David in penning Psalms, ordaining instruments, providing musicians for the
seruise of God, by word and deed taught us, by the virtue of music to stir
men up to devotion: and therefore registered that solemn sentence beseeming all
Christians, but specially musicians, and worthy to be engraven in their breasts
for eternal memory. Laudate Dominum in sono Psalm. 848.
tubae: laudate eum in psalterio and cithera: laudate eum in timpano and choro:
laudate eum in chordis and organo: laudate eum in symbalis been sonantibus:
laudate eum in cymbalis iubilationis: omnis spiritus laudet dominum. And for
this cause it has been usual among them in the old testament, after any great
grace or favor showed them by God, to rouse up their souls with musical
songs and instruments, to give him thanks, and praise his name for the
bestowing of such benefits, imparting to them such great good, or delivering
them from such evils. When Israel had passed the read sea, and therein beheld
Pharoe and his host buried in the bottom of those wallowing waves, Moses with
the men, and Marie sister to Aaron Exodus 15. Judith. 16. Iud. 5.
with the women, sung panigeries of praises unto God with hymns and
instruments: the like we read of Judith after she had vanquished Holophernes:
of Delbora, etc.

And the Church, for this same effect, uses the consorts of musical
instruments, and the harmony of voices: the which Saint Augustine greatly
commends, and Augustinus lib. 10. confess. ca. 33
reports of himself what exceeding spiritual comfort he reaped thereby, at
the beginning of his conversion, what tears he shed, and how he was internally
moved. For music has a certain secret passage into men's souls, and works
so divinely in the mind, that it eleuateth the heart miraculously, and
resembles in a certain manner the voices and hermonie of heaven: and
questionless there is nothing in this life which so sensibly discovers unto
us the pleasures of Paradise, as a sweet consort of music. True it is that
this sensual delight appertains more to yonglings in devotion, than grave,
perfect, and mortified men: for it serves them as a sensual object, to ascend
to God in spirit, to contemplate his sweetness, blessedness, and eternal
felicity, and thereby contemn this world so full of vanity and misery: but
these, who are more elevated to God by reason, than by sense ascend to him by
serious meditations, deep considerations, and exact penetrations of his word,
his majesty, attributes, and perfections. Wherefore Saint Augustine thought he
offended, when he was more moved with the melody of the song, than with the
sense of the Psalm: and for the same effect he highly commends Idem Ibidem.
Athanas.
Saint Athanasius, Qui tam modico flexu vocis faciebat sonare lectorem psalmi,
vt pronuntianti vicinior esset quam canenti. Who caused the reader of the
psalm, to sing with such a small inflexion of voice, that he seemed rather to
say, than to sing. But yet for all this, even grave and most devout men benefit
their souls, and not only the simpler sort, with the sweetness of music:
for although they lift up their hearts to God, persuaded rather by reason than
induced by sense, yet they cannot ever attend unto such serious cogitations,
but now and then intermingle their devotions with this sacred sensuality, and
pleasant path which leads to the fountain of spiritual comfort and
consolation. Music causes wantennesse.


Aristotle in his commonwealth forbids a certain sort of lascivious
music, and allows the Doricall, which is of another kind: for as in some
men's gestures, words, and manner of delivery, we discover a certain light
wantonness, so in some music there is to be noted a manifest loose
effeminatenesse: and the experience is so sensible, that it were superfluous to
proceed any farther in proof.

Alexander the great hearing Antigenida a most excellent Music moves ^^e.
trumpeter sound his trumpet to battle, was stirred up in such sort to fight,
that his very friends were not secure from blows, which stood next him. Saint
Basil recounteth Basil. in hom. de legen. lib. Gent.
that one Timothy did so excel in music, that if he used a sharp and
severe harmony he stirred men up to anger: and presently by changing his note
into a more sweet and softer tune he moved them to mildness and peace: and at
a banquet caused both these effects in Alexander the great.

The Na^^ans in the east India to stir themselves up to battle, hang at the
pommels of their swords certain plates to make a noise, thinking, or proouing
belike thereby, how their hearts are incensed to war. In Europe we never see
soldiers almost sight, but first provoked to wars, with trumpets and
drums. Tacitus reports, that the Germans inanimated themselves to the
wars, with singing the worthy wonders and heroical exploits of Hercules. And
finally experience teaches, that not only men but also warlike horses, with
drums and trumpets are inflamed to sight. This effect of sounds and
instruments, cannot proceed but from the passion of ire which is raised up and
rules the soul, occasioned or rather caused by them.

As music and instruments in one kind causes soldiers Music inclines to
peace.
blood to rise, and thirst after the shedding of the blood of their enemies: so
contrariwise another sort of music pacifieth the minds of men, and renders
them quiet and peaceable. The Arcadians by music (as I said above) were
transformed and transported from savageness to civility, from fierceness to
affability, from cruelty to humanity. And questionless as nothing is more
opposite to a warlike heart which never cease from killing, than an effeminate
heart, which is wholly addicted to loving; so if music can make warriers
womanish, it will consequently render them quiet, tractable, and peaceable.

Diverse other passions, besides the related, are moved by music, as mercy
and compassion: and for this purpose many beggars with songs demand their
alms, and specially the Germains, where the man, the wife, and their children
make a full begging quier; according to the Italian proverb:

Cosi Vanno cattando
Li Tudesci cantando,
Li Francesipiangendo,
Li Spagnioli biastemando.
Thus go a begging
The Germans singing,
The French men weeping,
The Spaniards cursing.
That is, the poor needy Spaniards, will sometime curse, if a man deny them
alms.

There are also some stately maiesticall songs and consorts of music, which
with a certain paused gravity seem to inuit a man's heart to magnanimity,
for they release I know not what resemblance of action and gesture, consorting
with great personages. Many more passions doubtless are stirred up with
music; and Saint Augustine is of opinion that all, for he did perceive, Aug.
lib. 10. conf. cap. 33.
Omnes affectus spiritus nostri, pro sui diuersitate, habere proprios modos in
voce, atque cantu, quorum nescio qua occulta familiaritate excitentur.

But to knit up this discourse, there remains a question to be answered, as
difficult as any whatsoever in all natural or moral philosophy, viz. How
music stirs up these passions, and moves so mightily these affections?
What has the shaking or artificial crispling of the air (which is in effect
the substance of music) to do with rousing up choler, afflicting with
melanlancholie, iubilating the heart with pleasure, eleuating the soul with
devotion, alluring to lust, inducing to peace, exciting to compassion, inuiting
to magnanimity? It is not so great a marvel, that meat, drink, exercise,
and air set passions aloft, for these are diverse ways qualified, and
consequently apt to stir up humors; but what quality carry simple single
sounds and voices, to enable them to work such wonders?

I had rather in this point read some learned discourse, than deliver mine
opinion: nevertheless, in such an obstruse difficulty, he that speaks most
apparently and probably, says the best: and therefore I will set down those
forms or manners of motion which occur to my mind and seem likeliest.

The first is a certain sympathy, correspondence, or proportion betwixt our
souls and music: and no other cause can be yielded. Who can give any other
reason, why the loadstone draws iron, but a sympathy of nature? Why the
Needle, touched but with such a stone, should never leave looking toward the
North Pole; who can render other reason, than sympathy of nature? If we make a
survey of all birds of the air, fishes of the sea, beasts of the land, we
shall find every sort affect a proper kind of food: a lion will eat no hay, nor
a bull beef; a horse eats bread, and a leopard abhors it: a kite lives
upon carrion, and a hen cannot endure it: if a man should beat his brain to
find out the reason, no better can be given, than sympathy of nature. So we
may say, that such is the nature of our souls, as music has a certain
proportionat sympathy with them: as our tastes have with such varieties of
dainty cates, our smelling such variety of odours, etc.

The second manner of this miracle in nature, some assign and ascribe to Gods
general providence, who when these sounds affect the ear, produces a
certain spiritual quality in the soul, the which stirs up one or other
passion, according to the variety of voices, or consorts of instruments.
Neither this is to be meruailed at, for the very same upon necessity we must
put in the imagination, the which not being able to dart the forms of fancies,
which are material; into the understanding, which is spiritual, therefore
where nature wants, Gods providence supplieth. So corporal music being
unable to work such extraordinary effects in our souls, God by his ordinary
natural providence produces them. The like we may say of the creation of our
souls; for men being able to produce the body, but unable to create the
soul, man prepares the matter, and God creates the form: so in music, men
sound and hear, God strikes upon, and stirs up the heart.

The third manner more sensible and palpable is this, that the very sound it
self, which according to the best philosophy, is nothing else but a certain
artificial shaking, crispling, or tickling of the air (like as we see in the
water crispled, when it is calm, and a sweet gale of wind ruffleth it a
little; or when we cast a stone into a calm water, we may perceive diverse
warbling natural circles) which passes through the ears, and by them unto the
heart, and there beats and tickleth it in such sort, as it is moved with
semblable passions. For as the heart is most delicat and sensatiue, so it
perceives the least motions and impressions that may be: and it seems that
music in those celles plays with the vital and animate spirits, the only
instruments and spurs of passions. In like manner we perceive by a little
tickling of our sides, or the soles of our feet, how we are moved to laughter,
yea and the very heart strings seem in some sort to be moved by this almost
senseless motion. And in confirmation hereof, we may bring two apt
conjectures: The first is, in our own hands or face, the which if we smooth,
tickle, press down, nip, heat, or cool, we perceive diverse sorts and
diversities of sensations, and feel our selves sundry ways affected: if such
varieties we find in a thick skin, how much more in a tender heart, far more
apter to feel than any member else of our body. The second conjecture is, the
filing of iron, and scraping of trenchers, which many naturally (yea and almost
all men before they be accustomed unto them) abhor to hear, not only because
they are ungrateful to the ear, but also for that the air so carved,
punishes and fretteth the heart.

The last and best manner I take to be, that as all other senses have an
admirable multiplicitie of objects which delight them, so has the ear: and as
it is impossible to expound the variety of delights, or disgustes, which we
perceive by them, and receive in them (for who can distinguish the delights we
take in eating fish, flesh, fruit, so many thousand sauces, and commixtions of
spices with fish, flesh, and fruit?) so in music, diverse consorts stir up
in the heart, diverse sorts of joys, and diverse sorts of sadness or pain: the
which as men are affected, may be diversely applied: Let a good and a Godly man
hear music, and he will lift up his heart to heaven: let a bad man hear
the same, and he will convert it to lust: Let a soldier hear a trumpet or a
drum, and his blood will boil and bend to battle; let a clown hear the
same, and he will fall a dancing; let the common people hear the like, and
they will fall a gazing, or laughing, and many never regard them, especially if
they be accustomed to hear them. So that in this, men's affections and
dispositions, by means of music, may stir up diverse passions, as in seeing
we daily prove the like. True it is, that one kind of music may be more apt
to one passion than another, as also one object of sight is more proportionat
to stir up love, hatred, or pleasure, or sadness, than another. Wherefore
the natural disposition of a man, his custom or exercise, his virtue or vice,
for most part at these sounds diuersificate passions: for I cannot imagine,
that if a man never had heard a trumpet or a drum in his life, that he would at
the first hearing be moved to wars. Much more might be said in this matter,
and yet not all fully satisfy and content a sound judgment, but what occurred
unto me in this question I have set down, leaving the choice and approbation,
or sensure, to them that see more in it than I do.

How Passions are moved by action.. 2.
ORators, whose project is persuasion, have two principal parts where with they
endeavor to compass their purpose, Ornate dicere, and concinne agere, To
speak eloquenly, and to act aptly: That consists specially upon proper words
and sound reasons, this in a certain moderation of the voice and
qualifications of gestures. We said above, that external actions as voice, and
gestures, were signs of internal passions; and there we taught, how through
those windows a man might pass with the sight of his understanding, and
discover the secret affections of another heart: the which ground and
undoubted verity, is the foundation whereupon now we must build this third
mean to move passsions: for Cicero expressly teaches that it is almost
impossible for an orator to stir up a passion in his auditors, except he be
first affected with the same passion himself. Neque enim fieri potest, vt
doleat is, qui audit, vt oderit, Cicer^ lib. de orat.
vt inuideat, vt pertimescat aliquid, vt admisericordiam fletumque deducatur,
n^si omnes ij motus, quos orator adhiberi volet iudici, in ipso oratore
impressi esse, atque inusti videbuntur. It cannot be that he which hears
should sorrow, hate, envy, or fear any thing, that he should be induced to
compassion or weeping, except all those motions the orator would stir up in
the judge, be first imprinted and marked in the orator himself. And therefore
Horace well observed, that he which will make me weep must first weep
himself.

Si vis me flore, dolendum est De art. poet.

Primum tibi: tunc tua me infortunia laedent.
If thou will have me weep, a doleful breast
First show: and then thy woes will me molest:
And the philosophical and moral reason hereof is most apert, because with
them it is a common received axiom, Nemo dat quod non habet: a man cannot
communicate August. lib. 2. de lib. arb. cap. 17.
that he wants, Quod in causis vniuocis est semper verum. And therefore how
shall one who has no feeling of the passion he would persuade, induce an other
by passion to accept or reject it? For if thy reasons move not thee, why
would thou have them to move Aristo. 1. post.
me? Propter quod vnumquodque tale and illud magis: If my hand be hot for the
fire, the fire must be more hot it self: if my chamber be lightsome for the
beams of the sun, the sun it self must be more lightsome: If I must be
moved by thy persuations, first thou must show me by passion, they persuaded
thy self. And therefore no marvel if many preachers persuade not the people
to virtue and piety; for they seeing the instructors want in themselves that
they endeavor to persuade to others, let all their sermons enter in at one
ear, and slip out at another. Ab immundo quis mundabitur: who shall be cleansed
by Eccles. 34.
the unclean? For as Saint Gregory well notes, Manus quae sordes abluit,
munda esse debet: the hand which washes filth away, should be clean. True it
is that the people ought to follow the Godly doctrine of their preachers,
although their lives be corrupted, for so Christ has commanded, because they
sit in the chair of Moses. Nevertheless let them be assured one day to smart
for it, in that they prepared and disposed not themselves to be fit instruments
for such eminent functions. Therefore if we intend to imprint a passion in
another, it is requisite first it be stamped in our hearts: for through our
voices, eyes, and gestures, the world will pierce and thoroughly perceive how we
are affected. And for this cause the passion which is in our breast must be the
fountain and origin of all external actions; and as the internal affection
is more vehement, so the external persuasion will be more potent: for the
passion in the persuader seems to me, to resemble the wind a trumpeter
blows in at one end of the trumpet, and in what manner it proceeds from
him, so it issues forth at the other end, and comes to our ears; even so
the passion proceeds from the heart, and is blown about the body, face,
eyes, hands, voice, and so by gestures passes into our eyes, and by sounds
into our ears: and as it is qualified, so it works in us. But I know some
would understand the cause, why a good reason in the preacher or orator will
not suffice to persuade the people, unless they themselves be affected with
the like passion? I answer, that wise men are most moved with sound reasons,
and less with passions: contrariwise the common people or men not of deep
judgment, are more persuaded with passions in the speakers; the reason is,
because as we have two senses of discipline especially, the eyes and the ears:
reason enters the eats; the passion wherewith the orator is affected passes
by the eyes, for in his face we discover it, and in other gestures: the eyes
are more certain messengers and less to be doubted of, for we many times
suspect the reasons least they be frivolous, although we cannot answer them;
but those passions we see, nature imprinteth them deeper in our hearts, and for
most part they seem so evident, as they admit no tergiuersation: wherefore the
evidence and certainty of the passion, persuadeth much more effectually the
common people, than a suspected reason: and the suspicion of sophistication is
much more increased when we see it not work that effect in the teacher which
he would stir up in the hearer. Again, usually men are more moved with deeds
than words, reasonable persuations resemble words, affectuall passions are
compared to deeds. Furthermore the passion passes not only through the eyes,
but also pierces the ear, and thereby the heart; for a flexible and pliable
voice, accommodated in manner correspondent to the matter whereof a person
entreats, conueyeth the passion most aptly, pathetically, and almost
harmonically, and every accent, exclamation, admiration, increpation,
indignation, commiseration, abomination, exanimation, exultation, fitly (that
is distinctly, at time and place, with gesture correspondent, and flexibilitie
of voice proportionat) delivered, is either a flash of fire to incense a
passion, or a basin of water to quench a passion incensed.

A man therefore furnished himself with the passion or affection he wishes in
his auditors, showing it with voice and action, although his reasons be not so
potent, has no doubt a most potent mean to persuade what he list. Wherefore
Demosthenes, as of all Orators the prince for action, so he defined, that the
principal part of Cicero in Brut.
an Oration was action; the second, the same; the third, no other than action.
Isocrates, otherwise called the father of eloquence, for lack of a good voice
never pleaded publickely. Cicero says, some were viri diserti, that is, very
eloquent, but for lack of action or rather untowardness, habiti sunt infantes,
they were accounted infants: and I have seen some preachers very mean
scholars, and in truth otherwise but silly men, yet for that they excelled in
action, all the world followed them. For action is either a certain visible
eloquence, or an eloquence of the body, or a comely grace in delivering
conceits, or an external image of an internal mind, or a shadow of
affections, or three springs which flow from one fountain, called vox, vultus,
vita, voice, countenance, life, that is, the affection pours forth it self
by all means possible, to discover unto the present beholders and auditors,
how the actor is affected, and what affection such a case and cause requires
in them: by mouth he tells his mind; in countenance he speaks with a silent
voice to the eyes; with all the universal life and body he seems to say,
Thus we move, because by the passion thus we are moved, and as it has wrought
in us so it ought to work in you. Action then universally is a natural or
artificial moderation, qualification, modification, or composition of the
voice, countenance, and gesture of body proceeding from some passion, and apt
to stir up the like: for it seems, that the soul plays upon these three
parts, as a musition upon three strings, and according to his striking so they
sound.

A number of precepts Orators prescribe about these three parts, and labor
extremely by art to perfect and accomplish the rude indigested motions of
nature: to them therefore I will leave the minching of this matter in
particularities, and only set down certain generalities.

First, although art supply the defects of nature, yet if a man have not a
good natural ability, it is impossible by art to come to any perfection for
this manner of motion. The reason hereof is manifest, because as in music, he
that wants a tunable voice by nature, although he otherwise excel in the art
of music, yet it were less pain to hear him say than sing. And I have
known most exquisit musicians unable to sing aptly five notes: so in action,
he that wants a good voice, a good nimble eye, a proportionat body, and
other parts natural, may speak with reason, but never almost aptly for
persuasion: indeed if the habilities of nature be not very untoward, art may
correct many defects of nature: as Demosthenes had a little lisping at first,
but by labor and diligence amended. Isocrates impediments were incorrigible,
and therefore all his labor had been lost, if he had employed himself to
acting.

Secondly, he that will act well, must of necessity stir up first that affect
in himself, he intends to imprint in the hearts of his hearers; and the more
vehement the passion is, the more excellent action is like to ensue. The reason
is, for, as I said above, the voice, eyes, and gestures sound without, as the
heart strikes within: and therefore the vehementer passion venteth forth, the
liuelier action. Yet here must one or two cautions be considered: First in ire
and indignation, that the passion and action relish not of some private quarrel
or revenge; for then it leeseth all the force and grace of persuasion, because
the passion smells then of proper interest and utility, and consequently
will be accounted inordinate and vicious. Secondly in fear and sadness, that
they render not the actions vile and abject: for then the passion will rather
be occasion or cause to smother and kill them, than to revive and animate them.

Thirdly, every part of action ought to express the mind as gravely, as
prudently, as solidly as may be: The reason is, because he that publickely
intends to persuade, must be esteemed a wise, and a good man; wisdom must
make the auditors believe he erreth not upon ignorance, honesty must induce
them to think he will not lie: therefore all his actions ought to be prudent
and grave: for if they be any way light or rash, then presently he will be
suspected, either not to have premeditated maturely his matter, or not to
regard what he says, or not to be so settled in virtue and knowledge as such an
important matter requires: for leuitie and rashness, at least argue
imprudence, inconsideration, immortification, and precipitation, which all are
capital enemies to deep consulation, specially in matters which concern
persuasion to virtue, or dissuasion from vice, exhortation to goodness, or
dehortation from illness. Wherefore in action all leuitie must be avoided: In
voice, that the words be not pronounced too fast, nor any light or scurilous
word enter in: In face, that the eye range not abroad vagabond like, nor be
tossed or turned too lightly; that the orator make no faces, writhing of
mouth, wrinkling of nose, or too much shaking of head: Ingesture, no tickling
with fingers, quickly wresting of the body, light going, or much gesti^ulation.

Fourthly, he ought to endeavor, that every part of action immitate as lively
as may be the nature of the passion: Sextus Philosophus said our body was
imago animi, because the manners of the soul followed the temper of the body,
and therefore he that knew perfitly this, could not be ignorant of that: so the
actions of the body should be, in a perfect persuader, an image of the passion
in the mind. But how shall this be performed? Two general rules at this present
occur unto my memory, not very hard to be learned, but exceeding profitable
to be practiced.

The first is, that we look upon other men appassionat, how they demean
themselves in passions, and observe what and how they speak in mirth,
sadness, ire, fear, hope, etc. what motions are stirring in the eyes, hands,
body, etc. And then leave the excess and exorbitant leuitie or other defects,
and keep the manner corrected with prudent mediocritie: and this the best may
be marked in stage plaiers, who act excelle^tly; for as the perfection of their
exercise consists in imitation of others, so they that imitate best, act
best. And in the substance of external action for most part orators and
stageplayers agree: and only they differ in this, that these act fainedly,
those really; these only to delight, those to stir up all sorts of passions
according to the exigencie of the matter; these intermingle much leuitie in
their action to Cicer lib. 3. de Orat.
make men laugh, those use all gravity, grace, and authority to persuade:
wherefore these are accounted rediculous, those esteemed prudent. But a
discreet orator may see in them what he may amend, and what he may follow. If
there were an excellent preacher, who were admirable not only for doctrine,
but also for action, he would serve as a glass for every orator to behold
the beauty or blots of his action.

Secondly love, desire, and joy, require a plain, pleasant, soft, mild, gentle
voice, and the like countenance: true it is that a discourse sermon or oration
being wouen with various periods, and compounded of sundry parts, generally
cannot be said to admit one only sort of pronuntiation, action, or gesture:
because although we intend for example to induce our auditors to love God, to
obey their prince, etc. yet reason requires, and art perscribeth, that our
probations be often grounded upon contraries, incommodities, disgraces,
punishments, and diverse inconveniences, which would ensue upon the want and
defect thereof: and therefore in every part and period, the nature and quality
of the affection, must rule and moderat the voice and action.

Hatred and ire exact a vehement voice, and much gesture a pronuntiation
sharp, often falling with patheticall repetitions, iterated interrogations,
proving, confirming, and urging reasons: the manner of this action we may best
discover in witty women when they chide; because although their excess be
vicious and not to be imitated, yet for that they let nature work in her kind,
their furious fashion will serve for a good mean to perceive the external
manage of this passion. Their voice is loud and sharp, and consequently apt to
cut, which is proper to ire and hatred, which wish ill, and intend revenge:
their gestures are frequent, their faces inflamed, their eyes glowing, their
reasons hurry one in the neck of another, they with their fingers number the
wrongs offered them, the harms, injuries, disgraces, and what not, thought
said, and done against them: if a prudent orator could in this case batter
their matter, circumcise the weakness of the reason, abate the excess of
their fury, certainly he might win a pretty form for framing his action.

In sadness and commiseration, a grave, doleful, plain voice is best, without
much variety either of eye, face, or hand, for the orator must show himself
in soul and heart afflicted, oppressed, half dead; and therefore no more life
ought to appear without external eyes and ears, than is necessary to deliver
the force of our reasons, and the grief of our minds: our proofs may be
urged and prosecuted but always with a pitiful weeping eye and a fainting
lamentable tune: yet notwithstanding, the voice sometimes ought to be
interrupted with woeful exclamations and ruthful repetitions, with alas, woe
is me, etc. The eye also may be gravely elevated up to heaven, or abiected to
earth, but it must be done seldom and merueilous soberly.

As fear participateth of hatred and sadness, in detesting an imminent evil,
and sorrowing least it befall, and therefore requires like voice, countenance
and action; so, because little it would avail to explain the peril and
danger thereof, except we encouraged and stirred up our hearers to attempt
means, to prosecute labors, to enterprise difficulties, to encounter and
resist the evil: therefore according to Saint Paul's instruction, we must
arguere, obsecrare, increpare, accuse, request, reprehend. The example we may
have in the passion of a man, whose next neighbors house being set a fire, if
he should first of all discover it and perceive that verse likely to be
verified in him.

Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet Then tend thy turn, when
neighbors housen burn. He would not come to his neigbour to advise him of the
fire in this manner: O dear neighbor, although I am far unfit by eloquence,
to persuade you to look to your house, and carefully to watch about it, least
fire fall upon it* as now of late I perceive it has done, therefore provide
water and succor, for otherwise both all your goods and mine will be
consumed: were not this speech ridicolous? would not men account such a man a
fool? nature has taught us another course in such a case: for he would run
crying into the street, fire, fire, help, help, water, water, succor, succor,
alas, alas, we are undone, quickly, speedily, run for ladders, pull down this
rafter, cut that beam, until the house; what mean you, stir hands, arms,
and legs, hie thee for water, run thou for iron crookes, and hooks, have,
have, we are all undone. This is the effect of fear indeed, here a man sees
the danger, and endeavors to prevent the harm. The like should a preacher
do, who knowing his auditors wallowed in sin, ought not with filed phrases,
and mellow mouthed words tickle their ears, but with terrors and fears pierce
their hearts: he should cry fire of hell, fire fire is kindled, sin is
entered into the soul, water water, tears tears, help help, repentance
repentance, the devil stands ready to devour you, death watches at unawares
to strike you, hell mouth gapeth to swallow you down, look about you, stir
your selves, Non in commessationibus and ebrietatibus, non in cubilibus Romans 13.
and impudicilijs, sed induiminm dominum nostrum Iesum Christum. Leave off your
riots, forsake your vanities, abandon your false deceitful pleasures, put on
Christ, imitate his purity, follow his fasting, prosecute his mortification,
see you not men die daily upon a sudden, falling into hell? have have,
flatter not your selves, time is uncertain, the peril too certain, the
punishment eternal, irreparable, inexplicable: thus ought a zealous preacher
speak, and so God commands him not to speak, but rather to cry, and that
incessantly. Clama, ne cesses, Isa. 58.
tanquam tuba exalta vocem tuam: and annuntia populo meo scelera eorum, and
domui Jacob peccat^ eorum. Cry, cease not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet,
tell my people their sins, and the house of Jacob their offenses.

Fifthly, although exquisit action be first commenced by nature and then
perfitted by art, yet both nature and art require practice and exercise,
otherwise all precepts though practical will be resolved into mere
speculations: and when these three concur together with other natural
habilities otherwise requisite, questionless they will make a man potent in
pleading and persuading, and enable him to work wonders among a multitude of
men.

How to move Passions by reason.. 4.
AS reason concerns the principal part of man, so reason specially should
stir up, or suppress the affections of man. But because most men, though
reasonable by nature, yet declare themselves most unreasonable, if not
brutish, by action, following rather the allurement of senses, than obeying
the persuasions of prudence; therefore this mean must either be handled very
artificially, or else all our endeavors will be but labor lost, for if we
intend to persuade them by profound reasons, who either understand them not at
all, or else very superficially, we shall moon them to loath our inducements,
and thereupon dislike and perhaps condemn our cause. Wherefore the passion
mouer must look narrowly to this point, and imitate herein the common practice
of prudent Physicians, who apply their medicin to the same maladies with
particular respect and consideration of the patients temper, and so to a little
child they will not give the like purgation they would to a strong man, nor to
a delicate lady, though affected with the same ague, which to a steely
stomackt boore of the country. In like manner, common people and profound
doctors, are not to be persuaded with the same arguments, for popular
persuasions these prize not, and deep demonstrations they pierce not. How to
fail right upon both, and not decline to either extreme in persuading the one
part severally, requires great prudence, and a sound judgment. Yet I think
there may be found out a mean to propound and deliver deep reasons
perspicuously, and plausible persuasions sharply, so that the plainness of the
one will make them plausible, and the acuteness in the other will allay their
flashnesse and render them pleasant.

First of all it is to be noted, that not every kind of reason has force to
stir up a passion, but an urgent and potent, either really or at least in
conceit: this we prove by experience, for common and ordinary motives move
us not much to love or like a thing: wherefore God to induce the Israelits to
wish and desire the land of promise, described it as a country slowing with
milk and honey, etc. and commonly every one who would persuade us to love or
affect any thing, highly commends it; or contrariwise if a man would have us
to hate and detest any thing, he endeavors as much as may be to make apparent
the excess of the evil or great damages it apporteth. Passions then must be
moved with urgent reasons, reasons urging proceed from solid amplifications,
amplifications are gathered from common places, common places fit for
oratoricall persuasion concern a part of Rhethoricke called Invention.
Wherefore it were requisite for an excellentstir-passion to have in a readiness
all those places which orators assign, and account their arcinall or
storehouse of persuasiue provision. I will briefly insinuat them, supposing the
reader and practiser of this point a scholar both in Rethoricke and
Philosophy, for otherwise he shall receive small profit hereby, and only I
will deliver him a short plain perspicuous method how to call to memory these
places; that by them, not only in this matter of passions but in all
discourses, he may be enabled presently almost in a glaunce to survey, and
comprehend all arguments and reasons which occur in his present affair.

Secondly, a philosopher cannot be ignorant of the four first questions, which
in the posteriors he is taught to demand of every subject. Quid nominis, Quid
rei, Qualis sit, Propter quid sit. The name of the thing, the nature of the
thing, the proprieties and accidents inherent in the thing, the final and
efficient causes of the thing. Unto these four heads I will reduce all those
topicall or Rhetorical places, which they call insita intrinsecall, and are as
it were inserted in the bowels of the thing, or have any persuasiue reference
unto the thing: for unto Quid nominis, which is the name, and affoordeth 1 Quid
nominis o^ notat^o.
sundry persuasions to them who are acquainted with diverse languages, specially
the Hebrew, and next the Greek, whose words are very significant and full of
etymologies, for in the Hebrew most of their substantives are derived from
radical verbes. To this place five more are reducible, 2 Coniugata.
as Coniugata, that is, when diverse words lie linked together, or proceed from
one, as from Doctrina, which is in the mind, issue doctus, for affecting the
subject wherein it lodges, and docte, for qualifying his speeches, writings,
and other literal actions; learning, learned, learnedly; wisdom, wise,
wisely; virtue, virtuous, virtuously. Things which we name, have always some
being, either real or possible (for chimeres and entia fictitia, although they
have a being in conceptu, yet not discussiue for questions A^sit.
or disputes) which we call Ansit, and this methodically ^ Anres sit possibil^s.
we divide into four problemes or questions: as, if the thing be possible, if
convenient, if necessary, if done. As for example, we may demand about the
incarnation of Christ, if it be possible, that the second person in trinity
could unite his person unto mankind, and deprive it of the own and proper:
many infidels deny the possibility. 4 An conueniens.
But admit it were possible, yet some other pagans deny that his incarnation
was convenient, that we should abase so mightily his majesty as to cover his
immortality with the mortal garments of our miseries. Yet admit it were
possible and convenient, notwithstanding there 5 An necessari^.
may be another question asked, whether it were necessary such a mystery
should be effected: and suppose it was necessary, if God would have his
justice exactly satisfied and a full ransom paid for the sins of man, yet
there 6 Ansacta.
remains the last doubt, whither God really defacto performed this or no.

Quid sit.
This question leads our memory necessarily to six other places: the nature
of the thing represents the definition, 7 De^initio.
for there is no nature (except su^ma genera which are parts of nature) but
they are difinible: so we have locum a difinitione, as, homo est animal
rationale, or, constans ex anima intellectuale and corpore organicae: in which
definitions, the first which is metaphysicall, affoordeth two places, a genere
and a differentia. And the second, 8 Genus. 9 Differentia. 10 Materia. 11 Forma.
which is physical, shows us other two, viz. the material and formal
causes: and for that every nature defined has either under it species or
indiuidua, here hence we have the sixth place a speciebus, the Rhetorians call
it a 12 Speci^bus.
forma.

Qualis sit.
The question Qualis sit demands to know the proprieties of the thing: but
we will extend it a little farther and comprehend al accidents and what else
may any way affect and qualify the thing, and so this question will open the
way to an endless treasury of invention. First in it shall be considered all
the proprieties and effects which necessarily ensue: as for example: Is it
laudable? then it is virtuous: Is it virtuous? then laudable: Is the sun
risen? then it is day: is the sun set? then is it night: and contrariwise.
This the Rhetoritians call locum ab antecedentibus 13 Locus ab anteced (...)
and consequen(...).
and consequentibus. Secondly we will anex hereunto all inseparable accidents:
as blackness in a crow, heat in every heart that lives, etc. Thirdly, all
separable accidents, which be innumerable: we may help our selves for
discourse sake, and the better further our invention if we reduce them to the
nine accidental predicaments, 14 Locus ^b ad(...).
and make a general survey over them: and commonly in the four species of
quality, action or passion, relation, etc. we shall ^ind diverse means to
persuade our matter. And first the predicament of quantity represents unto
me equality or in equality: and thereby I 15 Locus a comparatione.
have locum a comparatione maiorum, minorum, and aequalium; as if Christ washed
his disciples feet, much more ought we for humility sake, do the same one to
another.

The predicament of quality affoordeth unto me omnia bona and mala gratiae and
peccati, bona animae, bona corporis, bona fortunae. The perfections of grace,
as faith, All these have reference ad loc^^^ 14. qui est ab adiunctis.
hope, charity, the inspirations of God; the suggestions of the devil, the
allurements of the world: the acquisit perfections or imperfections of the
soul, as sciences, arts, trades, policy, prudence, wisdom, or any other
intellectual ability good or bad; virtue, vice, justice, injustice, etc.
Bodily perfections or imperfections consist in health or sickness, strength
or weakness, beauty or deformity, towardness or unaptness to any thing,
virtuous or vicious inclinations. The favors or crosses of fortune comprehend,
riches, or poverty, friends, or foes, fecunditie of children or sterilitie,
nobility or baseness of birth: whereunto we may reduce the antiquity of a
family, or how a man is the first foundation or origin of his house.

In the predicament of relation I find occasion to call to memory three
places. First a contrarijs, for this place 16 Locus a contrarijs.
includes the four species of opposition: contraria, relatiua,
contradictoria, priuatiua. Secondly, likelinesse or vnlikelinesse are also
relatiues, and consequently belong to this same predicament; and we have Locum
a simili and 17 Locus a simili and dissimili.
dissimili. And for that things which repugne any way together, carry with
them a spice or release of contrariety: therefore here we will settle locum a
repugnantibus. 18 Locus a non repugnantibus.
As for example, he speaks ill of him, therefore he loves him not; he
speaks well of him, therefore he hates him not.

Considering the predicament of action and passion, in regard they may be
affected with sundry circumstances, which better or impair them, therefore I
thought good to set down this rule, which in general distinguishes their
otherwise inuolued confusion.

Quis, quid, vbi, quibus auxilijs, cur, quomodo, quando.
Who, what, what time, and where,
How, why, what helps were there.
Who: notifieth not the person absoluely, which in every humane action is
required, and the condition of his person: as a king, a magistrate, a bishop,
or a clergy man, a dear friend, etc. for if any of these commit an offense,
the dignity of the person aggrauateth the sin: as Judas in iniuring Christ,
who was one of his disciples, sinned more grievously, than if another man had
acted the same trespass.

What: gives us to understand the damage or nocument, which casually was
annexed, but necessarily proceeds from our action, or some great good, which
thereunto ensues: as he that kills a poor man, who by his labor maintained
his wife and children: offends more heynously, than if he had wanted them.

What time: insinuates the season or day, when an enterprise or sin were
effected: as the worthy exploits of Judith and Hester were greatly to be
commended, because they delivered their people, at such times as they were in
extreme danger.

Where: designeth the place: and in respect of this circumstance, che sin of
Lucifer in heaven, of Adam in Paradise, theft or dishonestie in the Church, are
esteemed more enormious.

How: shows the manner of the action, the vehemency of the affection, the
intention or excess of malice, the knowledge or ignorance, with what
difficulty or facility, with what passion or impediment the action was
effected.

Why: points at the extrinsecall end, or remote final cause of the action:
as if a man steal to give alms, if he study for honor, if he serve his
prince and country mercinarily for hope only of preferment or gain.

What helps: this circumstance remonstrateth the council, aiders, abetters,
or any other way favorers of our actions, as also the instruments or servants
we used in the managing thereof.

Propter quid.
As this question inquireth the cause of the effect to be proved by
demonstration, so it ministers us occasion to remember these two places, a
causis, or ab effectis. 19 Locus a causi^. 20 Locus ab effect^.


To these twenty places we may ad ten more, grounded upon authority, largely
declared by Melchior Canus in his twelve books De locis Theologius; but for
that these concern specially divines, and they may easily commit them to
memory, therefore I will remit this labor to the related author.

This short abstract of invention I have rather set down to help the memory,
than to instruct the understanding; for I am not ignorant, that this matter
requires an ample volume, and both Rhetoritians and Logitians spend much
pains, and write large discourses thereupon. But for that I perceived in my
self, that a multitude of places, without a form of method, engendered rather
confusion than furthered invention, therefore I have sorted them into heads:
because the nature of our memory is such, that if it conceive but an inckling
of any matter, presently by the force of discourse, our understanding follows
it: and now having all places reduced to four heads, he had a bad memory could
not remember them, and a worse wit which could not draw forth a number of
arguments out of them. I cannot deny but pregnant spirits and elevated
judgments in a moment, almost, pierce their matter, and behold before their
eyes a number of sound and substantial reasons, which enuiron the question
proposed on every side; but these be few and rare, others need more help: and
yet even these also may be greatly furthered, for the best places which consort
with common peoples capacities, are for most part out of learned men's books;
as similitudes, examples, contrarieties, remote accidents, and circumstances,
and therefore they had need of some short remembrance, to pull their wits by
the elbow, and will them not to diue too deep, least they, who by reason
should best understand their reasons (I mean the meaner wits, who for most
part are general auditors) be deprived of that instruction and information the
Orator intends, and they expected. Thirdly, we must observe, that in
amplifications (which are in effect nothing else but either exaggerations, or
cumulations of reasons) diverse things are to be noted.

First, in amplifications all conceits should relish a certain greatness* and
carry with them some sort of excess: if we praise, then the persons and things
praised must be commended for some admirable excellency; if we exhort or
dissuade, then are to be discovered a sea of great goodness, or a multitude
of mighty evils.

Secondly, the reasons which we amplify, require great perspicuitie, and
apertnesse in delivery, because the attention which otherwise should be
employed about the affection, will wholly be consumed or drawn to the
understanding: for it is impossible to attend much at one time both to
speculation and affection. Furthermore our speech being cursorie, and specially
framed for mean capacities, will not be able to make any impression in
auditors, except our reasons be marvelous plain and evident.

Thirdly, our reasons should be largely declared, and yet with sharp, and
short variety interlaced: resembling a volley of shot speedily delivered, but
not without bullets to batter down the walls of wilful affections. And for
this cause we may use pithie short descriptions, compounded of some metaphor
annexed with some propriety, which is most usual with orators: as Cicero
commends histories: for says he, Histories are the witnesses 1. D^ Orat.
of times, the light of truth, the life of memory, the mistress of life, the
messenger of antiquity, etc. so may we in like manner describe man to be a
shadow of pleasure, a glorious flower, a fading rose, an insatiable appetite, ^
circle of fancies, a running river, a mortal angel, a reasonable beast, a
vicious monster declining from his nature, etc. Many similitudes or
dissimilitudes, examples, contrarieties, effects repugnant, may easily be
invented, readily delivered, and in a moment understood; so that by this means
profound conceit shall be facilited, and there with the auditors instructed,
delighted, and moved.

Fourthly, as passions are diverse, so motives to stir them up are various,
and therefore now method requires that we descend to the immediate sparks
which must set the soul on fire, and kindle the passions, or like winds blow
off the ashes, that the coals may be revived: for hitherto we have talked a
far off and laid but the first foundations, by these particular motives which
follow, passions immediately, properly, and effectually are moved.

Motives to Love.
O My God, the soul of my soul, and the life of all true love: these dry
discourses of affections, without any cordial affection, have long detained,
and not a little distasted me. Now that I come toward the borders of Love,
give me leave O loving God, to vent out and euaporat the affects of the heart,
and see if I can incense my soul to love thee entirely and suisceratly, and
that all those motives which stir up mine affections to love thee, may be
means to inflame all their hearts which read this treatise penned by me. But
alas; where shall I begin to parley of affections, who am so stained with
imperfections, and corrupted with infections? Come, come you sacred cherubins,
you morning stars of never darkening light, descend you Seraphins, you
burning lamps of love: and tell me what motives move you to love your God so
vehemently, and incessantly? I know you will answer, that your love is of
another stamp than mine, and therefore that your language cannot be understood
in the land of mortal men. Ah my God ever loved too little, and shall I never
be able neither to love, nor speak of love enough? shall I adventure to weaue
a web of such subtle golden threads, in such a rotten rustie loome? did not
Isay excuse himself for speaking of thee, because his lips were polluted and
durst not attempt so mighty an enterprise, till with a burning coal of love
his mouth was purified? Did not David thirst after thee, like the thirsty Heart
the fountains of clear water, and yet he exclaimed, Imperfectum meum viderunt
oculi tu^, Thou have O Lord beheld mine imperfection? Did not the Seraphins
Esaias. 6.
glowing with fiery affections, veil their feet with golden wings, thereby
showing a reverent shame of their imperfit love, as unworthy of such a supreme
majesty? And what, gracious Lord, shall I think, speak, or write of thy
love, whose best knowledge is scarce comparable with their ignorance, whose
purest affections are but inordinat passions, in respect of their fervent
desires, and inflamed charity? But alas, to say nothing, were to admite thee,
but with blind ignorance: to speak not condignly, were irreuerently to
converse with thee: What? shall I then neither speak, nor hold my peace? O
fountain of love, such is the abyss of thy goodness, that thou reputest that
enough, when we do all we can: endue me therefore, O bountiful God, with thy
grace, that since I cannot speak so worthily of thee, as thou deserves; at
least I may speak in such sort of thee, as at an unworthy sinners hands thou
expects. A long season (O my God, the wary waigher of all my ways) have I
ranged abroad and reuelled among thy creatures: I cannot say I loved them, for
then why did they cloy me and anoy me? neither can I aver that I hated them,
for they delighted me. Alas, they pleased me, because they were sprinkled and
bedewed with some drops of amabilitie, which thou did let fall upon them
from the immensiue Ocean of thy bounty: they molested me, because I loved not
them aright, that is, in thee, and for thee, but for themselves and my delight.
After I had prodigally spent my patrimony by surfeiting in pleasure, and
therein observing neither law, rule, nor measure, at last I returned to thee,
and found all those motives in thy majesty in a far more eminent degree
united, than I before in all the vast multitude of thy creatures, had tried
dispersed. I loved my parents, as The first motive of Love is par^ntage.
authors of my being, and imparters of life, and this without teacher by nature
I was instructed. When after I turned mine eyes to thee, I perceived there was
but a small spark of paternitie in my progenitors, compared to thee. Thou
gave them bodies, being, and life to be parents: thou preserved, conserved,
and enabled them: thou created my soul alone, wherein they neither had part nor
action: thou formed my body, when they never minded me: thou have kept me day
and night, when they never remembered me: yea, when both they and I were fast
asleep, thy watchful eye waked over both them and me. In the progress of my
tender years I loved them who Benevolence.
bestowed favors and benefits upon m^: and this I perceived not to be a thing
proper to men alone, but also incident to beasts, who love and fawn upon their
benefactors. When I lifted up mine ^ies to thee, and considered the meat I eat,
the drink I drank, the clothes I wore, the air I breathed, the senses I
used, the life I enioied, the wit wherewith I reasoned, the will wherewith I
affected, all were thy daily gifts, hourly, momently, yea instantly by thy
provident hand vpheld and maintained; I concluded with my self, that of all
benefactors thou was the best, and therefore deserved to be loved most: and for
that every instant I wholly in body and soul, life and being, depended upon
thee; so in every instant, if it were possible, I should consecrate my self
entirely, with a most grateful remonstrance and recognition of thy benefits
bestowed upon me. When years grew upward, and reason riper, in reading
ancient, profane, and sacred writers, I found in them certain worthy men
highly commended and celebrated, here a Solomon for wisdom, a David for
valor, a Hercules, an Achilles, an Alexander, a Caesar, a Scipio, an
Hanniball, a Constantine, in panigericall Orations, in heroical verses blazed
abroad to all the world present, and registered for record to all posterity, as
Third motive. Excellency.
valiant captains, prudent governors, glorious Heroes, mirrors and majesty's
for their times in the world. And it seemed to me, that my heart was drawn to
love and affect such personages, for albeit I admired their eminency above the
rest, yet I know not how, but such an excellency wrung out and enforced a
reverent affection in my breast: for I esteemed them worthy of love, whom so
many wise men thought worthy of admiration, and reputed as worthies of the
world. Afterward with the eyes of my consideration I glanced (O my God of
infinite perfection) upon thee: and all these renowned Heroes resembled to my
sight, so many mirmicoleons or lions amongst emmets (who surpass them a little
in greatness and force) in comparison of lions indeed for might, and Olyphants
for immensitie, nay less, for what are all monarchs and mights compared to
thee, but folia quae vento rapiuntur, Job. 13.
dried and withered leaves blown abroad with dust in the wind, with a blast of
thy mouth they are blown down from their regal thrones, withered with
diseases, dispersed in sepulchers, consumed to dust, and every moment, when it
pleafeth thee, annihilated and reduced to nothing. What has their power to do
with thine omnipotency? their base excellency with thy supreme majesty?
their prudence, policy, stratagems, with thine infinite wisdom, and
incomprehensible counsels? Ah my God of boundless blessedness, as the highest
pitch of their pre-eminence is vile vassalage compared to thee, so thy love
should disdain not only to be equalled, but also conferred with theirs.

The further I passed, the more objects alluring to love 4. Motive. Beauty.
I discovered: for beauty of bodies, the glory of nature, the glimpse of the
soul, a beam of thy brightness, I see, so enticed men's senses, inueagled
their judgments, led captive their affections, and so ravished their minds,
that such hearts were more present in thoughts and desires with such bodies
where they liked and loved, than with that body wherein they soiourned and
lived. And what was this beauty which so fed their appetites? it could not be
certainly any other thing than the apt proportion and just correspondence of
the parts and colors of visible bodies, which first delighted the eye, and
then contented the mind, not unlike the harmony of proportionable voices and
instruments, which seed the ear; and health which issues from the just
proportion and temper of the four humors; and some dainty taste, which ensues
from the mixture of diverse delicat meats compounded in one. This harmony of
mortal bodies (O my God the beauty of beauty) has disconsorted, and
consequently deformed many an immortal soul. Thou neither have body nor
parts, and therefore art thou not beautiful? Why then did thou say, and
pulchritudo agri mecum est: the beauty Psalm. 39. Isay. 66.
of the field is with me and in me? If thou did argument profoundly, and
conclude infallibly, that thou wast not Psalm: 73. Luck. 12.
barren, who imparted fecunditie to others: questionless thou must by right
reason be beautiful, who deckes and adornes the poor lillies in the field,
with a more glorious mantle than ever covered the corpse of sage Solomon, for
all his treasures and wisdom. Thou want grosle, massy, terrene,
corruptible parts, wherein according to our material sensual conceits,
beauty consists: but thy beauty transcendeth this infinitely more, than all
the world the least grain of sand which lies upon the Ocean shore. For thy
harmony, thy consort, thy proportion, springs from the admirable union of
all thy perfections: all thy creatures produced and producible, in thee are
united, the lamb and the lion, fire and water, whiteness and blackness,
pleasure and sadness; without strife or contention, without hurt or injury,
in a divine harmony and most amiable beauty dwell, reside, and live in thee.
Some philosophers said truly, albeit not so plainly as all common people could
perceive them, That thou wast a center out of which issued innumerable lines
(they meant thy creatures) the further they extended from thee, the further
they were disunited among themselves, and the nearer they approached unto thee,
more strictly they were linked together, and at last all united and identified
in thee their center, last end, and rest. Gardens and fields are beautiful,
palaces, cities, provinces, kingdoms, bodies of men and women, the heavens,
the angels, and in fine, the whole universal world framed in number, weight,
and measure, all parts keeping their places, order, limits, proportion and
natural harmony, all these in particular in themselves, and combined in one,
are inameled with a most gracious vagisnesse, luster, and beauty: all which
proceeded from thee, and resideth in thee, and are comprised in a far more
sublime and eminent degree in thee, than in themselves, or than an angel of
gold contains in value ten shillings of silver: for in themselves they are
limited in essence, and kept within the narrow bounds and banks of natural
perfection, but these little rivers joined in thee, find an illimitate and
boundless sea, wherein they have neither bottom nor bound. What shall I say
of you three, three sacred persons in Trinity, distinguished really, and yet
indistinct essentially? does not this distinction cause a difference, and this
admirable union an inexplicable consonance? Are not your three persons
hypostases or subsistences, the infinite bounds, lists, and limits of an
interminat, immensiue, and endless essence? Are not these the borders of your
beauty? your attributes of bounty, simplicity, unity, verity, eternity,
immensitie, impassibilitie, wisdom, providence, omnipotency, charity, justice,
mercy, clemency, benignity, magnificencie, in some sort distinguished, yet
really the same perfection are your blessed intellectual face: those amiable
colors, that glorious beauty, that maiestical countenance, that celestial
brightness, the Angels desire to behold, the blessed saints contemplat, and we
wandering pilgrims aspire unto in the end of our perigrination, the which will
feed us without satietie, content us without appetite of change, wherein
consists all happiness, joy, and rest.

Beauty is the rind of bounty, and those creatures are 5 Motive. ^ountie or
goodness.
more beautiful which are more bountiful: For bounty and goodness resemble
the Sun, beauty the beams, bounty the spring, beauty the river, bounty
the heart, beauty the face, bounty the tree, beauty the flower, bounty the
flesh, beauty the feathers. This truth cannot be denied: for if that beauty
be nothing else but a just proportion of parts, with an apt correspondence of
temper in colors in these inferior bodies, or brightness and lightness in
the superior, and such semblable perfections in souls and spirits, no doubt
but better parts, finer colors, purer lights proportionably combined, cause a
more excellent beauty, show, and luster: as the siner gold, the richer stones
(if art be correspondent) the more vage and beautiful jewel. But here alas,
in humane corpse it falls out contrariwise: for although indeed, a
beautiful body in a child, a youth, a man, a woman, an old man (for a
different beauty adorneth all these) argue a better substance, and a more
sound corporal perfection; yet the souls of such, by the malice of men and
women, are commonly worse; for beauty they make an instrument of vice, which
by right reason should be an ornament of virtue: and therefore such beauty ill
beseems such bodies, and fitly the holy ghost compares Circul^s aurtus in
nuribus suis, (...) pulchra and fatua. Prou. c. 11.
a woman's beautiful body, linked with a bad soul, to a ring of gold in a
swines snout, which ever lies rooting in dirt and mire. Bounty then and
beauty by nature are linked together, though perverse souls like stinking
corpse lie buried in beautiful sepulchers, though rustie blades be covered
with golden sheaths, though dragons gall and bane of Basiliskes stand closed up
in viols of Crystal. Yet howsoever by sympathy of nature they be connexed,
and by malicious affections, in us disconsorted, nevertheless, I have always
proved by experience, that bounty and goodness were principal motives of
love, yea, to say truth, I knew never thing loved, but that it was gilded with
goodness. If I loved learning, it was because it was good in it self, and a
perfection of mine understanding; if meat or drink, because they were good for
my body, to restore the forces vanished; if clothes, because they kept me
warm: and finally, whatsoever I affected, I palpably felt it either good in it
self, or good for my self. And thereupon I remember a sound philosopher
pronounced a solemn axiom, as undoubted in speculation, so daily experimented
in action, Bonum est, quod omnia appetunt, Goodness is that which all things
affect. All beasts, though reasonlesse, yet in love follow this general
instinct and inclination of reason, imprinted in their hearts (O infinite
wisdom!) with the indoleble characters of thy providence, to affect nothing
but that in some sort concerns their good. Ah my God of boundless bounty,
Nemo bonus nisi solus Deus, thou Luke 18.
only essentially of thy self, without list or limit art good, all things
else by participation and limitation. An Angel has goodness, and therefore
is amiable, yet he is but a drop distilled from thee, in that quantity,
degree, and measure, thy wisdom prescribed, and his circumferenced nature
required. What, O my God, is goodness, but perfection, integrity of essence,
completenesse and fullness of beauty? What is perfection, but an intier
possession of all that such a nature or substance should have? and so thy word
witnesses, that the J^itur perfecti ^unt (...), and omnis ernatus ^^rum. Genesis
2. 1.
heavens were framed perfect, because they wanted nothing necessary or requisite
to their nature: and for all this, the heavens want wit and reason, howbeit
they are perfect in their senseless kind. But in thee what want can their be?
no parts, because thou art simple without composition; no perfection can be
scant in fullness and intention, where all are infinite. And therefore if in
earth I thirsted after the vnpure drops of thy created goodness (compared to
thine increate bounty) how much more should I thirst after thee, the pure
Crystal fountain of life? Ah Quam bonus Israel Deus, ijs qui recto sunt
cord? Psalm. 72.
How good is the God of Israel to them who are of a right heart? Trinit as
diuinarum personarum est summum bonum, quod purgatissimis mentibus cernitur.
The Trinity of divine persons (says Austen thy servant) is a supreme Aug. 1.
de Trini. cap. 2. circa init^um.
goodness, which is beheld with most purified minds. Bonus est Dominus
sperant^bus in eum, animae quaerenti illum. Our Lord is good to them that hope
in him, to that soul which inquireth for him. What then, my God the abisse of
bounty, art thou not good to all, but to such souls as search for thee, as
are purified from offenses, as are right hearted? No no thy goodness no less
extends her sphere, than thine omnipotency her might: and as nothing ever
received being but by thine almighty hand, so nothing integrity of being but
by thy bountiful hand. What man ever lived and enjoyed not the heat and light
of this visible sun? Or who ever lived or continued life, but by the beams
of thine invisible bounty. But true it is and registered in all sacred records
of antiquity for an infalliable verity, that thy goodness is specially
extended and pours forth her treasures more abundantly upon those good
souls who in sincere, pure, affectuall, and thirsty hearts seek for thee.
Thou art a sea of goodness, favors, and graces, every one may enjoy thee that
will with all his heart serve and love thee; howbeit the greater vessel
receives more abundance.

The sixth motive to Love is Pleasure.
IN all the sons of men, and in all sorts of beasts, I daily and hourly
discovered, an insatiable desire of delight: and almost nothing loved
vehemenrly, but that which was canded with semblable pleasure: it were in vain
to demonstrate this by reason, since every moment fresh experience teaches,
that sensualities first step in every action, tends to pleasure and solace;
and those things she accounts and priseth most, which sensually delight her
best. O God of incomprehensible wisdom, and ininuestigable providence, how
potent is this bait of pleasure, to allure, to deceive, to precipitate unwary
souls into eternal misery! It is passed almost in every sense in a moment,
and yet the importunity never cease. The base and bad conditions of sensual
pleasure.
It is beastly (for all senses are common to men with beasts) and yet it
seems ever to promise a paradise of joy It is most erroneous sophisticating
men's minds, and yet bears, or at least pretends a show of reason. It in
appearance promises rest and quietness, but in effect dispoiled the soul of
all rest and quietness. It is admirable how men affected with pleasure are
changed and metamo^phosed from themselves, untroubled with such an inordinat
passion. It is exceeding dangerous, and yet for the present it lulleth a man
with a world of security. It is for most part vicious, and damnable, and yet
for most part and of most persons approved and accepted of as virtuous and
laudable. And therefore the bad conditions of sensual pleasure, be such as
wise men either wholly disdain them, or use them with such parsimonie, that
they take them as medicines in a certain careless passage, rather than much
desired solaces, not placing in them any extraordinary contentation and rest.
For how can that be called delight, which carries with it so many just causes
of coffeehouse, nay of baseness, disgrace, remorce of conscience, desert of
punishment? Ah my God the fountain of water of life, the true paradise of
pleasure, delight of delights, when these transitory follies, or fugitive
fancies, or pernicious errors, or sweet poisons, or sugared gall, so gulled and
mislead my soul, why had I not recourse to thee? how came it to pass that I
considered not those floods of pleasure prepared for them that love thee? De
torrente voluptatis potabis eos? The simphonie and sacred melody of Angels
ever sounding in the land of the living, and never ceasing for them that scrue
thee? Whywaighed I not those ineffable ioies that never eye see, nor ear
heard, nor heart conceived, which thou have and ever had in a readiness for
them who serve thee as subjects, obey thee as servants, love thee as children,
converse with thee as friends? Ah sovereign sweetness surpassing the honey
and honey comb, if I had but tasted one drop of those divine dainties, if I
had but sipt one spoonefull of those sacred liquors, it had bin no marvel if
I had served thee, endured all molestfull labors, supported all disgraceful
injuries: for that sweetness would have allayed all these bitternesses, that
gain extenuated and consumed to nothing all this pain which we sustain in
this miserable exile, But what if sensible feeling want, shall infallible faith
fail? It should not: but in whom does it not? for if lively faith were
excited, these fragill pleasures would be despised. Yet thou have not wholly, O
bountiful God, reserved all thy spiritual, honest, virtuous, supernatural,
divine pleasures, for the citisens of thy heavenly Jerusalem; but even in the
barren defect of this perilous perigrination, thou have let fall a certain
kind of manna, though not to be gathered in great abundance, yet in a little
measure and sufficient quantity; thou have refreshed in some sort thy thirsty
people with most sweet water distilled from the rock de petra melle saturauit
eos. For what are those admirable consolations thy faithful friends feel in
the inundation of their adversities, tolerated for thy sake, but a sacred
Manna in the desert? What are those comforts, which good souls gather even out
of Christ's bitter passions, but honey distilled from the craggie rock? What
else signify those iubilies of heart, and most secret joys, which proceed
from a good conscience grounded upon a confident hope of future salvation, but
those great clusters of grapes showed unto them, in sign of the fertility of
the future land of promise? What else can prognosticat the sweetness of
fervent prayers, but the infinite suauitie and happy contentation, which once
fervent believing lovers shall enjoy in thy blessed company and heavenly
conversation? But few feel these joys in this life: And why? because they
will not crack the shell to get the kernill; they refuse to pare the pear, to
eat the pulpe; they loath to till the ground, to reap the harvest; they fly
the wars, and leese the glory of the victory; they disdain the digging of
craggie mountains, and so never find the mine of gold; they shun the pain of
pruning their vines, and therefore enjoy not the fruit thereof: in fine, they
fly mortification of carnal sensuality, and therefore attain not unto the
sweet spiritual consolations of Christian charity. To conioyne them both
together, were as possible, as to combine light and darkness, water and fire,
the Oynions of Egypt with the heavenly Manna, the food of Angels: for this
resolution and infallible conclusion must ever be had in memory, that a man
cannot enjoy a paradise in this life, and a future paradise in the life to come.

The seventh Motive to Love, which is Profit.
O Sacred Monarch of this mighty frame, into what a disconsorted estate are
men fallen. I see it now held for a precept, publickely divulged in matters of
State, and as it were registered for a fundamental principle, That all degrees
and leagues of princes Botero lib. 2. della regio, di stato. cap. della
prudenta.
aim at private interest; and therefore that a prince should neither trust to
friendship, nor affinity, nor league, nor any other bond, wherein he that
deals with him, has not some ground of interest: as though all worldly
friendship were founded in one or other sort of utility. But this is not
proper to our days alone, for in passed ages an ancient Poet said:

Donec eris foelix, multos numerabis amicos, Philip. 2.

Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.
When fortune smiles, then friends abound,
When fortune frowns, few friends are found.
And one more wiser than he, Omnes quaerunt quae sua sunt, All look for
interest and private commodities. We said above, that all men naturally love
their benefactors, but more generally here we may avouch, that all men love
those things whatsoever afford them any profit or utility: a man loves his
horse, his house, his servants which are trusty, his possessions, his herds
of oxen, and finally, whatsoever adds or increases the goods of Nature or
Fortune: and as this love of concupiscence reigns in all worldly hearts, so
it teaches them to love best that which profits them most: and albeit very
often it be but base and vicious, yet guided by reason, and ruled by charity,
it may be good and virtuous. But what is profit or profitable? That which
enableth us, as a mean to get some good end, honest or voluptuous, or
agreeable unto us, intended and desisired. And therefore we account possessions
profitable, which serve us for necessaries to sustain life: we repute horses
profitable, because by them we make our iournies more speedily: we esteem
trades and merchandise profitable, because by them we gain ri^hes, which in
effect are all things. What shall I say here, O soueraign Lord? Shall I make
thee a mean to get me profit, who art the end of all profits and commodities?
Or shall I compare thy majesty with these our vile miseries? Who can be
ignorant of thy inexhausted treasures, but he that is ignorant who thou art? Or
who does not know the innumerable means and helps he daily receives from
thee, to conserve nature, and further grace, but he that knows neither
himself nor thee? what is thy rain and dew which continually fall and fatten
the earth, but our gain purchased without either payment or pain? What is the
heat of the Sun and four seasons of the year, so requisite for nature, so
beneficial to all mortal men, but daily commodities and hourly profits? what
bird in the air, what fish in the sea, what beast in the land, what planet in
the heavens, what star in the firmament, what metal in the earth, what
flower in the field, what tree in the orchard, what herb in the garden, what
root, bark, wood, leaf, flower, or fruit, yields not some emolument to man,
serves not him either for meat, medicine, clothes, exercise, pleasure, or
some other convenient end, and consequently are profitable unto him? and thou
therefore the root, fountain, and origin of all, profitable in all, by all,
and above all. In the spiritual life of our souls, thy sacraments, are
conduits of grace; thine inspirations, helps to holiness; thy word a medicine
for Ghostly maladies; thy crosses and afflictions, means, for amendment. And
thus my God of endless wealth, every creature affoording one commodity, with
a sounding voice unto my heart, though silent to mine ear, cries continually
and exhorts me incessantly, to confer them all to thy honor, who have so
kindly bestowed them upon me, for my good.

The 8. Motive to Love, which is Honesty.
I Take not Honesty in this place, as an object of temperance, opposite to
dishonestie or impuritie: but as a general object to all Virtue, called by
Divines and moral Philosophers, Honestum contra-distinguished to vtile and
delectabile, to profitable and delightful: for in the former sense a man may
be honest, and yet an unjust person, an Usurer, a Murderer etc. For diverse men
may Vide Arist^. 9. moral. Nic^. cap. 4. and Pl^^^ in Hipparcho.
be chaste of body, who are otherwise addicted to sundry vices in Soul. But
here I take Honesty, as comprehending all actions, or good inclinations, or
virtuous habilities, tending and bending the Soul to follow Reason, and
enabling a man to live like a man: and so Honesty includes all Virtues, and
excludes all vices.

We prove by daily experience, that if a man be beautiful and personable,
he is amiable: if valor be therewith conjoined, he is more esteemed: if
Prudence be added, he is more accounted: if Virtue be annexed, he is highly
reputed: if Religion adorn all these precedent parts, he is admired: if
eminent Sanctity glorify them, he is adored. For although every excellency
carries with it a sweet grace and motive to amabilitie, yet such is the
luster and glory of Virtue and Honesty, that it alone causes a more solid
friendship, love, and amity: a personable body is often linked with a
pestilent soul: a (...) Captain in the field, for most part is infected with
^^ effeminate affection at home: those things we love as profitable, we love
not absolutely, but rather in them our selves, for whose use they serve, and
therefore when commodity fails, love quaileth. But those men we affect for
their honesty, those we love indeed, and that affection is permanent: because
it stands upon a sound foundation, to wit, Virtue and Honesty, the
principal objects of Reason, and reasonable affections. And so we prove daily
our selves, that we find many men, who neither have beauty of body, nor
martial minds, nor ornaments of learning, nor riches, nor degrees, and yet
only for that we know them sincere, upright, and honest, all honest men love
them, and maugre malice of the wicked, though spitefully they backe-bite them,
yet in their hearts they cannot but commend them. And truly there is almost
nothing in this life, which absolutely ought to be loved, but that which either
is, or rellisheth of Honesty, for all other loves are either indifferent,
mercenarie, or vicious; if Virtue; or virtuous men for their Virtue ought to be
loved and esteemed. O my GOD! the Life of Virtue, what Love is due to thee? who
art the Quintessence and supreme Perfection, not of heroical virtue, but of
innate and consummate goodness, dignity, and majesty: which are as far
above the pitch of all excellent Virtues, heroical, supernatural, or
theological, and infinitely more, then the chiefest Virtues surmount the
baddest vices. All men by nature are sinners, are peccable, the just offend
often, and he that says, he has no sin, is a Liar. But thou art spotless,
impeccable, and as far from all sin, as incomprehensible Wisdom from
ignorance, and infinite Goodness from malice. The erroneous ignorant
Philosophers, who stumbled sometimes upon true Virtues, though in most they
missed the mark, could say, that if a virtuous Soul could be beheld with
corporal eyes, it would ravish a man with love and admiration: but what if
they had thoroughly penetrated the admirable secrets, and hidden perfections,
which long experience and Gods grace has taught, would they have said? what if
they had understood the mysteries of christianity, and entered into
consideration of the worth, luster, and glory of Faith, Hope, Charity, Grace,
and other divine Virtues, which they never dreamed upon? certainly they could
not have concluded otherwise, but that a virtuous and religious soul, was
gilded with sparks of Deity, or inameled with the various radiant beams of
Divinity, and therefore deserved to be loved, admired, honored. But what
then should both they and we say and affirm of thee, whose wit and will need
no inclining Virtues, to moove, or bend them to wisdom or goodness, who
run amayne of themselves? Virtues in us perfect those powers of our souls,
which without them were imperfect; but in thee as there can be no imperfection
to stain thine Essence, so all Virtues are needless in thee, in whom all
faculties flow in abundance, by their own force and efficacy: and therefore
thou art in regard of thine eminent Virtue, to be affectually loved, reverently
honored, and with all humility, submission and recognisance adored.

The 9. Motive to Love, is Love it self.
THe Diamond forms and fashioneth the Diamond, and Love forms and
fashioneth Love: fire converteth fuel into fire, and fuel converted
increases fire: Love causes Love, and the beloved reloving, augmenteth the
original Love. For albeit no man in this life can infallibly assure himself
to be beloved by any, for Love lies secretly closed up within the closet of
the heart, which is inaccessible to any mortal eye: yet Love like hid
perfumes, musk, and other odoriferous smelles, casts a sent though not
seen: for words, eyes, deeds, gestures, are moral messengers, and daily
discoverers of a loving mind. And without all question, those persons cannot
but be accounted hard hearted, barbarous, fierce and savage, who belove not
them of whom they are loved, in case the Love be pure, honest, and consorting
with Christianity: for base worldly love grounded upon interest, and fleshy
concupiscence, deserves rather the name of Mercinarie Lust, then Love: the
reason is, because Love is so precious a Treasure, so rich a Jewel, so divine
a Gift, that I am persuaded; if men could behold the hearts ^^a Plato in
Lyside.
of them that truly love them, it would be as violent to withhold them from
reloving again, as a Lioness from her whelps lying in her sight, a stone in
the air from his center, a bullet within a discharged Cannon. And no cross in
this life can befall an honest Lover more mortal and deadly, then not to be
beloved where he loves: because in Love, life, thoughts, and affections, are
transported into the person beloved, where, if they find not semblable
affection to entertayne them, they pine, they perish, they die. Who would not
love an honest virtuous Lover, who honoreth, prizeth, and serves whom he
loves? for honor, estimation and servitude, if they be cordial, cannot be
accounted but rare treasures. He that loves virtuously, esteems the beloved
worthy of honor, because he reputeth him virtuous, and therefore in affection
yields him condign honor due to Virtue: he serves him in regard of his
great goodness, which in his conceit meriteth all servitude and obsequious
complements. Who would not love a virtuous Lover, who consecrateth himself,
and all he has unto the person beloved? for that one friend is thought able
to do, which his friends can perform and effect: and therefore a man has so
many Arist. 3. moral. Nicom. c. 3.
bodies, souls, hearts, eyes, ears, tongues, hands, feet, as he has
friends; and so by this means is made potent and mighty. For a true friend
will in all cases, places, and occasions deal in the affairs and occurrents
of his friend: and for this cause Aristotle thought that friendship and amity
were more necessary for a City, then laws and justice, and that the Legifers
should have no less regard to Love, then to Laws: for if Citizens Arist. 8.
moral. c. 1.
loved as friends, they should need no laws to punish them as enemies. Ah my
loving God! I demurre too long in these speculative discourses, and withold
my soul too much from patheticall affections. Do thou Love us? who
doubts? for if thou had never loved, we had never lived: and if thy Love
continued not preserving Diligis omnia quae sunt: and nihil odisti little quae
fecisti. Sap. cap. 11.
our being, we should presently be resolved into dust and nothing. Well then
thou do prize us and honor us: else thou would never have given the
precious blood of thy Son to have redeemed us. This argues estimation, but
not honor: for honor supposes subjection, inferioritie, and I know not what
kind of vassalage and servitude: it seems too presumptuous, if not
blasphemous, to make thee either inferior or equal with men, whose Majesty
the highest Seraphims admire, reverence, worship, and with trembling knees
adore. Ah my God! of most maiesticall and extaticall Love, shall I presume to
enter into the abyss of thy eclypses, excesses, and charitable ecstasies? They
be too deep for me, yea, and all the world beside to comprise: yet I know who
said that thou went out of thy self, and suffered extacie through the
vehemency Dyonis. Artop. cap. 4. de divine. nom.
of Love: his meaning was, that thou seemed to abase thy Majesty, with
succouring and relieving our misery: and that exinanition and transformation of
thy supreme Glory with Mount-Calvaries ignominy tells us no less. Thy
providence is such over the universal world in general, and every kind of
creature in special, and every man in particular, giving them means to
atchieue their ends, concurring with them in all their actions, disposing of
all so sweetly, that Nature and Grace consort so well together, and thy
watchful provident eye with both, that the wisest may admire thee, and the
simplest perceive thee, and none of us all ever doubt of thy vigilant
solicitude, (I dare not call it servitude) yet if service be a succouring,
sustaining, helping, ministering necessaries, and in every thing assisting us in
best and basest offices, I may say thou lovingly serves all, who without thy
service could not serve themselves, nor all the world except thy self. Great,
no doubt, is thy love (O God without paragon in love) to men in this life: for
here thou do not only affect them, power out thy benefits upon them, distill
thy graces into their hearts, and a thousand ways externally and internally
work their salvation, but also that which surpasses all, it seems thy will
and power are at the command, or rather ready to obey the desires of thy
faithful servants, for what else mean those protrite words of the Psalm,
Voluntatem timentium se facit, He fulfilleth the will of Psalm. 144.
them that fear him? and what other sense can be brought of that request thou
made to thy servant Moses, Dimitte me, vt irascatur furor meus contra eos, and
deleam Exodus 32.
eos, Suffer me, that my fury be revenged of them, and that I may destroy them:
but that thy anger and revenge, thy displeasure and their intended destruction
laid in Moses power to rule and guide according to his pleasure? O admirable
omnipotency of love! which has power even over the omnipotent: but if in this
life, such is Loves puisance, what shall we say of thy friends and lovers in
glory, where all graces and favors abound, where love like the Sun ever
stands in the Zenith, where presses swim with wine, and fields flow with
honnie? Certainly we cannot imagine or conceave otherwise, and well, but as
thou who put on the person of the good old father, who said to his elder son,
Fili, tu semper mecum es, and omnia mea tua sunt. O Luc. 15.
Son, thou art always with me, and what is mine, is thine; so that thou and
all thy treasures are the final inheritance, possession and kingdom of thy
children. But yet more emphatically our blessed Savior declared the force and
effects of thy love when he said, Beati illi servi, quos cum venerit dominus,
invenerit vigilantes, amen Luc. 12.
dico vobis quod pracinget se, and faciat illos discumbere, and transiens
ministrabit illis. Blessed be those servants, whom their Lord when he comes
shall find watching: Amen I say unto you, he will cause them sit down, and
passing by, will serve them: this service and sitting, no doubt, signify the
eternal glory whereupon thy Saints shall ever feed, the which cannot be
prepared and ministered unto them by any others hands then thine which made
them. And alitle below to the same effect, speaking of his faithful and
trusty servant, what wages in blessedness he shall receive, he adds, Super
omnia quae possidet consiliet eum, his Lord and Master will give him signiorie
and authority over all he possesses, which is the consummation and final
perfection of all true love, and affectuall wishes of all true lovers, that the
one have a king of charitable command, and a certain friendly dominion over
the other.

The 10. Motive to Love, which is Resemblance.
THe ground of every man's love of himself, is the Identitie of a man with
himself, for the lover and beloved are all one and the same thing: because
love being nothing else but a complacence or contentation in the goodness or
perfection one has with a desire of the accomplishment thereof, consequently
as we ought both in grace and nature to prefer none before our selves in the
affection of virtue and perfection, so we should not love any above our selves.
From the Identitie of our selves and the love thereof, necessarily follows a
certain love to all them who are united any way unto us, and the stricter this
union is, the stricter affection it engenders, and for that all things united
have a kind of resemblance, therefore Philosophers and Divines ground
friendship upon similitude: here hence we love our kinsemen, parents, and
children, for the union and resemblance in blood: students ground their
friendship in the same kind of studies, soldiers in martial affairs,
courtiers in civil courtly carriage, tradesmen in their arts, mariners in
navigation: and finally all men of one profession love them of the same, and
Omne animal Eccles. 13.
diligit sibi simile: and every beast affects the like, lives with the like,
consorteth with the like. And the reason is, because a man in this life by
nature and grace, by the instinct of his innate judgment and reasonable
affection, prescribes unto himself an end in this world, void of troubles and
molestation, quiet, peaceable, full of rest and contentation: whereat all his
labors, thoughts, and meditations level: moreover, he being a sociable
creature had need of men to help him in council, comfort him in griefs,
succor him in sundry disasters of fortune, which daily and casually occur,
and finally converse peaceably and agreeably with him: all which, none can
perform better, not so well as they whose natures and conditions are like unto
ours: for what dissension can be among those men, whose wills are one and the
same? what sorrows can greatly molest us, where friends carry their portions
with us, and thereby alleviate a great part of their weight? what counsel can
prevail against many friends, who are wise, discreet, faithful, virtuous?
what conversation can be more grateful, then that, where neither injuries are
offered, nor suspected? in few, as virtue is the surest chain wherewith men
can be bound together, so resemblance in virtue the surest foundation of
friendship, and a virtuous company the happiest society. O my God of most
pure and perfect love, thou spoke the word and begot thine eternal word, thou
breathed out thy love and produced the holy ghost, the life and soul of all
true love, as well create as increate: thy love in Trinity is one and the
selfsame identified in all the three persons, and the selfsame thing with
their substance: and therefore most intier, inexplicable, and perfect is your
love, the which may not be termed friendship, but rather charitable amity of
an indivisible unity. Thy creatures are all beloved of thee, because thou like
a father in them have imprinted and stamped a resemblance of thy Majesty: and
because there is none so base and imperfect but that all the goodness it has,
resideth in thee, much more perfitly then it self: therefore no child so
represents his father, as every creature thy Majesty, according to that
perfection it enjoys, and thy boundless essence comprehends. What shall I
here say of the image of thy essence and three persons in Trinity engraven in
the center of every reasonable soul? this were a matter too prolixe to
discourse upon: but well I may conclude, that if thou love all thy creatures
for a dark cognizance they carry upon their backs of thy glorious greatness,
no doubt but thou will love and favor man, who bears in the face of his
soul thy perfect portrait and image in a far higher degree? much more might
be added of the blood of Christ, wherewith all souls are sprinkled, who have
put him on in their baptism. Long treatises might be penned of the
supernatural colors, and celestial graces of faith, hope, charity, and
other infused virtues, wherewith thy friends are refined, enriched, adorned,
beautified, and thy image perfited, but of this more diffusedly in my third
book of Threans. Finally, thy future resemblance which all thy faithful
servants shall possess in glory, of whom is verified that prophecy of S.
John, Scimus quoniam cum apparuerit, 1. Ioh. 3.
similes ei erimus, quoniam videbimus eum sicuti est. Because we know when he
appears, we shall be like unto him, for that we shall see him as he is. This
glorious retreat of thy blessed face would afford ample matter to praise thy
goodness, extol man's greatness in felicity, declare the beauty of thy sacred
beams wherewith our souls shall be gloriously inamelled, excite us to love
thee here more fervently, to resemble thee there more lively: but this large
subject would pass the strait compass of my prefixed brevitie: therefore O
blessed God, renew us within so perfitly here, that we may one day try this
truth, with thee there.

The 11. Motive to Love, which is agreeableness with Nature.
IF a man should inquire why the Vine so loves by nature the Elm, that it
wrappeth more kindly about it, and brings forth more plenty and better
grapes, then planted at the root of any other tree: questionles no other
reason could be given then a certain secret sympathy of Nature, a
proportionate agreeablenes, and natural conveniencie. What pain takes the
Hen to sit so long upon her eggs? what labor endure little Birds to build
their nestes, to feed their yonglings, to teach them by daily examples to
avoyde dangers, to procure food, to conserve, protect and defend themselves?
all these, and thousands such like, proceed from a certain Love, grounded upon
the agreeableness and concordance with Nature. So that small pleasures the
poor Birds find to leave their own provision sought with such labor, to
cramme their little ones; and no great delight the Hen can reap by so daintily
and carefully covering her eggs, but that the want of pleasure is supplied by
the conformity of Nature, which therein is apertly showed.

When we see beasts fight, we commonly wish in our hearts the victory should
happen rather to the one party then the other: If a reason of this desire were
demanded, it were impossible diverse times to be rendered, except we resolved it
into a secret sympathy of nature: likewise meeting with a company of
strangers which we never see men or women, presently one shall perceive a
certain more affectuall fancy inclined to love one then an other, although
diverse times both proportion, comeliness, or I know not what other perfection,
be more spectable in the rejected, then in the accepted. The same we might say
of diverse meats drinks, ayers, smells, lodgings, apparel, etc. which agree
and are conformable to some men's nature, but mavelous hurtful and offensive
to others, the which therefore are loved of those, and abhorred of these.

It is hard for me, if not impossible (O God the center of my soul) to
explicate the admirable proportion, conveniencie, and agreeablenes betwixt thy
mercies and our miseries, thy riches and our poverty, thine habilities to
perfect us, and our indignities to be perfited, thy patience and longanimitie to
support injuries, and our perversenes to commit offenses. Tell me O thou heart
of man, why thou live in this life, for most part disgusted, distasted,
unquiet, ever loving, never perfitly liking, thirsting ever for a happy quiet
rest, and never attaining any quietness to thy full contentment or rest? Ah my
God! one who knew this misery, and had felt the finger of thy mercy, told the
cause, for being as unable to settle himself, as he had perceived the same in
others, at last was stirred up to seek to thee, the center, life, and satietie
of the soul.

Tuenim excitas vt laudare te delectet. Quia fecisti nos Aug. lib. 1. confess.
cap. 1.
ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te. Thou excites us
(O God) with delight to praise thee: Because thou have made us for thee, and
our heart is unquiet until it rest in thee. So that as the fire flies to his
Sphere, the stone to his Center, the river to the Sea, as to their end and
rest, and are violently deteyned in all other places; even so the hearts of
men without thee their last end and eternal quietness, are ever ranging,
warbling, and never out of motion: not unlike the needle touched with the
Lodestone, which ever stands quivering, and trembling, until it enjoy the
full and direct aspect of his Northern Pole: O my God of infinite wisdom!
who can speak as well with works as words; let it be lawful for me
symbollically to interpret the triangular figure of man's heart, and say, that as
the face of the body may be termed the portrait of affections and passions; so
the heart may be called, the face and figure, or resemblance of the soul, and
consequently of thee, (whose image lies drawn in the plane thereof, limmed
with thine own pensil and immortal colors) the heart then of man triangularly
respects the blessed Trinity, every corner a Person, and the solid
substance your common Essence. This heart then resembling thee, touched with
desire of thee, cannot be quiet, but united and conjoined with affectuall love
and amity with thee. But come wit of man, and show thy sympathy in desire of
thy God, that by thee we may discover the agreeableness he has with all
reasonable Natures. What is thine inclination, and what thing with main and
might do thou wish and essentially crave? Truth: what truth? All: so that
thy thirst can never be served, except all truth thou see revealed: And where
is this Truth to be found? pass over the vaste universe, from the convexe
superficies of the highest Heaven to the center of hell, and thou shall not get
such a request satisfied: pass and pierce through all these trueths, and yet
the immensive capacity of thy desire will not completely be filled. For
until the Sea of all Truth, and the graund origin of al verities flow into
thee, these little drops will rather cause a greater, then quench thy former
thirst. Thy God then who is prima Veritas in essendo and dicendo, the first
Verity in being and speaking, and infinite in both, of all other objects, does
consort with this thy boundless comprehension best; and in fine must be thy
full satietie, or else never look to be satisfied. Now that the Wit knows
where his Rest rests: Come thou Will of man, and tell us what thou aymest at:
where dwells the purport of thy wishes, where lies the project of thy
desires? In goodness and perfection; for as the eye beholds light, and all
colors limmed with light; so thou affects all goodness, and all things gilded
with goodness: And where is all this goodness to be gotten? Ah! we try too
palpably, that all things covered with the cope of Heaven, are as far from
fully contenting our wills, as a bitte of meat to a man almost half dead of
hunger. Who ever yet in this life accounted himself persitly happy, and
thoroughly satisfied in mind, but those which sincerely and affectually loved
thee? Alas, who is he that sees not how our affections go rolling and
ranging from one base creature to another? seeking contentment, ever hoping,
and never obtaining, now in walking, now in conversing, now in beholding, after
in eating, studying, and a thousand such like inveagling baits, which do
nothing else, but with a clawing and cloying variety, rid us from a sensual
satietie: for when one sense has drunk up all his pleasure, and either
feels not his thirst quenched, or with too much his faculty or corporal
instruments endammaged, presently the soul seeks an other bait to avoid the
former molestation, with a new recreation: and so wandreth and beggeth of every
poor creature a scrap of comfort. All this (my sweet God the only object of
complet contentation) argues that what is loved without thee, although it
agrees in part with us, yet it iumpeth not right, it consorteth not in form
and manner as our souls and wills requires. Thou only who foulds in thy self
all kind of goodness art the sole convenient and agreeable object of our wits,
wills, loves and desires.

The 12. Motive to Love is Necessity.
Necessity was the first inventor of Arts: Pleasure added diverse: Vanity
found out the rest. Al corporal creatures issued from the hands of God with a
serviceable harmonicall convenience, consorting with the nature of man: many
for necessity, some for delight, others for ornaments. Among the parts of a
man's body some are necessary, as the heart, brain and liver: some exceeding
profitable yet not absolutely requisite, as two hands, two eyes, two ears, ten
fingers, ten toes: some are for ornaments, as the hair of a woman's head, and
1. Cor. 11. 15.
the beard of a man, an apt figure, and personablenes of body, pleasant
colors, and diverse such like natural complements. Wherefore if pleasant
arts, delightful creatures, complementall ornaments be greatly loved and
liked: questionles necessary trades, creatures, and parts ought much more to be
esteemed and affected, because that every one first loves himself, and then
all those means, which in some sort concern the being or conservation of
himself, among which those which are most necessary are necessaryly beloved.

If I consider my body (O good God the only moulder of all creatures) how it
depends upon thee, in upholding and propping up continually the weak pillars
thereof least continually they should fall, I well know their feeblenes to be
such, and so extreme, that no hand but thine Almighty is able to sustain
them. What way can I walk, what sense can I use, what work can I work, what
word can I speak, what thought can I think, what wish can I will, if thou
guide not my feet, concur not with my sense, work not with my hands, direct
not my tongue, manage not my wit, move not my will? without thy continual,
effectual, and principal influence neither my heart can breathe, my stomach
digest, my pulses move, my liver make concoction, or any part of my body suck
the vital nourishment which restores lost forces, and keeps my life in
continuance. And therefore I may well say that thou art as necessary to
preserve my being, as in first imparting of it, and as requisite to any thing I
can do, as my very soul, substance and faculties, which are principles of
doing. And therefore with what love should I incessantly affect thee, who have
such dependence upon thee? There be some fishes which presently dye if once
they be taken out of the water, and no doubt but much more speedily should both
my body and soul perish, and be brought to nothing, thing, if they were not
environed on every side, above, below, within and without, with the omnipotent
virtue of thine immensive Majesty.

The 13. Motive to Love, which is the pardoning of Injuries.
ALthough every virtue renders a man amiable, yet some there be so immediately
grounded upon the base of love, as liberality and magnificencie upon goodness
and amity, that they ravish and wholly lead men's affections toward them: for
that by them love and bounty power out themselves by communication of what
they have, to others. Contrariwise some other virtues so fortify and establish
a man in goodness, that they arm him invincibly, and make him most potent,
either by mildnes, not to perceive any Injuries, or so corroborate him with
patience, that he cannot or will not revenge them. When Mary had murmured
against Moses, and for the foulness of her fault, God who was most zealous of
his servants estimation, had stricken her with a loathsome leaprie, Moses (as
the scripture reports) Number. 12.
being the mildest man upon earth, could not suffer this just punishment to be
inflicted upon her, but presently demanded of God that he would cure her.
Whereas it seems that he neither perceived the Injury, nor could endure the
Revenge. And in very deed, it cannot but proceed from a noble magnanimious
mind, to contemn all base injuries offered, and to disdain to repay
condignely their deserts: for whomsoever I iniure, I impair either his
estimation, or his riches, or his body, or his soul: he then that can
tolerate such harms, shows himself superior to all that fortune or nature
can afford. Alexander the great went to visit Dio^enes the cynicall
Philosopher, who would not vouchsafe to visit him, and demanded of him, if he
had need of any thing; Yes marry, quoth Diogenes, (who satte in his
philosophical barrel) that thou stand from before me, and hinder not the
Sun from coming to me. Alexander was exceedingly delighted with this
answer, and so wondered at the majesty of this Philosophers mind, that after
his departure, perceiving his Nobles and Minions to mock and jest at such a
satyricall and exoticall answer unto their Emperor. Well, well, quoth
Alexander, you may say what you will, but I assure you, if I were not
Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes. For he desired in his heart to
surmount all men, and esteem nothing, and here he found Diogenes make none
account of him, whom he deemed all the world feared and trembled to hear of.
But yet Alexander prooved not Diogenes one step further, for if he had reviled
him, if he had whipped him, and diverse other ways iniuried him, then he might
have said in deed he was arrived at the haven of happiness, if he had
tolerated them with patience, and neither by deed, word, nor thought meditated
or intended revenge, for it is not so hard for a man to contemn that he has
not, as to despise all he has and patiently to suffer himself to be dispoyled
of all he has, and besides in body to be afslicted as Job, or to be blinded as
Tobie, or cast in prison as Joseph. If Alexander so prized Diogenes vain
contempt proceeding from a popular bravado rooted in a private pride, how would
he have esteemed Saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles, who left all, and
followed Christ's innocencye, tollerating with invincible patience a sea of
afflictions, crosses, and injuries! But thou O blessed Savior, who ecclipsed
thy Majesty with our mortal ignominies, and forsook the use of no Macedonian
Empire, but of the universal world, to whom the use as well as the dominion
belonged, for in the hemme of thy garment we find written Apoc. 19.
Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that
is, one of the basest graces and privileges granted to thine humanity,
(wherewith thy Divinity as with a scarlet roabe was vayled) was the propriety
and dominion over the world: yet for all this ample inheritance over Jew and
Gentile, thou had not so much house to cover thy head as Foxes which hold
their holes, and Birds that in fee-simple keep their neasts. What injuries O
sweet Jesus have sinful souls exhaled, breathed, nay darted out against thy
sacred humanity, frustrating it, for as much as in them laid, of all those
noble effects, which thou deserved for us by thy most bitter death and passion?
and yet thou art so armed with humble mildness and compassion of heart, that
thou by internal favors and external benefits cherishes them, as though thou
were nothing offended with them, but rather with opportune kindness, seems to
contend with their importune malice, with invincible patience exspecting their
repentance. What wrongs do we offer every moment thy sovereign Divinity, by
transgressing thy commandments, and thereby iniurying all the attributes of
thy Divine Majesty? And yet no sooner the prodigal child says peccavi, O
Father, I have offended, but thou falls upon him with kisses, and customarie
favors, forgetting his former follies: no sooner the sinful Magdalen batheth
thy feet with mournful tears, but thou bathes her breast with pardoning
joys. Ah my God of all goodness and mercy! what shall I prefer in thee, the
benefits I have received from thy hands, or the not present revenging of
injuries thou have received from my heart? for in them thou communicated thy
goodness conformably unto thy will, here thou sustained dishonor against thy
will, that tended to glorify thee, and perfect us, this impugneth thee, and
destroys us: injuries were violent, benefits connaturall; injuries issued
from corruption, and aimed at destruction, benefits proceeded from mercy, and
aimed at the relief of misery, injuries deserved infamy, and benefits
recognition and glory, wherein then did thou show more love and bounty, in
conferring benefits, or pardoning injuries? Questionles in pardoning injuries
for temporal favors, and spiritual graces (all except Christ's incarnation,
his merits and death) argue but a limited greatness not infinite, because a gift
amongst men is thought to proceed from a proportionable love unto the gift, as
for example, if a king give a 1000. pound we value his love to the person who
receives such a benefit in the degree of the quantity of the gift, and the
more he gives, we judge the better he loves, and the more the greatness and
wealth of the Prince is, the greater gift will ever seem lesser. But in
injuries contrariwise the greatness of the person offended mightily augmenteth
the excess of the offense, and therefore in sin, the person of God being of
infinite Majesty, the injury and offense almost is infinitely aggravated: for
if a base peasant beat a Gentleman, the injury is greater then if he beat his
fellow peasant, if he beat a Knight, the offense increased, if a Baron, more
excessive, if an Earl, it ascended, if a Duke, more enormious, if the Kings
son, more treacherous, if the King himself, more horrible, if the Emperor,
more execrable, so that the like offense done to different persons in dignity,
according to their higher degree and preeminence, is judged more grievous and
injurious. The which if we extend to God, it wants all proportion and
measure: For as his Majesty surpasses all in greatness and dignity, so the
injuries offered him are matchless, and incomparable with any kind of
iniquity.

The 14. Motive to Love, which is Hatred.
IT is admirable, how gealing frostes cause springs and wells, which in Summer
be exceeding cold, in the depth of Winter, to smoke with heat: for the
vehemency of the frost and coldness so glueth and environeth the earth, that
the hot vapors which are engendered within it, partly retyring from cold
repercussions, partly stopped from passages (the pores of the ground being
shut) unite themselves again with the water, and so cause warmenesse. We see
by experience, that raging Mastives who if they were loosed one at another,
they would fight till death, whereas in presence of the Bull or Bear they
join in friendship, and both, either by sensual consent, or natural
instinct, unite themselves in one to assault their common adversary.

The like we find among politic Potentates and Princes, who easily join in
league and amity with them, who are in dissension or wars with their
professed enemies. And holy Writ recounteth a case not much different from
this, of Herod and Pilate, who bare no great good will to our Savior, and
therefore, of foes they fell into friendship. Wherefore in all vproares and
commotions, riots and rebellions, all Nations can testify, that hatred of
subjects against superiors unites them in one, and causes revolt against the
State: as we read of David, to whom when he fled from the face of Saul,
resorted all they who were amuro animo, crossed, or afflicted, and he was their
1. Reg. 22.
Captain. The reason of this may easily be rendered, for first resemblance as I
said above causes love, now all they which hate our enemies resemble us in
that passion, and consequently are apt objects to be beloved. Again, profit
and commodity cause love, in this case the union of haters against their
common enemy is a re-inforcement of their strength, and an enabling of them
more easily to subdue their adversaries. Finally, as every man judges his own
cause good, and his enemies bad, so he is easily induced to think the case
alike of all them who are at like debate with his adversary, and therefore
think as innocents they ought to be desended and protected. How shall thou and
I join ^n hatred O God of concord? I may say against sin we may link
ourselves in union, but alas sin is a certain nothing, and I love it too
well, and therefore hardly can herein find occasion to love thee. Yet in truth
if a man be resolute against sin, there is no mortal enemy in the world who
should more detest and abhor his enemy, then he should sin: for nothing God
ever hated or can hate but sin, the causes, and effects thereof. For nothing
can dishonor God but sin, nor nothing really damnifie man but sin. The The
Devil mortally hates (O most merciful, bountiful, and amiable God) thy
sacred Majesty, and also all mankind: but why hates he thee? because thou
hates his arrogant pride, envy, and malice, and therefore with condign
punishments torments him. But what can his hateful poysonfull heart exhale out
against thee, either to afflict thee with pain, molest thee with sorrow, abate
thy blessedness, or diminish any way thy glory? He can as much prevail against
thy might, or as much impair thy greatness, as an Emets blast the mountains of
Hircan or Caucasus: and for that in effect he can do nothing, yet in the
excessive malice of his affect, he will do all he can: wherefore, knowing that
man is bound both by nature, grace, gratitude, vassaladge, and many other
titles to love, honor, and bless thee, and that by obediently Genesis 3. 1. 1.
Paral. 21. 1. Job. 1. 2. Zach. 3. 1. Math. 4. 3 9. Luc. 8. 12. Act. 5. 3. 2.
Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 6. 11. 1 Thessalonians 2 18. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 2. 10.
serving thee with humility and charity, he shall attain unto that happy
felicity, whereof he and his accomplices for their demerites are for ever
deprived, therefore, as well to rob thee of thy due honor and service, as also
to hinder him from the achievement of his eternal happiness, with all main
and might, like a roaring Lion raging with ire, and famished with hunger of
man's perdition, he rangeth abroad seeking whom he may devour, how he can
possibly impeach thy glory, or man's salvation, and therefore from the beginning
of the world until this day, and to the worlds end, will ever continue the
enmity betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seducing serpent.

Ah my God! I know full well, that all the Devils in hell combined in one,
howsoever they spit their spite, nay belch out their infernal gall against
thee, yet all their forces and substances, natures and what else they have, if
thou would but say the word, in a moment would be consumed to nothing. But
thine intent is, that we should fight with him, who with so many advantages
impugneth us, (yet by the assistance of thy grace) with honor and reputation
we should resist, expunge, and triumph victoriously over him; for that victory
is more glorious, and that glory more illustrious where adversaryes are
strongest, and our forces 2. Cor. 12. 7.
feeblest, Nam virtus in infirmitate perficitur: and Jobs virtue and thy grace
were much more conspicuous in his botches and biles, in his dunghill and ashes,
in the Job. 1.
slouds of his losses, and inundation of his crosses, then when thou blessedst
him with seven thousand Sheep, three thousand Camels, a multitude of Oxen and
Asses, when thou bestowedst upon him an ample family, and a happy issue of
Sons and Daughters; when thou guarded, protected, and with thy fatherly
providence compassed himself, family, lands and livings on every side. But
unless I unite my forces with thy grace, or rather thou with thy favorable
assistance join with me, alas I am as unable to encounter such a potent
adversary, as an Emet a Lion, a Pigmey a Giant, who reputeth iron as strawes,
and brass like rotten wood, who swalloweth slouds, and exspecteth that the
whole River of Jordan should run into his mouth. Yet armed Job. 41. 18. and
40. 18. Vide Mar^. 1. 26. 5. 2. and 9. 26. Luc. 8. 29. the forces of the Devil
his craft. 1. Reg. 13. 19. 2. Esd. 4. 11.
with thy protection, I fear not to prostrate him as David that mighty tower
of flesh, the uncircumcised Philistian, who boasted against the God of Israel.
For in Deo meo transgr^diar murum, I will pierce even the stony walls by the
power and force of my God: Si exurgant adverfum me castra non timebit cor meum:
If whole Camps assault me, my heart will not fear, for I know O omnipotent
God, that love thee as I should, thine almighty hand will uphold me in all
dangers, and strengthen me in all assaults. Sweet God, enable me therefore with
thy love, for the surest Castle Galat. 5. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
against the Devil is a faith working with charity, and the Devils bullets of
battery against this fort are suggestions 2. Cor. 12. 7.
working with concupiscence or self-love and sensuality.

The 15. and 16. Motives to Love, which are delivery from evil, and toleration
of wrongs for us.
Goodness or true love principally by four means are discovered: first, in
bountifully giving gifts and bestowing benefits, as Alexander the great, who
herein so excelled, that in all occasions he won eternal fame, and
incomparable love of all that dealt with him, for his magnificent deportment in
pouring forth his treasures: and no doubt but that common verse more true then
old, was penned for this and many more such like experiences, to wit:

Si quis in hoc mundo, vult cunctis gratus haberi:
Det, capiat, quaerat^ plurima, pauca, nihil.
He that to all, will here, be grateful thought:
Must give, accept, demand! much, little, naught.
Secondly in not punishing or revenging injuries when they be offered:
wherefore Saul understanding, that David whom he so mightily persecuted, got
him at such advantage, as that if it had pleased him to have revenged so many
wrongs offered him by Saul, he might with as much facility have bereaved him
in the cave of his life, as Saul had desire to dispoyle him of his life, I say,
after 1 Reg. 24* and cap. 26.
that Saul understood the revengelesse heart of David, levavit vocem suam and
slevit: he wept for joy, and apertly confessed his virtue, love and kindness,
and withal, acknowledged his own injustice and, iniquity.

Thirdly, in riddance and delivery from evil: when Judith entered into Bethulia
with Holophernes head, and Judith 1^.
by that means had redeemed her Country from the extreme danger of the
Assyrian Host, which of that people had not occasion sufficiently offered, to
love, admire, Ester 7. and. 8.
and adore her? After that Ester had procured the death of Hamman, and the
reclaim of that bloody Edict Assuerus at Hammans suggestion had sent abroad to
be executed, through all the kingdoms of the Medes and Persians: what Jew had
not there a most forcible motive to love, and reverence that godly Queen,
which so wisely, so courageously, so effectually had saved their lives, and
restored them to former liberty?

The same we may say of Moses, who rid the Israelites from the thraldom of
Egypt: and of Joshua and Sampson, who diverse times defended their people from
the hostile fury and invasion of their enemies: and for this cause, such noble
Generals among the Romans were entitled Patres Patriae, Fathers of the
Country, because they as Fathers had defended it, and therefore deserved to be
reputed and loved as Fathers.

Fourthly, in tollerating wrongs, crosses, disasters, afflictions for us. This
Verity we find recorded in holy Writ: Maiorem charitatem nemo habet, quam vt
animam ponat quis pro amicis suis. No man can show more love, then by pouring
out his life for his friend; if then any suffer wrongs for our cause, the
nearer they approach to death, the nearer they border upon the most perfect
remonstrance of Love; and consequently, are more forcible to cause or increase
kindness and affection. When Saint Paul persecuted the Christians in the
primitive Church, Christ for whose cause they endured such persecutions,
accounted their ignominies, his injuries, and therefore said, Saul, Saul, cur
me persequeris? Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? as though his servants
harms were his hurts. Who dishonors an Ambassador, but his King reputeth
the injury offered unto his Person? who revileth a servant sent from his Lord,
but his Master will think therein his honor stained? wherefore as Christ's
Apostles and Disciples, Ambassadors or Servants wrongs redound to their
disgrace that sent them, and in very deed they ought so to esteem them, as
done to themselves, because they plead and negotiate the Senders causes and
affairs, and in some sort represent their persons; even so, whosoever
handles or deals in our behalf, and thereby incurreth any disgrace in
honor, wealth, or body for us, ought to be reputed our friend, in furthering
our causes and negotiations, and have repaired all the damages he suffered in
our defense. Whosoever then suffers for our cause, we account as innocent,
and to suffer wrongfully, therefore we condole with him, and no doubt but love
him: Secondly, such an one is violently bereaved of some good for our good,
which cannot but argue an extraordinary good will toward us, and consequently
an apt motive to move us to love. Thirdly if that Position of Aristotle be
true, that we love them Arist. 2. Rhe^ cap. 4.
which tell and confess sincerely their faults and offenses: for as Thomas
Aquinas notes, such men shut the door to all fiction and dissimulation, and
therefore are thought upright, and so deserve to be loved: Certainly they that
suffer any damage or danger of damage for us, exclude all fiction or
dissimulation, and really prove they love us affectually, and not
superficially, and therefore deserve to be beloved reciprocally.

O my sweet Savior and impassible God! who by Divine nature art incapable of
damage, grief, sorrow or disgrace, of whom well we may say, Non accedet ad te
malum, nec slagellum appropinquabit Tabernaculo tuo. Psalm. 90.
Evil shall never come near thee, nor any scourge approach to thy Tabernacle,
Yet to rid me and all mankind from evil, thou abased thy self, almost to
the abyss of nothing, factus vermis and non homo, opprobrium hominum and
abiectio plebis; A worm and not a man, the scorn of men, and the scomme of
the people. Whether shall I say was* greater, and deserved more love, the evil
thou have endured for me, or the evil from which thou have delivered me? My
pain from whence thou have rid me, should have been infinite in durance,
and thy pain sustained for me, was infinite in dignity: my soul and body
were most cruelly in hell to have been tormented: and thy body and soul upon
the cross were rent asunder: the ugly fiendes were to imbrue their invisible
clowches in my execrable soul, and the reprobate Jews bathed their hands in
thy blessed blood: I was to have dwelt in utter darkness for my manifold
offenses; and the light of thine eyes were obscured, to satisfy for mine
innumerable transgressions. If I consider the pain thou sustained in regard
of merit, worth and valuation, as it far exceeded the demerit of our
sins; so consequently, all those evilles, damages and torments which we
incurred by sins; and therefore were well compared by Saint Chrysostom to a
spark of fire cast into the immensive Ocean Sea: for as Saint Paul witnesses,
Vbi abundavit Chrysostom in hom. ad Pop.
delictum, superabundavit and gratia; Where sin abounded, grace
over-abounded. But otherwise if we Romans 5.
weigh the substance of thy pains, we cannot compare them with those of the
damned, because those torments and thy loving dolors were in a far different
kind, and therefore admit not well comparison: for those griefs are enforced,
thine voluntary; those with remorce of acted offenses, thine with conscience
and perfect cognition of innocence; those are tortures for evilles, thine are
riddance from evils. And truly they who would ascribe unto thee the infernal
dolors upon the cross or in the garden, in mine opinion, rather offend in
ignorance, as not perfitly understanding the deformed nature of those
inexplicable torments, then upon malice attributing them unto thee. For neither
did thou sorrow for pains, as afflictions deservedly inflicted for thy
crimes, neither did thou nor could thou hate and abhor God the inflictor
of such horrible torments, neither did thou nor could thou despair of
thy Fathers favors, who infinitely, incessantly, eternally, undoubtedly loved
and honored thee, and of whose love thou wast as sure as of thine own eternal
life. Therefore at last I hope such vnpure minds The Puritans error.
will amend their impure errors, and at last reclame their ignorant
blasphemy. Notwithstanding this I will confess, and cannot deny, but that thy
pains as well in the Garden, as upon the Cross, were as bitter in vehemence
and intension, perhaps, as those of the damned, because thy love no doubt was
more intensive toward Mankind, then their love to themselves, therefore thy
hatred was more vehement of our trespasses, then their abomination of torments;
for love of the good we wish, and hatred of the evil opposite thereunto weigh
ever the same, and are balanced alike; wherefore grief necessarily ensuing
compassion full hatred, counterpoyseth the vehement intension of Love. And as
thy Love of man never had Paragon in vehemency; so thy Dolors never had like
in intension: and therefore truly the Prophet said in thy Person, Non est
dolor sicut dolor meus: No dolors are comparable with mine. By this I infer,
O sweet Jesus! that thou having delivered me from such horrible pain, and for
this Redemption suffered such excessive pain, I should love thee in condign
gratitude with correspondent affection to both pains, but this Sphere is too
large for my feeble activitie to reach: Thou therefore enlarge my heart, who
aymedst specially in them both, at a proportionate grateful Love and
affectuall recognition of men.

The 17. Motive to Love, which consists specially in the manner of giving
gifts, and bestowing favors.
IT is a common saying among spiritual men, that God respects not so much the
quantity, as the quality of our actions and good works: the which protrite
Axiom seems grounded upon diverse Scriptures. Specially the fact of that
poor Woman, which cast her two mites in Gazaphilacium, which gave more, her
need considered, then all they who bestowed large portions of their superfluous
riches: because ordinarily, when we find great difficulty to do well, and yet
break through it, that argues a more perfitte affection, and intier good will
toward the party for whose sake we undergo it. Again we have registered by
the Apostle, that hilarem datorem diligit Deus: Our Lord loves a pleasant
giver: that is, when a man imparteth his goods for 2. Cor. 9.
Gods honor and glory, God likes him that effects it with alacrity and
pleasantness: for some men you have, who bestow benefits upon their friends,
in such sort, as they seem to give so much of their blood, for they make a
show of a certain loathing giving, which diminishes in great part the gift.
Therefore in the receyving of a benefit, these circumstances may be
considered, which follow every one of them, dignifying of it, and consequently
casting a spark of bounty from the Giver into the heart of the Receyver, to
moove him to Love.

The first Circumstance. The greatness of the Giver.
THe dignity or preeminence of any Principle ennobleth and inhaunceth the
Effect; so noble Parents produce noble Children; a mean work proceeding from
an excellent Workman, wins by relation to the Author, I know not what more
credit and reputation, then if it had proceeded from an Artificer of lesser
account. In like manner a gift coming from a great Person, carries ever a
sent of a certain greatness, and rellisheth ever either of Nobillity,
Excellency, Superiority or all. Charles the fifth in his long troublesome wars
in Germany, being almost ever pressed with want of money, and unable to
remunerate the Services of diverse Dutch Captains and Nobles whom he had
entertained, after any great exployte performed by them, to acquit their
service in some sort (which Alexander would have repayed with Cities, or
States) he was accustomed in the open field in midst of his Nobles, to call
such a Captain or Coronel before him, and there in the presence of the whole
Camp, take a gold cheine from about his own neck, and put it about the neck
of the other, and so embrace him, and thank him, and with this honor, so
solemnly circumstanced, by such a Person, as the Emperor, with such
acknowledgement of his desert and valor, with the view of all the Army, many
of them esteemed this favor greater, then if in very deed he had given them
a City: for they valued that cheyne more, then many bushels of the like gold,
but not of like glory: for the only Emperors Person, and the taking of it
from his Neck, hanged at it such a precious Jewel, as in warlike conceits, a
million of gold would not countervaile: and it was esteemed a sufficient
testimony of honor, for a Martial man to vaunt of, all the days of his life.
There be also diverse reasons, why the dignity of the Giver, inhaunceth not a
little the value of the gift. First, all gifts are signs of love and
affection, and therefore as the love of a great Personage caeteris paribus, is
much more to be prized then of a meaner, so the gifts issuing from such
affections ought more to be accounted. Secondly, if the Giver be wise and
discreet, it argues he esteems us to deserve such a benefit, the which
reputation deserves no small estimation. 3. If the Giver be virtuous, it is
to be thought, he specially regards virtue in bestowing his favors;
therefore the gift showing a testimony and warrant of his opinion, gives forth
a blazon of the receyvers honesty, which wins credit and fame.

2. Circumstance. Strangeness in the Giver.
Gifts given by friends, and such as we are well acquainted withal, in regard
they be usual, be therefore by some less esteemed, for friendship and
familiarity enforce for most part, a mutual communication among friends of
fortunes favors. But when the Giver is a mere stranger, and yet upon
kindness with alacrity bestows benefits upon us, it cannot but proceed,
either from a most bountiful nature, kind and loving, or else from a singular
conceit they have of us, or both, which both deserve love and reciprocal
gratitude again. This kindness Abraham's servant and surueyor of his lands,
desired to try, in the Maid he was to bring home for his Masters Son
Isaac, out of the land Genesis 24.
of Mesopotamia, that if she unknowing him, after he had demanded her to
drink, she had said she would not only show him that favor, but also give
his Camels to drink likewise, that such a bountiful Woman was a fit wife
for his purpose; and as he prayed and wished, Rebecca performed.

The like courtesy showed Moses in defending the Exodus 2.
Daughters of the Priest of Madian, from the rusticall proceedings of the
Shepherds, who hindered them from watering their Sheep: and therefore was kindly
and deservedly invited by their father to soiourne with him in the time of his
flight from the face and fury of Pharao: wherefore it is held for great
civility, and as a sign of a noble nature to entertayne strangers kindly; and
contrariwise for extreme barbarousnesse to abuse or use them currishly. And for
this cause God commanded the Jews not to molest strangers, Advenam Exodus 22.
non contristabis.

3. Circumstance. If the giver be our special friend.
GIfts may proceed from welwillers, and friends: these two differ much: for we
may have many well-willers, but very few special friends: well-willers be
general friends as all them of our kindred, common good loving neighbors,
with whom we live in daily conversation, and pass our time, repaying one good
turn with another. Special friends be such as we repute so dear unto us as
our own lives, whose council Aristot. 9 Moral. N^coma. cap. 10. vult (...)
inter paucos, and frequenter (...) circa qu^ (...) sunt, ex eius sententia, v^x
cum (...) perfectam ^micitiam inire possunt.
we use, whose secrets we know, whose familiarity, trust, honesty, good will we
prefer before all others: and such be very few, two, or three at the most,
for more entire friendship cannot comport, because betwixt such friends must
pass such intercourse of affairs, such communication, such comforts,
compassions, congratulations, advises, reprehensions, persuasions, disswasions,
managings of negotiations, and in fine, such mutual care and solicitude
betwixt the one and the other, as if a man distract himself with many, he
cannot possibly be complete friend to any. Wherefore Plutarke wittily and
prudently commended that sentence of Pythagoras, Ne multis manum inijcias, Give
not thy hand to many: Plutarch. lib. de multitudine amicorum.
his meaning was, that he should not betake himself to a multitude of friends.
The gifts then of such familiar entire friends, ought much more to be esteemed,
then if they came but from ordinary weil-willers, as for example, no doubt but
David prized more those garments his beloved friend Ionathas gave him off his
own 1. Reg. 18.
back, with other furniture of war, above all the other apparel that ever he
wore in his life. The reason why this circumstance qualifieth the gift, I take
to be the cordial amity and friendship from which it proceeds, and ever
represents to the eye of the receiver.

4. Circumstance. If the gift be exceeding dear unto the giver.
NO doubt but that solemn sacrifice which God commanded Abraham to offer up
unto him, which touched him so near, and pierced his heart so to the quick of
his only son Isaac, miraculously conceived the hope of posterity, and that
seed whence-from his exspected Messiah was to descend, was so much more
acceptable unto God, how much more it was dear unto Abraham. And it seems
that God, to show how dear a gift he willed him to offer, particularized the
dignifying Genesis 22.
circumstances thereof, by saying: Toll filium tuum, Take thy son, if he had
commanded him to offer any of his servants, or of his kindred, it had not been
so much, but to deprive him of his son, was no small corrosive to a kind,
loving, fatherly heart. Vnigenitum: If Abraham had had more sons, the precept
had not bin so severe, to have lost one: but being his only heir, that
aggravateth exceedingly the fact: Quem diligis: whom thou love: if Abraham
had hated his Son, for his ill deportment, if he had bin a dissolute prodigal
hare-brain, then the case had bin altered, but being virtuous, prudent, modest,
and affectually beloved of his Parents, the commandment was bitter: Isaac;
Mirth, or joy, or laughter, not only because Sara laughed, when the Angel
promised her, she should conceive in her old age, but also for that children
born of parents in their last years, are commonly more comfortable and more
delightful unto them, then those which were begotten in their youth. Offeres
eum in holocaustum. Thou shall offer him for a holocaust. What terrible blody
words were these in the cares of a father, to imbrue his hands in the blod of
his only dear son? The precept was rigorous, the gift precious, Abraham
obsequious, and the kind commander in show severe, but in effect propitious:
yet all conclude, that the excessive dearenes of the gift unto the Giver,
exceedingly augmented the value thereof; the poor widow of Sarepta, who in the
extreme darth of the country had nothing to relieve hirself and hi^ son, but a
little slowre in a pot, and a little oil in a bottle, yet in regard she so
willingly imparted part of that little to Elias the prophet, it seemed God would
not let that flower 3. Reg. 17.
and oil diminish, until such time as the sterility was past. The like we may
say of that other sily Soul, which of her necessary sustenance cast 2. mites
into the common chest of the temple, and for that cause by Christ him self,
was reputed the liberallest benefactor to that church, because the necessity
of the gift declared the magnisicency of her mind. And generally where a person
depriveth himself of any thing, which he accounts and prizeth much, there
cannot be but great love and affection, for therein he overcommeth great
difficulty, which men commonly prove in the accomplishment of such difficill
effects: and moreover, a man by spoiling himself, of that is very dear unto
him, shows evidently, that his friend is much more dearer, for whose cause he
does willingly want it.

5. Circumstance. The greatness of the Gift in it self.
THe fuller Fountain causes a greater Spring: the better Plant the more
precious Fruit: the fatter Soil the more plentiful Harvest: and the kinder
Heart the greater Gifts. Among special and intier friends, Gifts admit not
degrees of greater or lesser, because such have all their goods and habilities,
one at the beck and least intimation of an other: whereupon grew that solemn
sentence, Amicorum omnia sunt communia. But this Circumstance holds among our
common friends and general wel-willers, whose affections by little and little
discover themselves unto us: and this rule is not to be esteemed one of the
worst, that greatness of gifts argues greatness of good will: for although
some few prodigal persons lavish forth their substances for a vain project
and estimation to be reputed liberal, bountiful, and despisers of Fortunes
favors: yet when evidently we are not certain our Well-willer is such a
braine-sick person, right Reason teaches us to infer out of the greater gift
the greater good will: and consequently to deserve a correspondence of a
semblable affection.

Some gifts are so exceeding in value and so vnprizable, that a man is never
able perfitly to recompense them, as for example, young Toby conferring with his
old father what reward they should bestow upon the Angel Raphael, who had
guided and protected him in Toby. 12.
all his journey, said thus unto him. What reward shall we give him? or what
thing worthy of his benefits? he carried me, and brought me back again in
health: he received the money of Gabelus: he procured me a Wife, and delivered
her of the Devil, he comforted her parents, he hindered the Fish from devouring
me, he has caused you see the light of heaven, and thus has he replenished us
with all good things. What condignely may we for all these bestow upon him? But
I beseech you father to request him, if perhaps he will vouchsafe to accept the
one half of all these riches we have brought. Thus the grateful Toby
acknowledged the Angels gifts greater, then he could ever satisfy: howbeit in
recognition of his good will, he offered half he had, whereby with the
greatness of the remuneration, he intended to declare unto the Angel the
greatness of his affection.

It is a common received principle as well among profane philosophers, as
sacred writers, that the gifts of God, of nature and grace; the gifts of
parents, of body and life; the gifts of instructors in learning and manners are
invaluable, and inecompensable: for as virtue, learning, body, life, soul,
grace, far surpass in degree and perfection all other riches and treasures
whatsoever, so all men in respect of such persons must for ever hold themselves
obliged, and never out of debt: because the virtue of gratitude is such, that a
man should ever recompense the benefit received like the earth, which receives
one grain of ^^lieate, and yields therefore twenty and more so benefits
should ever be repayed with interest, for if we return less we remain in
debt, if equal we seem to exchange, and rather follow the law of justice and
equality then of friendship and amity: therefore by gratitude we ever ought
to exceed the gift in value, which we receive, wherein equality releeseth
recompense, and the excess an emulous superiority in good will.

Zuxis a famous Painter so prized his Pictures, that he gave them all away, and
never would sell any, because he thought them so precious, as no gold could
countervayle them. Some others I have known who esteemed no less their
literal labors, because they were of-springs of wit, distilled from the
purest spirits in their brains, the which therewith they had abundantly
consumed, and therefore not to be bought with any treasure: besides, books
divulged are general gifts, and common communications of wisdom, the which
ought so much more to be esteemed, how much wisdom surpasses all worldly
wealth: bonum quo communius eo melius, and every good, the commoner, the
better: for it were malicious perversitie, to withhold from others a good thing
profitable to many, without our impeachment and hindrance: wherefore I cannot
but condemn that repining indignation of Alexander the great, who
understanding that Aristotle his in^^^^^or had divulged publicly his book of
Metaphysics which he had taught him privately, wrote unto him in anger, that in
so doing he had left him nothing peculiar, whereby he might excel all others
in knowledge and science, as though it grieved him that any man should be wise
except himself. With how much more reason and charity desired Moses, that all
the people might prophetize, Quis tribuat vt omnis populus prophetet, ^^^. 11.
29.
and det eis dominus spiritum suum?

6. Circumstance. If the gift tended to our great good or riddance from some
great evil.
A Shower of rain after a long drought, is more worth, then ten showers
another time: Money lent a Merchant falling bankerout to uphold his credit, may
be accounted so much money given. Those loaves of bread and that sword
Achimelech gave David in his flight from the face of Saul, were questionles in
his penury, 1. Reg. 22.
ten times more grateful and acceptable, then in his abundance. Therefore it
is great prudence and friendly policy to reserve gifts, and helps for men till
great wants, because they prize a little more then, then much another time. And
withal it deserves consideration, that in such cases, not only the affection
wherewith we bestow the benefit upon him, but also the good which ensues, and
the evil which he eschueth, and all such desiderable consequent effects, are
thought intended wished, and to proceed from that favor we show in such a
case, so opportunely, and in such extremity.

7. Circumstance. If it be given with alacrity.
I Have received some gifts of friends, given with such a promptnes, alacrity,
and show of affection, as in very truth it seemed vno me, that the very manner
of giving doubled the gift. When the Angels came to Abraham in the vale of
Mambre, he invited them to dinner with Genesis 1^.
such alacrity, so civilly and affectuously, as in very deed they had seemed
to have used him discourteously if they had refused his importune courtesy. 1
If you favor me, 2 pass not your servant, 3 I will bring a little water to
wash your feet, 4 and rest under the tree: 5 I will bring you some bread, 6 and
you shall (...) your hearts, 7 and then you shall depart: 8 therefore you came
this way: the Angels accepted his invitation, 9 and the good old man ran
presently and brought the tenderest and best calfe he had, and caused one of
his servants to kill him, 10 and Sara in as great haste molded paste to make
the^ ember-cakes: 11 when all was done Abraham stood and served while they sat
down. All these circumstances show the great desire that Abraham had to
entertain those strangers. I have seen some men so ready and prompt to grant
what was requested them, that they would have moved almost an indurat heart to
have loved them, for no sooner you had represented your desire unto them, but
presently you should have had such a resolute answer as possibly you could
have exspected in your heart, from the most dear friend you had in the world.
Mary sir with all my heart, and I give you a thousand thanks you would show me
such a favor, as to demand such a thing at my hand: this is not sufficient,
will you more, better? etc. and this they did not ceremoniously, but really,
the face, hand, gestures, and deeds, all sounded the same.

8. Circumstance. If it were given by our enemies.
THe law of Christianity corrects the errors of corrupted Nature, and
directs men assisted by Gods grace, to love their enemies, and show good will
to them, who bear ill will to us. Herein we are commanded to imitate our
heavenly Father, who stays not the beams of his Sun from lightning and
heating his most obstinate enemies, as Pagans, Jews, Turks, heretics and
obstinate sinners: nor withholds the sweet showers of rain from watering,
suppling and nourishing their lands and possessions, yea, and if we see our
enemies Ox or Ass erring, he enacted a strict precept to return them to
their Master: and if he were hungry, Exodus 23. 4.
he commanded us to feed him; Si esnrierit inimicus tuus ciba illum: si
sitierit, da illi aquam bibere, prunas enim Proverb. 25. 21
congregabis super caput eius, and Dominus reddet tibi. Here he gives a
singular good reason why this Circumstance of enmity increases the value of
the gift and most effectually mooveth to love: for, bestowing benefits upon
our enemies, we heap burning coals upon their heads, able to consume and dry
to dust all the malignitie of malicious enmity: for our Enemies receyving
favors, where they expected furies, and reaping benedictions and gifts, where
they expected maledictions and hurts, cannot but be mollified, and well
perceive that charity lodges where they supposed malice lurked, and in lieu
of revenge, they cannot but return love: for as benefits at enemies hands
were not deserved, so being bestowed they deserve to be loved.

9. Circumstance. If it were granted without suite or request, of the Givers
own accord.
IT is a principle of Stateliness, among great Personages, to use long delays
in granting Suitors their requests: if it be to bestow some gift, in delaying,
they think men more depend upon them, and the difficulty of obtaining will
make them esteem it more. If in pardoning some offense, then by delay of
granting, they cause the offenders in the mean time to conceive thereby the
foulness of their faults, and in others, the Post haee autem dixit ^ntra se:
etsi Deum non timeo, nec hominem revereor, tamen quia molesta est mihi haec
Vidua, vindicabo illam, ne in norissime veniens sugillet me. Luc. ca. 18. Et si
ille perseveraverit pulsans, dico vobis, and si non dabit illi, s^rgens eo quod
amicus eius sit, ^r pter importitatem tamen e^us surget, and dabit ^^ illi
quotquot habet necessarios. Luc. 11.
rigorous severitie held in pardoning, will strike a terror of offending. But
howsoever it be, long delays, and many suites vilify the gifts in both: for
chare emitur, quod precibus emitur, it is bought dearly, which is purchased
with long prayers. For importunity of prayers will wring out favors almost
perforce, because a man to be rid of such molestations and clamorous requests,
had rather grant a suite against his will, then endure such importune
petitions: the which our Savior declares by the example of the wicked Judge,
who although he neither feared God, nor respected man, yet the poor widows
importune prayers enforced him to condescend to her suite. And questionless,
it cannot be denied, but that when a person has gotten his desire, after many
petitions, suites and supplications, he esteems it more then half bought.
Wherefore those Magistrates and Princes which grant favors and give offices
to persons of desert without suite or supplication, are greatly to be
commended: for certainly those that sue for temporal offices or spiritual
dignities, by gifts, friends, or other means made by their own procurement,
should ever be esteemed more unfit caeteris paribus then they who live quietly,
and hunt not after such dangerous places, for it seems he conceaveth not well,
what charge a Superior takes upon him, and what good parts and sound virtues
such an office requires, which labors so extremely to be invested into such
a place and dignity. For albeit Qui Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus
desiderat, yet I will not say, but most non been desiderant: for I fear, such
gapers for preferment, aim rather at the gain, then the pain; and love
better the fleece then the flock.

10. Circumstance. If the Person by giving was endangered or endammaged.
Favors, benefits, gifts, are often confounded, and yet in deed in rigor of
speech, they be not all one. If a Prince show a kind countenance toward any
of his Courtiers, or graceth him with any kind gesture in remonstrance of good
will, every one will esteem these favors, but not account properly either
benefits or gifts. If a man be assaulted by thieves, and stand in danger of
death, if casually a passenger succor him, and so save his life, well we may
say, praestitit illi beneficium, he did him a pleasure, or benefit, but not
that he gave him a gift. For Donatio, whencefrom proceeds Donum, is libera
translatio iuris, dominij: possessionis, vsus, vel vsusfructus alicuius rei in
aliquem. Giving is a free translation of the right or title, of dominion,
possession, use, or fructification of any thing to any man. Sometime it
happens, that the gift brings with it, not only the title of some right,
but also it serves us presently to rid us from some evil, as was said above
in the 6. Circumstance; and daily experience teaches, that before men fall to
extreme distress of poverty, discredit, imprisonment etc. good friends
succor and relieve them with money; in such extremities the money is a gift
and a benefit, because it conferreth some good, and delivers from some
evil. Otherwhiles it chances, that the Giver, to do us good, depriveth, not
only himself of the gift he gives, but thereby he incurreth some great
peril, danger, or evil. As befell Achimelech, who relieved 1. Reg. 22.
David in his passage from Saul, for which charitable courtesy, he incurred
the Kings disgrace, and afterward lost his life. And in this Circumstance
enter many and various degrees of danger and damage, for the greater peril,
or grievouser evil incurred by the Qui negligit damnum propter amicum iustus
est. Proverb. 12.
gift, increase the goodness and valuation of the gift, and argue a greater
good will: and there ought precisely to be examined and exactly considered:
for as this case occurreth daily, so it ought to be weighed marvailous
circumspectly.

4. Circumstances more.
Unto the former Circumstances, we may for better distinction and fuller
comprehension of the matter, add 4. more. The first is, Vehemence of
affection, which appertains to the manner of giving, and may be reduced to the
7. Circumstance of Alacrity: yet in very deed these two differ: for diverse
times we give things speedily, and quickly, because we esteem them not much,
or for some interest, or other respect; albeit with no great affection: yet the
way to wade into men's hearts, and discover whether they bestow their benefits
upon us, with such entire and full affections or no, may be these. First
alacrity in giving is a good sign. 2. If in the giving we perceive the giver
much presses himself. 3. If the gift be great in it self. 4. If some danger
be imminent unto the giver for such a gift. 5. If the giver be our entire
friend. 6. If our capital enemy, for therein we may think, he by a vehement
charitable good will, overcommeth himself.

The second is, if the gift be common to many; as if a Prince bring a Conduit
of most excellent water into the Center of a City. If a Noble man erect a
great Hospital for the poor, blind, lame, and impotent. If a devout Citizen
give all he has to build a Church, Bridge, or such like charitable works,
these benefits, as they are extended to many, so they are more worthy in this
respect, then such as are communicated to few.

The third is, if in giving gifts among a multitude of equal desert, one be
singled from the rest, upon whom it is bestowed, for in such a case, affection
signiorizeth, and love makes election, because when in the receyvers there is
none or small difference in merit, then the determination rests upon the
givers good will, which then may best be declared, when among many, specially
one is severed.

The last is lack of interest, for such gifts as are unspotted with any
blemish of private profitte, warrant us* of a sincere affection: but how may we
know, when givers aim rather at utility then amity? first, if we be well
acquainted with their prowling, shifting, crafty, undermining nature, we may
assure our selves, that that flame is the effect of sea-coales, which carries
ever more smoke of self-love, then fire of refined good will. 2. If apertly
by some circumstance of speech or request he makes, we see evidently some
commodity conjoined, as for example, in all suitors presents, a man of a bad
scent may easily feel a smell of profit, which perfumeth those gifts. 3. If a
mean man bestow a great gift upon one in authority, which has no need of it,
such a token for most part tells his masters errand, to wit, that such a
present must prepare the way for some future favor: and this rule we are to
think holds so much the surer, when the giver is in some want and
necessity. 4. If the customary use of such gifts require some interest, as
commonly poor men's New-yeere gifts, require better recompensations then they
bring.

Certain Corollaries deducted out of the precedent Discourse of the Motives to
Love.
THe first Corollarie concerns the love of God, the which in giving us the
second Person in Trinity, to be our Savior and Redeemer, has almost observed
all these Circumstances of gifts in a most emminent degree, as, if I would
enlarge this Chapter, I could make most manifest: but every discreet learned
Divine, without much labor, by appropriating only these general
considerations to those special meditations, may perform it by himself.

The second Corollarie, touching the Motives of Love, which are in number
seventeene, for memories sake we may reduce to 3. heads. For love is an
operation of the Will; the Will affects nothing but canded with Goodness;
Goodness generally is divided into three kinds, Honesty, Utility,
Delightfulness, but in regard that things profitable are esteemed good or
badde, honest or dishonest in respect of the end whereat they aim, (for they be
always means, and level at some end) therefore I thought good to obliterate
that second member, and in lieu thereof, insert convenience or agreeableness
to Nature: for such things we love for themselves, and as it were in them stay
our affections, without relation to any other particular project.

Goodness the object of our will, is the perfection or appetibilitie of every
thing real or apparent; and is divided into 1. Honest: which is the object of
virtue, and consists in conformity to Reason: comprehending these motives to
Love. 2 Excellency -- in Prudence. Learning. Fortitude. Magnanimity.
Temperance. Justice, etc.
3 Bountifulness. 4 Condonation of injuries. 5 Toleration of wrongs. 6
Riddance from evil. 7 The manner of giving gifts.
8. Convenient to nature, that is, agreeable to nature for the conservation
thereof, either in being, perfection, or preservation of the kind, and
includes these motives to Love. 9 Parentage. 10 Beneficence. 11 Necessity. 12
A special kind of hatred causing union.
13. Delightful, that is, a certain kind of goodness polished with pleasure:
or wherein pleasure specially appears, and contains these motives to Love.
14 Beauty. 15 Profit -- of Soul Body Fortune.
16 Resemblance -- in Nature Affection Judgment Exercise.
17 Love of Benevolence co^cupisce^ce




I am not ignorant that the immensity of man's will may chop and change these
motives of love in diverse manners: for if we releeve often poor men's miseries
for vainglory, we pervert the virtue of mercy; if some fast for hypocrisy,
they abuse the virtue of temperance; if some pray with pride and contempt, as
the arrogant Pharisee, they stayne the virtue of religion: and questionles, any
wicked man may love him that easily condoneth injuries, not for honesty and
virtue, but thereby to prevayle more against him, and crow more insolently over
him, to coosin him the more boldly, and deceyve him without punishment.
Likewise, though beuty be placed among the objects of Delight, yet it may be
affected for honesty; and so I say of almost all the rest. But here I consider
the first aspect, and connaturall show that all these objects carry with them,
and how they first enter into a man's affection, and are apt to moove: and in
this sense I doubt not but their seats are right, and in consideration
thereof, I have reduced them to these heads.

The third Corollary. It may easily be perceyved in every one of these motives,
how much more is insinuated then is set down, and a good Scholar with a
flight meditation, may by discourse apply these generalities to particular
matters, for the motive of pleasure or profit may be minced into many parts,
and in every one a number of particular reasons, found out apt to induce the
persuasion of the same passion, and so I, say of the rest. Much more I could
have added to every one, but then the Treatise would have grown too great,
wherefore I judged it sufficient to touch the tops of general persuasions to
stir up love, intending thereby by to represent occasions to wise men of
discourse: for a slender insinuation will content a ripe apprehension, and
affoorde matter enough to a sound judgment. It might have passed a great way
further, and have explicated the supreme perfections in God, all which were
able to moove a man's heart, much more then these we have delivered, because as
they infinitely surpass all here we feel, see, imagine or understand; even so
they would abundantly stir up our affections to admire, love and adore him:
yet also them I thought good to omit as not so proper to our present intent;
nevertheless I cannot ore-slip some rude delineaments thereof, thereby opening
the way to pregnant wits of pregnant matter.

The fourth Corollary appertains unto the circumstances of imparting gifts
or bestowing benefits. wherein it is to be noted for memory sake, that we may
consider four things in the giving of a gift, all necessary, and all belonging
to our purpose, as in the subscribed Table shall plainly appear.

In bestowing a gift we may consider the Giver and his 1 Greatness. 2
Strangeness. 3 Friendship 4 Enmirie. 5 His danger and damage.
Gift 6 If exceeding great in it self. 7 If mavelous dear to the Giver. 8
If common to many.
Receiver 9 If it tend to his great good, or riddance from some great evil. 10
If in giving he be singled from the rest
Manner of giving. 11 If with alacrity. 12 If without suit or request. 13 If
with vehement affection. 14 If without interest.



The fifth Corollarie respects the practice of the aforesaid Motives, the
which may be used after this manner. First I suppose a man that intends to
move passions, ought to have time and space to prepare himself for cursorie
persuasions; for extemporall inventions seldom make any deep impressions,
because as in such cases the inducements are not well examined, nor the manner
of delivery premeditated, so the point in question cannot be so substantially
grounded and forciblely persuaded, as if Art in manner and matter had
co-operated with Nature. Secondly, presupposed then a man have leisure to
enrich his discourse, after one has perused and well understood the precedent
Motives, he should glaunce over these Tables, and either in his own
meditation, or in perusing some short treatise of his matter of Love to be
persuaded, reduce what he reads to these heads set down. As for example, if
he exhort Subjects to love their Country, Students to love learning,
Soldiers to love Martial Discipline: Men to love their Wives: Children to
love their Parents: Women to love Modesty, in all these and such like, a
little labor conjoined with this help will minister abundance of matter to
stuff an Oration, or Panegericall persuasion.

Means or Motives to moove Hatred, Detestation, Fear, and Ire.
THe Philosophers universally define, that Contrariorum est eadem disciplina:
Contraries are taught in like manner: and contrariorum contraria est ratio;
contraries have contrary reasons: so to our purpose with great facility, we
may now declare what Motives stir up Hatred by assuming the contraries to
Love: for example, if Love it self be a Motive to Love, then Hatred
contrariwise is a Motive to Hatred: If resemblance in nature, affection,
judgment and exercise cause union and love; certainly, dissimilitude in
nature, difference in judgment, disparity in affections, diversity or
opposition in exercise, cannot but breed dissension and hatred. Wherefore he
that perfitly understands the former Treatise of the Motives to Love, and of
himself can si^t out their contraries* has a sufficient Panoplie and
Treasorie of Reasons to stir up Hatred.

Furthermore, for better intelligence it is to be considered, that Divines and
moral Philosophers distinguish two sorts of Hatred, the one they call Odium
abominationis; Hatred of abomination: the other, Odium inimicitiae, that is,
Hatred of enmity. For as in Love, we affect the Person and wish him well; so
in Hatred of enmiti^, we detest the Person and wish him evil: as, if I love my
friend, I wish him health, wealth and prosperity: If the Judge hate the
these, he wishes him the gallows: But in this we differ, that I love my
friend, and health also, as good for my friend, so that my love is complete and
entire: but the Judge abhors the thief, and loves the gallows, as a due
punishment and deserved evil for the thief. Contrariwise, as in hatred of
enmity, the person stained with vice, mooveth me to detest him and wish him
evil, so in hatred of abomination, for the love I bear any person, I hate all
evils which may befall him: for example, a man loves his child, and therefore
abhors death as evil of the child; a just man loves God, and therefore
detesteth sin, as an injury done to God; a man loves his own health, and
therefore hates diseases, or what else may cross his health. So that here we
have three things: hatred of evil, in respect of the person we love: love of
evil, in respect of the person we hate: hatred and love combined in one
respect of perfect enmity and complete hatred.

Besides, as love levelleth at goodness, without desiring or hoping for it,
and only takes a good liking and complacence therein: so desire passes
further, and wishes the enjoying thereof, albeit such a wish medleth not with
hope of obtaining it; for many wish Mines of gold, States and Kingdoms, which
they never exspect, nor hope to possess: Hope adds expectation, for
perceyving some probable possibility of purchase, she stands waiting how to
come by it. For example, Cardinal Wolsey in his younger years perhaps loved,
and desired the degree of a Cardinal, but yet being so far from it, he had
small reason to expect it, but after he was entertained of the King, and
employed in affairs for the State, then he got ground for expectation, and so
fell into the passion of Hope. On the other side, hatred first detesteth the
evil in it self, either of enmity or abomination, as wicked men, death,
dishonor, etc. without relation to us or our friends. Detestation fuga or
flight abhors them as hurtful to us or our friends: but as yet they being
afar off, and not very likely to befall, enters not into the passion of
Fear, the which then stirs, when danger approaches. Ire proceeds from
some injury offered, and therefore hates the inflictor, and by all means
possible seeks revenge. Wherefore Ire, Fear, Flight, including every one of
them a certain sort or spice of Hatred, what generally can be said of it, will
serve for all them in particular; howbeit, some special considerations we will
set down in special for their peculiar Motion.

Particular Motives to Hatred of Enmity.
ALthough, as I said above, the Motives to Love contraried, be good means to
persuade Hatred: yet for that, as Philosophers say, Bonum ex integra causa
consistit, malum ex quolibet defectu: Goodness cannot consist without the
integrity of all parts, evil may and ordinarily does happen upon every
defect: that a man be in health, it is necessary every humor hold his just
temper and proportion; that a man be sick, it is enough that one humor only
exceed: that an harmony of Music be good, all parts must keep tune, time,
and apt concordance; that it be badde, one iarring voice will disconsort all:
in like manner, that a man be honest and good, is required that he be endued
with all Virtues: to be naught or ba^^e* it is sufficient he be a drunkard, a
thief, a whoremas^^^* an usurer, or infected with any one vice, etc. Wherefore
honest love supposing a man to be virtuous absolutely, thereupon groundeth most
effects of kindness, and therefore the contrarieties thereof will not so aptly
moove hatred, as some other particular considerations: for example, we
determined, that tolleration of wrongs, mooveth a man to love: the contrary of
this will hardly stir up hatred, for if we grant, that him we hate refused
to suffer any wrongs for us, but avoided them with main and might, we may well
conclude, he does not greatly love us, but violently we should infer
therefore, that he deserved hatred; and so I say of some others, therefore for
more perspicuity, and that we may find out more urgent arguments to induce men
to hatred, the case is to be sifted a little more narrowly. In hatred of
enmity we detest the person, as stained with evil, sin, vice, or wickedness,
for which we wish him justly punished: wherefore all these reasons which induce
us to conceive the greatness of his offense, or the indignity of the person,
or ill demeanor of his life toward God, in himself or his neighbor, all
these abundantly will excite hatred against him. Sometimes occasion will be
offered to moove the passion of hatred against some particular person, as to
inveigh against a Traitor, or public enemy to the State or our selves:
otherwhiles against a whole State, as Turks, Jews, Pagans, Heretics,
Rebels against a Commonwealth, or some Kingdom which warreth with us: and
as these evilles are different, so by diverse means we must persuade our
auditors or friends to hate them.

A private person may be brought into contempt and hatred by Motives gathered
from these three Principles. His Ingresse into this world: His Progress of
life: His Egresse or death.

His Ingresse. 1.
1 IF his Parents were base, wicked, or infected with any notorious vice; if
deformed in body, or marked by any monstruositie of Nature.

2 If the manner of his begetting was unlawful, as Bastardy, and herein be
diverse degrees of fornication, adultery, incest, sacrilege.

3 If he were born at such a time as the influence of the heavens had some
extraordinary action in the tempring of his body, as dog* days: or at what
time his father was in prison for some demerit: or in time of great plagues or
diseases, or commotion in the commonweal.

4 If he were borne in a bad place; as a wicked Country, among vicious people:
if in a City treacherously inclined, or has bin branded with any notorious
vice, or persons infamous.

5 If his mother in her childing died, or was tormented in bringing him into
the world, with more vehement pangues, then women commonly suffer: or if before
his birth, his good father dyed, as though God would not vouchsafe to let the
wicked child behold his fathers face* or presently after he was borne, wherein
God showed him a most special grace, to take him away betime, lest his wicked
son had carried his gray hayres with sorrow to his grave.

6 If in the childish years he accustomed to steal, lie, swear, or were
addicted to any vice, which showed the first buddes of a blasted body, and
corrupted soul.

But some will object, as I have heard diverse, what fault have I if my Parents
be vicious and base? And what commendation is thine, if thy parents be
virtuous and noble? and yet, who is he, that had not rather have been borne
of virtuous then vicious, noble then ignoble Progenitors? That is no fault but
a stain, this no virtue but an ornament: men know full well, that waters,
which run through stinking soyles, carry an unsavory smell: and that winds
and vapors drawn from infected places, are plaguie messengers to many
Countries: in like manner, Parents natural propensions to wickedness, imprint
for most part in their children, a certain resemblance: wherefore as these
external respects be not invincible arguments to convince a vicious nature, or
a corrupted soul: so when in the progress of life, we infallibly discover an
exorbitant badde carriage and brutish demeanor, then we may well infer, that
the first stains and infections were ominous presages of future malice: as if
Nature had foreseen what an infamous guest was to lodge in that body, and
therefore prepared a lodging correspondent: Adam had a Caine, Abraham an
Ismael, Isaac an Esau, Jacob a Dan, David an Absolon, and many godly Parents,
ungodly children, which argues manifestly, that neither good nature in
Parents, (for what bodies could be more perfect then those of Adam and Heua,
wholly framed by Gods own hands, and consequently could have no defect?) nor
virtuous example, nor provident instructions can suffice to withdraw a man from
wickedness, if his wicked will intends to follow it.

What, have not many Bastards prooved well? Yes, but more have prooved ill: and
consequently we may presume they will become rather vicious then virtuous; for
as the Cannon law well notes, such children are Ca. sigens d. 56
not brought up with like care and vigilance of their Parents as other
legitimate: and commonly such spurious ympes follow the steps of their bad
parents.

His Progress. 2.
THe persons whom we intend to moove to hatred That vice should most be
amplified which the auditors most detest.
ought to be considered well before we represent unto them the filthiness of
the man's vice for which we intend to make him odious unto them: for such is the
corruption of some companies, as great sins with them are little accounted:
for example, he that would disgrace a soldier in the Camp, by vehemently
exaggerating the man's fornication, should little prevayle: or a Merchant among
Merchants for usury, in taking ten in the hundred: or drunkenness among the
Dutch men: and such like offenses before, such persons, who either will boast
of them, or defend them, or at least extenuate the deformity of them: wherefore
in every company that vice specially must be noted, which among these men is
most detested, as treachery and cowardlinesse among soldiers, blood and
cruelty among Citizens, all sorts of heinous offenses among grave, sober,
judicious, and virtuous hearers.

As in every virtue there is a low degree, a mean, Intension of vice.
and an excellent: for there be beginners, goers forward and perfect,
incipientes, proficientes, and perfecti. Likewise in every virtue there is a
supreme excellency, rare, singular, and admirable; in temperance virginity, in
fortitude apert perilles of death, in prudence present resolutions, deep
council in affairs of greatest importance, as manage of States, and
government of Kingdoms. In justice neither to spare friend, father, mother,
nor child, who offend and transgress the Laws. In magnificence to dispend
great treasures readily for the honor of God, and general good of the realm.
In mercy easily to pardon injuries against our own persons. As, I say, in
every virtue there are found these degrees and eminent perfections, so in vices
and offenses there appear varieties of excesses in the same sin; as in theft
he that robs a rich man, and takes forty shillings from him, can not be
compared to him that steals a kowe from a poor man, wherewyth he sustained
his wife and whole family, wherefore the enormity of the sin ought greatly to
be weighed. Again, in vice some so far exceed, as they pass the common
course of vicious persons, and arrive at a certain ferall or savage
Savagenesse or feral^tie.
brutishness, delighting in nothing but wickedness, as beastly pleasures,
violent extortions, cruel butcheries, and such like barbarous beastliness,
whereby they make show to have lost all reason and humanity, and only follow
the fury of every inordinate Passion.

Moreover it is to be considered, that as every vice has her intension or
vehemence in malice and wickedness, so she has an extension and various kind
of deformities: for example, theft has usury, coosonage, pilferings,
burglaries, robberies: murder has woundings, lamings, man-slaughters,
wilfull-murthers: so in intemperance, gluttony, etc. In our present case, these
will mightily aggravate the persons wickedness, if we can prove him in sundry
vices to have committed various excesses, and in every vice not to have wanted
variety.

Yet all the enormities a vicious wretch commits in the progress of his
life may be reduced to these iij. heads; Irreligion toward God, Injustice
toward men, beastliness in himself.

First, If toward God he has been irreligious, an Atheist, an heretic, one
that upon every little hope of preferment or gain, would change and alter his
Religion: to this purpose I cannot here omit an excellent History, penned by
Eusebius and Zozomenus, of Constantius the father of Constantine the great; who
at what Eusebius. in lib. 1. vitae Constant. Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 6.
time the inferior Magistrates in every Province, by the decrees of the
Emperors, most severely persecuted Christians, and with sundry sorts of
exquisite torments bereaved them of their lives: Constantius to try his
Courtiers constancy in Christian Religion, put it freely in their election,
either to sacrifice unto the Idols, and remain with him, and keep their
former places and honors; or if they would not, to leave his company and
depart from him: presently they divided themselves into two parts, some offered
to sacrifice, others refused: by this the Emperor perceived his servants
minds, and thereupon discovered the plot he had cast: wherefore reprooving the
former, commending the latter, expostulating with them their fear and
timiditie, highly exalting these for their zeal and sincerity, and finally
judging them unworthy of the Emperors service, as traitors to God, expelled
them from his Palace: for how, quoth he, will these be trusty to their
Prince, who are treacherous and perfidious to their God? the others he appointed
to be his guard, to wait upon his body, and to be keepers of his Kingdom:
averring that he doubted not of their fidelity to him, who had been so
faithful and constant in professing and protesting their belief and religion.

Secondly, If he conspired against the Prince or State, molested the
Magistrate, iniuried the Innocent, committed Murder, Rapine, Theft etc. If he
be of a bloody nature, delighting in quarrels and brawls: or in fine has
perpetrated any notorious offense, whereby the Commonweal, or present
auditors are damnified, either in reputation, or any other way.

Thirdly, If he be convinced by good reasons, guilty in any one vice; that is
to be amplified after the best manner: specially, if there appear in it any
notable circumstance, as oppression of Widows, Orphans, Women, poor and
needy men, honest, devout, or ecclesiastical persons.

Fourthly, If he has iterated often the same sin, so that it is rooted in
him and become connaturall: and consequently we may despair any emendation:
then the obstinacy of his perversity deserves greater reprehension and
detestation.

Fifthly, If he has committed various offenses, the conglobation and
annumeration of them, one aptly falling in the neck of another, cannot but
stir up exceedingly the Auditors to abhor him: for this extensive variety
represents the person almost wholly covered with vice and iniquity, in whose
heart, as in a most filthy puddle, lie stinking all sorts of filthy offenses.

Sixthly, If in himself he be addicted to lying, swearing, periuring, cursing,
lust, gluttony, drunkenness, pride, ambition, envy, detraction, railing,
reviling, gaming, etc.

Egresse. 3.
ABout his Egresse, the causes and manner of his death are to be considered:
as, if he were culpably the cause or occasion of his own death: if his death
were violent, or any way extraordinary, whereby it may be gathered, that God
extraordinarily rid the world of such a reprobate: if in his sickness he
repented not, but rather despayred or presumed: if he dyed like a Candle which
leaves the snuff stinking after it, that is, all men that knew him, rejoiced
that he was gone, spoke ill of him, lamented of injuries done them by him: if
he left children of ill behavior after him. These and many more such like
considerations, will sufficient^^ serve to sift out the roots and grounds
whereupon amplificative persuasions must be built.

Hatred of a community. 4.
IN exciting Hatred of a Community, Kingdom, Province or any Society. First
we may weigh their natural dispositions and badde inclinations: and specially
those, which most offend our present Auditors.

First, As if they be our ancient enemies, if by nature bloody, crafty, proud,
insolent in government, impatient of Superiors or equalles: if cosiners,
extortioners, invaders unjustly of others dominions: ayders or abetters of
rebels or our adversaries.

Secondly, If their religion be Paganism, Iudaisme, Heresy, or Turcisme: and
in particular, some of their principal and most palpable errors should be
touched, and if we could discover any (as for most part all abound) point or
points they maintain against the law and principles of Nature, then such a
Position well declared, and the absurdities evidently inferred, cannot but
work great effects.

Thirdly, If in their temporal Laws, they have enacted any tending to tyranny
and oppression, if to further vice, and hinder virtue.

Fourthly, If they hold, pretend, or endeavor to bereave our State of any part
of preeminence, dignity, signiorie, province or country thereunto belonging:
if they have abused or iniuried our State, Prince, or Subjects any way, in
person, goods, or fame etc. And in fine, the number of spiteful injuries
offered, cannot but stirr^^p the spirit of spite against them.

Hatred of Abomination. 5.
HAtred of Abomination, as was said above, consists in a detestation of
evil, for the love we bear the Person: as Jacob so dolefully lamented Joseph
(whom he supposed dead) for the tender love he bare his person: And how bitter
is the memory of death to that man, which has peace and great felicity in
his substance, and that loves extremely this transitory life? To move this
Hatred, two things specially are diligently to be observed: first the Person
beloved, and all those reasons which may stir up his love: then the hurt of the
evil, and all the harms it brings with it: for example, we ought for the
love of our own souls, and the souls of our neighbors, detest and abhor
sin, and the offense of God: now all those inducements which moove us to love
our souls, strike in our hearts a horror of sin, which is the death and
destruction of souls. And all those reasons which show the deformity of sin,
stir up a detestation thereof. The general Motives alleged above, applied
to this particular, will suffice to persuade us to love our Souls: the nature
and harms consequent unto sin and all other evils, we would induce our
auditors to detest, may be collected out of the common places of Invention,
reduced above to Ansit, quid sit, quale sit, and propter quid sit.

Means to move flight and fear. 6.
WE said, that flight or detestation was opposite to desire: and that desire
was the wishing of a thing abstracted from hope or expectation thereof, as
every beggar would be a King if he might choose, albeit he never had, nor is
like to have any hope of the aspiring thereunto. Flight is a detestation of
some evil, though not imminent, nor exspected, yet such an evil as we abhor
it and detest it, and possibly may befall us, as a king to fall to poverty,
beggary, or servitude he abhors; yet because he living in such prosperity
conceives no danger nor peril, therefore he stands in no fear. These two
passions of desire and detestation, are stirred up with the same motives that
love and hatred of abomination, for as all the reasons apportable to render the
thing amiable, the same make it desiderable, so all the inducements which
persuade the object of hatred to be abominable, all the same cause it seem
detestable. As for example, I have a virtuous friend whom I love intierly, he
converseth with Atheists, the more I love him, the more I hate Atheism, as
evil to him, and therefore I abhor it should any way befall him. I am moved
to abominate it as an extreme evil, for what can be more sottish, then to deny
a God whom all creatures confess and say ipse fecit nos, and non ipsae nos, he
made us, and not we our selves? what can be more beastly then not to
acknowledge him nor his benefits, who every moment powers upon us sundry
favors? What horrible disorders should we see in the world, if there were not
supposed a God that governs and knows all, and at last with the balance of
his inflexible justice will examine, judge and reward all? No doubt but if
Atheism once enter into the hearts of men, virtue will be despised, and vice
esteemed, might will rule right, and the rich oppress the poor, and
epicurisme will take full possession, edamus bibamus cras moriemur, let us gull
our selves with eating and quaffing, for after this life no other remains,
and therefore little it imports us to live like beasts, and dye like dogs:
all these and many more such like arguments demonstrate the abomination of
Atheism, and also persuade evidently the detestation of the same, so that by
applying the harms or damages of the evil, considered in general, and
absolutely in it self, to my self, or my friend whom I love, we may easily
force flight and detestation.

Fear is a flight of a probable evil imminent: wherefore two things must be
proved and amplified to enforce fear: first that the evil is great: secondly
that it is very likely to happen: the excess of the evil may be gathered out
of the precedent discourses, the likelihood, probability, or certainty we draw
from sundry circumstances, as from our adversaries malice, and hatred against
us, their craft and deceit, their former manner of proceeding, whereunto we may
annexe the impossibility or extreme difficulties to avoid it, as their might
and our weakness, their experience and our rawnesse: so that where there is
obstinate and implacable hatred against us; knowledge and foresight how to
overcome us; power and means to put in execution potent malice and hatred,
what wicked effect will not then follow?

The vicinitie also of the evil moves much, for dangers afar off we little
esteem, as subject to sundry casualities and encounters: but when they are
near, and at the door, then it is time to be stirring. If an Orator would by
the passion of fear move the Italians, Almanes, and Spaniards to join in
league and wa^re upon the Turk, he might urge them in this manner. The Romans
in passed ages who with most careful eye did foresee and prevent the dangers
of their Empire, thought not themselves secure in Italy, except the
Carthaginians were vanquished: but how much more near are the Turkish Cities
to Spain, Germany, and Italy, then Carthage was to Rome? What a swift Navy of
Gailies has Danger imminent.
he always prepared by Sea, and therefore in one night may enter either the
coasts of Italy or Spain? What an infinite Army, as well of horsemen as
footmen has he always in a readiness to invade, offend, and ruin whom he
will almost at unawares, at least them that border upon him, ere they can be
half prepared? Of what force is this tyrant? The Romans still lived in fear
of the Carthaginians, though diverse times overcome by them, and have not we
much more reason to fear the Turkish puissance? What fortresses has he won
from Christians? what Cities sacked? what Provinces The Turks forces.
vanquished? what Kingdoms subdued? what Empires spoiled, enjoyed, possessed?
Who rules now Africa? The Turk, either all, or most. Who signorizeth over
Asia? The Turk. Who does domineere over the greatest part of Europe? The
Turk, his treasures are infinite, his victuals abundant, his people
innumerable, and so subject and obedient, that they repute it a favor to be
bereaved of their lives at their Emperors pleasure. Are all Princes Christian
able to leavie and maintain an army of 300000. fighting men. Solomon brought
so many before Vienna in Austria, what will such a world of combatents do? nay,
what will they not do? Cover the fields like Locusts, in expugnation of Cities,
rear up mountains of earth in a moment, fill up ditches with dead corpse of
their own men to scale the walls, with the very sight of such an invincible
multitude strike terror and amazement in the hearts of all them that shall see
them or hear of them. His malice is The Turks hatred against Christians.
no less then his might: what pretends he in Constantinople? forsooth to be
Emperor over all Europe, and successor to Constantine the great, this he
claymeth as right, this he means to win by might, this he resolves to enjoy
at length. Did he ever yet overslip opportunity when Christians were at civil
braules among themselves, or that he perceived any little advantage ready to
further his plots? let Rhodes, Cypers, Buda, and the best part of Hungary
witness his vigilant malice, and malicious intent. Whom hates he more then
Christians? who hold him for an usurper; who of right should possess and
inherit all he has. Whose religion has he extinguished in all those worthy
kingdoms he now enjoys, but Christianity? Whom calls he dogs but
Christians? But the Persian as yet holds him play, as potent as he, thirsty
of his blood, as the Turk of Christians. If that were not, truly (except
miraculously God preserved Christianity) we should have seen all Europe
over-runne: But why may we not suppose that at last they will come to some
truce or cessation from wars for a long time, as a wearied with so much
warring and bloodshed, or finally conclude a peace? and what then is like to
befall us? why rather were it not better now for all Christians to be at peace
among themselves, and assault and invade him upon this side, while we have the
Persian to encounter with him on the other? O blindness! O proud ambition of
Christian Princes! who seek rather to spoil their brethren of their own with
injury, then they will war against their common Adversary to recover their
own right.

Put case the Turks break over their banks, and make a general inundation
over all Europe, what great harm might we expect? what harm? God avert us
from prooving the Turkish tyranny? what man is secure The greatness of the evil
feared.
of his life in their Invasion, who has either strength, wisdom, wealth, or
nobility? whereby he may seem either to have opposed, or hereafter oppose
himself against them? what Matrone, what Virgin, what Lady shall befree from
their beastly violence? who shall keep lands or livings under the clowches of
such ravinous Kytes and devouryng Cormorants? whatsoever a man gets with his
sweat and industry, when he dies, the great Turkish Tyrant must inherit,
and what he deemeth or pleases, shall be allowed the wife and children.

The Galleys shall then want no Slaves to lead a hellish thraldom, when they
have vanquished so many as they may use in all drudgery and slavery at their
pleasure: the children, who are warlike in their infancy, perforce shall be taken
from their parents, and sent into a far country from the^, and there trained
up in martial prowes and Turcisme, and forget both father and mother, country
and kindred, and neither yield comfort ever to progenitors, nor receive any
comfort from them. Many more such tyrannical vexations, and barbarous
cruelties I could recount, but he that will not be moved with these, I hold him
neither a wise moral man, nor any way touched with one spark of christian
zeal.

Means to move Ire. 7.
IRe includes in it a certain hatred of enmity, and thereunto super-addeth a
desire of revenge: the first part has the same motives as hatred: and the
desire of revenge may be revived, quickened and increased by the exaggeration of
the injury receyved, the greatness and enormitie whereof we have insinuated in
the circumstances of bestowing benefits: for as gifts and favors proceed from
kindnesses and good will, so injuries from hatred and malice, and therefore the
contraryes of bountiful geving will demonstrate the heynousnes of spiteful
iniurying: wherefore as we reduced them to four heads, so we will these, to
wit, the giver, gift, receyver, manner of giving; the iniurer, injury,
iniuried, manner of injury.

The Iniurer. 8.
THe iniurers baseness augmenteth the injury, as a buffer given a Prince by a
Prince, were not so heinous an injury, as if a base peasant had done it*
because as the greatness of the Princes person ought more to be respected of a
base man then of an equal Prince, so by beating him his contempt is accounted
the greater.

Secondly, if the iniure^ be a wise, grave, and virtuous man, the injury by the
persons dignity increases: for example, if a Bishop or a famous Doctor
dispraise, or injuriously detract the good name of a Nobleman, Gentleman, or
Cleargyman, for commonly every one will esteem it truer coming from such a
man's mouth; and it is like to make deeper impression in their minds, because
such circumspect persons are not accustomed without great cause and urgent
reasons so to traduce any man.

Thirdly, if the injury proceed from a public Magistrate or officer of justice
whom it concerns in equity to procure and command, that every man have
right, the injury is greater: as if the Judge or Justice of peace infame any
person called before them unjustly, the injury is almost doubled, for the
innocent suffers wrong of him who in justice was bound rather to save his
credit, then so injuriously to abuse him.

4. If the iniurer were before our most special friend, for that common
grammatical example that Amantiu^ irae a moris redintegratio sunt, that lovers
ire sets love afier, and friends dissentions, renew, revive, and increase
friendship. This sentence I say must be seasoned with a grain of salt; and
first in voluptuous love, and mercinarie friendship the rule holds, for when
such lovers live in dissension, they want that pleasure they most desired, and
therefore as one who long time wants drink or meat after brings more
hunger and thirst, and consequently likes and loves his meat and drink
better then he did before, even so such want of wished delights causes a more
vehement desire, and joyful possession thereof. And yet this also must be
understood when there is hope remaining of future fruition, for otherwise love
transporteth herself into mortal hatred, as the spiteful malice of Putifers
unchaste wife witnesses, in persecuting until death the chaste and innocent
Joseph.

In faithful love among virtuous friends small trifling injuries are
oftentimes occasion of more fervent and vigilant love, as a little (...) in a
beautiful face causes the beauty better appear, so frivolous wrangles and
friendly frowns cause the amiable union of friendship; But in great offenses
and premeditated injuries, which admit no tergiversation nor amicable
interpretation, such of all others are most bitter and irreconcilable: and
therefore Aristotle well noted, that discords Aristot. 7. de Rep. ca. 7.
among brethren and friends were most vehement: for who would not be moved with
just indignation there to find hatred, where he most affectually loved: there
to receive injuries where he expected favors; there finally to reap harms
where he judged the offender in duty obliged to do good?

5. If he have received any benefits at our hands, and in lieu of reward,
recognition, and gratitude repaye us with injuries and ingratitude: and for
this circumstance we read that God in the old Testament expostulating the
daily injuries the stiff-neckt Jews offered him, he usually reprehended their
ingratitude with commemorating the continual benefits he had bestowed upon
them, as though such favors deserved better service.

6. If the iniurer with endamaging us, endamaged greatly himself; as a fly to
put forth a man's eye, leeseth her own life, so many men both wickedly and
iniustly care not to waste and consume their own wealth and substance in suits
and laws so they may beggar their adversaries: and not much unlike him who
said he could well be contented to be hanged, so he had killed his enemy. I say
this circumstance aggravateth greatly the injury, because it argues an excess
of malice, whereby the iniurer does not only injury me, against equity and
reason, but also rather then he will omit to harm me, he cares not to harm
himself, as though he preferred my evil, before his own good, and judged it
better to hurt us both, then his malicious mind should rest unsatisfied.

7. If he had offered me many injuries before, the which I never revenged, for
by this appears his malice is insatiable, and therefore reiterateth often his
mischievous mind, as though no drop of spite should rest in his heart vnpowred
out.

The injury in it self. 9.
WE may be iniuried in the goods of our souls, our bodies, of fortune or of
good name, existimation or reputation. In the goods of our souls if any man
craftily inveagle our judgments with errors, heresies, or false opinions. If
we be importunely induced, or deceitfully enticed to any offense of God, or
breach of his commandments. If any hinder o^ ^^op us from the service of God,
receiving of sacraments, hearing of his word preached or taught. In the goods
of our bodies by killing, mayming, wounding, beating, or any way abusing of
them. In goods of fortune by theft, cosinage, usury, not repaying due debts,
hurting our cattle, fervants, children, friends, lands, tenements, or any kind
of possession. In goods of same or reputation, by detracting, calumniating,
convitiating, or any way dishonoring us, as mocking, gibing, or after any
scurrilous manner deriding, libelling against us, or any way impeaching our good
name and fame we hold among me^. Ordinarily the goods of the soul are prized
above the goods of the body, and these more esteemed then the favors of
fortune, and they preferred before the blazon of honor: because, as the origin
of love, is first a man's self, and for it all other things beloved; so these
goods, which are most near himself, and concern his substance, or necessary
preservation thereof, are more affectually loved, then they which touch him
less; as first his body, then goods of fortune, and last of all, same. I said
ordinarily, for if we compare a title of honor, as to be Earl, Baron, etc.
these are to be preferred before a great sum of money: yet I doubt not, but
if election were given an Earl to be a beggar, and an Earl all his life; or
a simple Merchant, but exceeding rich: he would rather choose this, and refuse
that, for there is no misery like Nobility pressed with penury. Wherefore
always must be held with the chiefest of one degree of goods, with the
chiefest of an other, and so the comparison framed, as the chiefest goods of
the soul, of grace, virtue, wisdom, prudence, etc. are to be valued above
the life of the body, integrity of members, wealth, fame, etc. I know against
this division and reason, some will object that common Text of Scripture;
Melius Proverb. 22. 1.
est nomen bonum, quam divitiae multae: super argentum and aurum gratia bona. A
good Name is better then many riches; and a good grace, that is a gracious and
favorable good liking among men; above silver and gold. But to this Text I
answer, that in it are involved good friends, and their gracious good wills,
which are favors of Fortune, and so to be preserred before riches, which are
contained in the same degree. Secondly, fame and a good name sometime is
necessary to the perfection of virtue, and the good of the soul, as without
them, the Preacher should persuade but sorrily; the Magistrate be obeyed but
servilely, the Prince honored but ceremoniously; and in fine, take away a good
Name, and all virtuous examples will seem counterfeit hypocrisy. Thirdly, true
it is, a good Name ought to be prized above many riches, but I think there be
few rich men in the world, that had not rather be iniuried in their good Name,
then fall to begging. Fourthly, a good Name or a good Fame wayteth upon a good
Life, and he that lives badly, for most part carries as bad a name and a
fame: to our purpose then, a man must have care of his good Name, because he
should live virtuously, whereby such a good Name is gotten: and indeed, such a
precious fruit hanging upon so noble a Plant, surpasses all worldly wealth;
and this I take to be the true and literal sense of this Text of Scripture,
whence-from exhaleth that sweet and fragrant smell of gracious pleasing, and
contenting of all men: for a soul that is really virtuous, and so known and
blazed abroad, cannot but stir up men's hearts to like and love well such a
Person.

Every injury then offered, tends to the bereaving of us, of some of these
goods related, of soul, body, fortune or fame, and therefore according to
every degree of goodness, ought to be esteemed.

Secondly, if the injury did us much harm, and the iniurer no good: if it hurt
many a Town, City, Province, State or Kingdom: for, to more persons it
extends, the poison is more pestilent, and the malice more vehement.

Thirdly, At what end the Injury aimed, if he cosined, to procure means to
murder, to commit adultery, to hurt the State: this external Motive augmenteth
his malice.

The Iniuried. 10.
FIrst, the greatness of the Person iniuried, increases the injury, as a
blow given to a Prince, even by a Prince, is accounted more offensive, then
done to a private man by a Prince or a private person.

Secondly, the nocuments ensuing are to be considered, which necessarily
follow, and are not casually thereunto annexed. For example, one causes an
Innocent to be imprisoned or hanged by false accusations and forgeries: the
charges, as fees to Officers, Iaylors, loss of lands, goods, liberty and
life, extraordinary expenses for lodging, diet, going abroad etc. as all these
damages follow and augment the injury, so they ought to be satisfied, and
without consideration of this recompensation and full accomplishment thereof,
the heirs of the iniuried receyve not justice, nor a correspondent equality
to the excess of the injury, when restitution should be made.

Thirdly, if among diverse, who might, and in reason should have been iniuried
rather then we, yet upon spite, we were singled from the rest: for this iniust
separation proceeds from maligning hatred, specially bent against our persons.

Fourthly, if the person iniuried, was then presently doing, or laboring for
the offenders good or commodity: as if an Orator were persuading the
Commonweal to some glorious enterprise, a private subject should go about to
kill him.

The manner of Iniurying. 12.
IF we be in countenance and external appearance held as friends, and secretly
iniuried like enemies: this dissimulation adds an other vicious circumstance,
covering enmity with amity.

Secondly, if along time the Injury was thought upon, and premeditated; then
the continuation shows a more confirmed ill will against us: if at
Christmasse, Easter, or such times as are religiously celebrated.

Thirdly, if in place where we ought to be loved and honored or reverenced,
there we be wronged, dishonored, disgraced: as if a Bishop should be beaten in
the Church, or a Preacher threatened, preaching in the pulpit: a Judge upon the
Bench: a Counselor at the Council table: a King in his Throne.

Fourthly, in every particular injury, the manner of offending, and
demonstrating internal exuperant ill will, may a hundred ways be varied. Who is
able to recount the manners, how enemies kill, wound, and injury their
Adversaries? as the very cudgel wherewith a Cavalero is bastonated, greatly
aggravateth the offense, and many would wish rather to be deeply wounded with
a sword, then beaten in that fashion. Caracalla the Emperor, hearing that the
Lawyer Papinian was beheaded with a hatchet, was greatly offended, wishing it
Dio. in Caracal: Herod. li. 4
had been e effected with a sword for his more disgrace and ignominy.

Fifthly, if the injury be public, before a multiude, then the greater number
concurreth to blaze abroad the Infamy: for commonly, if with words or deeds we
injury one, the cause will be supposed to have been given by the person
iniuried, and so he must bear the blows, and also an universal discredit: I
say commonly, for it seems difficill, how the iniuried upon a sudden can quit
himself of the calumniations imposed upon him, though never so innocent,
because the iniurer in a trice may cogge out a world of lies, swear and stare
against him, the which flat denial will not suffice to confute; and to
convince them by witness or evident reason upon a sudden, all wise men will
confess to be extreme hard.

Means to moove Hope. 13.
HOpe is a Passion, whereby we expect probably or certaynely any future good,
or any evil to happen, conceaved as good. For example, the Souldyer expects
and hops for riches, when he lies before a City to besiege it: the blessed
Saints in Heaven live in a most certain Hope of the glorious Resurrection of
their bodies: the Dyvell in temptyng Gods Servants, hops to prevayle. Hope
therefore being grounded upon persuasion specially of obtaining; therefore all
those Motives which render the atchyevement more likely, all those stir and
moove the Passion of Hope: and the more forcibly, they which persuade it most
apparently and presently. This object is endless, and hardly can be brought to
any Method, for as the things hoped for, are without number; so the Means and
Motyves to induce men thereunto be infinite. Howbeit, these general Precepts
may be observed.

First, for that Hope expects the thing hoped for, of an other, or by a man's
labor, endeavor, or industry: therefore we must in stirring it, have always
an eye to the grounds and foundations, whereupon our Hope shall be built, for
as these fadge, so Hope follows: if these be small or frivolous, Hope is
vain and ridiculous: if they be strong and sound, Hope will prove more
certain and prudent: for wise men always according to these grounds judge of
the event: for example, a man may well hope the Turkish Empire cannot long
continue, because their manner of government repugneth with stabilitie and
continuation: for how is it possible, but that in every change of Emperor,
there should succeed civil wars among them, seeing the new Emperor
presently causes all his brethren to be slain, lest afterward they should
grow potent and trouble his Reign. I omit, that this bloody unnatural
Tyranny (which demands daily vengeance at Gods hands) deserves Division,
Rebellion and Destruction, and only infer, that they being certain to dye
in all humane Policy, nay, in natural equity, are enforced to make parts,
and while their Father lyveth, provide Forces and Friends, and after he is
dead, to prevayle by Main and Might, that their Brothers Creation be not their
destruction.

Secondly, among grave men, few reasons and strong are more effectual, then a
number, but weaker: because they be able presently, by the strength of their
wits, to confute and overthrow them. But a multitude of slender reasons among
the common people, strike a greater stroke; for conjectures and probabilities
work as forcibly with them, as deep demonstrations.

Thirdly, to gather these Motives into heads, I hold it best, in that hope
which depends upon the good will of another to perform, to discourse over
the Circumstances of actions. Quis, quid, vbi, quibus auxilijs, cur, quom^do,
quando. And out of them pick some persuasions of obtaining a grant. For
example; if the granter be our friend or kinseman, if of his nature liberal
and bountiful, etc. Quid if the thing be profitable to the giver, or
receyver, without any harm or detriment unto the giver. Vbi, if the giver or
granter be in place where usually he grants such requests, as entertained of
us, taking possession of great lands, etc. If we have potent Intercessours for
us, and wise Agents to procure what we desire: then this Circumstance of Quibus
auxilijs will greatly further our purpose. Cur: If he have many reasons to
grant our suite, and none to withstand it. Quomodo: If in the manner of
granting, he win himself great credit and reputation, either because it
argues a bountiful mind, or a compassion-full heart, or a charitable
conscience, or most, or all.

Fourthly, it were not amiss to set down all the objections which any way may
frustrate our Hope, and briefly, orderly, and as evidently as may be, refute
them: for thereby all cavilles, and impediments shall be remooved.

Fifthly, that which I have said of Hope, by a contrary rule, may be applied
unto Desperation: for the difficulty of obtaining that we desire, being
remonstrated to be inseparable, either by the parties malice, or inviticible
means which must be used in the procuring of it, that I say renders the thing
desperate and consequently vnexpectable.

Means to move joy and delight. 16.
AS there is nothing in this life more potent then pleasure to move men to
action, and the attempting of great exploits, so there is nothing more
requisite to be known to any man that will be grateful and acceptable unto
men, then how to move and excite them to pleasure. True it is that ambitious
men aspire after honors: but why thirst they so after the^, but because they
take an extraordinary delight to be honored? why do covetous cormogions distill
the best substance of their brains to get riches, but after they have gotten
them, to delight in the possession or fruition of them? the same may be said of
all inordinate passions which consist in the prosequution of some amiable or
desiderable object. And the reason is, for joy and delight are a possession of
some good thing, wherein nature receives great contentation, and therefore a
man in joy participateth a certain kind of felicity, for felicity is nothing
else but a complete contentation, quietness and rest of the mind and body;
wherefore the greater delight either really or apparently apporteth the greater
contentation, rest and quietness, and consequently the greater felicity. And
as there is no man affects not extremely felicity and happiness, so there
is no man extremely desires not joy and delight. They therefore that can move
these passions, feed them and continue them, must needs be most grateful,
acceptable, and beloved; yea they may almost do what they list in any company,
for all me^ love happiness and the continuance thereof: and those that can aptly
stir up this passion may be accounted authors of a terrestrial happiness and
felicity. Therefore I will alittle enlarge this discourse as most profitable,
if not necessary for most sorts of men.

First of all we must suppose, that all those motives Motives to delight.
which stir up love and affection, consequently move desire and delight: for
love is like the quality of lenity or lightness in fire, which inclines and
bends it to motion, desire is the motion, passage, or voyage; delight the
quietness or rest of the soul in her object, and therefore all those causes of
love we have delivered in the matter of Love, all those may serve for this
subject.

Secondly it is requisite a man consider the inclinations of those persons he
would move to delight, for quicquid recipitur per modum recipient is recipitur,
according to the disposition of the hearer are received the words of the
speaker. Some men are inclined to piety, some to study, some to one thing, some
to another: every one willingly hea^eth, and delights to have commended that
he professes, for in praising that we commend him: and this reason is gathered
out of a common experience, that men for most part desire to be praised. It is
a world to see how blind self-love makes women to dote of themselves, and it
seems ridiculous sometime, to see how they are fed and delighted with the
panigeries of parasites. I have seen some old Ladies half rotten, and some
others monstrously deformed, to take an extraordinary delight in themselves,
when others for flattery commended their beauty. In this point also we may
consider a secret motive, to delight in that thing a man is delighted in, as if
one be delighted in Music, in hunting, hauking, etc. some pretty new devise in
any of them would please the person exceedingly: and therefore the parasites of
Princes study daily and hourly how by deeds and words they may feed this
humor: yea some of the^ proceeded so far in dignifying their Kings and Monarks,
that they adored them as gods. And the others no less sacrilegious in
accepting, them they blasphemous in ascribing, were contented to have their
mortal corruptible bodies, and horribly infected sinful souls worshipped as
immortal, spotless, divine deities. This act of new pleasing inventions
proportionate to their passions and inclinations whom we would move to delight,
cannot but greatly help us in the way of persuasion, if it be plausibly and
artificially handled: for otherwise if it be grossly managed, it (...) of
flattery, and affected folly.

3. A firm hop^ and assurance of those things we desire and love, causes
delight, spe gaudentes says S. Paul rejoicing in hope: and that other spes
alit agricolas, hope nourishes the Countrymen; for the hope of gain causes
the laboring Husbandman not to feel the scorching heat of summer, nor the
hoarie frosts of winter: hope of glory allotteth the soldier to receive a
certain sweet mess in all dangerous incounters: hope of lucre makes the
Merchant merry at midnight, although he lie in the midst of the vast ocean sea
tossed with billows, and shaken with tempests: and the surer the hope is, the
greater joy ensues, as when the Merchant after his long voyage returns with
his Ship laden with merchandise, and comes with a pleasant gale within the
sight of his exspected haven, then his hope for the certainty of his future
possession of his apported wealth, being delivered from all danger, is changed
into joy and present delight. He therefore that will move delight in this
matter of hope, must exactly declare the certain grounds and undoubted
security of obteyning the thing exspected, according to the rules of exciting
hope, alleged in the precedent Paragraffe.

4. Because delight consists in the possession of some good thing real or
apparent; therefore all those reasons which tend to the amplification or
evident demonstration of the goodness of the thing, all those are fuel of
delight, and sparks of joy. For example, a man has bought a Mannour-house
wherein he delights: to please and delight him there is nothing more fit,
then to amplify the goodness thereof: as for situation, it stands in a
pleasant air, free from fennes or standing waters, no infection near it, the
inhabitants in former times were of a very good complexion, lived many years,
were strong, witty, etc. all which are good signs of a healthful soil: the
rooms and conveyances are very apt and proportioned, the walls and roofes
firm and durable, the water sweet, the walks, garde^s, and other commodities
so pleasant, as they resemble a Paradise.

5. It is admirable how the minching and particularising of the object of
delight increases and augmenteth delight, wherefore the fantastical and
lascivious Poets, though vainly and vitiously, yet wittily and artificially
depaint their lovers bodies from the head to the heels, in every part
discovering one or other perfection, excellency, or amiablenesse, apt to move
and stir up delight. And herein also all Tradesmen excel, for to persuade
their wares to be good and perfect, they will presently open unto you a number
of circumstances or oppurtenances of goodness or excellency wherewith their
merchandise is affected: for as they have more insight, and know more exactly
the goodness and defects of their wares then other men, so they can unfold best
the particular reasons which move love and delight. And for this cause I would
have all those who would move men to good life and virtue, to induce them
thereunto, by particularising of the pleasures and delights incident thereunto,
as the quietness of conscience, the gratefulnes to God, the honor and
reputation of all good men, the reward in the world to come, and every one of
these the finer it is sifted, the more pleasant it will appear.

6. It imports much in moving delight to persuade the stabilitie and
continuance thereof, that it seem not like a May-flower, which is budded,
blossomed, and blasted in a small time: and the reason is, for momentarie and
cursorie delights are for their brevitie rather despiseable then commendable.
The continuance of delight may be grounded upon the removing of all impediments
which any way may impeach or diminish it.

7. As there are two sorts of delight, sensual and intellectual; sensual
which takes his source from sense and passions; and intellectual, which
draws his origin from the understanding and the will: so in every object of
delight there is a certain intensive goodness and perfection, and there is an
extensive: as for example in a Cellar of wine there may be excellent good wine,
and variety of excellent good wine, and thereby our taste may be delighted
with the perfection of wine, and with the varieties of wine. In like manner in
all the objects of delight, we may find a certain intension of goodness, and a
certain extension, and both these well understood and declared, exceedingly
increase pleasure and delight: for the intention fills and satiateth the
soul, and the extension or variety takes away a certain distasteful
loathsomeness which one kind of uniform pleasure draws with it.

The sixth Book, entreating of the defects or imperfections of men's souls.
THE Geographers describing the situation of any country, are not content to
set down the provinces, cities, and territories thereof, but also they
depaint in their Cards, and explicate in their Books, the Countries and
Cities adjoining, that thereby men might know the borders and limits of both,
and not mistake the one for the other: even so, because our sensitive appetite
has the wit and will which border upon it; therefore I thought good, to
declare certain of their imperfections, which knowledge will not help us
alitle, to discern more exactly the nature of passions. Besides, good
Physicians of the body expend, not only the present agew, or humor, that
causes sickness, but also they search out the causes and of-springs of such
maladies: so I think it not amiss, to show the universal causes, from whence
inordinate passions proceed. And first of all we will descend unto the defects
of our wits or understandings.

2 Defects of our Understanding.

ALl the defects of our wit may be reduced to two, Ignorance, and Error; by
Ignorance we know not things necessary; by Error we know them falsely:
Ignorance is a privation, Error a positive action: all ignorance cannot be
prevented; many errors, but all cannot be escaped; from ignorance flows
vice, and from error heresy.

1. Natural ignorance.
ALl the sons of men are conceived and borne in sin and ignorance:
Aristotle compares our wits, at the beginning, to a smooth table, wherein
nothing is written, but apt to receive all forms and figures: and in this
truly I must confess one point of my ignorance, that it seems to me, that
God endoweth brute beasts with more sparks of knowledge, then reasonable men,
and they may be said, even in their nativitie, to have imprinted a certain
knowledge and natural instinct, to inquire and find out things necessary, to
be their own Physicians, to fly that may hurt them, and follow that may
profit them. Mark but a Lamb almost new yeaned, how it will find forth the
mothers dugge, discern and single her forth in all the flock, wait upon
her so dilligentlie, within eight days it sees light: but a child may be
many days borne, and yet cannot find out his mothers dugge, except the Nurse
move him unto it: neither can it cure it self, or demand what it needs,
otherwise then by weeping.

II. Errors of the last end.
WHen a man begins to practice a little his faculty of Understanding, then
you shall see how fitly he expels this chaos of infinite ignorance, like an
unskillful Physician, who, to cure one disease, causes a worse; so he
delivers himself of ignorance by a multitude of errors, quenching his
thirst with a potion of poison: this we may see more plainly, by the infinite
errors that men are subject unto by Nature: For let us consider the famous
Philosophers of passed ages, who lacking faith, bragged of natural knowledge:
Which of them knew but to what end man was created of God? their dissenting
sects and erroneous opinions. Lactantius and Saint Austen relate, how some
thought men's last Lactandib. 3. divina institut. ca. 7. Aug. lib. 19. civi^.
ca. 1. and sequentibus.
end was pleasure: others natural knowledge, some in privation of pain* some
to live according to nature, others, the goods of the soul, the body, and
fortune, with infinite such like false assertions; and this, not about a trifle
or May Game, but the very main point whereat men should aim at all their
lives, and whereunto they were bound to direct all their actions.

III. Errors in the means.
IF the end was apparelled with such darkness, how how could they be but
ignorant of the means necessary for the achievement of such an end? and we
daily prove, what difficulty men feel, in effecting, yea, in resolving
themselves, which action is good, which is badde; how many volumes have been
written of cases of Conscience, and yet, what good man's conscience is not vexte
some times with seruples? who can define the quality of his actions, affected
with such variety of circumstances? who can resolve himself, how far^e the
law of Nature engraven in our hearts extends? How often does an erroneous
conscience bark and byte, when the Soul did not prevaricate the Law of God,
or pass the limittes of Reason? This blindness of Mind, without all
question, argues great imperfection of the Soul, and extreme Misery of man.
Wherefore one cried, Delicta quis intelligit? Ab occultis meis munda me Domine:
and Psalm. 18. Job. 9. 2^*
another, Verebar omnia opera mea.

IIII. Difficulty in Understanding.
But what shall I say of the wonderful difficulty all men suffer to come by
the knowledge of any Truth? Veritas in profundo latet; Verity lies in the
bottom. In the West Indies, those that follow by digging, the Veins of Gold,
run under high mountains, many miles, descending through stony Rocks into
the bowels of the earth, yet they ever are winning ground, they reap Oar,
they recompense their travel, they labor with alacrity. But in learning
occurreth another sort of difficulty, Truth must be further fetched, greater
sweat and industry must be used.

For what cause I pray you, stand Schoolmasters armed daily with whips and
scourges, with such sour and bitter visages with thundering and threatening
words, but by terror to enforce their untoward and unwilling Youth, to overcome
the difficulty they find in learning? why at this present do so many ignorant
replenish the world, discoursing so blockishly, speaking so sottishly, Quidam
sunt tantae satuitat^, vt non multuma pecor^bus disserant. Angust. ep. 28. ad
thereon.
answering so absurdly, that scarce you would judge them endued with reasonable
souls, but only because they had rather be buried in that profound cave of
ignorance, than endeavor to overcome the extreme difficulty they find in
learning? What other reason can by yielded, why all ignorance and errors are
not abolished, and wholly extinguished, seeing learned men have left to their
posterity, so many thousand volumes, (that in some Libraries you should find,
five, six, ten thousand corpse of books, all written for no other end, than to
purify our wits, to consume the clouds of errors and ignorance) but the
difficulty we find in attayning unto learning? Whereupon grew those dissenting
and contradicting Sects of Peripatetikes, Academikes, Stoickes, Epicures,
Thomists, and Scotists, Realles and Nominalles, but by the disprooving of one
another opinion, which proceeded from the difficulty of understanding and
conceyving of Learning.

V. Ignorance and Errors about God.
YEt, if men, by sweat and labor, by distilling their Brains, and spending
their Spirits in studies, at last could win the victory of Errors and
Ignorance, then all pains were sufficiently rewarded, the interest would
defray the expenses of the Voyage. But alas! how many have wandered in a vast
desert of learning, amongst brambles and briars, not able to pass forward, nor
return backward? who would think, men could be ignorant of the Majesty of
God, which all brute and Interroga Iumenta, et docebunt ^e, Volatilia Coeli,
and indicabunt tibi, loquere terr^, and respondebit tibi, and narrabunt pisces
Maris. Quis ignorant quod manus Domini haec omnia fecerat. Job. 12 7.
senseless creatures confess? and yet such is, and has been the palpable
ignorance of the world, that in place of God, some worshipped Calves, others
Serpents, other Crocodiles, others Onions and Garlike. I omit how many
(supposed very wise) adored the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Elements of
earth, fire, and water, for these errors might have carried some show of
wisdom, in respect of the other absurdities. How could men be more besotted,
than to imagine God, by whom they lived, moved, and were, whose goodness
sustained them, whose power vpheld them, whose wisdom directed them, to be a
Crocodile, or a Calfe, or Commo^a quibus vtimur, lucem qua ^rutmur, spiritum
quem ducimus, a Deo nobis dari and impartiri v^demus. Cic. pro Ros^. Amer.
that Divinity could inhabit such savage Beasts? where was the imortall
soul? the Image of the Trinity? the faculty of understanding? the power of
apprehending, judging, and discoursing? Were all these drowned in darkness?
did no spark of light or life shine over them? O ignorance intolerable! O
blindness! more gross, than not to see, when the Sun lodges in his Zenith.

VI. Ignorance and Errors about our Souls and bodies.
But some will say, Gods Majesty dazeled their eyes, they were not able, by the
weak light of Nature, to behold so super-excellent a glory: well, at least
they might have known themselves; for what was more near them then their own
souls and bodies, their five senses, the operations of understanding and
affecting, the Passions of the Mind, and alterations of the body? yet the
Ignorance and Errors, which both inchaunted them, and inveigle us, are almost
incredible. I could propound above a hundredth questions about the Soul and the
body, which partly are disputed of by Divines, partly by natural and moral
Philosophers, partly by Physicians, all which, I am of opinion, are so abstruse
and hidden, that they might be defended as Problemes, and either part of
Contradiction alike impugned. Some I will set down, that by them conjecture
may be made of the rest.

Problemes concerning the substance of our Souls.
1 WHether in men's bodies there reside more forms then one. 2 Whether it can
be demonstrated by natural reason, that the Soul is immortal. 3 How can the
Soul extend it self through the whole body, being a Spirit indivisible,
inextensed, and able whole and entire to reside in one only and indivisible
point. 4 How are the Soul and Body, Spirit and Flesh coupled together, what
chains, what fetters imprison a spiritual Substance, an immortal Spirit in so
base, stinking; and corruptible a car^^asse? 5 How, by punishing the flesh, or
hurting the body, the Soul feels pain, and is afflicted. 6 Whether the
hayres, spirits, blood, choler, fleugme, skin, fat, nails, marrow, be
animated, or no. 7 Whether the Bones and Teeth be sensitive, or no. 8 How the
Soul contains those three degrees, of vegetative, sensitive, and reasonable.
9 How these three degrees do differ. 10 How the Soul of a Child, being
contained and dispersed in so little a body, when it is borne, afterward
dilateth it self, and spreads in the body of a man. 11 When an Arm or a
Leg is cut off, by chance, from the Body, what becomes of the Soul, which
informed that part? 12 Why departs the Soul from the Body in a vement
Problemes concerning the faculties in general.
Sickness, it being immortal, and independing of the Body, able to live in
air, water, or fire. 13 How many faculties do spring from the Soul. 14 How
they spring in order, one depending upon an other, or without any dependence.
15 How do they differ from the Soul? 16 Whether are they subjected in the
Soul, Body, or the whole. 17 What dependence has our understanding upon
Problemes concerning our understanding.
the imagination. 18 How a corporal imagination concur to a spiritual
conceit. 19 What is apprehension and conceyving? 20 What judgment and
affirming? 21 What discourse and inferring? 22 How these three differ, what is
their objects? 23 How apprehend we so many things together without confusion.
24 How are these three operations of our wit subordinated? 25 How they err. 26
How they may be certified. 27 What is a vital act of Understanding. 28 How
the forms, faculties, habites, and Soul it self concur to such an act:
about every one of these four, many questions may easily be propounded, but
hardly resolved. 29 What is a Habit? 30 How engendered? 31 How augmented? 32
How diminished and corrupted? 33 In what faculties of our Souls habites
principally allodge. 34 Whether the act or habit be more perfect. 35 How are
habits distinguished in the same faculty. 36 How the habites of our imagination
and understanding, of our sensible appetite and will, differ, when they tend
unto sensible objects. 37 What is the universal object of our Understanding?
every thing, or only the truth of things. 38 Whereupon comes the difficulty
we find in Understanding, proceeds it from the object, or the weakness of
the faculty, or both? 39 How does Reason direct and correct Sense? 40 Whether
knowledge concurreth, as an efficient cause, to effect the operations of our
will, or no. 41 What is Art? what the Idaea in the Artificers mind, by whose
direction he frames his works, what is Prudence, Wisdom, the internal
speech and words of the mind. 42 What is the habit of principles? 43 What the
law of Nature, and how engrafted in our Understanding. 44 What is Conscience?
45 Whence-from proceeds Remorce. 46 What is evidence and certitude in
Knowledge, and how they differ. 47 How Knowledge and perfect Science, differ
from credulity and opinion, and whether fear be necessarily included in every
opinion. 48 If ever man had such a demonstration as Aristotle describes in his
first Book of Posteriors. 49 Whether a Demonstration once had, can ever be
lost, or no. 50 Why can we not come by as firm knowledge in Logic, Physics,
or Metaphysics, as in Mathematics. 51 How we understand, discourse and
dispute in Dreams. 52 Whether children discourse actually, or no. 53 What
should be the reason, why some be more apt for understanding than others. 54
And why some more fit for one Science, then others. 55 Why great wits have
ill memories, and good memories be not of profound conceit. 56 Why some men's
wits be excellent in speculations, but very simple in practice, other rare in
action, and dull in speculation. 57 How we remember* Concerning Memory.
58 In what part of the Brain resideth the forms fit for memory. 59 How they
be subordinated to our will. 60 How we forget. 61 How we conceyve things in
dreams we never see nor heard of before. 62 What helps and hinders
Memory, and by what manner. 63 Why does Memory fail in old men. 64 Whether
Memory be a faculty distinguished from our Understanding, or no. 65 Whether
artificial Memory impeacheth natural Memory, or no. 66 How comes it to
pass, that a man can be able to recite a long Oration, from the beginning to
the end, without confusion. 67 How can one recite a Psalm from the beginning
to the ending, and yet shall be scarce able to prosecute one verse, if you give
him it in the midst, except he begin again. 68 How can possibly be
conserved, without confusion, such an infinite number of forms in the Soul,
as we see Learned men and Artificers reteyne? in what tables are they painted?
in what glasses are they to be seen? why does not the huge Mountain darken
little moaths in the Sun? the forms of fire fight with the forms of water?
69 How, when we would remember, can we single a Fly from the university of
Beasts, fowls, and fish? how a Violet from the infinite variety of flowers,
herbs and trees? 70 What is the object of our Will? Concerning the Will.
71 What Intension. 72 What Election. 73 What Free Will. 74 When our Will fully
consents to any thing. 75 What Motives moove us to love or hate. 76 What is
love, hatred, hope, desperation, fear, boldness, desire, abomination,
pleasure, sadness, ire. 77 In what confisteth the particular virtues and vices
of the Will, what is humility, liberality, magnanimity, etc. all these be
extreme hard to be known, and whereas one perhaps can guess grossly at
some description, you shall have ten thousand, who can scarce imagine what
they mean. 78 How the Will commands the toe or finger to moove, and
presently they obey; the manner, or mean. 79 How lower Passions of the Mind
seduce and pervert the Will. 80 How the will, being blind, can make choice and
election of diverse things, preferring one before another.
If I would follow here an other Subject, that is, the super-naturall gifts
wherewith GOD has endued our souls, wits, and wills, by discoursing of
Faith, Hope, Charity, and Grace, I might easily multiply this aforesaid
number, with as many more, as all learned Divines will confess, but this would
both pass the limits I have prescribed, and also the matter whereunto I am
betaken. But let us now descend unto our sensitive appetite, wherein we may
moove almost all those difficulties touched in the Will.

81 How do humors of the body stir up Passions. Concerning Passions and
internal sense.
82 Or, why do Passions engender corporal humors. 83 After what manner are
Passions stirred up. 84 How they blind Reason. 85 How they cease and fall away
by themselves. 86 Whether our coveting and invading appetites are one faculty,
or two. 87 How they are distinguished. 88 In what subject reside they. 89 What
is our fantasy or imagination. 90 Where it resideth, and how it receives and
keeps those forms and figures which sense ministered unto it. 91 How our
Understanding makes it represent unto it what it pleases. 92 How our Wit can
cause it conceive such objects as sense never could present unto it. 93 Whether
it contains more faculties then one, or no. 94 How does our eyes see,
admitting something into them, or emitting something out of them. 95 What is
the object of our sight? 96 In what part of the eye consists principally the
virtue of seeing. 97 Why do two eyes not see all things double. 98 Why fix we
steadfastly our eyes upon one thing, when we will see it exactly. 99 Why do
old men see better a far off, than near hand. 100 Why do spectacles help
the sight. 101 And those spectacles hinder young men, which do help old men.
102 Why has Nature drawn so many veiles, and stuffed them with humors in the
eye. 103 Why in the deepest cold of Winter, when the face is almost benumbed
with cold, yet the eye almost feels no alteration. 104 Why cannot many abide
that you look fix in their eyes. 105 How comes it to pass, that green
colors comfort eyes, and white or black colors spoil them. 106 Whereupon
comes such variety of colors in the cyrcle of the eyes. 107 Why does the
beholding of sore eyes cause sore eyes. 108* What is the cause that makes
every thing seem double, if we press the corners of our eyes. 109 Why does a
Palace, if it be quadrangle, seem round a far off. 110 Why do Stars in
the firmament seem to us to twinckle, and not the Planets.
Twenty more Problemes I could set down, about the manner of seeing, about the
Pyramid, which perspectives imagine necessary for every operation of seeing:
what those axes be, those corners greater or lesser, the manner of producing
those visible forms, their concourse, their substance and wonderful
proprieties, all these afford abundant matter of discourse, and occasions of
difficulties. But let us pass a little to our hearing.

111 What is the faculty of hearing, where it resideth, Concerning Hearing.
and what is the object. 112 How are sounds brought so far off to our ears.
113 What is the Echo. 114 By what manner is it made. 115 Why may we see the
flame and smoke of artillery aloof off in a moment, but not perceive the
sound till a good while after. 116 Why those that stand below in the
Churchyard, hear them better which speak above, than those which stand in the
Steeple below them. 117 Why do we hear better by night then by day: 118 Why
does the fyling of Iron grind some men's teeth. 119 For what reason corporal
Music and Consortes of Instruments so ravish and abstract a spirit, a soul,
transporting it almost into a Paradise of joy. 120 Why does iarring voices so
much discontent the ear.
These Questions I might propound, but GOD knows, who was, is, or ever shall
be able to answer them exactly; I know superficial Scholars and ungrounded
Philosophers, who, ad pauca respicientes de facili iudicant, will think these
easy to be resolved, because they can say what they know; but that will not
suffice, because the Sphere of knowledge does infinitely exceed the limits of
their capacities. As much as I have delivered in this matter, might be said of
touching, tasting, and smelling; of laughing, weeping, sighing, coughing,
respiring; of famine, digestion, nutrition, augmentation, generation; of the
causes of many diseases, of infections, of fits of agues, their causes,
courses, continuances; whence-from proceeds the indeficient regular, and
irregular beating of the pulse, the substance, situation, correspondence, and
use of all parts of a man's body, the conversion, dispersion, perfection and
alteration of blood.

No man, I think, can be learned, who may not plainly perceyve what an
infinite matter I have propounded here of knowledge, and yet how little, even
the wisest know. This subject would have bin more apparent, if I had interlaced
these questions, with diversities of opinions, and confirmed each one with the
best grounds and arguments; but this curious sort of discourse, I leave to
Schools. Only I will infer our extreme Ignorance, that few or none of these
difficulties, which concern us so near as our souls and bodies, are
thoroughly as yet, in my judgment, declared, even of the profoundest wits; for
I know not how their best resolutions leave still our Understandings dry,
thirsting for a clearer and fresher Fountain.

VII. Ignorance and Errors in knowing base Creatures.
BYt no doubt, God is of infinite Majesty, our souls immateriall spirits, our
bodies thereunto proportionated, and therefore there may be some excuse
pretended of this Ignorance; the objects are too noble, our capacities too
feeble, the means to attain unto such knowledge, too difficult: our Soul
dwells in the tabernacle of flesh and blood, it is drowned in humors and
fatnes, it is blinded with vapors and mists, it sees through carnal windows,
and cloudy spectacles. Well, I admit this ignorant answer, but at least, if we
cannot understand those things which be above us, our selves, and those which
be equal with us, we shall comprehend and fully conceyve all those Creatures
beneath, which serve and obey us. But alas! our Ignorance is not here finished,
for I know not whether I may better say, men are ignorant of all things in
general, or know nothing in particular; for in truth, there is no Creature in
the world, that we perfectly comprise and understand: I now leave the Heavens,
the Stars, the Planets, the Birds of the air, the Fishes of the Sea, the
Beasts of the Land, and will take one of the least creatures which creeps upon
the earth, and thereby convince our Ignorance, Basil epi. 168. quae est ad
Eunomium.
as Saint Basil convinced the boasting presumption of Eunomius the heretic,
who vaunted that he knew GOD and his Divinity, and that shall be, a very Emmet,
so little in body, so base in substance, of so small account, yet I say, that
no man, how learned soever, can satisfy those demands which may be propounded
about this contemptible beast.

1 Whether it breaths or no.

2 If those little corpse be vpheld with bones.

3 If those small members be lincked together with sinews, or chayned with
strings.

4 If those sinews be fortified with muscles.

5 Whether down the back Nature extends a chain, pliable to turning or
bending.

6 Whether through the chain passes a white marow.

7 Whether the sinowy membranes impell the rest of the body.

8 Whether it has a Lyver, or no.

9 Whether in the Lyver a receptacle of Choler.

10 Whether a heart.

11 Whether kidneis.

12 Whether arteries.

13 Whether veins.

14 Whether skins.

15 Whether a traverse or midriffe.

16 Whether is it bare or hayrie.

17 Whether single or cloven footed.

18 How long lives it.

19 After what manner is it begotten.

20 How long dwells it in the womb.

21 Why do not al creep, but some fly, and some creep.

All these questions are moved by S. Basil, and he concludes thus, Si
minutissimae formicae naturam nondum cognitione apprehendisti, quomodo
incomprehensibilis dei vim te imaginari gloriaris? If thou can not comprise
by knowledge the nature of the least Emmet, how gloriest thou to imagine the
power of the incomprehensible God? These questions only concern the body of
an Emet, but many more might be demanded, and ten times more, about the
sensitive soul, yet these suffice to declare the weakness of our
Understanding. Yea, I will add an other consideration, of no smaller
importance then the rest, that although as we see by daily experience, many
men study night and day, poring forth their brains and eyes upon their books,
yet I am of opinion, that if we could see the opinions, even of the best
learned man in the world, with as plain perspicuitie, as we discern black
from white, we should find in his understanding more errors then truethes,
more falsities then verities, more ignorances then sciences, more that ought to
be forgotten, then is well learned; finally more chafe then corn, (I always
except matters of faith and religion.) The reasons which induce me to this
opinion, are these. First, I see such varieties of opinions even among the
profoundest wits, that ever the world yielded, (whose writings are extant)
about the self samething, one contradicting and condemning another, both
bringing strong reasons to confirm their opinions; one or both must needs
err, the Truth being one and indivisible. Secondly, I perceyve the same
profound Scholars, at one time defending with many reasons one opinion, and
after, with as great boldness impugning the same, retracting the former. And
why, I pray you, may they not err the second time, as well as the first? for I
warrant you, they thought they had as great evidence and assurance before, as
they presently possess. And why may they not as well reclayme again, as they
did before? You will say, secundae cogitationes be prudentiores, and wise men
recall their former errors. And I pray you, are not tertiae and quartae
prudentissimae? After a sleep upon the pillow, many correct their daily
thoughts: does not one day teach another? Wherefore I see no reason; why wise
men may not, in their retractation as well err, as in their former assent.
Thirdly, the Scriptures seem to insinuate little less, Cunctae res
difficiles, non potest homo Eccles. 1.
eas explicare sermon. All things are difficult, neither can man declare them
with speech: and after speaking of God he says, mundu^ tradidit etc. he
delivered the world Idem. cap. 3.
to their disputation, that man should not find out the work which God had
wrought from the beginning to the end.

VIII. Curiosity in knowing things not necessary.
AN other general defect and imperfection proceeding from Nature corrupted,
and tending to corruption, follows all the Sons of Adam, and that is a
certain natural curiosity, a diligent inquisition of other men's actions, and
an extreme negligence in our own: moale-hilles in other men seem mountains,
and craggie rocks in our selves smooth rushes: other men's faults be before our
eyes, but our own behind our backs. It is a world to see with what rigor and
partiality men censure others actions, and with what smooth countenance they
conceal their own defects. Let us not look any further but to David, who
never was angry with himself for killing Vrias, and abusing his wife; but
straitwayes, after that Nathan had propounded 2. Reg. 12.
the case in far inferior degree, of the taking of a sheep, he was
presently moved with indignation, and condemned the offender to death: the
reason why we judge more quickly other men's faults than our own, partly
proceeds from self-love, which blinds us in our own actions, partly,
because we see other men's defects directly, and our own by a certain
reflection; for, as no man knows exactly his own face, because he never see
it, but by reflection from a glass, and other men's countenances he conceives
most perfitly, because he vieweth them directly, and in themselves; even so, by
a certain circle we wind about our selves, whereas by a right line we pass
into the corners of other men's souls, at least, by rash judgments and
sinister suspicions. Galen to this purpose relates Aesop, who Galen. de
coganim. morb. ca. 2.
said we had every one of us a wallet hanged upon our shoulders, the one half
upon our breasts, the other half upon our backs: the former was full of other
men's faults, which we continually beheld: the part behind was laden with our
offenses, which we never regarded. And he says, that Plato rendered a reason of
this: for every man is blind toward that thing he loves, and therefore one
extremely loving himself, is most blind in censuring himself. Therefore I am
of opinion in this point with Socrates, that as sober men ought Plutarch. in
Moraribus.
especially to take heed of those dishes and cates which allure and provoke
them to eating, although they be not hungry, and those drinckes which entice
them to drink, howbeit they be not thirsty: so those shows, speeches, and
companies principally ought to be avoided, which urge them to desire things
impertinent, and to judge rashly without discretion; because, to examine, and
to be inquisitive of our own faults can be never unprofitable, but to spy
into other men's actions, rarely or never can be profitable, except it be
superiors or persons in authority, Scrutemur, says Jeremy) vias nostras,
Thren. 3. 40.
but he says not, aliena^: Yea, Saint Paul forbids, Tu quis es qui iudicas
alienum s^rvum. Romans 14. 4.


This engrafted curiosity extends not only his briarie branches, wrapping
them about other men's affairs, lives, and conversations, but also to those
secrets, oracles, and mysteries, which far exceed men's capacities, or are so
unprofitable, that the commodity men reap by them, will not countervaile the
labor and pain spent in procuring, effecting, or obtaining of them. Nihil
(says Chrysostom. hom. 9. in 1. ad Thessa.
Saint Chrysostom.) ita curiosum est and avidum ad rerum obscurarum and
reconditaru^ cognitionem vt humana natura, Nothing is so curious and thirsty
after knowledge of dark and obscure matters, as the nature of man. Hencefrom
came those voices, Altiora te ne quaesieris, and fortiora Eccle. 3. 22.
te ne scrutatus fueris: sed quae praecepit tibi Deus illa cogita semper: and
in pluribus operibus eius ne fueris curiosus, non est enim tibi necessariu^ ea
quae abscondita sunt videre oculis tuis. In supervacuis rebus noli scrutari
multipliciter and in pluribus operibus eius non eris curiosus. Things deeper
than thee, inquire not after, and stronger than thee, search not; but think
always upon those things which God has commanded thee; and in many of his
works be not curious, for it is not necessary for thee to see with thy eyes
those things which be hid: in superfluous matters wade not too much, and in
many of his works be not curious.

And by a similitude Solomon declares well this matter, Prove. 25. 27.
Sicut qui mel multum comedit non est ei bonum, sic qui scrutator est
maiestatis, opprimetur a gloria: As it is not good for him that eats much
honey, so the searcher of majesty shall be oppressed with glory. Saint Paul
perceiving this curiosity in his time, willed Timothy 1. Tim. 1. 4.
to persuade men that they should not intend their minds to fables and
endless genealogies. We have in these our miserable days, as curious a
generation as ever was clasped under the cope of Heaven: for, what vain
studies, exercise (for most part) our iudiciarie Astronomers, by calculating
nativities, foretelling events, prescribing the limits of men's lives,
foreshewing their perils and dangers; but mere cosinage, and vain curiosity?
How many labor night and day, spend their times and livings, in Alchymie, in
searching forth that matchless stone which they never see, receiving no other
lucre than a continual bait to feed curiosity? Who would not have registered
him among curious fools, which labored so many years to make a shirt of male
with rings of wood, fit for no man's profit or good? Who will not admire our nice
Dames of London, who must have Cherries at twenty shillings a pound, and
Pescods at five shillings a pecke, husks without pease, young Rabbets of a
spanne, and Chickins of an inch: from whence proceeds this gulling ambition?
this spoiling of the croppe? this devouring and gormandizing of the
commonweal, but from a gluttonous curiosity? I leave off curious gardens,
sundry fashions of apparel, glorious buildings, which all be of-springs of
curious pride. And to conclude, I will say, that not only lust, but mere
curiosity has caused many men and women to leese their honesty.

IX. Of vain discoursing.
WIth an other imperfection men's souls are branded, and no man I will free
from it; howbeit I think it concerns especially the wisest. This defect is a
certain vain and chimerizing discoursing, by which men build Castles in the
air, and frame unto themselves mountains of gold. To this I reduce the vain
conceits and opinions they feign of themselves, bordering near unto Idolatry,
because few men there be which spend not much time, in admiring themselves,
ever esteeming more than they deserve: and I know not how, ascribing such
excellency, that they seem endued with some spark of Divinity; for who is
he that will confess any man so complete as himself in every thing? which
singularity argues affectation of a petty deity.

Besides, men consume very frivolously much time, study, and meditation, and
for the most part, needelesse in their own designements, casting with
themselves ways of preferments, profit, pleasure, credit, and reputation in
offices, which (God knows) they are far off, yet they feed themselves with
fancies. I omit what plodding use all appassionate persons, to bring to effect
their inordinate affections, as revengers of injuries, ambitious, lascivious,
envious men; for questionles they spend their best hours, and purest spirits,
for the most part, in mere fantastical discoursing.

Moreover, it is a wonder, to see what pains many men bestow, in confirming
their preconceived errors. I know some Philosophers and Divines most obslinate
in their opinions, and yet they study most earnestly to establish them, which
in very deed, I see evidently to be false and erroneous; yet such a defect we
carry with us, that errors once drunk up, are quickly converted into nature,
and consequently sealed up with vicious habites.

X. Of Distractions.
AS the earth unmanured brings forth brambles and briars, with many
stinking weeds; and manured, also springs forth here and there darnell and
cockle: even so our understanding, if it be ill guided, yields, not only
vain discourses, if it be ill guided, yields, not only vain discourses, but
also in the midst of most serious meditations, it blasteth forth many
impertinent distractions: what exercise can be more holy than prayer? and where
occur more impertinent thoughts, than in the heat of such an holy exercise?
the which imperfection Saint Jerome feeling and Hieron. in dial go adversus Lu.
^serianos.
lamenting, said, Nunc creberrime, etc. Now most often in my prayer I walk in
galleries, now I reckon my gains, or withdrawn by some unclean thought, I do
those things, which are shameful to be spoken. Abraham could not offer
sacrifice unto God, but with one hand; he was constrained to ward his offering
from the molestfull crows, which were about him, ready to carry it away.

Alas! how often do the infernal kites seize upon our souls, and hinder the
holy sacrifices of our prayers, by impertinent thoughts? In the depth of
studies, how often do we prove, that idle cogitations distract our minds, and
enforce them to wander in foreign countries, in such sort, as although the
body be consistent in one place, yet the soul runs like a vag^ant person,
or rather, slieth from country to country, and almost in a moment sayleth over
the immensive Ocean Sea? whereupon ensues, that the use of a man's soul lies
not in his own hands, because his actions be subject unto so many
interruptions; which proceed, either from the malignitie of the Devil; the
vehemence of some passion; a strong imagination and deep impression; or an
inconstant mind desirous of variety and alteration.

The Defects and Imperfections of our Wills.
NOt only the land, by the universal course of God, was plagued with
sterilitie, and unprofitable ofsprings, but also the Sea bordering upon the
Land, with horrible tempests, mists, rocks, shelves, and other miserable
dangers, whereupon poor Mariners miscarrie: even so, not only our
understanding, by that bitter Apple which edged all men's teeth, was distasted
by ignorance, and infected with errors, but also, our wills were troubled with
tempests of wicked inclinations, and shelves of vicious perversitie, whereupon
souls perish, and fall into eternal calamity.

Difficulty to do well.
ONe huge rock I find in this vast Ocean of our boundless Will, common to
all men, (and whereunto all others may be reduced) yet not in like degree; I
mean an exceeding difficulty to do well: our understandings (I confess) must
labor to find out the truth, but no labor to be compared with the labor to do
good; few beasts you have which do themselves more ill than good, and as few
men which do themselves not more ill than good. Were it not a miracle, to see a
mighty huge stone ascend by it self above all the clouds, or the Sun
descend to the earth? Yes doubtless: but why were this a miracle? Because a
stone by nature is inclined to descend, and the Sun to roll about the world;
therefore it were a wonder to see them move against their own inclinations. As
great and as strange a marvel it might seem, to see our wills so prone to
vice, to descend to the vain pleasures and delights of the flesh, because
these motions are most opposite to their natural and principal inclination:
for no wise man can be ignorant how the chiefest force of our will bends to
follow the rule of reason, prosecute virtue and honesty, detest vice and
iniquity: therefore to follow virtue is connaturall, to affect vice a vicious
miracle. Notwithstanding we daily try what difficulty we find in the narrow
way to goodness, and what extreme facility in the broad way of wickedness: for
one man that is virtuous, how many thousands are vicious? Whereupon comes
this notable excess? Of the extreme difficulty me^ find in doing well, which
deterreth the most part of them from it: the roots of virtue, says one, are
bitter, and therefore delicate lips will not taste them: well-willers of virtue
must resist flesh and blood, which worldlings so beastly pamper, and cruelly
cherrish. Yet I know some would desire to understand from whence proceeds
this wonderful difficulty ^ we all prove to do well, the reason which may
moove a man to doubt, questionless, deserves good consideration; for if we
that be Christians well expend what means we have to do good, and what to do
ill, we shall find that these be fewer in number, and weaker in force and
efficacy, then the other, the which I thought good briefly to set down,
partly to declare our wilfulnes and perversitie, who having so many means,
will not use them: partly to remember the Reader, that hereafter he may benefit
himself of them, and be confounded for his misdemeanour in them.

We are moved to do well; First by the law of nature imprinted in our hearts
like a lantern, or a torch, to direct us in the darkness of the continual
night of this miserable life.

2 Our will principally bends to follow this law, as our hands and feet the
direction of our eyes.

3 The remorce of conscience, which in the very act of sinning, keeps the
watch of our souls, advises us by barking, that enemies are present: and
after that we have sinned, how the wall is broken, and consequently opened to
the invasion of infernal thieves.

4 The infamy and discredit which waits upon vice, for such aversion all men
by nature carry in their minds from sin, that no man can esteem in his
heart, or love truly any vicious man.

5 We see in every good commonweal virtuous men preferred, esteemed, and
accounted of, and therefore honos alit arts, why then should not credit and
reputation nourish and augment virtue?

6 By natural discourse a man may well perceive how the oil of his carnal
Lamp daily consumes, the natural heat vanishes, death approaches, and
therefore why should not the vicinitie and certainty of death cause him to
lead a virtuous life?

7 All states and kingdoms, ordered by laws, and governed by reason, appoint
punishments for vices, according to their qualities; for what mean prisons,
stocks, fetters, gives, racks, gallows, hatchets, but to warn us that their
creation was for sins extirpation?

8 Nothing can have more force to allure a man to do well, than the peace and
tranquillity of the mind, a quiet and serene conscience, is judge convivium,
this we gain by virtue, this we leese by vice.

9 The Infidels, brought up in the mistie fogges of infidelity, conceived a
terror of their gods judgment, thinking them ready to punish their sins, and
condemn their offenses; which fear even nature teaches us when we offend,
that God being most just, will not permit unpunished injustice.

10 And did not the same Infidells expect Elizian fields as Paradises of
pleasure, wherein was laid, by the author of nature, a reward for those who had
not abused nature? but grace being above nature, affords us more motives to
virtue, more helps to fly vice.

11 What adamant heart can be so hardened with vice, that the blood of Christ
shall not break? why was he drawn up the Cross, but to draw us to virtue
from vice? Why cried he, long a salute mea verba delictorum, but because he
crucified indeed our sins in his own body, which in vain before without
virtue of this passion had been washed with blood of goats and calves?

12 The Sacraments of his Church, those fountains of grace, those conduits of
his passion, those heavenly medicines, those linckes and chains wherewith the
members of Christ's church are united in religion; for what other effect were
they instituted, than for the watering of our souls to the increase of virtue,
and the whole supplanting of vice?

13 The internal gifts of God, the armor of Faith, Hope, and Charity, with
graces and favors, wherewith the holy ghost endueth our souls, fortify us
against vice, and habilitate exceedingly to virtue.

14 The manifold inspirations of God, the illustrations of his holy Angels,
which stand in battle array to defend us, tend to no other end, than to
persuade us to virtue, and dissuade us from vice.

15 Why has God provided so many teachers and preachers, but to be so many
watchmen over the house of Israel, to cry like Trumpets, and blaze the sins
of the house of Jacob, lest by wallowing in wickedness they reclaim no more
to goodness.

16 The holy scriptures were written with the finger of God, as Registers of
his eternal will, letters of love to invite us to virtue, and threatenings of
ire, to dehort us from vice, therein, by more sure authority he delivers
unto us whatsoever he had written more obscurely in the book of Nature,
persuading, directing, counselling to goodness, piety, and religion:
dissuading, diverting, threatening, and terrifying from vice, impiety, and
ungodliness: wherefore one of the chiefest scopes, for which the sacred Volume
was sent from Heaven, was to make us decline from evil, and do good, dye to
old Adam, and live with Christ, crucify sin, and follow virtue.

17 God, by his infinite wisdom and charity, gave us, not only teachers in
words, but also actors in deeds; not only them who filled our ears with godly
persuasions, but also them which represented virtue most lively to our eyes,
with good examples and holy actions: so were the lives of Saints in all ages
as so many Orig. libr. 1. in Job and Grego. ibid.
Stars, which gave us light how to walk in the darkness of this life; and
so many spurs to prick us forward, that we should not linger in so divine a
voyage. Their fervent charity reprehendeth our tepiditie, their diligence in
Gods service, our negligence, their watching and praying, our sluggishnes and
indevotion.

18 If there were a Kings son of most beautiful countenance and divine
aspect resembling his father as much as a son could do: who would not judge
this Prince both inhumane and mad, if he would cut, mangle, and disgrace his
own face with grisly wounds, and ugly forms? What an injury were this
against his father, what an offense against all his parents? Even such cruelty
use sinners to themselves and God: because by sinning they deface and mangle
that lively Image of the holy Trinity, drawn by God himself in the substance
of their souls, and so are injurious, not only to themselves, but also to
their God, their Father, their King, the holy and individed Trinity.

19 Who spoyleth Gods Temple, is accounted irreligious, who prophaneth his
Church, is thought sacriligious: and who but he which has lost all sparks of
piety dare adventure to attempt so heinous a crime? Yet Vicious adventure and
perform it, they profane their bodies and souls, they fell them to lust and
wickedness, they expel the holy ghost from them, they put him forth of his
just possession which he holds over them as a Father by virtue, and after by
wicked deserts enforce him as a judge, like prisoners, to iayle them by justice.

20 Those which live in Christ's true Catholic Church by communion of Saints,
enjoy an other mean to do well, and that is, the common prayers and
supplications of the faithful, which beat continually at the gates of Gods
mercy, and doubtless return not void again; for many petitions God hardly
can deny.

21 A dioyne hereunto the supernatural providence of God, which feeds the
foul of the air, and cloatheth the lillies of the field, the which being so
careful of unreasonable creatures, what shall we think he does to the
faithful? questionless, he neither will sleep nor slumber that watches the
house of Israel, he will keep his servants as the apple of his eye, he will
give them meat in due season, he will finally sustain their weakness, erect
them if they fall, direct them if they err, succor them if they want, refresh
them in the heates of concupiscences, mittigate the tempests of their
temptations, moderate the waves of wicked occasions.

22 The horrible pains of Hell thundered in holy Writ, the weeping and gnashing
of teeth, the woorme which will gnaw perpetually upon the very heart of the
soul, with remorce of conscience: those inextinguible flames of infernal
fornaces, that cruel hatred of griesly Devils and ugly hell hounds: those
remediless pains and torments without hope of recoverie, remission, or
mittigation; and above all, that privation and loss of the sight of the face
of God, prepared for all those that would serve him in sanctity and holiness
of life: all these evils, certainly to be incurred, I think, might move
sufficiently any wise man to look about him, what he does, whether he goes,
what reckoning he must make, for these be not May-games, or Esops fables, but
sacred truths registered in Scriptures, daily put in execution, hourly felt,
and of every wicked man to be prooved.

23 If God had only terrified us from sin with inexplicable pains, every
discreet man might have had sufficient cause to abhor it: but besides,
having invited us to virtue, by promising ineffable joys, who can now excuse
us? what can we pretend? With reward he pricks us forward, with torments he
draws us backward, he bridles our wantonness with one, and spurs on our
slothfulness with the other.

24 Virtue of it self, even naked, if neither reward had been promised, nor
punishment threatened, might sufficiently have moved us to love her, and follow
her, because she carries such a show of honesty, such internal beauty, such
a grace and excellency, that her possession may be thought a sufficient
remuneration.

25 The horrible punishments mentioned in Scriptures inflicted for sin, even
in this life (if we had grace) might enforce virtue upon us; for what cast Adam
out of Paradise? Sin: what wounded him in nature, and spoiled him of grace?
Sin: what drowned the world? Sin: what rained fire and brimstone from
heaven upon those infamous cities of Sodom and Gomorrha? Sin: many examples
more I could bring out of the old Testament, as deaths of private men and
Princes, submersions of armies, dispersions of Countries, mortality of
thousands, famine, wars, and plagues, captivities, and imprisonments, for no
other cause inflicted than wickedness and sin: but let us only fix our eyes
upon the Son of God nailed upon the Cross, and we shall see how sin
mangled his body and afflicted his soul; those nails, tears, streams of
blood, exclamations, gall, and pains are monuments of sin, and memories of
our perverse and wicked life.

26 Above all other evils incident to an evil life, of great force to
restrain our untoward wills from vice, is the extreme injury we offer to
God by sin, transgressing his law, perverting his order, disposition, and
providence, iniuring his infinite goodness, which ought of all creatures to be
beloved, despising his Majesty, to which, as to their last end, all men ought
to direct their actions. And finally, showing our selves ungrateful to his
love, the which ought to be affected with all submission, obedience, and
gratitude.

27 What can more deter men from wickedness then their own private loss,
or move them more to virtue then their own present gain? By vice our souls
are spoiled of their riches, their most precious robes, and heavenly attire; by
virtue they are apparelled: by vice they are wounded even to the center; by
virtue they are healed: by vice they are impoverished; by virtue enriched: by
vice they are defiled; by virtue cleansed: by vice they become dens of
devils; by virtue seats of Angels.

28 But some will object, the soul is spiritual, and her losses cannot so
well be perceived, but if we had some palpable and sensible motives to draw us
from vice to virtue, then the case would be altered. But sensible reasons want
not, and no day or hour passes wherein appears not some silent sermon or
real persuasion, to avoid sin, and follow goodness. Do we not see daily men
dye? is not death of the body caused by the death of the soul? is it not an
effect of Adams original disobedience? Whence-from proceed so many diseases,
plagues, and pestilences, that Physicians brains are troubled to know their
number, for the multitude, or reduce them to method, they are so disordered.
But say, what brought first hunger and thirst, sweat and labor, toyling and
moyling into this world, but our forefathers gluttony? What made so many poor
men, such a number of beggars, but Adams original theft? what causes our
days to be so short, that many drop away in the very prime of their years?
few come to the time their complexion requires; the strongest scarce arriveth
to a hundred years, but our progenitors inordinate appetite of Divinity, and
consequently of eternity? finally, the terror of death ever imminent, the
daily crosses in common conversation, the distonsorted courses of the heavens,
with their influences, tempests and storms, contrary to the generation and
increase of fruits of the earth, the disobedience of beasts, the cruelty of
men, the craft and cosinage we daily prove, all descend from sin, and well
admonish us, that if one sin deserved so many, so long, so great punishments,
what will a multitude?

29 Wicked men do not only by offenses injury the majesty of God, but also
they abuse his gifts and benefits, not only, like Scorpions they kill their
mother before they be hatched, but also, like ungrateful debtours, oppugn
their creditours with their own goods: for the ungodly use that will God gave
them to love him, to hate him; that wit he bestowed upon them to meditate upon
his law and commandments, they pervert, by thinking how to transgress them:
that heart he imparted to affect their neighbors in pure love and charity,
that they defile with malice and dishonestie; that tongue he lent them to utter
his praises, that they blot with oaths and blasphemies; those hands he framed
as flowing conduits to feed the poor, those are wholly employed to avarice and
rapine; and to be brief, that universal body and soul which ought to have
bin kept in holiness and sanctification, they abuse to offend God with sin and
prevarication.

30 To conclude, all creatures which God created for the use of man, and as
servants, attended upon him as their master; all they (I say) exclaim against
a vicious life, they are so many trumpets, which cease not to sound the abuses
we offer them, by offending their Maker: the Sun gives the light to work
works of light, and not to live in the shadow of darkness: the Moon with her
fecunditie inviteth thee to bring forth fruits of justice, and not iniquity:
the harmony of the heavens, the multitude, variety, brightness of so many
Stars and Planets, exhort thee to subordinate thy soul to God, to adorn thy
mind with virtue, to give good example, and shine unto men by a godly
conversation: Isay 24. 23.
for otherwise, in sign of revenge, before the day of Mat. 24. 29.
judgment, they will withdraw their beams, fall from heaven upon thee, show
themselves as disdainefull to behold Mark. 13. 24.
sinners, as sinners were careless to enjoy the benefit of their influences
and operations, to the glory Wisd 5 18. Armabit creaturam ad vltionem immicorum.
of God and the profit of their souls.

By this it appears, what abundance of means God has imparted to us, to the
intent all difficulties in the way of Virtue, might with facility be
over-commed: some be internal, some external, some of grace, some of nature,
some instructing the understanding, some inclining the affection, some
continual, some by turns: and to be brief, no man can say that God has
been a niggard with him, but that he has been unanswerable to God.

The Impediments to Virtue.
MAn in this world stands in the midst betwixt God and the devil, both
pretend to win him to their Kingdoms; God to eternal pleasure, Satan to
eternal pain; God by his power could quickly deliver him, and break all the
bonds and chains wherewith the devil did or does bind him: but his wisdom
thought good, not to admit any man of wisdom and discretion to his friendship
without his own^ consent; for as Saint Augustine says, Qui creavit te sine te,
non iustificabit te sine te: He that created thee without thee (that is, thy
consent or cooperation) will not justify thee without thee (that is, thy
consent and cooperation.) Wherefore we see Christ in Scriptures so often asked
them whom he cured in body, and healed in soul, Vis John 5. 6. Mat. 9. 2. and
22. Luke 8. 50.
sanus esse? confide, creed, and such like speeches, which signify, that he
would not cure any, but them, who were willing: wherefore God would not oppose
all his power and might against our ghostly enemies, but only such sweet
means as might procure our assent, and yet able to overthrow all the troops
of our adversaries: he beats at the doors, and we with his grace must open
Apoc. 3. 20. Mat. 23. 37.
them, he calls us, as the hen her chickens, and we must run to shroud
under his wings; he inviteth us to Mat. 11. 29.
bear his yoke, and we must carry it with him: finally, so many persuasions,
exhortations, promises, and prayers pregnantly prove, that not we, nor God
alone must overcome the forces of our enemies, but we with God, and God with
us. Therefore, since we have declared what means God has granted us to fight
with the devil, let us see now what stratagems and deceits the devil uses to
daw us from God to a perpetual thraldom and slavery in Hell.

The first Impediment is, the Suggestions of the Devil.
FIrst, the Devil immediately by his suggestions allureth us to sin, he being a
spirit, by secret means can enter into the former part of our brain, and
there chop and change our imaginations: he can represent pleasures with a
goodly show; he can propound Virtue as a most bitter object; he can make us
slothful in the way of God; by stirring the humors, altering the blood, which
cause a tedious loathsomeness in us. His craft is admirable, his malice
extreme, his experience long, his forces mighty, his darts invisible, and
indeed, so strong, that if we were not assisted by Gods providence, and the
ministry of his holy Angels, it were not possible to resist him. Yet I doubt
not, but Gods good Angels help us more to Virtue, then the wicked spirits
incite us to vice; because questionless, the charity of them, exceeds the
malice of these: whereunto if we adioyne the providence of God, in restraining
and limitating the Devils power, as we see he restrained him in tempting of
Job, there can be no comparison.

The second Impediment is, ill Education.
Wear also haled to vice, by ill Education, for as I have said before, all
our youth-time we give our selves to pastime and play, living like so many
brute beasts, engendering, and daily increasing a number of vicious habites,
which, ere we come to the use of discretion, are made so connaturall, that vice
seems more conformable to Nature than Virtue. Yet the principal inclination
of our Souls to Reason, so many Virtues given us of God, so many gifts
bestowed upon us by the holy Ghost, much more forcibly moove us to goodness,
than vicious habites to wickedness: for Virtue inclines more vehemently than
Vice, and Grace overcommeth Nature.

The third Impediment is, wicked Conversation.
ILl Examples, and ungodly Conversation, imprinted in tender years, and weak
souls, take such root, that hardly after they can be supplanted: this we see
by experience, that as those speak, with whom children converse, purely, or
barbarously, Latin, Greek, or English, so children learn: even in like
manner, as those live, youth live, and frame their manners; according to their
conditions. Wherefore holy Writ has instructed us, that as a man uses wise or
foolish company, so he shall become himself foolish or wise. Qui cum
sapientibus Proverb. 13.
graditur sapiens erit, amicus stultorum similis efficietur. A man therefore
being brought up among wicked men, for most part accommodateth himself to
their humors; the reason is, not only, because, as men persuade by words, so
they do much more by deeds, every action being a silent persuasion (our eyes
perceiving their objects more certaynely then our ears) but also for that many
examples, I know not how, come at length, to breed such impressions in men,
that even vices seem Virtues. Let us not seek very far for trial, but even
at home; sometimes I have seen Tarleton play the Clown, and use no other
breeches, than such sl^^s or slivings, as now many Gentlemen wear* they are
almost capable of a bushel of wheat, and if they be of sacke-cloth, they
would serve to carry Mawlt to the Mill. This absurd, clownish and unseemly
attire, only by custowe now, is not misliked, but rather approoved. The like I
might say of long steepled hattes; of going naked in Baths and washing places,
yea in every place, as in the Indiaes; because the use of many seems to take
away all abuse.

Now therefore to our purpose, since most men are vicious, and few men
virtuous, by evil examples we are vehemently enticed to vice and wickedness.
Nevertheless we may oppose many good men with whow we live: the examples of
Christ, and his Apostles daily preached and teached, cannot but countervayle
the examples of men, either void of reason, or religion; for who is he, but
either an Atheist or a fool, which will immitate an others vices contrary to
law, conscience and reason, only because he sees many do so? Who will not
condemn him as an Idiote, who said, he would err with many for company? Who
would not judge him an Atheist, who vaynely vaunted he would go to Hell with so
many Gallants, rather then to Heaven with poor Fishers: these reasons are as
void of wit, as destitute of piety.

The fourth Impediment is, corrupted Books.
THe world leads us to sin, not only, by trayning us up vitiously, and
enticing us by (...) examples, but also, by suggesting unto us ^any occasions
of ill, by obscenous and naughty Books, as light and wanton Poets, as
Machivellian policies, the Art of coniuring, and such other dregs of men's
wits, and of-springs ungodly affections: to these if you adioyne many shows,
stage plays, and such impure exercises, which tend to the manifest overthrow
of tender Souls, you shall have a troop of soldiers, or rather robbers,
serving the world, to win a Kingdom.

Indeed I must confess, that these books and exercises corrupt extremely all
good manners, and with a silent persuasion insinuate their matter unto the
chief affection and higest part of the Soul, and in all good Commonweals,
are either wholly prohibited, or so circumcised, that no such hurt follows, as
some by stealth purchase, and by a wilful theft rob their own souls of
grace and goodness: yet against these Pamphlets, I oppose thousands of
spiritual Volumes, the holy Scriptures, sermons, exhortations, homilies,
meditations, prayer-bookes, which surpass the other in number, in efficacy,
in learning, and therefore those ought not to be compared with these.

The fifth Impediment is, of Passions.
THe flesh molesteth us in the service of God, with an army of unruly Passions,
for the most part, withdrawing from goodness, and haling to illness, they toss
and turmoyle our miserable souls, as tempests and waves the Ocean sea, the
which never stands quiet, but ey(...) in ebbing or flowing, either winds do
buzze about it, or raynes alter it, or earthquakes shake it, or (...) tyrannize
over it: even so our souls are puffed up with self-love; shaken with fear,
now they be flowing with concupiscences and desires, and presently ebbing with
desperation and sadness: joy alters the mind, and ire tyrannizeth and
consumes both body and mind.

Against the garboyle of these tumultuous Passions, I oppose the barking,
biting and gnawing of a wounded conscience, which wayteth continually upon
inordinate Passions: I oppose the law of Nature, the brevity of all pleasures;
for no Passion can long content the mind, but even a gust of pleasure gulleth
the soul, and so cloyeth it, that the very dainties seem loathsome: Nam ab
assuetis non fit Passio: If hereunto you add so many diseases, so many
disgraces, such infamy, which commonly accompany exorbitant Passions. You shall
find that they have no such efficacy to pervert us, as the other to convert us.

The sixth Impediment is, of Inconstancy.
MOst men feel in themselves a certain Inconstancy, whereby they become
wonderful various, and fickle in their own estates, exercises and manner of
living: for if we discourse universally about the nature of man, we shall find
him continually, as it were in a cyrcle, that is, winding about pleasures, or
flying pains, and after a small while returning to them again. For example,
who live in Cities, desire to enjoy a while the Country, and those that
possess the free air of the Country, wish the sights of Cities; and both,
after a while, loath that they most desired, and would return to their former
estates: and then, after awearied of them, they renew their desires, and
effectuate their purposes; the self same we prove in senses, we see green
fields, beautiful palaces, pleasant gardens. But not long time this object
will content us: shortly after, the eyes being satiated, then our ears must
be delighted with Music: and after they are loathed, then must we have
varieties of meats; the stomach being filled, then follows rest, then
sight, talk, or such like exercises as we used before: and after this manner
we roll up and down Gods creatures, ever thyrsting, and never content: even
so in the servyce of God; for our souls herein consort with our bodies, which
are feeble, and tender in youth, but grow till they come to a certain
perfection, the which once obtained, they return again to their former
imperfections, ever fading, consuming and resolving, till they come to their
final decreement, and as great weakness as they begun withal. In spirit
and mind many begin to do well, but after a while they loathe the very
Manna of Heaven; the best and most precious liquors of Paradise savor not to
them, they seem taynted, they begin in spirit, and finish in flesh, they
follow God, but after a while they sigh for onyons of Egypt. And I needs must
say, that this inconstancy has caused many souls miscarry, and those which
seemed to have entered the gates of Paradise, fell most miserably into the
dungeon of Hell.

This inconstancy reigns not only over the soul, A certain contrariety in
the soul hinders men from goodness.
at diverse times, as now the Sea ebbeth, now flows, now is tempestuous, now
calmed, but at the self same time, it will, and will not, loves and hates,
affects God and his enemies, the slesh and the world; not unlike to two
contrary winds, which at the self same time toss the clouds, one beneath, an
other above, one into the East, the other into the West, the which contention
Saint Paul felt well, when he said, Sentio aliam legem in membris meis
repugnantem legi mentis meae: and Aug. lib. 8. co^sess. cap. 10.
S. Augustine in resolving himself to serve God, said, Nec plane volebam, nec
plene nolebam, ideo mecum contendebam: but as he had pronounced before, Ego
eram qui volebam, ego qui nolebam: for indeed the lower part of the soul
draws the will one way, and reason haleth another, so that in the self same
will there is a double motion, the one to virtue, the other to vice, even as
the Philosophers say, the lower heavens are moved from West to East by their
proper motions, and from East to West by the force of the first moved or
highest heaven.

But against this Inconstancy, I can oppose many means to goodness, of
greater force and efficacy, the which can more constantly further us to
goodness, then inconstancy can incite us to illness: have we not registered in
holy Writ, and sounding always in our ears, the inexplicable joys of Heaven
promised to Virtue, and the terrible pains of Hell threatened to vice? Will not
the fear of Gods judgment, which hourly we attend, enforce us to watch and
pray, lest we be taken at unawares? May not the incertainty of our deaths,
moove us to a constancy in life? Will not so many warnings of death, judgment,
hell, heaven, so often inculcated, sufficiently stir us up to stand upon our
ward? Cannot so many stays of grace uphold and stay the inconstancy of
Nature? How many are withholden from wickedness, only through terror of
temporal punishment, and shall not so many terrors countervaile a fickle and
inconstant inclination? Where lies the anchor of Hope, and the vnmooveable
grounds of Faith and charity?

The seventh Impediment is, coffeehouse of our own Estate.
AN other Impediment I think most men feel at one time or other, which
hinders not a little the the progress of Virtue; and it is, that none can be
contented with their own estates: we perceive not only a war or battle in
our minds, but also a certain coffeehouse in our selves, whereupon broke
forth those saying, Nemo sort sua contentus, laudet diversa sequentes: we
may be well compared to certain sick men, who would ever be changing their
beds, yet they never find rest, for that the cause of their grief lies not
in the beds, but in their bodies: the reason why men live so discontented with
their own estates, proceeds from many crosses, which every state, condition,
exercise, or office carries with it; besides, the often exercising of one
thing engenders fatiety, and therefore always Nature affects variety.
Against this tediousnes and loathing life, many great helps I can object; for,
those which attend indeed to serve God, find a certain secret Manna, a
Paradise of consolations, which will easily mittigate the crosses and
discontentments ministered by a nature ill inclined: for as God permits no
evil to escape unpunished, so he lets pass no good unrewarded; and
although this reward shall be reaped in the harvest of eternal life, yet with
a quiet conscience, the tranquillity of mind, an internal peace and consolation
in heavenly affairs, he fully in this life recompenseth all disasters and
calamities which occur. Cucurri viani Psalm. 118. 32.
mandatorum tuorum (said one) dum dilatasti cor meum: and as he that guides by
his providence the stern of men's souls, permits them not to be moyled
with tentations above the forces and habilities wherewith they are endued, so
likewise, he will not see them so dejected with crosses, that he will not erect
them with consolations: so said he, which well had tried the passions of the
cross, that, Sicut abundant passiones Christi in nobis, ita and per Christu^
abundat consolatio nostra: for as the passions of Christ abounds in us, even
so by Christ abounds 2. Cor. 1. 5. Iudit. 8. 20. Psalm. 93. 19. 2. Cor. 7.
Heb. 12. 5.
our comfort; many more sweet sentences to this effect may be read in holy
scriptures, all able to incite a well willing heart, to take a good courage in
the way of virtue and good life. And then if a man cast his eyes up to heaven
and consider the eternity of pleasures, laid up for a moment of pain; if he
weigh that the Sun sets the same hour to him that passed the day in good
works, in fasting and praying, and to him which vitiously spent it in feasting
and playing, he shall perceive how vain fancies, and voluble crosses vanish
away as little clouds before the Northern winds. Much matter might here be
delivered concerning this point, but I cannot follow it, because my purpose is,
only cursorily to handle the heads of difficulties to goodness, and of favors
to avoid ill.

The eight Impediment is, That pleasures are present, which the flesh and world
yield: The joys of heaven absent and future.
THough men and beasts in many things differ, yet in one we may most plainly
distinguish them, for beasts regard only or principally what concerns the
present time, but men forecast for future events; they know the means and the
end, and therefore comparing these 2. together, they provide present means for
a future intent. But I know not how original sin has enchaunted our hearts,
that present pleasure, all men for most part prefer before all future joy:
for since we see not by faith present, those things we expect by hope, or abhor
by fear, in the mean time the devil, flesh, and world, delighting us with a
present bait, we neglect that we should expect, and accept that we find next:
not unlike to children, who prefer an apple before their inheritance. And
without all doubt, I take this to be a most vehement occasion of vice, and such
an one as has cast many poor souls to hell; for worldlings will be of the
surer side, they think it better to possess one bird in their hands, then
expect two in the fields, to be sure of a present commodity, then to be
uncertain of a future gain: for as I remember, one asking of a godly man,
(who lived in great austerity, poverty, mortification, flying from present
pleasures, with as great zeal as commonly others seek after them) what if
there were no heaven nor Paradise wherewith those pains should be recompensed?
The good man answered; but what if there be a hell, wherewith thy vices shall
be punished? An other I know, gave a more direct answer, for, he being
demanded the like question, said, that if he were never to receyve any reward
for those small labors and duties he did to the glory of God, that he
thought himself sufficiently recompensed in this life, with the quietness of
a good conscience, with the honesty of a virtuous life, that he could do
something for the love of Christ, who had suffered so much to save him: that by
his works the Majesty of God was glorified, John 15. 8.
to whom all homage was due, all service inferior. And truly so it is, that if
foolish and besotted worldlinges could well discern how all these present
pleasures vanish like smoke, because they are not durable, waver like wind,
because they are inconstant, cloy quickly like rank meat, because they be
imperfit, sting like scorpions, because they be poisoned, and to be brief,
they quench no more the thirst, then salt water, which ever leaves the
stomach dry. Contrariwise, those spiritual comforts God bestows upon good
souls here, are so divine, so pure, so excellent, so content, and inhaunce the
Soul, that they exceed all delights, that either Nature affoordeth, or Art
inventeth: and well they know this truth that have prooved it; such as
mortify sensuality, casting from them the dregs of Egypt, those, I say, shall
not only enjoy the land flowing with milk and honey in Paradise, but a
heavenly repast, the food of Angels even in the desert of this world, which,
Nemo novit, nisi qui accipit, and therefore they deserve to be condemned of
extreme folly, who prefer a present toy before eternal joy.

The ninth Impediment is, Negligence in serving God, or seeking means how to
come to our end.
WE see by daily experience, that all natural creatures contend extremely to
win their ends, and to procure the means they conceyve necessary for their
good, their preservation, propagation or end. With what force falls a stone
down to come to his center? With what vehemence issues forth the fire
included in a Cannon, to ascend to the Moon? With what continual and
restless course runs a river to the Ocean Sea? With what care, industry,
and diligence do Birds make their nests, Emets hoard up their provision, all
beasts provide their food: but now let us make a reflection upon our own
actions, and we shall find as extreme negligence in our selves, as we perceyve
diligence in them: What is our end? God: What the means? to fly vice and
follow Virtue: Let us now discourse over the world, and try what extreme
diligence men use in procuring riches, honors, pleasures, and what exorbitant
negligence in providing virtues and good works to come to God? for those, the
Merchants scowre the Seas, despise tempests, account not rocks, weigh not
sands, contemn all perils, which either sailing by sea, or traveling by land,
ordinarily do carry with them: for these the soldiers run upon pikes, fear
no famine, watch and ward, live always in danger, and never in perfect rest:
for these, the very base pesants and rusticks labor in Winter, and moyle in
Summer, singing in hoary frosts and snowes, jesting at parching suns and
scorching heates: pass on further, and walk about the streets of great
Cities, Exchanges, Palaces of Noble men, Courts of Princes, and mark how
Virtue suffers exile, and vice is friendly entertained, shall you
peradventure in all these places hear one talk of mortification, of means to
avoid ambition, to cross inordinate appetites, to suppress the lusts of the
flesh, to know what may help them to pray, or what commonly hinders those
that would pray^ Alas! this language is not understood, all tongues are silent,
they know not what it means, and therefore are loath to hear of it. A thing
so necessary, so daily and hourly to be practiced, is never thought upon: what
negligence can be greater^ are men so blinded they see not; or if they see,
what makes them so careless? But against this poison we have diverse remedies,
and cures of Virtue to heal these sores of vice: for consider but with thy
self; that notable Parable and palpable reason taught us by Christ, and
prooved by continual experience, when the rich man has massed up his treasures
with hook and crook, moyling and toyling, when he thinks to enjoy, lo, a
voice comes, Stulte, hac nocte animam repetunt a te, quae autem parasti cuius
erunt? And doubtless, if men were wise (me thinks) the continual fear of
death might enforce them to contemn such a base and drudging life.

Besides, if all creatures by the instinct of Nature, endevor so much to win
their full and complete perfection, why should we degenerate so far from our
own nature, as not to accomplish that we lack: mark but the seed cast into
the ground, how it labors to die, after to live; how it fixes his roots,
pierces the ground to enjoy the Sun and air, erecteth the stem, springs the
husks, issues the ear, yields with the wind, and never gives over till the
corn be brought to a full maturity: we see how new wines, beer, and all
liquors work, by boiling the rawer parts, expelling the dregs, reducing
themselves to a due temper, proportionated mixture and perfection: if these
insensible creatures, so industriously labor to come to their end, shall not we
endeavor to atchieve our end and felicity? If they, according to their small
ability employ their natural talentes, why should not we, endued with so many
graces, procure our own good and perfection? Why stands God at Apoc. 3. 20.
the doors of our heart beating, but to enter in? Why do Gods servants cry
out upon our negligence, but Iere. 25. 34.
to bring us to diligence? Why does God punish many in the prime of their
years, in the fat of their fortune, in the glory of their prosperitye, but
to advertise us by their examples of the inconstancy of this world, and that
we might learn to be wise by their losses, to be vigilant and careful by
their carelessness?

Some more Impediments I could deliver, as the many occasions offered daily to
do ill, the great readiness of matter and favorers thereof, the insatiable
desire possesses our hearts of inordinate pleasures, the admirable diligence
in procuring temporal treasures, the extreme delight all men conceyve in
their own actions, the great account and estimation they do make of them: how
soon they despise or abase the enterprises of others, how perverse and
obstinate they live in their own opinions. I could (I say) make long discourses
upon these particular objects, but that they may all be reduced to self-love,
inordinate Passions, the world and the devil, of which we have entreated
largely before: only I will here adioyne the reason and cause of all this
Treatise, why, we having so many means, so forcible, so divine, Mat. 7. 15.
and 20. 16. 1. Pet. 4. 18.
so continual, so supernatural, to serve God, to follow Virtue, to fly sin;
and scarce half so many impediments leading us to vice and ungodliness: yet
for one that does well, thousands do ill, and for one that goes to Heaven,
almost a million goes to hell: and that the difficulty may seem more apparent,
add another consideration: questionless, all universal effects proceed
from universal causes, as we see all men die; therefore we gather, that all
have a Nature corruptible, all men are subject to Passions, preventing and
dissenting from reason, therefore we infer, that Nature is corrupted: even
so, since most men do ill, and few good, and after this tenor in all
Countries and Nations, therefore we must find out some general cause.

Some will say that this proceeds from original sin, whereby our nature
remained corrupted, and therefore prone to evil, slow to good; this reason
indeed touches some remote cause, but yet it does not fully satisfy: first,
because we have set down all the internal effects, and impious of-springs of
original sin, and yet they can not amount or countervaile the number of
those helps we have to do good. Besides, it ought to be declared, how original
sin has so infected nature, that it is so feeble to virtue, and so strong to
vice; for all the wounds which internally moove us to sin, reside either in
the wit, will, or sensitive appetite, the which we have conferred with those
stays, both God and good nature has bestowed upon us to do well. Furthermore,
by the passion of Christ his merits and grace, original sin is forgiven us,
who by baptism have put Gala. 3. 27. Ephesians. 5. 6. Tit. 3. 5. Eze 33. 12. Joel.
2. 25. Ephesians. ^. 5. Eze. 36. 26. Psalm. 33. 8. Psalm. 90. 13.
on Christ, he has restored unto us his former favors, adopted us for
children, changed hearts of stone, into hearts of flesh, fortified our souls
against vice, enabled our faculties against sin, protected and guarded us
about with Angels for our defense against Satan, that our feet should not be
stayed in the way of virtue, by blocks and stones our ghostly enemies cast in
the narrow way that leads to heaven, to hinder our voyage, or frustrate our
designements.

Therefore to conclude this matter, I resolve my self that we have more means
to do good, then occasions to do ill; and them also of their nature to be more
forcible and potent: nevertheless for four reasons, more men are wicked then
virtuous: first, for lack of prudent meditations; secondly, for ill education;
thirdly, for palpable and present delectation; lastly, for defect of due
prefervation. I mean first, that men miscarrie so often in this peregrination,
for lack of good consideration, because most of those means God has
vouchsafed to bestow upon us, require a certain meditation and ponderation;
for they be like hot coals, the which you may take in your hands, and
presently cast away without burning, because all actions welnie require time or
space for their operations, but if you hold them a while you shall feel their
effects. So it falls forth in the mysteries of our faith, he that meditateth,
burns, he that perfunctorily runs over them, scarce feels their heat:
In meditatione mea (says David) exardescit ignis, in my Psalm. 38. 3.
prayer, fire is kindled, because meditation blows the coals by
consideration, whereunto follows the flame of love and affection: for
otherwise what profit can we take of the inconstancy of our lives, and
certainty of our deaths, of the severe and infallible judgment of God, the
inexplicable pains of hell, the ineffable joys of heaven, if we never
consider them? What avails us to have the scriptures, that God punished in
this life so many with extraordinary deaths, that by sins we are spoiled of
grace, wounded in nature, disenabled to goodness, and incited to ilnes, if we
never ruminate them in our minds, or ponder them in our considerations?
Questionless, it were to swallow meat without chewing, which rather
endammageth health, then restores the lost forces. Wherefore I like well those
wise and godly men which every day allot themselves a certain time, stinting
their hours for meditation, propounding before the eyes of their
consideration, now one mystery, now an other, now the passions of Christ, then
the pangs of death, now the strict judgments and punishments of God, then the
eternal delights laid up for us in his heavenly Paradise: these therefore like
fruitful Psalm. 1. ^.
trees planted by the river sides, render their fruits in due season, these
arm themselves in the morning to resist all encounters which may occur the
day time: these be those vigilant virgins which attend with their Matthew. 25.
lamps lighted, the coming of their heavenly spouse: these be those careful
householders, which prevent infernal Matthew. 24. 43. Luke 12. 39.
thieves, lest they should rob their treasures: these be those which live ever
in peace and tranquillity of Phil. 3. 20.
mind, who dwelling in earth, converse in heaven.

The second reason and principal, is ill education, of the which we have
spoken before, and yet I must say here with holy scripture, that as it is
impossible for the Ethiopean to change his skin, so it is impossible for youth,
Iere. 13. 23.
brought up licentiously, to change their ill manners; for use breeds
facility, facility confirms nature, nature strongly inclined, can hardly be
diverted from her common course, but follows her vicious determination. It is
a wonder to see how custom transporteth and changes nature both in body and
in soul, the which may well be proved by the young Maid the Queen of India
sent to Alexander the great, the which being nourished from her youth with
serpents poison, had so changed her natural constitution, that if she had
bitten any Aristot. ad Alexand. Vide Hieronimum Cagniolum de institutio
principis 7.
man, he presently died, as Aristotle affirms, that by experience he had
proved, even so as serpents poison had changed her body, so ill manners alter
the soul, and as her teeth poisoned that they bit, so wicked men those souls
with whom they talk, Corrumpunt 1. Cor. 15. 33.
bonos mores colloquia prava: and acuerunt linguas suas sicut serpents: nature
therefore in tract of time Psalm. 139. 4.
over-runne with so many weeds of wickedness, abhors extremely to supplant
them, loathing so long, molestfull, and continual labor, and therefore
contenteth her self, rather to eat the black beries of briers, then the
sweet cherries of virtue: for this cause those children have a double bond to
their parents and schoolemaisters, which distill even with milk into their
mouths the sweet liquor of piety, virtue, and good manners. Qu^ semel est
imbuta recens serva^it ^dorem testa diu. ^lacc^^.


Of liquor first which earthen pot receives,
The smell it does retain for many days.
Whereunto agrees that vulgar axiom of Philosophers.

Omnis habitus est difficile separabilis a subject. The third reason is,
present delectation; for that we hope is future; that pleasure worldlings
perceive, is present, sensible delectation feeds the corporal substance of
senses, and therefore we easily perceive it, but virtue affects the soul,
not after so palpable and gross manner, and therefore they despise it:
wherefore men's souls, by inveterated customs used to sensual and beastly
delights, either not believing, or mistrusting, or rather doubting of
spiritual joys, they neglect, and for the most part, care not for them,
contenting themselves with their present estate, not looking any further: and
so, as beasts they live, and as beasts they dye, according to that saying, Home
cum in honor esse^, non intellexit, Psalm. 48. 13. and 21.
comparatus est iumentis insipientibus, and similis factus est illis, and so
become, sicut equus and mulus, in quibus non est Psalm. 31. 19.
intellectus.

Finally, the lack of preservation hinders our spiritual profit, because I
conceive our souls without prayer, meditation, the Sacraments of Christ's
church, exercise of virtue, and works of piety, not unlike a dead body, which
for lack of a living soul daily falls away by putrefaction, leeseth color,
temperature and all sweetness, and becomes ghastly, loathsome and stinking;
even so, the soul without those balmes God has prepared as preservatives, it
will be infected with vices, and stinking with sins: therefore those which
neglect these benefits, are not unlike sick men, which know where medicines
lie, but will not seek for them, or receive them.

These four causes I take to be the principal enemies Math. 11. 3^.
of our spiritual life: howbeit I doubt not that Christ's yoke is sweet, and
his burden easy, if men would consider the means, and accept those helps God
has bestowed upon them. But all means and helps which ordinarily we prove
may be rejected by a wicked will, Prove. 1. 24. Isa. c. 5. and 62. 2. Matthew. 23.
37.
and a hard indurated heart may resist the sweet calling of God, Quia vocavi
and renuistis, extendi manum meam and non erat qui aspiceret.

By these Scriptures and many more we may easily Acts 7. 51. Mat. 11. 21.
infer, that neither lack of means, nor lack of grace hinders us from
doing well, but our own perverse and wicked will: let us but run over two
or three examples, and we shall even touch with our fingers the certainty of
this verity.

Consider but Adams fall, how many means he had to do well, and yet how basely
he fell, he first, by Gods especial grace, was endued with so many internal
gifts of virtues and knowledge, that easily he might have observed that
commandment: the inferior parts were subordinate by original justice to the
superior, so that passions could not assault him; he had all beasts, and the
whole garden of Paradise, with all the herbs and trees at his pleasure,
therefore the precept was not so rigorous; for what difficulty were it for a
man to abstain from one tree, having the use of thousands? He knew most
certainly, how by eating, into what a damnable estate he cast himself and all
his posterity: wherefore the event might have taught him to prevent the cause:
but above all, the perfect knowledge of the sin he committed against God, the
extreme ingratitude, disloyalty and treachery, might have bridled his mouth
from that poisoned Apple, which brought present death of the soul, and after a
time, a certain death of the body. But all these helps countervailed not his
negligence in consideration, and his ill will seduced with ambition.

Let us take an other familiar example, which daily occurreth, more common than
commendable: a woman married, which breaks her fidelity promised to her
husband, mark but what helps she has to restrain her from this sin: I omit
the Sacraments of Christ's Church, the threatenings of death, Gods judgment and
hell, the enormious offense she commits against God, the abuse of his
benefits, the breach of his law, the contempt of his grace, the remorce of
conscience, the wounding of her soul, and spoiling of the same; all these, and
many more common helps granted to all sinners, I will speak nothing of,
albeit I think them sufficient to withold any ingenious heart from
prevarication, only let us weigh those particular means she has to abstain
and withdraw herself from this offense, as the great injury she offers her
husband, the breach of love between them, the infamy whereunto she for all
her life shall be subject, the stayne of her kindred and friends, for her fault
redoundeth to their discredit, as her good to their reputation, the
shamefastness wherewith God has endued women, to retain them from these
shameful actions, the baseness and brevitie of that pleasure she pretends
vnvailable to that cost she bestows; yet for all this loss, she will hazard
it: she neither regards the good she leeseth, nor the harms she incurreth,
nor the little trifle she wins, transgresses the law of nature, the law of
God, the law of christianity, the law of friendship, only for lack of
prudent and mature consideration married to a wicked Wili, and perverse
affection. That which I have said of this lewd Woman, the same might be said
of all sinners, because the means to do well are so many, and the dommages so
great, that every sin consummate carries with it, that I could make a whole
book of them, and perhaps, in time, I will do it. In the mean season (gentle
Reader) whenever occurreth any occasion apt to induce thy Will to offend
God, run not too fast after it, ponder a little, crave help from above,
consider thy helps, expende thy harms, and presently thou shall see that all
tentations of this world will become like to the huge Statue that
Nabuchodonozor beheld, with the head of gold, the breast of silver, the belly
of brass, the legs of iron, Daniel c. 3.
the feet of iron and earth; for all pleasures are golden in the entrance,
but still decrease to terrestrial and earthly substaunces, toward the end
they become loathsome, and are accounted vilde, the little stone, without any
humane hands cut from the mountain, will deiect, and cast prostrate on the
ground this huge mass of metal, I mean the grace of Christ, all the
multitude of tentations, and suggestions of the Devil, and then thou may
reign over them by grace in this life, and glory in the end, Amen.

FINIS.
A Succinct Philosophical declaration of the nature of Clymactericall years,
occasioned by the death of Queen Elizabeth.

Written by T: W:

LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorpe, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Crane, by Walter Burre. 1604.

A Succinct Philosophical declaration of the nature of Clymactericall years,
occasioned by the death of Queen Elizabeth.
AFter the death of Queen ELIZABETH, who died in the 70. year of her age,
which was the Clymactericall period of her life, diverse pregnant wits, and
curious Philosophers were assembled by chance together, and among sundry other
learned Discourses, one demanded of me, what were these Clymactericall years,
their nature, and effects: For (quoth he) I have heard many Philosophors and
Physicians talk of them, but as yet I never thoroughly could pierce or
penitrate them. I answered him, that the Treatise thereof required longer
time, then that place and present occasions afforded, but that afterward at
more ley sure he should understand them, if he were desirous to learn: The
Gentleman importuned me so much, as at last he drew me to write this Discourse
which follows: and for that it seems not altogether impertinent to this
explanation of Passions, I think it not unfit to be inserted in the last Book
of the Passions of the Mind; because the same temper of body, and propension
to death, which is the base of Clymactericall years; the very same conferres
much, either to move Passions, or hinder the opperations of the soul, as in
the progress of this discourse shall plainly appear.

Clymax in Greek signifies a Staire or a Ladder, and metaphorically is
applied to the years of a man or woman's life; as if the whole course of our
days were a certain, Ladder, compounded of so many steps.

True it is, that as the constitutions of men's bodies are, for the most part,
of two sorts, the one is firm and strong, the other more weak and feeble: so
the Physicians by long experience have observed, that the fatal ends of them
who be of a lusty constitution, finish for most part in some score of years,
and so they number such persons periods by twenty, 40. 60. 80. 100. 120. And
to Other count them by tens.
this purpose said Moses, *whose eyes were neither darkened, nor any tooth
loosed. * Centum viginti Deuteronomy. 31. 2.
annorum sum hodie, non possum vltra egredi, and ingridi: I am now an hundred
and twenty years old, I can no more go out and come in, that is, no longer
live: and so it fell out, for that * same year Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
he died. And GOD himself said of man * Erunt Genes. 6. 4.
dies illius centum and viginti anni. The days of man shall be an hundred and
20. years.

The next Clymactericall year in them of solid and virile constitution is an
100, and so the Scriptures report. Numerus dierum vitae hominum vt Eccles. 18. 8
multum centum anni. The number of the days of the life of men at most is an
100 years. Another kind of men whose complexion is weaker, have a lesser
kind of measure, as they have shorter life; and yet these also be of two
sorts, some stronger, some weaker: the first Clymactericall years are nine,
eighteen, tweentie seven, thirty six, forty five, fifty four, sixty three,
seauenty two, eighty one; the seconds are, seven, fourteen, twenty one,
twenty eight, thirty five, forty two, forty nine, fifty six, sixty three,
seauenty. Of these two ages spoke David when he said. Dies annorum Psalm 89.
10.
nostrorum in ipsis septuaginta anni. Si autem in potentatibus octoginta anni
amplius little labor and dolor. The days of our years are seauentie years,
and if in Potentates they be eighty, the labor and grief is greater.

The most dangerous of all these passages or steps, are the forty nine,
compounded upon seven times seven: and sixty three standing upon nine times
seven, and next to these is seauenty, which contains ten times seven;
they number them also by nine, and so make eighty one, the most perilous as
comprehending nine times nine.

These observations then of Physicians presupposed as true, for men that are
wise, virtuous, and experimented in their faculties ought to be believed (for
wisdom and experience protect them from error, and honesty from lying and
deceit) it were good to examine and search out the cause of these notable
alterations and dangers of death in the Clymactericall years, for those
humors which alter the body, and dispose it to sickness, and death; the same
bend the soul to take inordinate affections and passions. I have heard some
Physicians resolve this doubt into the influence of heavens, to wit, that so
many courses of the Sun, Moon, and Planets from the time of a man's
Nativity, work such effects; so that some men, let them live never so
orderly, after so many circular motions of the Sun and Moon have warbled
over their heads, upon necessity they must fall into one sickness or
another, and so die.

Some others ground this variety and dangerous diversity, upon the singular
providence of God, who has created all things In numero, pondere and mensura:
and therefore has prescribed infallibly the periods of men's lives, according
to that Psalm: Notum fac mihi domine finem meum: and numerum dierum meorum quis
est: vt sciant quid desit mihi. Ecce mensurabiles posuisti dies meos. Psalm,
38. Make known unto me O Lord mine end, and the number of my days, that I may
know what I want. Lo thou have put my days mensurable; that is, prescribed
certain bounds and limmits of age not passable: and therefore both
Philosophers and Physicians conclude, that a man with many disorders,
surfeits, exercises, etc. may shorten the natural course of his life, but that
he cannot any way prolong it, and pass the prefixed instant of his death: the
similitude we have in a candle lighted, for let a man use all the diligence
possible, the light and fire feeding upon the candle, perforce will consume it
at last; and God or any Angel behoulding the quantity of the wike, tallow,
time of the year (for in cold weather a candle consumes more then in hot,
Per antiperistasin) and other circumstances may precisely foretell, that such a
candle cannot continue burning longer then such a minute of such an hour; in a
shorter time it may be consumed with wind, witches, snuffe-fallings, or such
like things which waste it away, but longer it cannot be prolonged: after the
same sort stands the courses and the listes of our lives prescribed by God
and prefixed by nature: and so God has appointed these Septuarie, and Nonarie
years as best seeming his wisdom and providence.

These manners of declaration I will not confute, for albeit I do think them
both in some things most true, yet they are too general and remote to answer
and satisfy fully our demand. The difficulty, no doubt, is exceeding hard,
and rather I believe it to be true for the authority of Physicians, then for
any credit I can give to their reasons; for indeed all that I have heard
discourse thereupon (and I have heard some very fine wits) and what I have
read, does not content nor satisfy my mind. Therefore I will set down my
Phylosophicall conceit (for in this speculation Physic depends upon
Phylosophie) and first suppose that customs, habites, changes, and great
alterations in men's bodies come seldom upon a sudden, but by little and
little grow and increase by tract of time; and as we say.

Gutta cauat lapidem, non vised sepe cadendo,
Sic homo fit doctus, non vi, sed sepe legendo.
The dribling drops by falling often,
Not might, make marbles thin:
So men by often perusing books,
Not force, do learning win.
Galen to declare the nature and force of custom Galen. de Consuet. c. 2.
and what effects it works in us, demands this question: how it comes to
pass, that some men's natures abhor exceedingly some sorts of meat, and are
not able to disguest them; as for example, says he, some cannot abide beef,
others shell fishes; and we have many who cannot so much as endure the sight
of cheese, others of aples: And yet these same persons by little and little are
brought to eat, disguest, yea and greatly to like them? He answers, that all
beasts and men have natural propensions, to such meats as are consorting with
the natural proprieties of their bodies, and abhor such things as are
contrary; and therefore the Lion feeds upon flesh, not upon hay; and the
Ox upon hay not upon flesh; yet it falls out that by tract of time, those
meats which we detested, after by use become familiar, for they alter the
body, and by the suck of their nourishment, change the affections and
qualities of the stomach, in such sort, as that meat, which before was
molestfull, and in very deed hurtful, becomes sauorie and healthful: and
this he proves, not only to be true in men and beasts, but also in feeds and
trees, whose fruit in some countries are poison, transferred into other soyles
where they receive another kind of norishment, they become, not only by tract
of time; not hurtful, but very healthful; not poysonfull, but pleasant.

Secondly, it is to be considered, that our bodies generally have certain
courses, passages, stations or periods, wherein they notably change their
actions and operations: till 21. years, or 25. at the most, we grow in height,
for some come to their full growth sooner, some later: from 25. to forty two,
or forty five, we grow in breadth or thicknes, from this, till the end of our
days we decline: the cause of these three notorious alterations is our
natural heat or humidum radicale, (which in mine opinion is nothing else but
the vital temper, and qualification of every solid part of our bodies) the
which residing in a moist body, causes it to grow, like the heat in a loaf
of Dowe set in the Oven: afterward, what with internal heat, external
drying of the winds, and sun, and other continual exercises, which daily
exsiccate the body, and draw out the vndeguested moisture, the innated heat is
not able to rouse up the body any more in height, but spreads it abroad, and
so enlarges, and ingrosseth it: after which continual working, heat is
weakened, and so by little and little still decays: and finally resolves in
dissolution.

Thirdly, in this septuarie number of our years, although we cannot discover
such notorious differences, as in the three former passages, yet in these
likewise, we may observe some markable change. At the first seventh year, men
commonly note, that then the child begins, to have some little sparks of
reason: and for this cause, the Cannon Law permits such, directed by their
parents or Tutors, contrahere sponsalia, to make a promise of future marriage.
In the fourteen year, the youth is thought to have the perfect use of reason,
and then the Cannons account him capable of marriage. At twenty one, a man is
reputed able iudiciously to dispose of his goods, and faculties, and therefore
the Common Law riddeth him then of his wardship, and the Cannons give him
leave to take the order of subdeacon: the first seven years are called
infantia, the second pueritia, the third adolescentia, the fourth, that is,
from twenty one to twenty eight, iuuentus, from thence to forty nine, he is
esteemed to stand in statu virili, the next till sixty three is senectus,
after, till seauenty and seauentie seven, for most part ensues decrepita
aetas. In all these periods, or Clymactericall years, it is to be noted, that
although the change in that year be perceived most palpably, and sensibly, yet
in all the precedent, they were preparing, working, and something disposing
thereunto: as for example, we must not think that the least drop of rain,
which in effect breaks the stone, does it of it self, for that were
impossible, but it does it in virtue, and by force and working of all the
former: And perhaps for this cause they were called anni scalares, for that
every year precedent, was a step to the last, wherein the Ladder or stairs
were ended.

Fourthly, there is a great dispute among Physicians, what should be the cause
of the Paroxismes, or fittes in Agues, and once I my self being troubled with
a tertian Ague, in Italy, in the City of Como, there came two Physicians my
dear friends, and a Doctor of Divinity all at one time to visit me, and even
then I stood in expectation of my fit. After many complements and discourses
about my sickness, at last I demanded these two Doctors of Physic, that they
would resolve me in one doubt about my disease: they answered, with a good
will: Well, said I, you both conclude, and it stands with good reason, that
this sickness of mine proceeds from excess of choler: now I would know of
you, when my fit is past, is the choler all disguested, consumed, and voyded
away or no? If it be consumed, why does my Ague return? if it be not
consumed, why does mine Ague depart? The Physicians here answered one
contra^ie to another: for the first said it was disguested: Why then returns
mine Ague? For this cause quoth he, the Ague proceeds not only of choler,
but of choler putrified, corrupted, and poisoned. Now sir, the choler
poisoned is consumed, but other choler which remains, is not corrupted, but
by the next paroxisme it will be corrupted: Well, said I, what thing is that
which corrupts and poisoneth that good choler, which before was not
corrupted? It seems strange to me, how so much precisely should be corrupted,
and the other being so near lying by it, or rather united with it, yea
mingled in it, not to be infected: In truth I remember not what he answered,
but I am sure he satisfied none of us all. The other Doctor of Physic said,
it was not consumed, but nature feeling the force of that poison, united her
self to fight against it, and so allayed most of the vehemency, vigor, and
malignitie thereof: and he gave an example of a pot of water set on the fire,
for quoth he, if the coals be covered with ashes, the hot water cools,
blow the fire and it warmeth and boyleth, let ashes return, or the fire die,
the water returns to the first coldness: So quoth he, the poison of the
choler, by natures might is overcome, when the Ague departs, but after that
those spirits and forces, which nature had united, are dispersed, the fire is
quenched, and choler again corrupted. But quoth the other Physician, so the
sickness should never depart, for if your choler be still in cooling and
heating, and nature now fighting, now ceasing, when I pray you shall this
combat be finally ended? Marry sir quoth his fellow Doctor, in this sort,
nature mittigateth the forces of choler this fit, and allayeth them: now
nature in the mean time, is strengthened with good food, and the humor either
purged, or quailed with physic, and so by little and little it is quite
disguested.

Not so said the other, for then the second fit should always be less then
the first, and the third less then the second, and so forward to the last: but
this is false, for his third and fourth fits, were much more vehement, then
either the first or second. And besides, by this declaration, no man should
ever die upon an Ague. For if in every fit, the sickness ceased not, until
the humor were allayed, then certainly in Agues, (which are mortal) the fit
should never pass, which is most false.

With this the Doctor of Divinity, who was a very good Philosopher, and for
that he had been much troubled with maladies, he was like many wrangling
Gentlemen, a petty-fogging Physician at his own costs, as they be
petty-fogging Lawyers through their own suits. Why said the Divine, may we not
hold that the Ague is in the liver and heart? No quoth the Physicians both, that
cannot be, because no Physician ever held, that any Ague was in partibus
solidis, that is, in the heart and liver, etc. except the Hecticke. Well said
the divine, I say not that it is in the heart and liver immediately, for that I
will confess perforce must be choler, but I say the fountain and spring, the
root and crigen to reside in the liver, the which immediately causes corrupted
blood and inflamed choler, for they being extraordinarily corrupted
themselves with vehement heat, cannot but engender blood, spirits, and humors
of like infection and corruption. And by this way I answer the first doubt
that when the Ague cease, choler is diguested: Why then returns it again?
Marie sir, because the heart and liver being out of temper, in that space of
time engender so many more perverse humors, as oppr^sse nature, so vehemently
and dangerously, that she must employ all her might to resist them, abate
them, extinguish them. In truth Master Doctor (said I) this opinion I like
very well, and I will confirm it, for since mine Ague first began, these
Physicians have inculcated nothing so much unto me, by word and deed, as to
cool my liver: to this effect all their syrrops and waters of Endive, Sicory,
and Barley tended. And with this discourse we ended our dispute, and mine
Ague: the which with this pleasant conference passed away.

Fifthly, Plato avouches, that Agues have ages Plato in Dialog. de Nature.
like men, as also consummations and ends, with whom Galen consents: This
sentence of Plato, Valesius a worthy Physician explicateth in this manner. As
there are two sorts of diseases, sharp and Valesius de Sacra Philo. cap. 7.
cronicall, both which have their decretory days, but not alike, for the
sharp have odd days, especially seven: the cronicall twenty, sixty,
eighty, a hundred: so there are two prerogations or courses of life. the one
is common to many, the other to few, and such as are of a most lively
constitution: both of them have their Clymactericall or decretory years. The
first we number by seven and nine, the latter we count by ten, and the
last period is a hundred and twenty.

To this Discourse of Valesius let us add a certain point of experience and
doctrine of Galen, Galen. lib. r. de diebus decretorijs c. 22.
who in the decretorie days of a fever, which numbreth by seven specially, he
will tell you the fourth day, whether the Agew will leave the patient the
seventh, or whether he shall die upon the seventh day, or no: and also
withal, he teaches to foretell the very hour of death upon the seventh
day.

Last of all, out of these considerations we may gather as much as will
sufficiently (I hope) satisfy the Question proposed in the beginning of this
Section, viz: why in these Clymactericall years men commonly die? To which I
do answer, That for every six years or eight, men still gather up more
or less humors, which prepare the way for an Agew in the seven or nine: As
we said before, when the fit is past, the heart and liver prepare humors
for the next ensuing, and in case they be not sufficient in the seven, they
multiply to the nine: if in this they fail, then they pass to the fourteen,
then to eighteen, etc. And for this cause Physicians council their Patients
to purge in the Spring and Authumne, to hinder the increase of humors, albeit
they feel themselves nothing diseased at all.

This we may declare by the example of them, who are infected with hereditary
diseases, as the gowte, or the stone: for albeit they evidently appear not
till old age, yet in all the progress of their years, the parts and humors
infensibly are prepared. Or we may say, that in six or eight years the liver
and heart which are fountains of blood, and origens of humors are so infected
and corrupted, that in the last year they engender more unnatural superfluous
humors, than can stand with the right and natural constitution of the body.

But some will say, by this opinion a man should ever be sick, for he should
never want corrupted humors, wherein sickness consists. To this I answer;
first, that health consists not in indiuisibili, in an indivisible point, so
that it admits not some few peccant humors withal, but has a certain
amplitude, like as if into a But of strong Canary Wine, a man every month
should put in half a pint of water, every day a spoonefull, at the months
end, yea the years end, the Wine would be almost as potent, as at the first,
yea and perhaps more, if it be well helped.

Secondly, we see that Custom breeds qualities and alterations so
insensibly, as in long time (till they come to a full growth) they can hardly
be perceived.

Thirdly, I doubt not but he that has for example the first fourteen year
of his life for his Clymactericall, in the precedent years, shall gather more
corrupted humors, then he whose Clymactericall year is nine and forty, and
also feel himself proportionally more weak, albeit he can not well
perceive; for I my self have known a man, almost with half his lungs rotten
with a consumption, and yet boldly auowch that he was strong, for Ab assuetis
non fit passio.

Some will object, that we see by experience many men die within the space
of a day or two, who before were as sound and whole, as could be: neither in
their urine, blood, or pulse appeared any sign of sickness, or superfluous
humor.

To this I answer, that such a man was either oppressed with some vehement
Passion, or some violent exercise, or some other extrinsecall cause, which
accelerated, perverted, and extraordinarily augmented the humor, and so caused
death: for as I said above, although a man (considering the common course of
his days) can not pass his prefixed time and Clymactericall periode, yet by
many means he may shorten it.

Much more I could say, pro and contra, for this Declaration, but because it
were something too Physical, and not so necessary for this Moral Treatise,
therefore I will bury it with silence: for this point, in very truth, is so
intricate, that I perceive, the best wits are exceedingly troubled to
extricate themselves out of it.

And therefore, as this I esteem probable, so I would give any Physician most
hearty thanks, who in few words would teach me a better way.

I said in brief, for I have seen some such long tedious Discourses, as I
loathed to peruse them, doubting lest the uncertain profit, would not repay
the certain pain.

Finis.

