AN EPISTLE DEDICATED TO AN HONORABLE PERSON.

In the which, are discovered a dozen bad spirits, who from the beginning have
much haunted, and grievously tormented the Protestant Congregation: so that
every one may perceive, if he be not tooto partial, and overmuch carried away
with affection, that such an Assembly cannot be the true Church of God.



Imprinted, M. DC. XXII.

(...) thing else can ensue, but that in lieu of true faith they reap nothing
else but some humane opinion, or some other fantastical illusion, which is as
far from divine faith, as truth from falsehood, and a black Devil from an
Angel of light.

But because no Sect can be supported without some certain means, in place of
all those infallible grounds, which are in use amongst Catholics, and ever
have been since the Apostles time, they have brought in the spirit of Railing,
of Heresy, the spirit of Lying, and Contradiction, and every ones Private For
D. Luther says: That there be as many sects and Religions among us, as there
be men, There is no Ass in this time so sot^ish and blockish, but will have the
dreams o his ownef head, and his opinion accepted for the instinct of the holy
Ghost, and himself esteemed as a Prophet. Luther ep. ad An^werp. tom. 2 Germ.
lenae. fol. ^01. The Centurists term all the followers of the Confession of
Ausburg, Ecebolios, and likes them to the fish Poul-countrell, which changes
often his color, and to the old Pagan God Vertumnus, who could turn^ himself
into all shapes, and tell us: That they now approve the true do^trine, and
presently after condemn the same, now calling that heresy, which before they
preached as an unconquered truth. Cent. 9. in pra^at.
Imagination and fancy; and by the use of these they bolster and vphould in
some fashion this their new vpstart Congregation: which to be so, you shall
easily perceive in this my short Epistle.

And to begin. Among all those monsters and bad spirits, with the which they
have pestred the world, the spirit of Contradiction is most familiar among
them, seeing they do so excel in it, as none indeed, if he but look into
their writings, can tell whom to trust or believe. For if you will but run
over these Motives which this Parson brings forth, in his Epistle, to move your
Honor to join to his distracted To Sir Edwyn Sands, they (to wit the
Protestants) are like scattered troops each drawing adverse way without any
means to pacify their quarrels. In his Relation f. 8. To learned Duditius,
the Protestant Divines do coin a monthly faith. Beza ep. theo. 1. To
Melanctho^, They know not whom to follow. Protest. Apol. page 509. To learned
Mayor, The simple doubt whether any true Church of God be yet remaining. In
orat. de consus dogma. N. E. epist. page 7.
Congregation, you shall see nothing affirmed by him, which some of his famous
brethren will not deny, and nothing denied by him as fals^, which another of
his own coat more learned then he, will not affirm to be most true. Thus
then has our just God stricken them with the spirit of giddynes and
disagreement, as while they endeavor to build up their heretical Tower of
Babell, their own labors fall upon them, and crush them down to their utter
ruin and destruction.

But to the end, your Honor may understand we do them no wrong, we will make a
short survey, and cast the eyes of our consideration, over some points of this
Ministers ^arring Epistle, in which, this Parson first tells you, That
Giant-like Catholics fight against Christ and the primitive Church, about
Communion in one kind, as though it were unlawful to offer one kind to the
people, or that Christ had given some Commandment, as concerning that point:
whereas D. Luther D. Luther. They sin not against Christ, who use one kind,
seeing Christ has not commanded to use it, but has left it to the will of
every one, saying: As often as you do these, you shall do them in memory of me.
De captiuit. Bahyl. cap. de Euch.
the Patriarch of all the Reformers, will tell you a quite contrary tale to
that of this petty Ministers, to wit, that neither the giving of the Communion
under one kind by the Priest to the people, is unlawful, nor that there was
ever any commandment, enacted by Christ, for receiving it subvtraque that is
under both kinds.

Again he tells You, that Transubstantiation now is a new invention, and was
no matter N. E. ep. page 8.
of faith before the Council of Lateran, which was 1215. years after Christ.
But M. Fox his Reverend Father, will teach your Fox Act. mon. printed 1576. p.
1121.
Honor, how this Parson lies lewdly, because according to him, above 100.
years before this time denial of Transubstantiation began to be accounted
Heresy.

Moreover he tells you, that the adoring of the Sacrament, or Christ contained
in it, is N. E. ep. page 8. Kemnit. in exam. Conc. Tri. par. 2. page 91.
Idolatry. But Kemnitius one of the famous Protestants that ever were, will
inform you of the contrary, That none doubts to adore it, but he who with
the Sacramentaryes denies Christ's body to be present.

Likewise this Parson would have you believe, that it is not Christ's body which
is really N. E. ep. page 3.
in the B. Sacrament, but a nail to fasten true Christians to the Cross of
Christ. But what ever Scripture told this Parson it was a nail? Christ says
This is my body, expressly, which is to be given for you, and this Parson says,
it is not Matthew. 26.
Christ's body, but a nail. Whom will you rather believe, Christ who is truth
it self, and cannot deceive, or this minister who is a liar, as we have seen,
and commonly does nothing but deceive.

Again, he would delude you with this N. E. in his epist. p. 3.
his interrogation saying, Who does deny the real presence? as though none
denied it; which is such a gross untruth, as I think the Devil himself is
not wont to suggest a grosser. For does not Luther long since conclude against
Beza epist. Theol. 1. page 7.
Zuinglius, from whom Calvin, as Beza confesses, does not dissent, that the
Devil by Zuinglius and his adherents, labors to sup up the egg, Luth. ser.
de Euc han. fol. 335.
and leave us the shell, that is, as he expounds himself, to take from the
bread and wine the body and blood of Christ, so that nothing remain but plain
Bakers bread.

Neither would this Parson have you believe, that Christ can put his body in
more N. E. ep. page 9.
places together at once. For the which his Reverend Father D. Luther, and all
the M. Fox says: Christ abiding in heaven is no let, but that he may be in the
Sacrament if he list. Act mon. page 998. Cra^mer also says: The Controversy in
this matter is not what may be, but what is. Christ body may be as well in the
bread, as in the door and stone. In his answer to Gardener page 454. See M.
Reynolds answer to M. Bruce his sermons p. 349. N. E. ep. page 9.
prime Protestants, will knock him over the thumbes, and tell him, that it is
blasphemy to deny this to the omnipotent power of Christ.

He would have you believe, that you ought to yield this respect to the
Scriptures, as to profess, that they are a full and sufficient rule for
precepts of Holiness, and necessary matters of faith. But his learned brother M.
Hooker, will tell you another tale. Of things necessary (says he) the very
chiefest is to know what books, we are bound to esteem holy, which point is
confessed impossibl^^ for M. Hook. in his Eccl. po^icy. l. 1. sect. 14.
the Scripture it self to teach: for if any book of Scripture did give
testimony to all the rest, yet still that Scripture, which gives testimony to
the rest, would require another Scripture to give credit unto it; neither could
we ever come to any pause whereon to rest, unless besides Scripture there were
some thing which might assure us. And thus you may perceive this Parson
rejecting Traditions, does not believe the Scripture according to M. Hooker:
which notwithstanding, this Parson tells us, is N. E. ep. page 12.
the ground of his faith, which not believing as he ought, for any thing that
we know, he may Kemnit. exam. par. 3. p. 200. D. Fulke says: I confess that
Ambrose, Augustine, and Hiero^, held Invocation of Saints to be lawful. In his
Reioynder to Bristow page 5. Epist. pag^ 13. Symonds on the Revelations page 57.
be a Jew, a Turk, or an Infidel, and so no fit man to bring your Honor to
his faithless Congregation.

He would have you believe, that one Peter Gnapheus, a pernicious Heretic,
was the first that shuffled in, the Invocation of Saints into the prayers of
the Eastern Churches. But Kemnitius, a greater Clearke then this Parson is,
will convince him of this grossly, and tell him that the Invocation of Saints,
was brought into the public assemblies of the Church by Basil, Nyssen, and
Nazianzen, about the year 370. which was above a hundred years before
Gnapheus was borne.

This Parson would have your Honor believe, that Images are not to be
worshipped, as though it were a new Invention. But his brother M. Symonds, will
tell him, that it is not so new as he would have you believe: for according to
him, S Leo decreed, that Reverence Damas. l. 4. cap. 17.
should be given to Images, which was about a 1200. years since: and Damascene
will tell Niceph. l. 1^. hist. c. 27.
you, that it is a Tradition of the Apostles: and Nicephorus, That the
audacious spirit and impudent mouth of Xenaias, was the first that ever vomited
out this saying, That the Images of Christ and of those whom Christ loves, are
not to be reuere^ced: and M. Perkins says, how Paulinus writes, That the B.
of Jerusalem a^ Easter yearly set forth the Cross for the people to worship
himself being the chief of the worshippers. In his problem p. 81. In the
answer to his epistle. Luth. tones 5. VVite. in psalm. 5. ^. 166. in Galat. c.
50 fol. 416. Sebast. Franc. Chron. part. 11^. f. 263, Theol, Heidelberg in
Protocol. Frank^n. in prae^^t. ad Antha^. Theol. Mansfeld, in confess Mansfeld.
lac. fo 120 M Bernard of VVorsop against the Separatists. See dangerous
positions for the Puritans against the Protestants. And M. Barow. and M. Smith
against Bernard of VVorsop, and al both Puritans and Protestants
others.

All his Epistles runs in this vein of ^arring and warring against his
learned brethren, greater Doctors then himself, stuffed up with no fewer
black lies and ugly heresies, then irreconciliable iarres and most manifest
contradictions, of the which I have set down twenty about the B. Sacrament
only; and no fewer might be laid open about the rest if it were thought
expedient. But to show how this contradicting spirit, does dominere in this
Parson, I thought them sufficient; which is also enough to discover, the ugly
spirit of schism and heresy, against whom God is not wont to fight by force or
subtilty, but with the spirit of giddines and disagreement: for so says D.
Luther; that the authors of schism are disagreeing among themselves; they bite
and devour one another, till at last they perish. This the examples of all
times do testify. After that Afric was Stanislaus Rescius in ^entur. Euang.
^ectarum. Fitzberb. of Policy and Religion part. 2. page 449.
overthrown by the Manichees, then presently followed the Donastes, who
disagreeing among themselves were divided into three sects etc. In our time the
Sacramentaries first, and then after the Anabaptists divided themselves from
us; nether of them are at unity among themselves: so allwaies sect brings
forth sect, and one condemns another.

And the very same argument, is yet further made manifest against the
Anabaptists, by Sebastian Francus, and the Deuines of Heidelberg, and also
against the Sacramentaries by the Deuines of Mansfeild, by the Puritans against
the Protestants in England, and the Protestants against the Puritans, and the
Brownistes against them both: so that Stanislaus Rescius, numbreth among them
170. distinct sects, and others far more: and this every one may the better
believe, if he consider that it is very hard, to find any two of the learned
sort of them of one opinion, teaching all principal matters of Religion.

Hence it comes to pass, that they are not afraid to censure and condemn
one another of heresy. For if we believe We seriously judge the Zuinglia^s and
all sacramentaryes to be heretics and aliens from the Church of God, So Luth.
these. 81. contra Lou. Ana^om. 7. in defens. verborum Coe^ae fol. 38, be says:
Touching the soul, and spiritual matters, we will avoid them as long as we
live, we will reprove and condemn them for Idolaters, corrupters of Gods word,
blasphemers and deceauers; and of them as of enemies of the Gospel, we will
sustain persecution and spoil of our goods, whatsoever they shall do unto us.
The Zuinglians of Zuricke complain that Luther inueigheth against them, as
against obstinate Heretics, and such as are guilty to themselves of all
impiety, and the most vile and pestilent men that go on the ground. Confess.
orthodoxa. Eccles. Tigur. in praefat. fol. 3. 4.
Luther, and the Lutherans, Zuinglius, Calvin and the other Sacramentaryes are
damned Heretics; and if we give credit to Zuinglius, Calvin, and his
followers, both Luther and the Lutherans are guilty of the same crime. And no
less will D. Couell auerre of the Protestants and Puritans in D. Couell in
iusta and temperata defens. page 07. art. 11.
England. For least any think that our contentions (says he) are of small
matters, and that our difference is not great, we have both condemned one
another of heresy, if not Infidelity; and of those points which quite
overthrow the grounds of our Christian faith. And the fountain from whence all
these so bitter iarres and wars do proceed, is the want of some certain and
infallible rule to direct them; for seeing all seem to accept of the bare word
of Scriptur, for the only ground of their faith, interpreted according to their
own private spirit, and foolish imagination, which whether it be true or no,
he cannot certainly tell, seeing that such a sentence, may admit diverse
expositions; and yet because he thinks, that he can defend that new
interpretation invented by him, although not truly, yet at least with some
color, or show of truth, he presently by defending it obstinatly, is made the
author of a new Sect.

Hence M Parkes speaking of our Protestant M. Parkes Apolog. supra epist.
dedicat.
writers, says: Every man makes Religion the hand-mayd of his affections: we
may say now that there are as many fayths as wills, and so many doctrines as
manners of men, whiles either we write them as we list, or understand them as
we please; in so much that many are brought to their wits end, not knowing what
to do. Men say they know whom to fly, but whom to follow they cannot tell.
This age is the last and worst, wherein heresy and infidelity join and labor,
to subvert and overthrow all grounds of Christian Religion.

From this bad spirit of Giddines and Heresy, aryseth another no less
scandalous among the Reformers, called the Spirit of Railing, in the which they
have such a talent as they spare none, whether he be Prince or Prelate,
Catholic, Puritan or Protestant, or whosoever oppose themselves, against their
new found ou^ imaginations. With this spirit, Bishop Barlow takes up Father
Parsons (otherwise a religious See D. Barlow his answer to the book
entitled, The judgment of a Catholic Englishma^ etc. concerning the we woath
of Allegience. page 67. 63.
man and a worthy Divine) telling us, That he was a blacke-mouthed Shemey,
famous for nothing but for capital infamyes, a bastard by birth, a libeller by
custom, a factionist in Society, an expulst Academian, rung out with bells as
a carted strumpet with pannes, for a graceless companion, a Diabolical
Machiauellian, a stain of humanity, a corrupter of all honesty. Again, A
Camelion for his Profession, a back-slyding Apostata, a perjured intruder, a
dissolute libertine in act, in choice, in maintenance, a fugitive with
discontented renagates, a viperous complotter against his Country, a firebrand
of treasonable combustions by pen and advice, and which of all other is most
remarkable, a Jesuit by proxy, a Votary by substitution, a Paduan Montebanke,
and Empericall Qua^saluer, a disdainefull scorner of all reproof or counsel,
and yet a scorned Vassal by all the Popes he had served, a dog to snarle etc.
This cancker of youth, this spawne of vipers, this slave of Satan etc. A dead
dog, being while he lives a rotten carcass, of a poisoned Cur, infected in his
intralls, and infecting with his savor the air he breaths in, and the land
wherein he had his first breath, a miching Cur, a carrionly Cur etc. as if he
were the porter of Hades, Carons mastiue, Plutoes Cerberus, he harrowes Tartar,
and (I tremble to write it) feignes with a wish, Queen Elizabeth's glorified
soul in ghastly Ghost, to speak from Hell. So far Bishop Barlow Prelat-like.

Hence D. Luther against King Henry the Luth. in lib cont^^ Regem Anglia.
eight, rayleth thus, calling him: An envious madd-foole, babbling with much
spittle in his mouth, more furious then madness it self, more dotish then folly
it self, endued with an impudent and whorish face, without any one vein of
Princely blood in his body, a lying Sophist, a damnable rotten worm, a
Basiliske and progeny of an Adder, a lying scurrill covered with the title of a
King, a clownish wit, a dotish head, most wicked, foolish and impudent Henry.
And says further: He does not only lie like a most vain scurrill, but passes
a most wicked knave; thou lie in thy throat foolish and sacrilegious King.
Hence Erasmus (a Confessor with Erasmus contra non sobriam Lutheri ^pistolam.
Fox, and of good judgment, and a well meaning man with D. Reynolds) tells us,
that Luthers Epistle, breaths deadly hatred, is all full of impotent, if not
furious reproaches and malicious lies. He malepartly rayleth against Kings and
Princes when he lists; extreme hatred, desire of command and firebrands of
inciters drive him out of the way, he craketh naught but Devils, Satan's,
Hobgoblins, Witches, Megeraes, and such more then Tragical speeches. His mind
can be satiated with no railing, he is besides himself with hatred, he has no
sincerity, no Christian modesty.

Neither are the Puritans so honny-mouthed, as they would make men believe; for
now and then out of their abundance of this spirit, they bestow some few
sprinklings upon them who for their titles otherwise ought to be styled their
Reverend Fathers, and the chiefest Worthyes of the Protestant Church. Thus
then, as though they had dipped their pen in gall, they salute the English
Bishops, telling us: They are right puissant, poisoned, persecuting Lib. 2. of
dangerous positions cap. 11.
and terrible Priests, Clergy Ministers of the Confocation house, the holy
league of subscription; the crew of monsters and ungodly wretches, that mingle
heaven and earth together, horned Masters of D. VVhitguift in resp. ad
defension: mapud Fitgsim. in his Britan. p. (...).
the Conspiration house, an Antichristian swinish rabble, enemies of the
Gospel, most covetous wretches and popish Priests, the Convocation house of
Devils, Beelzebub of Canterbury the chief of the Devils.

But if they rage thus against their Reverend Fathers, what mildnes can we
expect toward their dearly beloved brethren? Verily, the taunts and
contumelies of ministers against ministers, (says M. Ormerod) are unchristian,
they M. Ormerod picture of a Puritan fol. 3.
refuse to salute one another, wishing the plague of God to light upon them,
saying, they are damned. And thus with whole Cart-loades of dirtifying words,
curses, execrations and condemnations, they besmeare and bedaube their
opponents, as else where I have showed; which is a most manifest sign, that the
furious, raging and railing Spirit, does much predominate among them.

But besides their Spirit of Contradiction, their Spirit of Heresy, and their
Spirit of Railing, there oftentimes rusheth out another, no less deforme and
vggly then the former, which is the black Spirit of Belying their Adversaries,
for seeing their Heresies cannot be maintained with the spirit of Verity and
Truth, they are enforced to use the benefit of that Spirit, which O slander in
Epitom. Cent. 16. page 796. See Bernard of VVors^p in his book of the
Separatists Schism. p. Campanus in Colloq. latin. Luthsom. 2. c. de Aduer. fol
354.
is the enemy of that most noble Virtue, to wit the foul Spirit of Lying,
falsehood and Untruth; and indeed they so joy and exult in this black art of
lying, as the Lutherans report, how the Caluinists hold for a received
principle and rule, that it is lawful to lie for the glory of Christ: and
those of the purer sort in England, tell us, that the Protestants preach lies
in the name of the Lord. And Campanus lets us understand, that as certain as
God is God, so certain it is that Luther was a Devilish liar. And that this
Epistler has reasonably well learned this lesson of lying, you may perceive
partly out of that which hitherto we have said, and partly out of this that he
would N. E. ep. page 3.
have you believe, that in the article of Merits, the Protestants subscribe to
the Orthodoxal judgment of S. Augustine, which is so false, as no less man then
D. Luther himself calls in scorn, Hierome, Ambrose, and Augustine, Merit
mongers of the old Papacy.

Again he would have you believe that I cite D James to give witness against
Wickliffe, Epist. page 5.
that he was in some point an Anabaptist, and a Stoic: which is indeed a false
lie, seeing I do not so much as name D. James in the whole book against
Wickliffe.

This Parson would have you believe, that the Testimony of Protestants for the
Papacy, Epist. page ^.
separatly considered, is a worme-eaten pillar, too weak for the supportance
of that Religion. But Bishop D. Morto^ epist. dedicat. in his answer to the
Protestant Apology. D. VVhitale. contr. 292. c. 14.
Morton will tell this Parson he lies, and inform your Honor, That the
testimony of the Adversary is the greatest reason of satisfaction. And D.
Whitaker, That it must needs be a strong argument, which is taken out of the
confession of the Adversary.

He would have you believe, that Watson his testimony is true, affirming that
the Jesuits do confess, that the ancient Fathers never touched ^pist. p. (...)
the thing of Transubstantiation, which for ought this Parson knows is a most
gross untruth, seeing Watson publicly at his death, craved pardon of the
Jesuits for the wrong he had done them; and that he wronged them in this, is so
manifest, as every one may see in Zuarcz and Bellarmine only, above 40.
Fathers for the doctrine and belief of Transubstantiation.

Again he would have you believe, that Epist. page 11.
the Invocation of Saints is not the old way, but some new innovation: whereas
D. Morton Morton Apol. par. 1. p. 217. 218.
will inform your Honor, how the quite contrary is most true, affirming, that
all Antiquity taught Invocation of Saints.

This Parson would have you believe, that Priests radically do not believe
Transubstantiation, because some being required after consecration, Epist. page
8.
refused to say, God grant I may have no benefit by the blood of Christ, if it
be not in the Chalice; for, this they might most lawfully refuse to do upon
some other ground, although most firmly and constantly they all believed
Transubstantiation.

This Parson perchance would have you believe, that Catholic Priests are like
his companions, who are wont to teach one thing and believe another. No, no,
this belongs to our new Rabbis, as they confess themselves. For M. John Musa
this Parsons brother-minister Ioannes Matthefius de vita Luth. concio. 12. fol.
147.
says: Mathesius told me, that one time he complained very grievously to
Luther, that those things which he preached to others, he himself could not
believe: the which Luther hearing, answered. Now blessed be God, that the same
happens to others, that is wont to happen to me: For hitherto I thought that
none had done this but my self. Was not this a Rogish trick, in these prime
pillars and chief Reformers? How can any give the^ credit, if they iuggle
thus, in matters concerning either our chiefest good and salvation, or our
eternal ruin and destruction?

Besides all these wicked spirits, our Reformers have four or five more, with
whom they are very familiar, to wit, the spirit of Pride, the spirit of
Liberty, the spirit of Carnality, the spirit of Blasphemy, and lastly the
Devil himself, who is as it were the Lord and Prince of all these. But to
speak a word of every one.

Out of the spirit of Pride, they swagger like Lucifer, and condemn, and
contemn all Fathers, all Counsels, and Churches. For what have we to do with
Fathers, with flesh and blood (says D. Humfrey) or what is it to us, what D.
Humfrey in prafat. ad Orig. Beza in his preface upon the new Testament
dedicated to the Prince of Conde. ann. 1587. Luth. lib. contra Regem angliae
fol. ^480.
the false Synods of Bishops do decree? Seeing (says Beza) that Satan was
president in their assemblyes and Coun^elis. But to be brief, out of D.
Luther, who was the first Father, you may take a scantling how to judge of the
rest. Henry (says he) for his Massing sacrifice brings in the sayings of
Fathers; here say I, that by this means my sentence is confirmed: for this it
is which I said, That the Thomisticall Asses have nothing which they can
allege, but a multitude of men, and the ancient use. But I, against the
sayings of men Fathers, Angels, and Devils, put down the Gospel, which is
the word of the eternal Majesty; here I insult over the sayings of men though
never so holy; so that I care not though a thousand Augustines and Cyprians
should stand against me. And in another place having rejected Fathers,
Counsels, schools and ages, he thus concludes: Neither Luth. de seruo arbit
apud Stephan. in defens. Apolog.
let the multitude, magnitude, latitude, profoundity, miracles, sanctity of the
Church of Saints move thee a jot; all of them were damned if they thought as
they write.

Out of the same Proud Spirit, although by their own confession, they are
covered over Calvin. in antid. Council. Tridsess. 6. cap. 5. 10. 13. 15. and lib
^l Instit. c. z. Pareus in Prologom. ad Oscam Pros. D. Luth. tom. 1. in 1.
Petr. c. n.
from top to toe, with filth, uncleanness, and mere iniquity; yet never thelesse
they boast and brag that they are all holy and sanctified from their mothers
womb, all certain of predestinatio, justification and salvation, All equal
in honor and dignity to S. Paul, S. Peter, the Mother of God, and all the
Saints in heaven; that they all have received the same treasure from God, and
all that good is, as largely as they, that they are all Saints; and that he is
accursed, who does not call himself a Saint. In the mean time they thrust
Christ Jesus out of his eternal throne, telling Cart wrig. 2. Repl. p. 191.
Calvin. in cap. 3. ad Galat. l. ^. instit. cap. 7.. ^. Beza in c. 17. Matt.
us, That he was seen to be a miserable man, truly a sinner, doubtful of his
salvation, deserved nothing of God, but burst out into a voice of despair.

Thus they triumph in their Lucifer-like pride, as I said, against Christ and
his Saints, although the Scripture, which they would make the world believe is
their entire rule of faith, has no such blasphemous speeches against Christ,
but the quite contrary, to wit, That he was the splendor of his Father, the
figure of his substance, without spot, or blot of sin, the fountain of all
grace and virtue, to whom was given a Name above all Names, power both in
heaven and earth, to raise himself from death to life, to ascend into heaven,
to sit at the right hand of his Father, and to crush all his enemies under his
feet.

I do not deny but Spangeberge, is somewhat Cyriacus Spangeb. contra Stepha.
Agricol. fol. ^. a.
more modest then others, seeing that although he prefer Luther before all
the Saints of God, the Apostles, yea and our B. Lady that thrice renowned
Queen of Heaven, yet he puts one before him, to wit S. Paul, saying:

Christus habet primas, habeas tu Paul secundas:

At loca post Paulum proxima Luther habet.

First place to Christ, the next to Paul,

Then Luther first of others all.

Here hence it is no wonder, that Conradus Risse tells us in plain terms:
That God did take from ^itzherb. 2. part of policy and Religion. page 453. ^.
31.
him (to wit Luther) the true spirit for his pride, and gave him instead
thereof, an angry, proud, and lying spirit etc. Thus far of their spirit of
pride.

The spirit of Liberty is the broad way that leads to perdition, which indeed
they have made so broad, as I do not see, how the Devil can well desire a
borader. For first they reject the ten Commandments as impossible; the Ca^^^.
lib. 2. instit. c. 7.. 5.
Laws of Moses, or the Ceremonial law, is abrogated, and Christ our Savior
made none; and humane laws do not bind in conscience, and therefore they
infer, how they are freed from all. Hence (says Calvin) Christian liberty
Calvin. l. 3. instit. c. 19.. ^.
consists in three parts; first that the consciences of the faithful, while
they with the confidence of their Justification, do raise themselves above the
law, do forget the whole justice thereof. And after. It is requisite, that
mention of the law being taken away, they only embrace Gods mercy. And. 4. Our
consciences are free from the yoke of the law. And. 7. he rejects all humane
laws, as well Ecclesiastical as civil, which are made about things of their
own nature indifferent. The third part is (says he) that we make no scruple
of external things, which are of themselves indifferent, but that we
indifferently use or omit them. Hence he infers that no man is obliged to
human laws, concerning fasting and holy days.

This liberty of the Gospel is founded in two principles, the one is, that
the Pope is Antichrist, for by this is taken away the Canon Law; the other,
that we are not bound to obey Kings and Princes if they command any thing not
contained in Scripture, and thereby are both Imperial, and Municipall, which
we call the common Laws, abolished.

Thus far of the Libertine spirit of John Calvin which he may be thought to
have sucked from D. Luther, and his most learned scholars. Luth. de liberate
Christiana. Idem ad c. 2. ad Galat
For thus discourses D. Martin. Only Faith, and the Word does reign in the
soul; whereby it is manifest that only faith suffices a Christian man for all
things, and that he needs no works for his Justification: and if he needs
no works, he needs no Law; if he need no law, he is free from the law; and
it is true, that the law is not made for the just. Thus argues Luther: and
upon the same ground he affirms resolutely else where. Only Faith is
necessary that we may be just, al other things are most free, nether commanded
any more, nor prohibited. Luth in c. 7. ep. 1. ad Cor ^
And again in another place. Thou art bound to God in nothing, but to believe
and confess him, in all other things he makes thee free, that thou may do
according to thine own will, without any offense of conscience. This being the
doctrine of Luther the Master, it is not to be wo^dred at, if some of his
scholars, have drawn out these, and the like positio^s, all tending to the
enlarging of the liberty of this fifth new invented Gospel. The law (say
they) is not worthy to be called Confessio Ma^sf^ld in secta Antinomorum,
the Word of God: if thou be a whore, or a fornicatour, or an Adulterer, or
any other sinner whatsoever, only believe and thou art in the way of sauation,
even when thou stickest fast in the very midst of thy sin. The ten
Commandments belong to the Court, but not to the Pulpit. Whosoever have any
thing to do with Moses, do go the right way to the Devil etc. The saying of
Peter, Make sure your vocation by good works, is unprofitable. Whenever thou
have any cogitation, that any means is to be used, that men may be good,
honest, and holy, and chaste, thou art already gone astray from the Gospel.
Hereupon says D. Luther: Let us take heed of sins, but especially of good
works. And others tell us, How we ought to pray to God, that we may remain
constant even unto the end, without all good works, seeing that good works
are not necessary, but hurtful and pernicious to our salvation; And that
Christians with good works belong to the Devil. To the which they adding that
the best work they do, can be no better then a mortal sin; we infer, that
they are bound, in conscience never to do any good work.

And because their faith, according to D. Whitaker. Fides aut est perpetua aut
nulla. contra Camp. rat. 8. page 143. Luth. in 2. part. Postillae printed
Arge^t. Germ. an. 1537. fol. 140. Luth. tom. 1. ep. lat. n. folio 334. ad 1
hilippum.
D. Whitaker, once had, can never be lost, they may give full scope, and loose
their raines largely to all liberty and loosenes of life. For as nothing does
justify but faith, so nothing (says Luther) does damn, but infidelity. And
although the Apostle tell us; That Fornicators Adulterers and such like, shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven; Yet out of D. Martin, Sin cannot
withdraw us from Christ, although we should commit fornication and murder a
thousand times a day. But truly if we may be as great Saints in glory as the
Apostles, our B. Lady the thrice renowned Mother of God, or any other Saint in
heaven how great soever, and yet have liberty to kill and murder a thousand
times a day, contemn all laws both of God, and man, never fast, or do any
work of penance; who will say, that this way to heaven is strait, and not
rather so broad, as all the black spirits in hell, for the increase of sin,
and amplifying of the Devils Kingdom, can scarce invent a broader.

But if we add that of M. Wotton, who tells us, That sin is remitted as soon
as committed, Wotton in his answer to the popish art. p. 41.
the faithful person having received the remission of all his sins past,
present, and future together; we shall see such a flood gate opened to all
kind of vice and villainy, that I think the very great Devil of hell would
have been ashamed by himself, to have published either in print or in pulpit
such a Libertine Position, if it had not been under the mask and vizard of a
Minister called M. Wotton.

Of the spirit of Carnality, I am very loath to speak any thing for fear of
offending your chaste and modest ears; but seeing our Protestants are so familiar
with this foul spirit, the matter is of great importance, to see them so
drowned in this filth as they are, which is so opposite to the pure spirit of
God, as one contrary can be to another. Therefore I would desire your patience
although you hear somewhat contrary your own Noble Dispostion, seeing it
cannot but redound to the great confusion of all our modern Nouellists, and to
the great good of others.

And to begin. They allow and prove Luth. tom 9. de Ma^rimonio fol. ^18.
that Fornication, Adultery, and Poligamy is lawful. Fornication is taught by
D. Luther, in calling the maid, if the wife be stubborn, and should refuse.
Adultery, according to the example of Assuerus, who married Hester and put away
Vasthy; who likewise says, that if the husband be impotent, the wife may
either marry another or with his consent secretly lie with his brother, or
some other man. And indeed these new Reformers have been so frantic and mad
with this spirit, as to think it no less impossible for a man to live chaste
then to fly over the mountane Caucasus. For thus speaks D. Luther: As Luth. in
colloq. Germ. cap: de Matrimonio.
no man can live (says he) without meat or dr^nk. so no man can abstain from
a woman etc. and the cause is, that we are conceived in a woman, and nourished
there, and borne of a woman, fed, and bred of a woman, and thereupon it
follows that we cannot by any means be separated from women. And in the same
book he goes forward thus; Zuinglius tom. 1. fol. 115. Ochin. dial. l. 2.
^ial. 21. p. 200. 204. Luth. de Bigam. Epis. prop. ^2. Idem in Genes 1. 1^
Martyr in 1. Cor: 7.
S Hierome writes many things of the tentations of the flesh; Ah, a small
matter, A woman, in a man's house may remedy the disease; Eustochium might
easily have helped or releiued Hierome in that case. Thus says he. And could
any shameless Ribauld, speak more shamefully of Gods Servants and holy
Saints? Zuinglius and his fellow ministers of the Eua^gelicall doctrine
confess, that they did burn with lustful desires of the flesh, and by means
thereof were made insamous before the Congregations.

Ochinus, Luther, Peter Martyr, and others playing the part of Jews and
Turks, allow plurality of wives. Beza was infamous for preferring Beza in sua
Creof. page ^8. Bolsec. in vita Calu.
Andebertus his boy, before Candida his stru^pet, and Calvin for his Sodomy at
Noyon was branded on the shoulder with a hot burning iron. And this carnal
Minister is not ashamed to tell your Honor, that when I style Luthers doctrine
licentious and beastly, for allowing in some case, Fornication, and Adultery, I
make of a Mole hill, a Mountain.

But to be breife, the ministers themselves are Zecanorius lib. de corruptis
moribus.
not contented with one wife, as confesses Syluester Zacanorius saying: O good
God, what incredible ^hinges have I seen etc. And among many other enormities
of Adulteries and Murders, he says: One of them (he had killed his wife with
poison to use other women) being demanded why he had committed so great a
crime; he answered, that marriage in Lutheran ministers does not extinguish
wandering lusts; although they give such scope of divorce in this matter of
marriage, as Libertine Luther says, that a man may have ten or more wives fled
from him, and yet all living.

But now go tell these carnal and fleshly D. White in his way to the true
Church. p. 395. Tyndall alleged by Fox Act. mon. page 1337^
Libertines, that Fornication, Adultery, Incest, Poligamy are most grievous
sins, and that all such shall be accursed and cast down into the eternal
flames of hell fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; presently they
will answer out of M. Tindall (who was, as D. White writes, a man sent from
God to call his people out of Babylon) that Christ has ordained that there
should be no sin but Infidelity, no Justice but Faith. And so according to
the doctrine (forsooth) of this man of God, Fornication, Adultery, Incest,
Poligamy, Sodomy, Murder, and such like, are no sins at all, and therefore not
to be feared. Out of Beza, That David by his murder and adultery, did not loose
the Holy Beza in Respons. ad Act. colloq. Montisbelg. part. altera page 7^.
Luth tom. ^. Wit. sermon. de 4 Matrimon. fol. 119.
Ghost. And out of D. Luther, That sin cannot withdraw them from Christ,
although they should commit fornication and murder a thousand times a day. And
indeed the satisfying of these beastly lusts, in the prime Pillars and chief
Protestant Reformers, may be thought to have been one of the principal ends,
at which they aimed, when they ran first out of their Cloisters, and
Monasteryes, cast off their religious habits, turned renagates from God,
Apostataes from their sacred and holy Orders, and of vowed Priests became
sacrilegious married Ministers, from whom sprouted out this Parsons new
trimmed up Congregation, of the which so much he braggeth.

Of their spirit of Blasphemy I have spoken elsewhere, as of their tending to
Atheism; and therefore, now only I would have your Honor to mark, that these
two spirits, are not peculiar to some of the meanest among them, but to such as
are esteemed great Rabbis and Apostles of this Congregation, especially if
they be compared with this petty Minister, Parson Estwicke For learned Eckhard
tells us, that Eckhard. in fasciculo Contro. c. 7. quest. 2.
Calvin, Beza. Martyr, Boquinus, Renicherus, and others are become so impudent,
as they are not afraid to write, that God is the first, the chief, the willing
and decreeing, yea the provoking, creating, efficient and enforcing cause of
sins. Out of which doctrine some Reformers prove, that all these Protestants
turn God into the Devil.

Moreover D. Luther not without blasphemy would have us believe, that christ
suffered Luth. in confess. ma^ori de coe^a Domini and lib. de Concuiis part. 2.
and dyed upon the Cross, according to his Divinity. For if I believe (says
he) that only the humane nature of Christ suffered for me, Christ is a base
Savior, not of any great price, or value, yea he himself needs a Savior.

Hence Zuinglius exclaimeth, This can by Zuingl. tom. 2. in respons. ad Luth.
confess f. 458 469. 470. and in resp. ad Luth. l. de sacra. f. 411. 401. 337.
Ibidem. p 401.
no reason be explained or excused: for Luther clearly and manifestly
confesses, that he will not acknowledge Christ to be his Savior, if only his
humanity had suffered. He calls him also Marcion, and says, he is guilty of
most high blasphemy against the nature and essence of God. And elswher, against
Luther he writes thus: If thou contumeliously go on in this sentence, that the
humanity of Christ Jesus, is essentially and corporeally present wheresoever is
his divinity, God willing we will bring thee to these straites, that either
thou shall be forced to deny the whole Scripture of the new Testament, or to
acknowledge Marcions heresy. This I say in good faith, we promise we will do.

Again, D. Bilson tells us, That the Protestants D. Bilson in his survey p.
467. Idem in praefat. p. 466. 474. and defens. page 126. 122. Bilson page 490
defen. page 134. Bills. page 496. 486. defens. page 131. 136. Bill. page 497.
503. defens. page 197. 138. Bills. p. 55. defens. page 141. Bills. page 517.
defens. page 142. Parks ep. dedicat. and page 1^9. and sect. 20.
clear not Christ from sin. It was rife in the pulpits and usual in the
Catechisms (says he) that the death of Christ Jesus on the Cross, and his
blood shed for the remission of our sins, were the least cause and means of
our Redemption. And rejecting further these Protestants doctrines thus he
relates them, Christ's will was contrary to Gods will; Christ in his agony knew
not Gods will; Christ was forsaken both in body and soul; Christ suffered hell
torments; Christ suffered the pains of hell; Christ suffered the death of the
soul; the death of the soul is such pains and sufferings of Gods wrath, as
always accompany them that are separated from the grace and love of God; God
did forsake Christ.

Thus you may see, how our most B. Savior, Redeemer of mankind, and
consequently as well all Christians, as all others, are damned with him by
these blasphemous Protestants. Lastly M. Parkes tells us, That the person of
Christ is prophanly spoken of; the Scripture is falsified to fasten blasphemy
upon Christ, heaven and hell, the Divinity and Humanity, yea the very soul and
salvation of Christ our Savior himself is called in question.

But to conclude, although it be an artiticle of our Creed, That Christ shall
come to judge the quike and the dead, and that he will render to every one
according to his works; yet D. Luther most blasphemously vomiteth out this
hellish Lu^h. tom 1 Germ. VVittem. fol. 273.. 3.
speech: When Christ comes to thy mind as a Judge, which is to command thee to
give up the reckonings of thy stewardship, or of thy life now at an end, be
thou assured (says Luther) that he is not Christ, but the Devil himself.

To show that they are tormented with the spirit of Atheism, will be witness
worthy Zanchius in his epistle before his confesson page 7. D. King. upon
lonas. ^2. page 442. D. VVhitguift. in his defense ^ract. 3. c. ^. p. 278.
Zanchius, who affirms, That among other monsters, Atheism has been fetched
out of hell, by the Ministers of Satan, in some of the reformed Churches. And
Doctor King late Bishop of London, says: So far is it off, that we are
become true Israelits with Nathanael or but almost Christians with Agrippa,
that we are proved fully Atheists. To whom we may add D. Whitguife Bishop of
Canterbury, who tells us in plain terms, That the Church of England is
replenished with Atheists.

And that they want not the Devil to teach and instruct them, and to be as it
were a familiar friend with them, to make them aquainted Hosp. in bist.
Sacrament. part. altera fol. ^^^. Courad. Riss. lib. Germ. contra Joan. Hessi.
de C^^a lib. ^.
with all these former spirits, they will not deny themselves. For Hospinian
says, That Luther being taught by the Devil, that the Mass was wicked, and
being overcome with Satan's arguments, did thereupon abandone the Mass. And
another Protestant tells us, That Luther bought a familiar Devil of Carolostade
for four shillings. And Luther himself blusheth not to speak thus: The Devil
sleeps nearer and oftener by me, Luth. in Collo. men^ f. 271. 275.
then my Katherine; and Satan favors me much more then he does others.

He also tells us, That the cause why the Sacramentaryes do not understand the
Scripture, is, Luth. in colloq. de vero Deo page 33. Luth in colloq. Pranck. f.
18. S^hlussel. in prafat lib. de Theol. Ca^uinist.
because they want the true opponent, to wit the Devil, who at length is wont
to teach them very well: for when we have not such a Devil hanging about our
necks (says Luther) we are nothing but speculatiue Deuines. But Conradus tells
us, that for all this the Caluinists or Sacrame^taryes do not want the Devil
for their master and suggester: For it is certain (says he) that the
Sacramentaryes do destroy and overthrow the Testament of the son of God, with
dreams suggested unto them by the black Devil.

And again, D Luther says: That we are held captive by the Devil, as by our
Prince and God, so that we are forced to do what soever he will, and Luth. tom.
3. Germ. Ien f. 247. Luth. in colloq. me^sal. de oper: Dei p. 49. Vide concio.
Luth. de Domin. loeta^e inter 27. concio. VVittem. and Arge^t. impress. 46 fol.
^8.
suggesteth unto us. Here you see how Luther makes no bones, to challeng the
Devil for his God. And in another place: I know not whether I teach truth or
no (says he) for very often Satan does assault me, and oppress me so
violently, as altogether I forget Christ. I have the Diueill within me, and I
know him in his skin, because he has eaten more then a bush^l^ of salt with
me: he is wont to walk with me in the Dormitory; and especially I have two
pleasant Devils who are Doctors of Divinity in this College, and obseruers of
all my actions.

Moreover he was so devout to the Devil, In colloq. ^nensal. Germ. fol. 281.
285.
as he was wont to pray to him in this manner, saying: O holy Satan, pray for
us, for we have never offended thee, O most clement Devil. Conradus also tells
us, That the spirit of the Caluinists is the spirit of darcknes, and that
Satan does speak by the Caluinists, as by his own instruments. And again,
Conrad. l. 3. There. Calu. art. 8. Conrad. ibid. in proaem. Osiand. in Euchir.
cont. Calu. page 267.
That it is more clear then the Sun shining at midday, that not the true God
but the Devil himself, did suggest to Zuinglius the Sacramentary heresy in a
dream. And Osiander likewise says, Let any godly or friendly Reader think
what deadly poison Satan does power out into men, under the Caluinian
doctrine, by which almost all Christianity is overthrown.

And another famous Protestant called Iezlerus, would have us know, That the
Lutherans call the Zuinglians convinced Heretics, devilish, Iezler. lib. de
diutur. belli Euch. p. 93.
of every side possessed, above, before, behind, within and without with
Devils; to be numbered among Anabaptists, Nestorians, Arrians, Turks; to be the
wickedest men that live upon the earth; and^ to be damned for all eternity.

And to conclude, another Protestant called Ioannes Schutz has published in
print; that Schutz. in ^o. cause. in praefat.
the sect of the Sacramentaryes is a certain sink^ into which many heresies
flow; the last wrath o^ Satan the which he stirring up in his rage, dot^
exercise against Christ and his Church. Of this sect M. Zuinglius and Calvin
were prime pillars whose deaths were answerable to their lives. For of Vldricke
Zuinglius his state and death, to whom the Devil suggested the Sacramentary
heresy, D. Luther having condemned him for a^ Heretic, accounts him blessed
that stands not in his way, and exhorts every one to fly his books, no
otherwise then the poison of the Devil of hell. He is a man (says he) so unto
ward, that he has lost Christ wholly: and I confess (says D. Martin) Tom. 2^
80 de Aduero,
ingenuously, that I cannot place him now amongst Christians; he teaches no
article of faith truly, and is seven times worse then when he defended the
Popes faith and Religion. God is a just Judge, and his judgments are right, who
suffers not the blasphemers and co^temners of his word to go unpunished, but
to perish miserably. And lastly, to the end he might bring others to his
error, he went to war, and there was slain and dyed like a thief.

And Franciscus Stancarus his censure of Calvin is this. Beware (says he)
Christian Reader, Stane. lib. 4. contra Calvin. N6 4.
and chiefly all you Ministers: I say, beware of Caluins books, and especially
of the articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, and Mediator, of the Sacrament of
Baptism, and Predestination; for they contain impious doctrins, Arian
blasphemies, that it seems the spirit of Seruetus who was burnt, (according
to the Platonists opinion) has passed into John Calvin.

And Sclusse^^urge a Superintendent, and one of the most famous men, that ever
were among the Lutherans, says: God that would not be mocked by men, has
showed his judgment i^ Schlus. ^ 2. art. 9. Theol. Cal^in. f. 72.
this world against Calvin, visiting him by the scou^ge of his fury, and
horribly punishing him before the day of his death: for he stroke this
Sacramentary Heretic in such sort, as he dyed desperate swearing and calling
upon the Devil, to whom he gave up hi^ wicked Ghost.

But now, if this Protestant Assembly by the Protestants own confession, be a
Congregation stuffed with the spirit of Heresy, of Lying, and Railing, against
all kind of people, friends and foes, Peers, Prelates, and Princes; a
Congregation swelling with Lucifer-like Pride in the highest degree, teaching
the basest miscreant in it to perfer himself in matters of faith, before all
Doctors, all Fathers, all general Counsels and all Churches, and in sanctity
of life; although they be truly nothing else, but a mere mass and puddle of
iniquity (as Calvin says) to equal themselves to the greatest Saints that
ever were, the Apostles, and the mother of God; a Congregation taught
doubtless by the suggestion of Satan, to contemn all laws of whatsoever
sort, both humane and divine; a Congregation infected with the spirit of all
kind of liberty, lechery, and lewdnes of life, and yet assecuring the followers
of it, to be as sure and certain of their Predestination, Justification and
Salvation, as Christ himself; a Congregation laden with horrible Blasphemies,
and reproa^hfull speeches, against Christ our Savior, and the living God;
replenished with Atheists, and fraught with Devils, and so many kinds of
unclean spirits: If, I say, this Protestant Congregation be such an Assembly,
as they themselves do acknowledge and confess; I wonder that this Parson was
not ashamed to be so senseles, and without brains, as to inuit your Honor to
be a member thereof.

FINIS.

