A Succinct Philosophical declaration of the nature of Clymactericall years,
occasioned by the death of Queen Elizabeth.

()

Written by T: W:

printer's device of Thomas Thorpe consisting of a boy with wings on his right
arm and with his left hand holding or fastened to a weight, construed in the
emblem tradition a talent kept from rising by the burden of poverty (McKerrow
142)

LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorpe, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Crane, by Walter Burre. 1604.

A Succinct Philosophical declaration of the nature of Clymactericall years,
occasioned by the death of Queen Elizabeth.
AFter the death of Queen ELIZABETH, who died in the 70. year of her age,
which was the Clymactericall period of her life, diverse pregnant wits, and
curious Philosophers were assembled by chance together, and among sundry other
learned Discourses, one demanded of me, what were these Clymactericall years,
their nature, and effects: For (quoth he) I have heard many Philosophors and
Physicians talk of them, but as yet I never thoroughly could pierce or
penitrate them. I answered him, that the Treatise thereof required longer
time, then that place and present occasions afforded, but that afterward at
more leisure he should understand them, if he were desirous to learn: The
Gentleman importuned me so much, as at last he drew me to write this Discourse
which follows: and for that it seems not altogether impertinent to this
explanation of Passions, I think it not unfit to be inserted in the last Book
of the Passions of the Mind; because the same temper of body, and propension
to death, which is the base of Clymactericall years; the very same conferres
much, either to move Passions, or hinder the opperations of the soul, as in
the progress of this discourse shall plainly appear.

Clymax in Greek signifies a Staire or a Ladder, and metaphorically is
applied to the years of a man or woman's life; as if the whole course of our
days were a certain Ladder, compounded of so many steps.

True it is, that as the constitutions of men's bodies are, for the most part,
of two sorts, the one is firm and strong, the other more weak and feeble: so
the Physicians by long experience have observed, that the fatal ends of them
who be of a lusty constitution, finish for most part in some score of years,
and so they number such persons periods by twenty, 40. 60. 80. 100. 120. And
to Other count them by tens.
this purpose said Moses, *whose eyes were neither darkened, nor any tooth
loosed. * Centum viginti Deuteronomy. 31. 2.
annorum sum hodie, non possum vltra egredi, and ingridi: I am now an hundred
and twenty years old, I can no more go out and come in, that is, no longer
live: and so it fell out, for that *same year Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
he died. And GOD himself said of man * Erunt Genes. 6. 4.
dies illius centum and viginti anni. The days of man shall be an hundred and
20. years.

The next Clymactericall year in them of solid and virile constitution is an
100, and so the Scriptures report. Numerus dierum vitae hominum vt Eccles. 18. 8
multum centum anni. The number of the days of the life of men at most is an
100 years. Another kind of men whose complexion is weaker, have a lesser
kind of measure, as they have shorter life; and yet these also be of two
sorts, some stronger, some weaker: the first Clymactericall years are nine,
eighteen, tweentie seven, thirty six, forty five, fifty four, sixty three,
seauenty two, eighty one; the seconds are, seven, fourteen, twenty one,
twenty eight, thirty five, forty two, forty nine, fifty six, sixty three,
seauenty. Of these two ages spoke David when he said. Dies annorum Psalm 89.
10.
nostrorum in ipsis septuaginta anni. Siautem in potentatibus octoginta anni
amplius eorum labor and dolor. The days of our years are seauentie years,
and if in Potentates they be eighty, the labor and grief is greater.

The most dangerous of all these passages or steps, are the forty nine,
compounded upon seven times seven: and sixty three standing upon nine times
seven, and next to these is seauenty, which contains ten times seven;
they number them also by nine, and so make eighty one, the most perilous as
comprehending nine times nine.

These observations then of Physicians presupposed as true, for men that are
wise, virtuous, and experimented in their faculties ought to be believed (for
wisdom and experience protect them from error, and honesty from lying and
deceit) it were good to examine and search out the cause of these notable
alterations and dangers of death in the Clymactericall years, for those
humors which alter the body, and dispose it to sickness, and death; the same
bend the soul to take inordinate affections and passions. I have heard some
Physicians resolve this doubt into the influence of heavens, to wit, that so
many courses of the Sun, Moon, and Planets from the time of a man's
Nativity, work such effects; so that some men, let them live never so
orderly, after so many circular motions of the Sun and Moon have warbled
over their heads, upon necessity they must fall into one sickness or
another, and so die.

Some others ground this variety and dangerous diversity, upon the singular
providence of God, who has created all things In numero, pondere and mensura:
and therefore has prescribed infallibly the periods of men's lives, according
to that Psalm: Notum fac mihi domine finem meum: and numerum dierum meorum quis
est: vt sciam quid desit mihi. Ecce mensurabiles posuisti dies meos. Psalm,
38. Make known unto me O Lord mine end, and the number of my days, that I may
know what I want. Lo thou have put my days mensurable, that is, prescribed
certain bounds and limmits of age not passable: and therefore both
Philosophers and Physicians conclude, that a man with many disorders,
surfeits, exercises, etc. may shorten the natural course of his life, but that
he cannot any way prolong it, and pass the prefixed instant of his death: the
similitude we have in a candle lighted, for let a man use all the diligence
possible, the light and fire feeding upon the candle, perforce will consume it
at last; and God or any Angel behoulding the quantity of the wike, tallow,
time of the year (for in cold weather a candle consumes more then in hot,
Per antiperistasin) and other circumstances may precisely foretell, that such a
candle cannot continue burning longer then such a minute of such an hour; in a
shorter time it may be consumed with wind, witches, snuffe-fallings, or such
like things which waste it away, but longer it cannot be prolonged: after the
same sort stands the courses and the listes of our lives prescribed by God
and prefixed by nature: and so God has appointed these Septuarie, and Nonarie
years as best seeming his wisdom and providence.

These manners of declaration I will not confute, for albeit I do think them
both in some things most true, yet they are too general and remote to answer
and satisfy fully our demand. The difficulty, no doubt, is exceeding hard,
and rather I believe it to be true for the authority of Physicians, then for
any credit I can give to their reasons; for indeed all that I have heard
discourse thereupon (and I have heard some very fine wits) and what I have
read, does not content nor satisfy my mind. Therefore I will set down my
Phylosophicall conceit (for in this speculation Physic depends upon
Phylosophie) and first suppose that customs, habites, changes, and great
alterations in men's bodies come seldom upon a sudden, but by little and
little grow and increase by tract of time; and as we say. Gutta cauat lapidem,
non vi sed sepe cadendo,
Sic homo fit doctus, non vi, sed sepe legendo.
The dribling drops by falling often,
Not might, make marbles thin:
So men by often perusing books,
Not force, do learning win.


Galen to declare the nature and force of custom Galen. de Consuet. c. 2.
and what effects it works in us, demands this question: how it comes to
pass, that some men's natures abhor exceedingly some sorts of meat, and are
not able to disguest them; as for example, says he, some cannot abide beef,
others shell fishes; and we have many who cannot so much as endure the sight
of cheese, others of aples: And yet these same persons by little and little are
brought to eat, disguest, yea and greatly to like them? He answers, that all
beasts and men have natural propensions, to such meats as are consorting with
the natural proprieties of their bodies, and abhor such things as are
contrary; and therefore the Lion feeds upon flesh, not upon hay; and the
Ox upon hay not upon flesh; yet it falls out that by tract of time, those
meats which we detested, after by use become familiar, for they alter the
body, and by the suck of their nourishment, change the affections and
qualities of the stomach, in such sort, as that meat, which before was
molestfull, and in very deed hurtful, becomes sauorie and healthful: and
this he proves, not only to be true in men and beasts, but also in seeds and
trees, whose fruit in some countries are poison, transferred into other soyles
where they receive another kind of norishment, they become, not only by tract
of time; not hurtful, but very healthful; not poysonfull, but pleasant.

Secondly, it is to be considered, that our bodies generally have certain
courses, passages, stations or periods, wherein they notably change their
actions and operations: till 21. years, or 25. at the most, we grow in height,
for some come to their full growth sooner, some later: from 25. to forty two,
or forty five, we grow in breadth or thicknes, from this, till the end of our
days we decline: the cause of these three notorious alterations is our
natural beat or humidum radicale, (which in mine opinion is nothing else but
the vital temper, and qualification of every solid part of our bodies) the
which residing in a moist body, causes it to grow, like the heat in a loaf
of Dowe set in the Oven: afterward, what with internal heat, external
drying of the winds, and sun, and other continual exercises, which daily
exsiccate the body, and draw out the vndeguested moisture, the innated heat is
not able to rouse up the body any more in height, but spreads it abroad, and
so enlarges, and ingrosseth it: after which continual working, heat is
weakened, and so by little and little still decays: and finally resolves in
dissolution.

Thirdly, in this septuarie number of our years, although we cannot discover
such notorious differences, as in the three former passages, yet in these
likewise, we may observe some markable change. At the first seventh year, men
commonly note, that then the child begins, to have some little sparks of
reason: and for this cause, the Cannon Law permits such, directed by their
parents or Tutors, contrahere sponsalia, to make a promise of future marriage.
In the fourteen year, the youth is thought to have the perfect use of reason,
and then the Cannons account him capable of marriage. At twenty one, a man is
reputed able iudiciously to dispose of his goods, and faculties, and therefore
the Common Law riddeth him then of his wardship, and the Cannons give him
leave to take the order of subdeacon: the first seven years are called
infantia, the second pueritia, the third adolescentia, the fourth, that is,
from twenty one to twenty eight, iuuentus, from thence to forty nine, he is
esteemed to stand in statu virili, the next till sixty three is senectus,
after, till seauenty and seauentie seven, for most part ensues decrepita
aetas. In all these periods, or Clymactericall years, it is to be noted, that
although the change in that year be perceived most palpably, and sensibly, yet
in all the precedent, they were preparing, working, and something disposing
thereunto: as for example, we must not think that the least drop of rain,
which in effect breaks the stone, does it of it self, for that were
impossible, but it does it in virtue, and by force and working of all the
former: And perhaps for this cause they were called anni scalares, for that
every year precedent, was a step to the last, wherein the Ladder or stairs
were ended.

Fourthly, there is a great dispute among Physicians, what should be the cause
of the Paroxisme^, or fittes in Agues, and once I my self being troubled with
a tertian Ague, in Italy, in the City of Como, there came two Physicians my
dear friends, and a Doctor of Divinity all at one time to visit me, and even
then I stood in expectation of my fit. After many complements and discourses
about my sickness, at last I demanded these two Doctors of Physic, that they
would resolve me in one doubt about my disease: they answered, with a good
will: Well, said I, you both conclude, and it stands with good reason, that
this sickness of mine proceeds from excess of choler: now I would know of
you, when my fit is past, is the choler all disguested, consumed, and voyded
away or no? If it be consumed, why does my Ague return? if it be not
consumed, why does mine Ague depart? The Physicians here answered one
contrary to another: for the first said it was disguested: Why then returns
mine Ague? For this cause quoth he, the Ague proceeds not only of choler,
but of choler putrified, corrupted, and poisoned. Now sir, the choler
poisoned is consumed, but other choler which remains, is not corrupted, but
by the next paroxisme it will be corrupted: Well, said I, what thing is that
which corrupts and poisoneth that good choler, which before was not
corrupted? It seems strange to me, how so much precisely should be corrupted,
and the other being so near lying by it, or rather united with it, yea
mingled in it, not to be infected: In truth I remember not what he answered,
but I am sure he satisfied none of us all. The other Doctor of Physic said,
it was not consumed, but nature feeling the force of that poison, united her
self to fight against it, and so allayed most of the vehemency, vigor, and
malignitie thereof: and he gave an example of a pot of water set on the fire,
for quoth he, if the coals be covered with ashes, the hot water cools,
blow the fire and it warmeth and boyleth, let ashes return, or the fire die,
the water returns to the first coldness: So quoth he, the poison of the
choler, by natures might is overcome, when the Ague departs, but after that
those spirits and forces, which nature had united, are dispersed, the fire is
quenched, and choler again corrupted. But quoth the other Physician, so the
sickness should never depart, for if your choler be still in cooling and
heating, and nature now fighting, now ceasing, when I pray you shall this
combat be finally ended? Marry sir quoth his fellow Doctor, in this sort,
nature mittigateth the forces of choler this fit, and allayeth them: now
nature in the mean time, is strengthened with good food, and the humor either
purged, or quailed with physic, and so by little and little it is quite
disguested.

Not so said the other, for then the second fit should always be less then
the first, and the third less then the second, and so forward to the last: but
this is false, for his third and fourth fits, were much more vehement, then
either the first or second. And besides, by this declaration, no man should
ever die upon an Ague. For if in every fit, the sickness ceased not, until
the humor were allayed, then certainly in Agues, (which are mortal) the fit
should never pass, which is most false.

With this the Doctor of Divinity, who was a very good Philosopher, and for
that he had been much troubled with maladies, he was like many wrangling
Gentlemen, a petty-fogging Physician at his own costs, as they be
petty-fogging Lawyers through theyrowne suits. Why said the Divine, may we not
hold that the Ague is in the liver and heart? No quoth the Physicians both, that
can not be, because no Physician ever held, that any Ague was in partibus
solidis, that is, in the heart and liver, etc. except the Hecticke. Well said
the divine, I say not that it is in the heart and liver immediately, for that I
will confess perforce must be choler, but I say the fountain and spring, the
root and origin to reside in the liver, the which immediately causes corrupted
blood and inflamed choler, for they being extraordinarily corrupted
themselves with vehement heat, cannot but engender blood, spirits, and humors
of like infection and corruption. And by this way I answer the first doubt:
that when the Ague eases, choler is diguested: Why then returns it again?
Marie sir, because the heart and liver being out of temper, in that space of
time engender so many more perverse humors, as oppress nature, so vehemently
and dangerously, that she must employ all her might to resist them, abate
them, extinguish them. In truth Master Doctor (said I) this opinion I like
very well, and I will confirm it, for since mine Ague first began, these
Physicians have inculcated nothing so much unto me, by word and deed, as to
cool my liver: to this effect all their syrrops and waters of Endive, Sicory,
and Barley tended. And with this discourse we ended our dispute, and mine
Ague: the which with this pleasant conference passed away.

Fifthly, Plato avouches, that Agues have ages Plato in Dialog. de Nature.
like men, as also consummations and ends, with whom Galen consents: This
sentence of Plato, Valesius a worthy Physician explicateth in this manner. As
there are two sorts of diseases, sharp and Valesius de Sacra Philo. cap. 7.
cronicall, both which have their decretory days, but not alike, for the
sharp have odd days, especially seven: the cronicall twenty, sixty,
eighty, a hundred: so there are two prerogations or courses of life: the one
is common to many, the other to few, and such as are of a most lively
constitution: both of them have their Clymactericall or decretory years. The
first we number by seven and nine, the latter we count by ten, and the
last period is a hundred and twenty.

To this Discourse of Valesius let us add a certain point of experience and
doctrine of Galen, Galen. lib. 1. de diebus decretorijs c. 12.
who in the decretorie days of a fever, which numbreth by seven specially, he
will tell you the fourth day, whether the Agew will leave the patient the
seventh, or whether he shall die upon the seventh day, or no: and also
withal, he teaches to foretell the very hour of death upon the seventh
day.

Last of all, out of these considerations we may gather as much as will
sufficiently (I hope) satisfy the Question proposed in the beginning of this
Section, viz: why in these Clymactericall years men commonly die? To which I
do answer, That for every six years or eight, men still gather up more
or less humors, which prepare the way for an Agew in the seven or nine: As
we said before, when the fit is past, the heart and liver prepare humors
for the next ensuing, and in case they be not sufficient in the seven, they
multiply to the nine; if in this they fail, then they pass to the fourteen,
then to eighteen, etc. And for this cause Physicians council their Patients
to purge in the Spring and Authumne, to hinder the increase of humors, albeit
they feel themselves nothing diseased at all.

This we may declare by the example of them, who are infected with hereditary
diseases, as the gowte, or the stone: for albeit they evidently appear not
till old age, yet in all the progress of their years, the parts and humors
insensibly are prepared. Or we may say, that in six or eight years the liver
and heart which are fountains of blood, and origens of humors are so infected
and corrupted, that in the last year they engender more unnatural superfluous
humors, than can stand with the right and natural constitution of the body.

But some will say, by this opinion a man should ever be sick, for he should
never want corrupted humors, wherein sickness consists. To this I answer;
first, that health consists not in indiuisibili, in an indivisible point, so
that it admits not some few peccant humors withal, but has a certain
amplitude, like as if into a But of strong Canary Wine, a man every month
should put in half a pint of water, every day a spoonefull, at the months
end, yea the years end, the Wine would be almost as potent, as at the first,
yea and perhaps more, if it be well helped.

Secondly, we see that Custom breeds qualities and alterations so
insensibly, as in long time (till they come to a full growth) they can hardly
be perceived.

Thirdly, I doubt not but he that has for example the first fourteen year
of his life for his Clymactericall, in the precedent years, shall gather more
corrupted humors, then he whose Clymactericall year is nine and forty, and
also feel himself proportionally more weak, albeit he can not well
perceive; for I my self have known a man, almost with half his lungs rotten
with a consumption, and yet boldly auowch that he was strong, for Ab assuetis
non fit passio.

Some will object, that we see by experience many men die within the space
of a day or two, who before were as sound and whole, as could be: neither in
their urine, blood, or pulse appeared any sign of sickness, or superfluous
humor.

To this I answer, that such a man was either oppressed with some vehement
Passion, or some violent exercise, or some other extrinsecall cause, which
accelerated, perverted, and extraordinarily augmented the humor, and so caused
death: for as I said above, although a man (considering the common course of
his days) can not pass his prefixed time and Clymactericall periode, yet by
many means he may shorten it.

Much more I could say, pro and contra, for this Declaration, but because it
were something too Physical, and not so necessary for this Moral Treatise,
therefore I will bury it with silence: for this point, in very truth, is so
intricate, that I perceive, the best wits are exceedingly troubled to
extricate themselves out of it.

And therefore, as this I esteem probable, so I would give any Physician most
hearty thanks, who in few words would teach me a better way.

I said in brief, for I have seen some such long tedious Discourses, as I
loathed to peruse them, doubting lest the uncertain profit, would not repay
the certain pain.

Finis.

