AN ARMOVRE of Proof: Very profitable, as well for Princes, noble men; and
gentlemen, as all other in authority, showing the firm fortress of defense,
and haven of rest in these troublesome times and perilous days.

Made by John VVoolton Minister of the Gospel.

printer's device of a serpent on a rod upheld by two hands emerging from
clouds

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by John Shepperde. Anno. 1576.

coat of arms of the Cecil family COR. VNVM VIA. VNA



To the right honorable, Sir William Cicil Knight, Lord Burleigh, and Lord
high Treasurer of England, John VVoolton wishes the favor of God; continual
health, and prosperous selicitie.
THere is engraffed, and deeply rooted in man's mind, an Man judges corruptly
according to the eu^ of worldly matters.
error and false opinion, which even immediately after his dounefall, did
spring and show it self out of original sin, to judge of Gods Providence
according to wordly events: and if sometime he see the better side, and iuster
cause oppressed fraudulently and tirarmously, then he either denies altogether
Gods care over mortal men, or else doubts of the equity of the cause, and
gives judgment, that those which are overcome, have the weaker title, and are
cast away from God, and that the conquerours and victors do defend the
sincere part and better title, and and are accepted of God And this thing
comes to pass especially in matters of religion, where men according to the
estate of kingdoms, and inclination of the people, do weigh and esteem ^
fruits of a ^ubting mind matters of eligion.
the truth of the same. I his grievous error, if it continue any space in man's
breast, it breeds in some an Apostasle, and utter departing from God: In
othersome troublous motions, and flitting minds, which in time do quench in
man all sense of godliness, and at last carries him headlong into a godless
contempt of Religion, or drives him downeright into dreadful desperation. For
man's mind, which was gonies of the inde and conience intolleble.
created to search out the truth and to ^ol^w^ the same, is not able to endure
those conflictes, and assaults of a vexed mind: and sorely I am of this
opinion, that the gnowings and frettings of the conscience which arise by
means thereof, are more dolorous than any torments which man's body may
sustain. Pompeius Magnus ompeyus Aagnus.
ariuing at Mitelenen, after that famous foughte^ field of Pharsalie,
discourses with Cratippus his whose race of life, and makes large mention of
his adverse fortune, and lastly drowned in the gulf of despair, viterly
denies Gods providence, by cause in a just and good quarrelf (as himself
thought) God suffered him to fall. ^emades.
And Demades that eloquente orator and grave Senator of Greece, giving as
wholesome counsel in matters touching the common wealth, as either
Themistocle^s, Miltiades or Pericles, was wo^t to allege for himself, that
froward fortune and unhappy desteny, did frustrate his devises.

Which voice albeit even then it escaped not just reprehe^sion of the wise,
yet it paynteth lively unto us the ruin of the Attyke common wealth, the
great perilles and dangers in all cinill regiment, and the declining of
Empires and kingdoms. We live no doubt in the last times, and old age of the
world, which is feeble and doing, for by common eourse of nature; after vigor
and strength, follows inclination and faintness, and tho end of things is
always weak: Wherein we see the rage of Satan to spur men's minds to ward
fury; to stir up troubles, cruel wars, and all kind of calamities every
where, and for that he knows the restitution of mankind to approach, and his
time short, he omitteth nothing unattempted, to draw great swarms and
companies of the world, to forsake nuereligion, and to run into ignorance
and blasphemy.

And that I may let pass those, that upon the Occasions that move wordling to
relinquishe Religion.
coasts of Hungary depart from us to the Turk persuaded with wealth and
prosperous success of his wares: What Tragedies does the Devil move on each
side of us to terrify men from following Christ his ensign, and from a free
and liberal profession of his most sacred and c^ernall Gospel In Scoplande we
have heard of daily slaughters and butchery of Christ's children, where it is
now a common slight to minister an Italian dram unto their Princes, and
trayt crously to murder the peers and nobles of their land. The dealings of
the Duke of Alu^ and his successor in the low countries, are more lamentable,
where no laws, no faith, no promises are kept, no antiquity of noble
families regarded, no faithful service to their Prince and country remembered,
no silence nor abiuring of ^rue religion accepted, but Spanishe cruelty
executed upon all ages, degrees and fexes, without any consideration: besides
these, no spoil nor robbery of men's substaunes, no extreme punishments nor
torments, no rasing of towns and Cities, no adultery nor filthy Sodomy can
content their monstrous and most vile natures and appetites. All good natures
tremble and quake at the reports of the French eruelty, exceeding Phar^^ and
Nero in all rage and tirannie, whose proceedings are such, that we may gather
that their determinate minds and purposes are no^^t^eeasse, until they have
the heart blood of all those in whom any spark or breath of Christian Religion
at any time heretofore has has appeared, and so driving away the shining
brightness of the Gospel, to reduce the Romish Idol, and to exalt him in all
Europe, as the chief Monarche again. For now they cloak not their malice with
pretense of suppressing rebellious subjects: but lynking unto them the Spanish
nation, do most evidently profess them selves the sworn enemies of Christ
his espouse, and the chief defenders and Champions of Babylonish Idolatry.
The puissance and great might of that side, their terrible executions, and
the froward events of lawful and godly enterprises, languisheth and wholly
discourageth many men that heretofore have given some countenance unto the
Gospel: And no mortal wight were able to continue in so sharp and endless a
battle firm and constant, without an undoubted assurance of Gods providence
and fatherly care over them. Wherefore godly men comfort themselves with a
grounded faith, being tossed too and fro, in vehemente storms and tempests,
and do know that the son of God guides the stern of his ship, and as he
promised, so has he in deed exhibited his holy spirit, by whom he gives
unto his children courage and strength, to give testimony of the truth,
without dred in the middle of all punishments and ^^rme^ts. Touching the
fornamed Tirants, (...) me God has given stout stomachs, ^^^till (...),
greet victories, whereby they are grow^h into a licetious boldness, bending
(...) ^^ght against Christ his Church: we (...) our selves, that God will
withdraw (...) his general graces, that he will depri^^ them of all their of
n^ments in body and mind, that he will leave them unto themselves; as he
forsook P^mpey, ^lcibiades, Alexander and What end abides the enemies of the
Gospel. Valerianus.
such like. We have an especial example hereof in Valerianus. the Emperor,
who in the beginning for his upright justice and valiant heart, was dearly
beloved of the Senate and common people, but afterward, setting himself
against Gods Church, became captive unto Sapores. Sapores.
king of the Persians, who used his head as a^ootostoole, mounting upon his
horse, and in his old age, vnskinned him from the top of the head unto the
plant of the foot, so that at last he found an ouermatch stirred up by God,
Chaldaeus Paraphr. cui contradicit tamen Caluinus.
that taught him how tender in the sight of the Lord are the wounds of his
saints. Their places are prepared no doubt: albeit somewhat deferred the
stacknesse thereof, will be recompensed with the weight of the same. Cayne his
fra^recide was punished in the seventh generation. Bias his opinion is noted of
the wise, who when he saw a wicked monster prosper say de, Asshredly that
fellow must needs be punished, albeit I live not to see it. The history of
Bessus serves hereunto, who murdered his own father, Plutarchus.
and lived long after in great prosperity, until at the last, passing by a
nost of chittering birds as he went to a solemn banquet well accompanied in
great madness threw down the nest with his spear saying, These birds do
right and day with their noise lay unto my charge the murder of my father
whereupon he was apprehended, condemned, and executed. Let no man therefore fret
because of the green Psalm. 37.
bay tree in Libanus: stay but a little, and the leaves will fail, the tree
will rotte away, and the plague thereof will no where be found.

And touching our selves, I see no cause why we should in the quarrel of our
God conceive What Christians ought to do in these perilous days.
such trernoling and fear at the great strength and tyra^nie of our enemies,
as many carnal men now do. When Jerusalem was in great distress and
danger of mighty ^nimies, Esaias the Prophet is sent from the Lord with this
iniunction, In silence Esaias. 30.
and in confidence shall be your strength. What is this silence? and what is
this confidence? First it is our duty to suffer afflictions patiently.
Secondly, not to busy our selves out of our vocation. Thirdly, not to mistrust
Gods help, and so carnally to enter into ungodly leagues and unlawful
friendships, as the kings of Judah No leagues are to be made with Gods enemies.
leaned sometime upon the Egyptians, now upon the Sy^ans, and in the end
were made slaves unto them, and cast out of Gods favor, for so speaks the
prophet Iehu unto Iehosaphat* 2. Para. 19.
Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? for this
thing the wrath of the Lord is upon thee. Against, such difference and
unlawful defenses are these words spoken: In silence and confidence shall be
your strength: that is to say, awaite upon Ieza. 30. 31. 48 Psalm. 32.
Gods hand, run not to the Egyptians, Turks, Papists, and to have help of
them. Your cause is good and just, the almighty regards you, and if you be
put to the worse, yet is it better to suffer calamities, than with dishonest
devises to hurt a good matter. Let no man faint therefore, because now adays,
many worthy men endewed with the gifts of Gods spirit, are Tirannously The
estate of Christ's Church in this world.
murdered, by most ^ile and dishonest persons. Such troubles the Church never
wanted, but has passed them all, and shall continue until Christ's coming to
judgment.

The face and countenance of Gods Church is not always after one manner. It is
sometime ample, fair, and glorious: sometime small, half dark and
contemptuous in the world. Much like the Moon, who according to her place,
receives from the Sun sundry beams, so The light of Christ's church never
wholly quenched.
that the Devil shall never be able utterly to extinguish her light: for even
in her wane she spreads her out at large, and waxes round and full again.
And albeit, some branches of the Church be cut off and perish, yet the root
and stock of the same abides always sound and incorrupt. In the
conservation whereof, the pleasure of almighty. God is to exercise our faith,
hope, and invocation, and to give us to understand, that he will not permit
man's deliberations to take place in the regiment of our lives, but to
acknowledge our protection to come from above, least we might proudely boast
Our ^wne hands have done these things. Iudi. 7.
If the Church be not co^serued by those means which carnal reason deuiseth,
or at what time Why God helps not according to man's policy and devises.
our hearts do earnestly wish it, or by such men who according to our
judgment, are of sufficient wisdom and strength to archieue it, we are even
then by use and experience taught, that the regiment of Christ's congregation
much varieth from civil policy. For unto promises of temporal blessings, a
condition of calamity and affliction is most commonly annexed, wherein the
beauty of Christ's espouse shines most clearly, in that she bears constantly
and patiently for Gods cause, pelne, and misery, and at the last, is delivered
miraculously and gloriously.

We have a mirror hereof, in that notable promise Ismael. Jacob. Kedar.
Nabayoth. Gene. 25.
made to Abraham and to his posterity by Isaac. In thy seed shall the nations
of the earth be blessed, from which blessing Ismael is not only excluded, but
also cast out and banished. Yet surely out of Ismael by his son. Kedar, that
mighty nation of the Arabians often mentioned in the Scripture, did issue and
spring, and from his eldest son Nabaioth descended the Nahatheans, Ismael and
his generation with their estates.
a people in Arabia faelici, of whom the Poets speak much in their
monumentes, attributing unto them the same name. Mahomet the first author of
the Turkish blasphemy, and the erector of the Saracens kingdom, deriueth his
progeny by a long contract from the said Ismael, whose posterity do rule wide
and broad throughout Asia, Atricke and part of Europ eve at this day, and do
not cesse to make continual war with Abraham his children, that is to say
with the true Church of Christ.

But Jacob the heir of the blessing, and his children are led by and by into
exile out of the Jacobs condi^i^.
^and of promise, and becomes subject to a strange king in Egypt, where his
posterity endured hard servitude and detestable slavery many years. E^au Esau
prospers. Gene. 36.
in the mean season, enjoys at home pleasant ^est and pcace, and in plenty
and wealth multiplyeth and increases that nation called Edumites. Now albeit
the Israelites seem to be abject from god, yet they are preserved wonderfully,
and most The Israelites miraculously delivered.
worthy and evident tokens of Gods favor toward them, are showed in the land of
Egypt, and lastly with Gods mighty hand and stretched out arm, they are
delivered from Pharao his cruelty, and are reduced into their natural
country. God do the not therefore give events and success by such means and
ways, nor at such times as humane reason craves and desires: but with his
long tarying, sharpneth our faith, and kindles an ^ardent invocation in us,
and so either mitigateth or wholly takes away miseries and calamities. Albeit,
the aid and comfort of the holy Ghost does The power of the holy Ghost
principally in torments.
never show it self more manifestly than in assisting and comforting the godly
against the fierce and outrageous torments of the wicked, whereby they are
kept from despair, stayed from denying their God, and preserved from murmuring
and repining against his majesty.

Wherefore let all men that have a place in The Captain and delyueres of the
Church.
Christ's Church, rest and stay them selves upon God in these days of ours,
wherein the world runs upon wheels: let them set before their eyes, that
Dani. 12.
which is written in Daniel, At that time shall Michael stand up the great
Prince, which stands for the children of thy people. And again, There is
Dani. 10.
none that boldeth with me, but Michael your Prince. These sweet and
heavenly co^solations, are the only refuge and chief pillars of the godly, and
their whole confidence is reposed upon the Lord of hosts, the son of the living
God, who names himself the Emperor and Captain of his Army^ and is indeed
that great prince Michael, who warcheth and wardeth his own people, preserves
his espouse in storms and tempests, gives her Halcions days to hatch her
young ones, represseth and bride leth the furor and rage of Tyrants.

The remembrance of these things as they are meet for all the members of
Christ's Church, so are they most necessary for princes and Magistrates,
being the nourcing fathers thereof, the keepers of the two Tables, and the
defenders of ^
his holy word the Gospel, against whom Satan and his limbs do rage and rore
with a wonderful fury, envying their prosperity, undermining their estate,
and thirsting after their blood and destruction. VVher by I have bin moved to
draw this little treatise, being indeed nothing else but a Consolation for
Princes and noble men against the subtle practices and bloody purposes of
cruel tirants. This argument surely was most meet for a wise and profounde
learned man to labor in. And I heartily wish, that some excellent wit, upon the
view of this my rude (but strong foundation) might be moved to make some more
beautiful building. In the mean season, until some better artificer take this
work in hand, I thought good to publish this commonefaction or instruction,
which I most humbly offer and present unto your right honorable Lordship, not
as a matter needful to put you in remembrance of any thing that should be
wanting in your honor apperteyning to the duty of a wise counselor and just
magistrate, but rather to be as glass for you to see and behold, to your
great comfort, how God has by his mighty hand always kept and defended all
such Princes, Cou^sellers and Magistrates, as have adua^ced his glory in
setting forth true religion, and executed justice in their vocations and
callings, wherein with what great study and care of mind you honor has labored
now many years, God and good men can tell and are evident witness, and your
self recording the devilish devises of your enemies to thwart and frustrate
your proceedings, to prejudice your prudent policies, and to bring your honor
to utter ruin and destruction and on the other side, how God of his great
goodness has given good events to all your enterprises, and preserved your
honor from time to time, even miraculously in great perilles and dangers, must
needs acknowledge Gods gracious favor (and that I may so speak) his approved
and vnperceable armor, wherewith he succoureth and saves (...) judges and
magistrates that are learned in his law, kiss his son Christ and become
fosters and nourcing fathers of his Spouse the Church.

The living God preserve your right honorable Lordship from all evil, conserve
and keep you unto the end in the known truth, defend you with his mighty
hand against Satan's rage and fury: and finally, suffer you not to be
discouraged with these grievous temptations and dangers, which must needs
without his aid, not only trouble, but also utterly discomfort you in your
calling in these Tragical times, wherein the Devil bends and brandesheth his
fry darts with greatrage, and terror against the magistrates breasts. But
comfort you, make your yoke pleasant and your burden light through the word of
truth and grace of his holy Spirit, Amen From Exceter, the last of Febru. Anno
Domini. 1576.

Your honors most humble John Woolton.

AT what time Aurelianus the Flauius Vopiscus in Aureliano. Sabellie. ennead.
7. li. 8.
Emperor, that obstinate enemy to right Religion, and the only author of ye
ninth rufull persecution against the Christians, was much molested with
conspiracies and rebellions in sundry his Provinces: he appointed one
Saturninus his Liefetenant in the East Saturninus
parts: Whom the inhabitants of Alexandria for his approved prowes in war,
his wisdom and politic regiment in peace, saluted and proclaimed Emperor
after Aurelianus death. Which title and dignity Saturninus so long and
earnestly refused, that the rude people (whom the ancient Proverb truly
terms a monster of many heads) altered in a moment their loving affection
into fury, and of faithful friends became almost mortal foes. For they seeing
their good wills unconsidered, and all provident care over them utterly
neglected, with an universal and mutinous noise, cried kill him, kill him, and
shaking their weapons threatened present death. Saturninus thus pressed, or
rather oppressed, yields unto them: he assumeth the Scepter and Dyademe, but
speaks unto them in this wise. You know not (my dear The carefully life of
princes and noble men.
and loving companions) the comberous and dangerous conditions of Princes and
noble men, swoordes and pykes hanging over their heads, lauelins and darts
euerywhere, their heads untrusty, their counselors faythlesse, their meals
careful, their sleeps unquiet, their iourneys troublesome, their expeditions
unlucky, their wars bloody, their life and years discommended. In youth
they are thought selfewill: in age men say they dote. You now carry me into
most perilous and raging seas, but this is my only solace and comfort, that I
shall not make shipwreck alone.

He saw right well by daily experience, that men guyding the stern of
common wealths, do taste in that course and trade of life more Aloes than
sugre: and do suppe up rather the bitterness of gauls, than the sweetness
of honey. For albeit in delicate and riotous fare, in sumptuous and gorgeous
apparel they abound and exceed, yet they have in the middle of a thousand
rocks and quickesandes, as snares, poysonynges, Seneca controuersiariu^ lib. 7.
conspiracyes, Rebellions, sudden murders and such like. And that I may
omittethe open ways and most plain passages, which all men generallye tread
toward death, and the manifold casualties and mischaunces Man's life fyckle
and bariable.
wherein this seelye life of ours is intrapped at noonedaye, whilst we all
are borne but after one manner, and dye after a thousand: yet especially, the
great men of this world do for the most part sail in the thick mist, and
dark night, and suddenly are stricken under water themselves in a sound and
heavy sleep. The storm and tempest shewetlrsome tokens before it aryseth to
the vigilant husbandman, and Shipman. The houses tracke before they fall. The
smoke signifies the flame following. Only without Seneca episto. 17 epist. 104.
any watchworde man destroys man. And especially the great and mighty man is
subject to the malicious and enuyous stroke of man: and the nerer the stroke
the more closely is it kept. Princes and noble men are most of all other
deceived by such as look cheerfully The noble man's life most variable.
upon them, that come humbly to kiss their hands and feet with Al hail,
showing ye cou^tena^ce of loving men, but having the inward appetites
Flatterers no small de cay to noble men.
and desires of tauening beasts. Caesar whom neither the stout Germayne, the
bold Britayne, the hautie Spaniarde, the politic Frenchman, neither subtle
Egyptian, with warlike weapons were ever able to vanquish in the plain field,
could not avoid in the Senate at Rome, in time of peace, the short daggers of
such faithless friends.

And that I may omit those common speeches, that true faith and constant
promises can not settle themselves about high estates: The devil himself, when
he spyeth the weapons and wits of wicked men blunt and dull in such eases as
he has bin an insatiable murderer from the beginning, so then does be
practice all his old policies, and attempteth all means to cast down the
Magistrates, and with them to overthrow the whole multitude. And that those
things are most true, many woorthye wightes have approved and confessed, who
studying to apply all their endeavors Many worthy men hereof purpose refused
public Regument
with commendation and good conscience to execute their callinges, have seen
good meanings and devises for the most part turned vpside down. These things
caused Tiberius the Emperor often to call Regiment a monstrous beast. When
Pompeius Magnus was advertised by letters sent unto him from Pompeius magnus.
the Senate, that all power and authority was conferred from Scylla unto him
by the general consent of the people, he sorowfully smit him self upon the
breast, saying thus: Ah troubles and sorrows without end.

Had it not bi^better for me to have descended of obscure parents, than thus
to be wasted with publyke cares, to be undermined with malice and Envy, and
ever to be a stranger not only in my own house, but to my dear and loving
wife and children? Of Pompey his judgment have been many excellent men: who
being delited with the prinate and quiet life, and wearied with weighty offices
in the common wealth, have most willingly resigned and given up their
authority. It is written of Diocletianus Augustus, that Diocletian.
of his own election he left his dignity, and refused his Crown, willing to
pass his latter days rather in some solitary place in ye country, tha^ in a
Palace in the eye (as it were) of a mighty Empire. I am not ignorant what
some Authors report of that fact of Diocletianus: but howsoever it was, it
swarueth not from this purpose. Dyon in the life of Adrian makes mention of
one Similis, who often used Similis.
to say that he accounted that private condition of his which he lead in
Campania to be his life: but these other days spent in Court be called death
and not life. For so sounds that Epitaphe which he willed to be ingraued
upon his Tomb. Here lies Similis whose name was ancient, but in deed he
lived only seven years. The noble man made so small account of that his time
spente in prease of mighty men, himself the chief in all honor and
dignity. Xenophon in that dialogue entitled Tyrannus, seems of purpose to
induce Hiero disputing with Socrates, often Hiero.
repeting and confirming by his own experience the private and mean estate of
life: far to excel the public calling of officers, and the high condition
of noble men: not only in tranquillity of mind and ease of body: but
oftentimes in competent and laudable wealth and riches.

All these wise men did well perceive that to exploite weighty affairs, and
to guide the common wealth, is a matter of much moment, enwrapped above all
other kinds of life in infinite perilles and most desperate and dangerous
troubles. The Emperors of Rome have well confirmed these things, for of
forty of them next succeeding Julius Caesar, scarce ten dyed naturally in
their beds. And so much did men shun that calling, the end whereof by
experience they often did see to be either the piersing swoorde, or privy
poison, that by coaction or constraint they supplied the office. And in these
our times, being no doubt the last and iron age of the world, wherein all
living things in strength and might do decay, the firmament and earth grown
old, and in force and power spent, and (as it were) worn out, what other
things see we than iniquity (according to the word of Christ) to abound,
and especially disobedience in all degrees almost to superabounde? The late
Vide Serapiouem and Enceliu^ de vi and natura Adamantis
conspiracies, tumultes and vprores in this our natyue country: and the hard
heart of Adamante not possible to be mollifyed without blood, has openly
displayde a I cocenesse in discipline, an oblivion of loyalty, and a
monstrous contempt of a most mylde mothers meekness and mercy. Satan has
spitte out his poison against the prince and magistrates, he has discharged
his great ordinance against the Castle of peace and concord. The sedulitie and
great care of the magistrate has not wanted in watching and warding the same:
but unless the lord of heaven and earth had kept this forte, all the keepers
had watched in vain. If he had not bin on our side, then Psa. 127. 124 Psa.
143.
(as the Prophet says) had we bin swallowed up quick: Then had the swelling
waters gone ouer-our soul, and we like to them that goe-downe into the Pit.

These things deeply weighed, and oftentimes considered of the noble (for they
ought never to be forgotten) admonishes them not only to be thankful to God
for so miraculous Psalm. 124.
a deliverance, who has not given them as a pray unto their enemies teeth: but
moreover teaches them what protection and defense they ought principally to
provide hereafter in sembable tumults and troubles. The Heathen Magistrate
would account his chief suertie and best defense, to consist in store of
money, in great horses, in valiant Soldiers, in great and mighty armies. The
Christian Magistrate will not refuse these external helps, but principallye
will acknowledge his defents to come from God, and therefore will not fear
Psalm. 27. and 117.
what man may do unto him. The Heathen Magistrate would make flish his right
hand and comfort. The Christian Magistrate will lift up his eyes unto the
mountains, and make Iere. 7. Psalm. 121. Psalm. 119.
the Lord his aid and help, and will seek his consolation out of Gods
word. The infallible and present consolation, and the firm The division of
this book.
fortress of christian Princes and Magistrates consists upon foute
principal pyllers. First of his vocation and calling. Secondlye, of the
worthy and most notable promises of God in the scripture, that he will be
their helper and defendour. Thirdly, of the honor and obedience, which God
severely commands to be given unto magistrates. Fourthlye, of innumerable
examples in holy write: whereby we see the good Magistrates always to have
bin mayntayned and preserved, and the rebellious and disobediente to have bin
suppressed and punished.

The first Consolation of the Magistrate in respect of his calling, and of the
dignity thereof.
The Magistrate is a person ordained and The definition of a Magistrate
instituted of God himself, both to be a maynteyner and defendour of the
first Table, wherein those things are especially comprehended, which
appertain to the worshipping of God: and also to be a keeper and preserver of
the second Table, containing external disciplyne, and obedience in humane
society: and to be gods Liefetenant, sounding the voice of the law Moral,
guyding his subjects according to the same. And as this ordinance is of God:
so has it been of The calling of a magistrate most ancient. Gene. 9.
most ancient time. For in Noha his days immediately after the flood when God
gave leave to mortal men to kill living creatures for their food and
sustentation, he forbad them to eat beasts being yet alive in their blood, as
Wolves devour lambs, and as the Griphon renteth doves, least men abusing such
livertie, Pity and mercy toward unreasonable creatures.
might in time being fleshed (as it were) in cruelty, kill one another, and
shead man's blood. The living Lord requires a kind of pity and mercy
toward creatures, albeit unreasonable: not to deal with them as with
insensible things: wherein Cato Censorius is justly Plutarchus in vita Catonis.
reprehended of Plutarch, who without all humanity sold his bondmen, now old
and altogether wasted in his service. God therefore thundereth a severe
intermination or threatening, saying, whosoever sheadeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shead. For in the Image of God has he made man. In which words
of the Lord we see the institution of a Magistrate, to the end he should
succor and defend the poor and innocent from injury and vyolence, and
correct and punish the transgressors for their faults and offenses. In times
paste, Kings and rulers therefore The worthy style of princes.
considering not only the antiquity, but also the dignity of their calling to
be of God, have in their styles used this Phrase.

N. By the grace of God King.

Acknowledging that all preeminencye of Psa. 82.
Majesty, authority, and power of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and of all
other Magistrates and officers whatsoever are given and conferred by God
himself. Which cogitation is very profitable, not only to repress Means
whereby mighty my are stayed, from arrogancy.
the insolency and hautinesse of mind, which commonly accompanies dignity
and authority, being very pernicious in all regiment: but also much furthereth
to the better administration and discharge of their calling in the fear of
God. For as they see and understand themselves appointed in their places and
degrees by God: even so are they seriously put in mind that they must yield an
account of all their doings to him: and therefore they will endeavor with all
their power and strength to obey and serve him with all fear and reverence,
according to the saying of the King and Prophet: Be wise now therefore ye
Kings, be learned ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice
in trembling.

Now as we learn the worthiness of this The great estimation of magistrates
amongst the Heathen.
calling by the light of Gods word: so may we see the same in the Gentiles,
following the light of most worthy titles and names: as the Persians who both
called their Kings Gods, and lying prostrate before them, signified an opynion
of their royal minds and majesty. Afterward the Grecians excelling in all
science and learning, called their Princes Pastors or feeders of the people:
with which name excellent Homere has celebrated worthy Agamemnon. Mynander
aptly and briefly calls a King The lively Image of God. Albeit that saying
seems to be drawn out of Hesiodus an ancient Poet, who numbered noble and
vertouns Princes amongst the Gods, attributing unto them after this life a
kind of divine power over men. Which opinion was afterward received both of
the Grecians and Romans: as it is most evident to them that obscrue their
languages. For as amongst the Romans all such as were translated for their
noble acts, amongst the number of the Gods, were called Indigetes, as if you
would say: dwelling with the Gods. So the Atheniensians named such worthy
wightes Jupiters, sons of God, enjoying (...).
heaven as it were by right of inheritance. But in process of time, the Romans
most honorably termed their Emperors and nobles, Fathers of their country,
and added the names of Royalty and Majesty. And finally, accompting such
speeches not answerable to their great enterprises and exploits, they erected
unto them Images, Altars, Chapels, Churches, Holidayes, and Sacrifices. Which
doings if you try by the touchstone of true religion, I confess they will
appear dross, and be found blame worthy. Yet I say, by some spark or
glimse of nature, or by some celestial inspiration, they reverenced next and
immediately under God the creator of things, and somdeale adored the
Magistrates. These examples must needs please all sache as do not barbarously
reiecte the light of naturr, and the Lady of man, Reason (I mean) and
understanding.

But most pithie persuasions and comfortable Christ allureth the office of a
magistrate
consolations are drawn out of the wells of living water, not only quencting
men's dry and thirsty affections in this lyte, but springing to life
everlasting. Almighty God therefore in the regiment and policy of his own
people the Israelites, after their entrance into the land of Promise, first
appointed Judges, and then Kings, unto whom he made the common people
subject, which authority and secular power of Magistrates Christ him self
and the Apostles have allowed and confirmed. The answer of Christ touching
paying of Tribute, even to a Heathen Magistrate is most evident. Give (says
he) to Caesar those Math. 23.
things that belong to Caesar: and unto God those things that belong to God.
Which precepte Christ himself fulfilled in paying Tribute. The blessed mother
of Christ Marie the Math. 17.
virgin accompanied with Joseph, went to Bethleem to be taxed among other
Citizens and subjects. The speech of Christ to one of Luke 2.
his company caryeth weight with it: Put up thy swoorde in his place, for all
that take the sword, shall perith with the sword. Math. 26.
In which sentence we see the power of the Secular swoorde allowed, having
annexed unto it ordinarye and lawful correction and punishment, whereby
private murders and other offenses may be stayde and let. It follows then
of the premises, that this condition of life, is bolye and acceptable to God,
whereby the disobedient are brideled, and the innocent maynteyned and
conserved. Saint Paul the chosen vessel, enlarges and expounds the Romans 13.
words of his master: Let every soul be subject unto the high powers: for
there is no power but of God: and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resistech the ordinance of God: and
they that resist shall receive to them selves judgment: for Princes are not to
be feared for good works but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of
the power? do will, and so shalt thou have praise of the same, for he is the
minister of God for thy wealth, but if thou do evil, fear, for he bears
not the sword for naught: for he is the minister of god to take vengeance on
him that does evil. Wherefore you must be subject not because of wrath only,
but also for conscience sake. For for this cause ye pay also Tribute, for they
are Gods ministers, applying themselves for the same thing. In this place the
holy ghost calls three times the Magistrate by the name of Gods minister.
And is not this a true, a steadfast, and an excellent comfort? Is not the great
and heavy burden of Magistrates made light? Is not their pensive minds and
careful care eased and relieved?

In times of darkness none were thought A magistrate executing his calling
does God good service.
to serve God, but such as went into the church to hear mattins and mass. But
S. Paul the organe and instrument of God, tracheth that a Magistrate sitting in
judgment, hearing pleas, examining causes, succoring the widow and orphane,
and pronouncing sentence according to justice and equity, does God true and
faithful service. Wherefore albeit many griefs, cares, sorrows, calamities,
and incommodities do accomber this life, do waste and consume them, yet have
they this consolation: I execute this my condition and estate by Gods ordinance
and calling, whither therefore God prolong or shorten my days, it forces not.
I live and dye in that function which is acceptable unto God. And God
directs the Princes heart.
God surely does not only govern their external doings, but boweth and
inclines their hearts and denises after his will and pleasure, according to the
saying of the most prudente Solomon, The Kings heart is in the hand of Prou. 21.
the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it whether soever it pleases
him. Thus you see with what weighty words the spirit of God extolleth their
callings, and that not without brgent (...). For if we take away the
Magistrate, or wilfully violate their sacred authority, we take the sun out
of the world, we abandon truth and peace, we make the whole earth a den of
thieves.

CHAP. 2. The second consolation, drawn from Gods manifold promises, to help
and defend the Magistrate.
IF Princes or Magistrates did turmoyle and tumble in their Gods especial
providence over the Prince and Magistrate.
regiment without Gods special help and providence, no marvel it were, if the
thought and care of one day, did utterly ouerwhelme and oppress them. But
therefore have they an unspeakable solace, that God both conferreth dominion
and rule at his own pleasure, and also directs and guides them accordingly,
using them only as external instruments. And his exceeding great love is most
evident toward them, in that to every Magistrate and God by his holy Angels,
defends the magistrates. Dan. 10. and. 12.
Prince in their dominions, be appoints special Angels to defend,
strengthen, and conserve them. Whereof we have an example in y^ Prophet Daniel,
where mention is made, that the Angel Michaell sloode on the Israelites side
against their enemies. It were impertinent to this matter, to allege men's
opinions of Angels, wherein there is some diversity. But this is truly
gathered, that as the wicked fiende Beelzebub, sends legions of Devils into
Princes palaces to stir up seditions, and to bring in all kind of calamities:
so Gods Angel pitcheth his camp round about them, and if they fear God, they
have always more number with them than against them, to shield the^ from the
darts of Satan's Soldiers, and to bridle their malice and fury.

The Philosophers, into whom nature poured viuacitie and sharpness of wit, did
see that monarchies and kingdoms could not continue The manner of the old
world, in electing magistrates.
by humane policy, and were constreyned to cofeffe, that by Gods providence
kings and kingdoms (...) maintained and defended. The Fathers of the first age
amongst ye Gentiles, used first before they went to the Eloction of their
prince, to offer sacrifice to their gods, and crowned him King, who by Oracle
was pronounced most meet to ye office, wherein they have opened their minds in
this matter: verily y^ without gods help, they are able to accomplish nothing
again ye through his help, they are able to (...) W^ Somnius yt Philo^pher ^^
Egypt bet^ how Great: Alexander went to off(...) unto Jupiter of Ammo in Egypt,
((...) many (...) naturlled) he answered well, That al men were vndor Gods hand
and Special examples of Gods providence.
poyce but to (...) he) and to be a prince, is the highest and greanst
benefit. He added moreover: that God was a parent ginerally unto al me, but
that he especially a dopted unto himself as his most loving children, y^
princes and mag^^rats: And certain it is, yt many, who have him cast out by the
it parents or kinssblke, as it were an untimely fruit, have vin by Gods
singular providence preserved, yea being objected to Beasts, have bin of buite
beasts nourished, and at last became great Princes, and Lords of the world.
We read in histories, that Romulus was nourished of a Woolfe: Cyrus of a
Bitche: Abidus of a Do: Hiero of Bees, that brought honey into his ^ppes. And
finally, that I may not omit king David, who in his young years was a refuse
among his brethren in his fathers house: how wonderfully was he preferued from
the mouth of the Lion and Bear: how miraenlously was the young Babe Moses
taken out of the deep waters, and appointed to lead the children of Israel
through the red Sea. Such ensamples both profane and divine, (if they are
to be called profane, that minister so good matter,) do plainly declare, that
such as are ordained to be Princes and Rulers, are even from the hour of their
virth, receyned into Gods Iutele and protection.

The sum and effect thereof consifleth in this, that the Magistrate have
only and always before his eyes, Gods providence and mercy in his son
Christ: so shall he and all his business, be far from peril and danger,
and safely stand without all compass of gunshot. Let him remember Gods earnest
promise to the Israelites, obeying his commandments. If thou hearken unto my
Exodus 23.
voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy unto thy enemies,
and will afflicte them that afflict thee. If he fear God in The Magistrate
that sets God before his eyes, cannot perish.
deed, this notable promise will more encourage him, than all Castles, Towers,
munitions and Armies. For if God will be an enemy unto their enemies, let
their adversaries devise, imagine, conspire, and bend all force against the
Magistrate, they cannot prevail, they cannot undermine or supplant them, so
long as God defends the Magistrate, and fights against their enemies. How
is it possible, that the one should prevail, and the other perish? David
having approved the truth of Gods promise in him self, far above his
expectation, utters this sentence: I will love Psalm. 18.
thee dearly O Lord my strength: The Lord is my rock and my fortress, and he
that delyuereth me, my God and my strength, in him will I trust, my shield,
the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge. And again: Thou did cause
thy Judgment to be Psalm. 76.
heard from Heaven, therefore the Earth feared, and was still. When thou O God
arose to judgment to all the meek of the world. The worthy Captain Joshua
called to ruls and conduct Israel into the land of Promis, receives most
heavenly encouragements at Iosu. 1.
Gods mouth, speaking unto him in this wise: There shall not be a man able to
withstand thee all the days of thy life. Is I was with The Prince and
Magistrate ought to ^ead Gods book.
Moses so will I he with thee, I will not leave nor forsake thee. Let not this
Book of yt law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night.
Have not I commounded thee to be strong and of a good courage? fear not, for I
the Lord thy God will be wit^ thee whethersoeuer thou go. These words are
mighty and ardent, which all Princes and magistrates ought to apprebende and
bold fast. They were without doubt written to this end, that all such as
continue in Gods fear, might know whereunto to trust. For whatsoever things
are written before time, are written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Whenever then, any Prince or
Magistrate will make Gods word his chief solace and treasure, will love and
fear God, and trust in his grace and mercy: he shall have God his right
arnre, his buckler and shield, his patron and defender, that: be may quietly
and safely lay him down to sleep and take his rest, for that the Lord of
heaven Psalm. 4.
and earth susteyneth him. And therein observe and diligently record the often
repetition of these words, Be strong, and of good courage. Courage and
boldness commendable in Princes.
If he had bin a milkesoppe and faint hearted in his office, he could not have
served God, nor executed his calling, nor provided for his army. This example,
if ye mighty would follow, they should not be so easily co^fou^ded, they should
not hazard and make shipwreck of their fame, honor, and dignity.

We see worldly Princes only or principally to depend upon their wisdom,
strength, The chief comfort of carnal Princes.
and riches (ignorant as it should appear, that all Potentates are by Gods
Providence ad^aunced and set up, and by his hand displaced and pulled down)
For preferment is neither from the East nor from the West, nor from the South:
but God is the Judge, he makes Psalm. 75.
low, and be makes high. Such men therefore leaning to such brittle and
weak posts, are wounded upon the splinters and shiuers, their fall and ruin
is great, their shame and ignomie is greater, ye triu^ph of their enemies is
greatest of all.

That noble and Godly Prince David, David.
may be lively example and spectacle unto all Christian Magistrates. For being
rich and mighty, yet he accoumpted the promises of the Lord, and confidence
in the living God to be his principal Armory. The salvation of Psalm. 37.
the righteous men shall be of the Lord: he shall be their help in time of
trouble, for the Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them
from the wicked, and shall save them, because they trust in him. And again, at
such time as he was to be anointed King, and to assume that great office and
charge, he comfort him self in the holy Ghost after this manner. The Lord
is my light and my Psalm. 27.
salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even my enemies and my foes came upon me
to eat my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an host pitched against me,
mine heart should not be afraid Though war be raised against me, I will
trust in this. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauti^ of the Lord, and to visit his temple. For in the time of trouble
he shall hide me in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his Pauilion shall he
hide me, and set me upon a Rock. What need many authorities in so clear a
case? You see evidently, that God withstandeth and resists the most puissant
and fierce enemies of his Magistrates, that he promises to cool their
courage, to mitigate their madness, and to repress their rage. Again, that
what commodity and ornament soever may beautify their calling: God gives and
grants far above their expectation.

Which wondeful love and mercy of God, The miserable end of such as have not
acknowledged their power from God.
for that some Nemroth, and mighty men of this world, being as it were
drunken with their so prosperous successes, have not aknowledged, they have at
the last bin made servile slaves, too object, and cruel rascalles: and being a
little before baughty as Lions, have bin for their unthankfulness thrown
down, their honor laid in the dust: and them selves have layne in the way like
dead Dogs. Wherefore these considerations ought always to be in the eyes and
minds of Princes and magistrates, that they may fear and reverence God, and
repose their confidence rather in his majesty, tha^ in outward power and
strength. For to what purpose are expert Captains and Soldiers, Irmies well
ordered, store of all munition, plenty of victual. Are not all these lost in
a momente? and even as we do cut down green grass, so the God of heaven
confounds all the glory of war and of battle. What a huge power had
Holofernes at We ought not to trustin ma^s strength. Iudeth. ^. and 7 Leagues
and truces with wicked and godless princes have evil euentes.
the seege of Bethulia, what policy and counsel was used to stop the water
from them, so to enforce them to yield their City? yet how easily did God
destroy and scatter such a Captain, such an Army, so many engines of war
by the hand of a woman? What shall we say of so many kings as were linked
together against Joshua, and so many nations against the only Israelites in
the time of Gideon and others? Who would not have persuaded him self of his
good success? And who would not have exhorted the Israelites to yield them
selves, especially if they had compared armor to armor, ancients to ancients,
men to men, country to country. But how foolish and fondly did they triumph
Iudi. 7. and 8.
before the victory? Let Princes and Magistrates cease, let them cease (I
say) to fire their hearts in Castles, Fortes, Captains, Armies, money, or any
like thing, which worldlings have in price and only esteem. Let them rather
consider the terrible threats of God, left in this world, whereby men are
drawn from fragile to firm things, from flesh to spirit, from man to God. God
speaks by the mouth of Esaias: Woe unto them that Esa. 50. and 31.
go down into Egypt for help and stay upon horses, and trust in charets,
because they are many, and in horsemen because they are very strong: but they
look not to the holy one of Israel, nor seek unto the Lord: for when the
Lord shall stretche out his hand, the helper shall fall, and they shall
altogyther fail. David speaks in like manner. The King Psalm. 33.
is not saved by the multitude of an host, neither is the mighty man delivered
by great strength.

A horse is a vain help and shall not delyner any by his great strength.
Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him and trust in his
mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them in famine. In
these words, the spirit of GOD comprehends all such t^ings, as men make
account of to atchieue weighty affairs: yet they so paynte them out with
significante terms, that if all worldly might were knitte together, you may
not ascribe victory unto them for that they shall vanish away like smoke, and
be scartered like chafe before the face of the wind in the day of battle.

It is the Lord alone then at whose hand we must ask counsel. It is the
Lord that when man determines prosperity, in pulling back his hand sends
adversity. And again, it is he alone, that when men have Psalm. 30. Psalm. 107.
heaviness in the evening, sends joy in the morning, and delivers them out
of al distress. I Would not have any to gather hereof, How far policy and
humane power is to be followed.
that I reject the foresight and prudent policy of the Magistrates: for no man
(but he that is stark mad) would have them so witless, that as the
superstitious Jews would not take armor upon them for their necessary
defense on the Sabbath day, so that Princes should cast away lawful means to
defend them selves. But I urge this to my port ability, that they first seek
help at Gods had, and then man's lawful aid, which when they have on every
side well furnished themselves withal, even then I exhort them also to depend
totally upon God. And I would not have them dull or slothful: for albeit
God do without intermission care and labor for Preparation for war
necessary.
them: yet they ought to be workers withal (if I may so speak) and follow him
showing them the way: and if any want by humane imperfection, I would have
them to solace them selves in the perfection of God. For as in maladies and
sickness of our bodies, we go unto the Physician to recover health: Even so it
is fit and convenient in some times and seasons to have in readiness
munimentes of war to withstand our enemies. God is not pleased with
carrlesnesse: he is tempted and displeased with negligence in all conditions
and callings. The conflict of Christ with the Math. 4.
Devil in the wilderness teaches us not to be idle. And the wise man Syrach
says, He Syrach.
that loves danger shall perish therein. They must therefore bend all their
force to save and preserve their charge. They ought to approve all good means
and use all honest consultations, to ordeyne profitable and commodious things
for the common wealth. But this caution ought always to be observed: that they
do not make the Lady the handmayde, and the handmayde the Lady, but that they
make the Lord their shootanker: that they so procide artillarie and engines of
war, that the Lord may be the moderatour and director of the same, otherwise
without God, weapons will wooke their own wounds, and strength will be their
confusion. Proud Pharao Exodus 14. Pharao.
followed the Israelites with so mighty an Army, that the hearts of the
Israelites melted with fear, but God was against him, who stroke his
shoulders with a suddayne terror; and vnpinned the Charret wheels, and took
them away with so mighty and miraculous a band, that the Egiptians cried, we
will fly, we will fly, for the Lord fights for Israel. Eugenius.
Arbogastus.
When the two Tyrauntes Eugenius and Arbogastus endeavored after the example
of Iulianus the Apostata, to reduce the superstition Munition without Religion,
destruction.
of the Gentiles into Europe, and were furnished with many thousands of bloody
Panims, that Theodosius the Emperiour himself was strike^ with fear and herror
at their vie^e, be himself spent all the night in prayer, and received comfort
in a vision of good event. The day following, the battle was Theodosius.
joined, in the first charge, many of Theodosius soldiers were put to flight,
the Emperor being in a great agony of mind, falls A miracle.
flat upon the ground, he sigheth and groneth in his soul, he perceth the
heavens with prayer, he is heard of God, who raising a mighty strong wind,
blowing toward the face of the So^rates lib. 5. cap. 24.
Tirants, which violently turned back again the arrows and darts sent from
the infidels host into their own hearts and bowels. And finally, God with his
elements fighting against them, put them to most horrible sham^ and confusion.
For Eugenius falling upon his knees before the Emperor to obtain mercy,
had his head cut off by Theodosius Soldiers, being in some rage, and
Arbogastus the author of that calamirie and bloodshed, after he had fled two
days and saw no hope of life, he fell (like unto Saul) upon his sword, and
powered out his blood. Of this miraculous victory writes the Poet Claudianus.

O nimium dilecte deo, cui militat ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
Whosoever therefore can say truly of them selves, Some trust in Chariols, and
some in Hories, but we will remember the name of the Lord: may be bold to say
that which follows in ye Psalm: They are brought down and fallen, but we are
risen and stand upright.

But that the difference between dinine and A difference between humane and
divine help.
humane help may be more lueulent, I thought it convenient to adioyne the
speech of David uttered at what time he marched against monstrous Goliath the
Philistine. For out of the words of that most renoumed captain and champion,
this diversity will appear. Thou Psalm. 17.
(says David) co^mest unto me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a
shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the
host of Israel, whom thou raylest upon. This day shall the Lord close thee
in my hand, and I shall smite thee, and take thy head from thee, and I will
give the carkases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of
the heavens, and to the beasts of the earth, that all the world may know that
Israel had a God: and that all this assembly may know, that the Lord saves
not with sword nor with spear, for the battle is the Lords, and he will
give you into our hands. Such was the voice and heart of David, wherein his
invincible faith is evident to have done more wonderful things tha^ either his
enemies or his own cou^^reymen were able to do with policy or armoure. Surely
this notable courage in ye name of ye living Lord might happily seem in the
eyes of carnal men, to be rashness and not boldness, foolishness and not
wisdom, that a dwarffe would fight with a Giant, a boy with a man of
flourishing age, unarmed against one well armed, ignorant of war against an old
beaten soldier, a sherphook and a sling, against a spear, sword and shield.
Ind yet the victory fell to this unlikely side: such an approved cote armor
is Gods name, which all men ought to account their chief post and pillar,
their haven and sure anchor. Achior Captain of the sons of Aminon, in that
his notable oration before Holofernes Iudeth. 5. and. 6.
confirms, that the Jews whilst they sinned not before their God, prospered
against their puisant enimyes every where, not with bow, sword or shield:
for it was the Lord that with his miracles and wonders fought for them, and
gave them victory in the day of battle. Therefore to conclude this place,
you plainly see that Princes and Magistrates ought not only to be busied in
prouyding humayne help, but their principal care ought to be in serving the
Lord, in obeying his word, and fearing his holy name: so may they safely
settle and ground themselves upon gods most comfortable promises, which he
can and will perform, both because he is able, and most Psalm. 145.
of all power and might: and also is loving and merciful, and will fulfill the
desires of them that fear him and call upon him faithfully.

The third Consolation is in the great love and favor of God toward the
Magistrate, commanding his people most severely to reverence and obey them.
As by a secret inspiration and inward motion of nature we are taught to love
and reverence our parents: even so by the same we are induced to obey and
honor the Magistrates. And as God does revenge with most sharp punishementes
the wilful stubbornenesse of the one, so does he never hold giltlesse the
disobedience of the other: end therefore he gives a serious and severe
precept, by Romans 13.
his elect and chosen vessel Saint Paul, that men should give to the higher
powers, tribute, fear, and honor, calling them by the name of his officers or
ministers: by whose hand as he does punish the wicked, so does he cherish
and defend the good and innocent. Which title given by God, makes them
Magistrates called Gods in the scripture.
more noble and renouned than their robes and ornaments of silks, purple,
silver, gold or precious stones: yea if you put together all dignity of the
earth, all these will not so auaunce a Magistrate, as one short title given
him Psalm. 8^
by God. David uses a like still, saying: God stands in the assembly of
Gods, be judges amongst Gods. Here the heavenly Prophet calls them Gods,
which name so high and full of maitstie they have, by reason of their office
and ministerye which they execute in Gods room here in earth, in doing of
judgment and justice, in punishing sin and iniquity, in comforting the
widows and fatherless, in desending the virtuous and innocent. Exo. 20.
And in another place: Thou shall not rail upon the Gods, neither speak
evil of the rulers of the people.

Here Saint Hierome translateth Elohim Dijs, in english Gods, because of the
works annexed (as is aforesaid) exeeuteth to their office and calling. Now
to omit in Gods light how precious and dear the magistrates The necessity
and commodity of the magistrate.
are: let us weigh the inevitable necessity, and unspeakable commodity yt the
higher powers bring to mortal me^, which we may gather from gods mouth, who
threatening unto the Jews subversion and destruction of themselves and their
City, speaks in this wise. The Lord of hosts will take away from Esai. cap.
3.
Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and strength, even all the stay of bread, and
all the stay of water. The strong man and the man of war, the Judge and the
Prophet, the prudent and the aged: The Captain of fifty and the honorable,
and the counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent man. And I will
appoint children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them. You see
that when good The miserable estate of countres in the defect of magistrates.
rulers and counselors do want in common wealths, in steed of joy there
arises sorrow, in steed of charity discord, in stead of peace war, in
stead of prosperity, all misery and calamity. For, to take away the
Magistrate, is even as you would take the expert shipmaster out of the ship, or
as you would set wild horses to draw a Charet without a guide. Whereof the
one runs headelong upon rocks and quicksandes: the other ouerturneth all,
not without extreme peril and danger to themselves. For in such seasons and
tempest the words of the same Prophet are always Esai. 3.
verified. The people shall be oppressed one of an other, and every one by his
neighbor: the children shall presume against the ancient, and the vile against
the honorable: when every one shall take hold of his brother of the house of his
father etc. And for that without Magistrates, no society and fellowship can
stand amongst men, seeing by the infection of the devil, all are ready and
inclined to offer injuries and wrongs, and to commit detestable and
abominable acts, the will of almighty God is, that we should not only honor
them, but also most earnestly pray for their long and happy continuance, by
whose mean we are shielded from woe and misery: Who (as Plutarch writes) do
partly distribute gods gifts, and partly conserve them amongst men standing
always as King Alfonsus was wont to say Alfonsus.
in defense of the law and people, watching always for the peace and safety
of the same. Hereof we have president in the worthy letters of Hieremie the
Prophet, sent to the Jews Hiere. 29.
who were led captives for their sins and iniquities from Jerusalem into
Babylon by the hand of Nabuchodonozer. Seek (says God) the prosperity of the
City, whether I have caused you to be carried away captyues, and pray unto the
Lord for it, for in the p^ace thereof you shall have peace. Saint Paul in
effect Prayer for the magistrate. 1. Tim. 2.
gives like precept to his people and congregation, saying: I exhort
therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men: for Kings and for all that be in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable way of life, in all godliness and
honesty: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our savior.
These and such like places may woorthely and in deed comfort and stay the
mind of Princes: for they do argue and give a firm and an infallible
document, the living Lord to have a singular providence over rulers and
governors. Tertullian declares Tertulianus apolo. cap. 30.
how earnestly the Primative Church prayed for their Princes in these words:
We Christians cast up our eyes to heaven, our hands spread abroad, because they
are clean: our heads uncovered, because we are not ashamed: without any
monitor, because we pray from the bottom of our beartes, and do make
intercession unto God for all Emperors, ye it would please his majesty to
give unto them long life, sure palace, trusty honest subjects, quiet
regiment, and in fine, all good things that may come to man. There is extante
a pattern and example of perfect prayer for Princes, indyted by the holy ghost,
and penned by his principal secretary David throughout the twenty Psalm. 20.
Psalm, with an assured promise that God will hear such prayers: which Psalm
I wish all noble men to make familiar unto them.

Now albeit in these words of God already produced, sufficient might seem to
be uttered Evil thoughts against the magistrates forbidden.
for the ancthoritie and consolation of Princes: yet the almighty Lord not
satisfied therewithal, proceeds in restreyning subjects in slau^derous
speeches and cursed thoughts against their Magistrates.

Thou shalt not rail upon the Judges, neither Exo 22.
speak evil of the ruler of the people. Which precept Solomon the wysest that
ever was or shall be, expounds at large in this wise. Curse not the King, no
not in thy 1. Reg. 5. Ecclesi. 10.
thought, neither curse the rich in thy bedchamber: for the birds of heaven
shall carry thy voice, and y^ which has wings shall declare ye matter. Men for
ye most part think their loyalty well discharged if they show not disobedience
externally: neither do they account it any offense if their hearts boil with
rancor and malice. But Solomon says, ye matter is far otherwise, showing true
and faithful obedience to consist not only in the hand, but also in the heart:
we have a common saying (thought is free) but that has force before men only.
For as men's se^ses are so dull that they can not smell such things enclosed so
deeply in the most hid places of man: yet the breath and vnsautrye smell of
them perecth the clouds and ascends up before the majesty of God, for so
much are imported in Salomons words, That which has wings shall declare the
matter. The sentence of Ibicus.
Ibycus approves this sentence. When Ibycus fell into the hands of thieves,
and perceived that they would eruelly murder him, and saw no man present to
reskewe him: he happened to see a company of Cranes flying over their heads,
who casting up his eyes and hands most lamentably and earnestly, prayed them
not to suffer his death unrevenged. The the eues secretly laughed at that his
playnte, thinking it vmpossible that ever the Crames should bring to light that
heinous fact and offense. But not long after, it happened two of these
murderers to sit on a benche in the City, when Cranes flying with a noise
that way, one of them said to his fellow skoffingly, Behold the reuengers of
Ibycus: which words one or two sitting by (who heartily loved the man for his
singular learning and virtue) ouerharde, and conceyuing some suspicion, caused
these two fellows to be apprehended and imprisoned, and lastly with torments
to be examined: whereby the cruel murder was disclosed, and they according to
good Ibycus prayer condemned and executed. Here Salomons words had their
working. That which has wings shall declare the matter. The wise king did well
understand, and we do feel by our selves, that Nature being our parent, or
rather our stepdame, has poured into mankind such filthy froth and drousie
dregs, that we do not only judge sinisterlie of others: but are tediously
and maliciously bent to our superiors: and out of those the sinckes and
puddelles, the raging floudes of murmuring and blaspheeming, of sedition and
rebellion, do gushe and break. Solomon therefore shows the duties of honest
and faithful subjects, namely, that as often as they see any seditious
Absolon, or skornefull Caine, or railing Semei, that then they should be as it
were deaffe, dumb and blind, that they should bridle their carnal
inclinations, that they should give no credit to rumors and tales, that they
should not conceive any evil of Princes and rulers: but if they happily hear
or see any spots in them, to cover them with the cloak of ignorance and
patience.

It consequently follows of the premises, that whether it be Nabuchodonozer,
Zedechias, or Ezechias, that do rule and govern, and to what exigent so ever
the people are brought in civil causes, they may not by anyt means practice
sleights, deceites, sedition or rebellion against their prince: al ways are
rather to be attempted, tha^ those venomous ointme^ts and plasters, which yt
vulgar sort have in readiness, and wherewith they are delited. And surely The
devil is the author of disobedience to magistrates.
such rash and raging counsel, such firebrands of sedition and rebellion,
proceed not of any heroical spirit and courage, but are kindled and set on
fire by ye furor of ye devil, utterly to burn and consume towns, Cities and
kingdoms, as Sozomenus does by a very strange history not ably Sozomenus.
lib. 7. cap. 23.
declare. When the Citizens of Anteoche were moved to rebel against Theodosius
for a grievous tribute or subsidy laid upon them, and were yet doubtful in
mind what to do, the night before the uproar, a wicked fend or spirit
appeared unto them in the air in shape of a woman, of a houge and monstrous
stature, running hither and thither with merueylous celeritie, styring the
air, and raising the wynd with a great fan, and making such a noise as the
keepers of wild beasts do, when they practice them to fierceness and
cruelty against their time of bayting: with this strange apparition, the
devil no doubt added furious holdnesse or rather madness to their minds to
go forward in that their detestable enterprise, wherhy they had drawn utter
destruction upon their own heads, if Elauianus their bishop had not with his
most humble intercession mitigated the wrathful mind of the Emperor. If you
peruse the histories and Cronicles of all times, it will plainly appear, that
The profane historians have obserned the vuhappie end of rebels. The end of
those that murdered Julius Caesar. Appianus.
whosoever resisted the supreme magistrate, purchased unto themselves gods wrath
and whot anger, and came to utter shame and confusion. Profane writers have
observed, that of those xx: ii. Senators, which gave unto Iulrus Caesar in the
Senate house xxiij. wounds, and dipped his hands in blood, not one of them
lived above three years after Caesar's death, not one of them dyed naturally in
his bed, and which is most notable, yt many of them murdered them selves with
ye same weapons that perced Caesar's sides. Cassius the first author of this
murder, Cassius.
being by profession an epicure and a skoffer of all talks touching heaven,
hell, and the immortality of the soul: as he was fighting obstinatly in ye
battle at Philippos against Octauianus and Anthonius, saw a soldier exceeding
the common stature of man, coming against him with maine upon a ^olie
courser, having a terrible look, armed with purple or binddie harness, and
fiercely charging his staff upon him, wherewithal Cassius being amazed,
turns his back and runs away: But the spirit following, cries aloude unto
him: What Valor. max. lib. 1. cap. 8.
more remains for thee to do, if thou think this murder nothing? Thou haste
not slain Caesar O Cassius: for no heavenly power can be murdered: but in that
thou have used violence against his earthly body, thou haste deserved Gods
wrath against thee. So Cassius falling upon his own weapon through despair,
at the last learned the reward of rebellion, and that there is a God in
heaven, a soul in man, (...)
a devil in hell. M. Brutus also, the chiefest in credit with the people of
all that company, and one who had received great benefits of Caesar, whom he
loved so dearly, that even at his last gasps he called unto him and said my
son Brutus saw at the battle aforesaid a mighty big black Iudian
fighting against him, and wounding his soldiers on every sidr, which (as
Valerius writes) was even god him Valerius Max. ca. 5.
self that cast darts at him, and fought against him. Brutus being a Stoicke
and an imitator of his uncle Cato, seeing both God and man fight against him,
conueighed him self out of the battle, and when Strato the Retoritian being
often and earnestly desired to thrust his sword in him, would not in so heavy
a case gratify him, he himself persed his heart with his own dagger. The poets
in their fables of the slaughter of Gyantes by Jupiter and of the Phlegians in
Thessalia, being such The Phlegians.
as were seditious, and forced neither for God nor man, and therefore were
carried quick into hell with a flud raised by Neptune, do admonish men of the
unhappy end of rebels and Traitors, of whom Virgill writes.

Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6.
Phlegyasque miserrimus omnes
Admonet, and magna testatur voce per vmbras
Discite iustitiam moniti, and non temnere diuos.
Of the last verse there is a very memorable Sabellicus.
narration, which because it is not only pleasant but profitable, I thought it
not unmeet for this place. There goes a greth a great talk in Italy, of a
woman who being brought up in spinning and carding, or otherwise berye simply,
was as soon as she came to woman's state, rapte (as it were) and inspired not
only with a spirit of prophecy, but endued with lerning, in such sort that
she was had in great admiration of all men. Lazarus Bonami an Italian, a man
of great name for his knowledge, was moved with the great fame to visit her,
and to approve the truth of the same: for it was given out of her, yt she would
(as she was carried with inward motions) entreat and discourse of, humayne and
deuyne learning profoundly, and absolve and answer unto the most difficulte
and barde questions. At bys The most excellent berse in Vergil.
coming he demmau^deth her which was the best verse in all Vergil his work:
she answered,

Discite iustitia^ moniti, and non temnere diu^s.

And further added with some behemencie, Thou art answered, Bonami, Depart
and trouble me no more. And assuredly she was not deceived, for if you turn
all Profane Poets in Greek or Latin, no one verse may be in any respect
hereunto compared.

But to my purpose, I am of this opinyon, that in most lamentable cases of
subjects, even in mere servitude men ought to use all modesty and humility
toward their princes, least by malaparte and obstinate dealing, they rather
exasperate and incense them, than pacifye and cool them. Fierce Lions being
dalyed withal, cherished and gentlye stroked, In what sort it is most
convenient for subjects to deal with scuere magistrates.
do lay aside after a sort their savage cruelty, and being pleasantly
wrastled with, will show themselves weak: but if a man show roughness and
sharpness, and use vyolence and force, he shall wish himself without the
compass of their claspes. So is it with princes and Magistrates, who in some
respects are of like nature and inclination with Lions: whose heads (as I
said) may be stroked but softly and smothlye, but if a man wring and prick
them, or otherwise offend them, he is but cast away. And if there happen or
arise some intolerable Tyrant, or if a good and virtuous Prince do degenerate
into wickedness and do oppress his people, yet such burdens art seldom
eased with such leuers. But it happens for the most part, that the grudgyng
people whom Solomon chastized with rods, 1. Reg. 12.
and loded with light burdens: Reboam corrected with scourges, and ouercharged
with heavy lodes. As the Poets devise of the monster Hidra, whose head when
Hercules cut off, he saw two arise out of band in ye same place: the Prince
therefore and Magistrate, how socuer he be inclyned, he is Gods gift: but
he is a most heavenly treasure if be execute his calling with equity and
justice: unto whom such men as show disobedience, are termed in scripture the
sons of Beliall. And this is undoubtedly 1. Reg. 20.
true, that if at any time the prince appear over weak for rebels, if he
be contemned and at last vanquished, then the Lord himself descends into the
field, to revenge the contumely and injury done to his officer, as in the
Chapter following shall more abundantly appear. Wherefore it apperteyneth to
subjects, not only for conscience sake, and to avoid damnation, but also for
worldly peace and quietness, even in the severe and sharp regyment of their
Princes, to refer them and their cause to almighty God, who only is able by
his inestimable power either to alter their minds and actions for the subjects
comfort, or utterly to take them away for their quietness.

Hereof we have many examples seruyng Gods wonderful counsel in delivering
his people from Tyrans.
for the instruction and admonition of such as be placed in high dignity, but
especially for the solare and comfort of seely subjects, being weried with
the burthenous yoke of merciless Magistrates, where in the wonderful
judgment and counsel of God does in nothing more manifestly show
themselves. We read of such as were even now advanced to the highest
dignity, and adorned with all glory and honor: by and by to be thrown down
suddenly by incredible means, and al their power and strength to have bin
laid in the dust. Who can denit, but that Gods dealing with Nabuchodonozer the
Lord of the whole earth, far exceeds man's capacity? who for his
intolerable pride, sustained a new punishment, lying out amongst brute beasts,
and wandering with them until seven years were come and gone. Moreover we
read The strange and variable estate of Empires.
partly in Scripture, partly in other credible monumentes, that by Gods
dispensations, proud Tire to have bin prostrate and overthrown by the
Egyptians, the Egyptians to have bin overthrown by the Assyrians, the
Assyrians to have bin spoiled by the Chalde is and Babilonians, the Babilonians
to have bin vanquished by the Medes and Persians, the Persians by the Greeks,
the power of the Greeks again to have bin conquered by the Romans: and we
see lastly the majesty of the Roman Empire daily weakened, by that cruel
enemy of Christendom the Turk, who in taking our Castles and Cities,
accompteth it but a sport to wade in the blood of his own Soldiers, so that
he may attain his desire. It were a long process, exactly to prosecute all
causes of such mutations and chaunges in Empires and Kingdoms: but this shall
be sufficient for my purpose, to notify out of the holy Scripture, by the
example of the Kings of Judah and Israel, who The cause why kingdoms are
punished.
albeit they were by Gods election appointed to rule his chosen people, and had
received more excellent benefits at Gods hand, than ye Princes of the
Gentiles: yet if at any time they showed themselves unthankful, if they became
stubborn and declined from Godliness, they felt by and by the sword, either
of ye Babilonians, or of ye Assyrians, or of some other enemy, and sometime
were led into most lamentable captivity and bondage. Therefore it is the Lord,
that at his own pleasure, without any occasions of mortal men, does alter and
transpose kings and kingdoms. It is God that exalts and David.
brings low, yt blesses and beats Princes and Magistrates, in such times
and places as it seems best to his majesty, so that the subjects need not
to devise and busy themselves with violence, to reform or depose their
gonernors. Syrach. 10.
And seeing that (as the wise man says) The governor of the earth, is in the
hand of the Lord, and when time is, he shall set up a prositable ruler over
it: It is the part of subjects, thankfully and dutifully to reverence such,
whom God has appointed to supply his own place in Earth. And surely, our own
quietness may persuade us, y^ conseruatio^ of all estates may requite us, and
Christian religion will straightly command us so to do, namely, to restrain out
thoughts, tongs, and hands, from doing any thing against those yt be placed in
authority over us.

But here rises question of the bounds Of the limits of obedience.
of obedience, whether subjects ought to obey their magistrates, if they
command things contrary to the law of God and the law of nature. Unto the
which question, we shall answer both soundly and safely, if we examine what
honor is, and gather a definition what obedience is.
or declaration hereof out o^ Gods word. Honor has sundry slgnifications in
the scripture, but as it serves to this cause, To honor, is to fear, to love,
to reverence, to obey, To obey (I say) as it were unto God, who exacteth the
same at our hands, and unto whom we know out obedience acceptable: so yt if ye
magistrate shall either do or command any wicked thing, we may not obey,
either by imitation ^or by action: For the latter commandments have relation
unto ye first. But we are taught in the second commandment, the sins and
iniquities of the fathers to be punished in the children unto thr third and
fourth generation: Therefore they are not to be obeyed in things against God
and nature. Ionathas hearkened not unto his father Saul, when he sought the
life of David: and is therefore greatly commended in the word of God. The three
companions of Daniell obeyed Nabuchodonozer in political things, they loved
him, and they reverenced him as a mighty Monarch and most bountiful prince:
but when he exected Idolatry, they neglected his power and might. Saint Peter
the commander of obedience 1. Pet. 2.
due to fathers and Magistrates, when the seniors of the people would have
stopped his mouth from preaching of the Lord Jesus, he answered earnesily,
We ought rather to Act. 4. and 5.
obey God than men. But what need I to seek many proofs, seeing the Lord
him self has comprehended all such authorities in one sentence? If any man
come to me and hate not his father and mother, and wife, and children, and
brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life Math. 10. li. 14
life also, he cannot be my disciple. It is out of all doubt, that the
magistrates ought not to command any thing against God and the law of
nature, and they should bend all their study so to govern, that their
subjects may feel and taste, that they have their authority from God, and that
they use the same in God. But if they enterprise any thing without that
compass, the subject should preposterously prefer the servant before the
master.

It may be demanded, what if the Prince A question. What subjects may do when
they are oppressed.
seeing his will and commandment neglected, use extreme executions against
such as will not obey him, may the subject resist with violence? I say no, no
violence by no means. Let him disobey, not in rebelling, but in suffering all
injuries and oppressions. Let him Subjects may not infer but sustain injuries.
not by any calamity be stirred to lift up his hand against a Ruler, and so
offend the majesty of God. And if he cannot by way of petition and
supplication mitigate the Princes anger: neither yet by flight and departure
avoid the same: it remains that he commit him self and his cause to that
just judge, who has reserved vengeance to him self, and has promised to
power it upon wicked and impenite^t Deu. 32. Romans 12.
persons, at such a time as al their limbs and stays shall slide from them.
The violence and extreme cruelty which wicked rulers do unto Christian
subjects, are of two sorts: For some touch temporal things only as our
bodies, our lands, our livings: others do concern heavenly things as ye truth
of gods word, faith in Christ Jesus, and the true worshipping of God, and such
like. Now as for our Temporal things, a Christian may sustain damage and utter
loss of al his goods, yea, and of his life also, and yet may keep his faith
and hope of eternal life, firm and stable. But he may not suffer those divine
and heavenly things to be taken from him. For there is no creature, be he
never so mighty, that is able to spoil me^ of those treasures. Besides that,
ye taking away of heavenly Romans 8.
things lie not in the power of the magistrate, but remain by Gods grace, in
the will and consent of the beleener. And ye heavenly Lord only, is of power
to exercise judgment in semblable cases, either to reject men and cast them
away according to his justice, or to preserve them according to his mercy to
eternal life. So that albeit the Prince would with a thousand torments drive
us to embrace superstition and idolatry, we are neither bound to obey him,
neither yet is he able (if God be on our side) to vanquish and conquer us.

Moreover, there is no small difference between A great difference between
doing, and suffering injuries.
those men that do patiently tolerate unjust violence, and those that do offer
injurious violence to others. A Christian may suffer with a good and quiet
conscience injustice, but he cannot in like sort practice and execute unlawful
things. In all actions therefore, the perfect line of Gods law is to be
considered: and that our desire and will is to do good things, and to omit y^
contrary. And if being detained in bonds or imprisonme^ts or otherwise, we
cannot serve y^ Lord our God, and yet do earnestly wish and desire to do it: In
such case our wills and intentes are accepted before God for acts and deed.
Again, if the prince do command us to do y^ which is to be avoided, no man may
excuse him self before God, by reason of that commandment: neither will it be
a sufficient discharge unto him to answer, I was commanded, I was compelled,
I did it unwillingly. S. John says, this is the victory which 1. John. 5.
overcomes the world, even your faith. And how shall we resist Satan the
great prince of this world, if we be such weakelings that we cannot resist no
not the world? And how shall we resist ye whole world, if through the threats
and torments of one worldly prince, we turn our backs from the truth. He that
is regenerate by Gods spirit, may truly say, I do not now live, but Christ
lives in me: I Gala. 2. Romans 8.
am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels nor Principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, etc. shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. There is a mirror
or glass of such innocent and vprighte dealing in that worthy man Papinianus,
in Papinianus the sincere lawyer. A^lius Spartianus in Antonino.
profession a civil lawyer, in religion an Ethnike, which is as hereafter
follows: When the Emperor Autoninus Caracalla whom some do call Bassinianus,
had murdered cruelly and unjustly his brother Getha in his mothers lap, who
was so dear unto the army, for his father Seuerus his sake, that the Soldiers
Herod. lib. 4.
were almost bent to run upon Bassinianus with their weapons for that fact:
the Emperor dealt with Papinianus his counselor, whom all the Soldiers
reverenced for his deep wisdom and vprighte Justice, to defend his
unnatural offense: unto whom Papinianus answered: Wilful patricide (o
Emperor) is more easily committed than defe^^^d. O worthy sentence, and well
beseeming a counselor and a lawyer. That good man was more willing and ready
to suffer like smart with Getha, which he knew would proceed from the Tirant
for his refusal, than to defend, or by any color to smooth or cloak wilful
murder.

But some man will say, if we maintain Objection.
our causes so precisely, and withstand the magistrates so stubbornely, we
shall exasperate them, and pull the house upon our own heds. But if we yield
unto the time, God may alter the Princes heart, and we may eat our bread in
rest and quietness. Unto such objections Answer Demades.
I will otherwise answer, than Demades answered the Athenians in times past.
Cassander the Macedonian practiced with the Athenians, that they should
worship Great Alexander as a God: who staggered somewhat at the matter:
Wherefore Cassander denounces open war against them, if they would not do
it. Demades made then an Oration unto the people, and amongst other things used
this speech: That it stood them upon so to consider of heaven that they might
not lose the earth. But I think it best to transpose the sentence, That it
stands men upon to take heed, so to consider of the earth, that they lose
not heaven. Therefore, albeit all potentats of the earth grind their teeth
against us, yet it is our parts to show our boldness in God. And as in worldly
matters some use to say, Let justice go forward, albeit all the world perish.
So let Christians say, Let us do Gods will and pleasure, albeit heaven and
earth do perish. Augustine has a golden saying. Men may not commit sin in
showing obedience. Daniel disobeying the Dani. 6.
King, forbidding him to serve his God, excuses him self, saying, Unto thee O
King, have I done no hurt, that is to say, I have not trespassed against thee,
for I have obeyed the lyning God.

This admonition of the limittes of law^ull Natural reason teaches to obey
our superiors only, in things lawful.
obedience, is taught by perfect reason, and confirmed by profane examples,
acquitting s^^ayes men from the spot of disobedience, that bend their endeavors
to obey the supreme power and majesty. Antigona gravely excuses ^^^ self to
King Creon, saying, that she may not for his commandment or fear violate the
law of nature being divine. And when Telemon ye kings son with vehement speech
defended his esponsed wife Antigona, the Apud Sophoclem.
King said, How dare thou contend with thy (...)? He answered, because thou
would do monstrous things. Creon. Do I mo^strously to honor my estate, and to
use my prerogative? Hemon. Thou can not O King honor thy estate by any
means, when thou dishonorest God. Ex Stobaeo.
Stobaeus reports a worthy answer given to a young man by one. Musonius in
this sort. There was a young man given altogyther to the study of Philosophy
and other liberal sciences, but was hindered by his father, who most earnestly
forbad him those studies, and willed him to frame his life another way. This
young man repaireth to Musonius, and uses these words: Musoni, are children
bound to obey their parents generally, or are there some private causes
excepted? unto (...) he answered: In my opinion it is a thing very commendable
for children to reverence their parents, but it were necessary to know, what
duty and obedience is, and if we consider the contrary, namely what the vice,
stubbornness and disobedience is; we shall more easily know the virtue. Well
then, let us by questions sift this matter. What if a father, having no skill in
Physic, nor knowing y^ qualities and temperature of simples and compounds,
would command his son being sick, to receive some medicine, which the father
thinks profitable, but is indeed unwholesome and mortal: will any man
account the son disobedient because in such causes he bath not followed his
fathers ^antasie? verily I suppose not. Moreover if y^ father himself being
sick, do call unto his son to give him some meat or drink which will
satisfy his appetite, but augment his sickness: If the son give not ^ate
unto his father therein, will ye pronounce him obstinate? surely no man of
perfect mind will so judge of him. Much less is he to be called disobedient,
that being commanded of his father to deceyut, to steal, to murder, or to
attempt or do any thing unlawful, will not fulfill his precept and
commandment. Therefore when men refuse to follow the wills and minds of such
as do command any thing dishonest and unlawful, whether they be magistra^tes,
fathers, or masters, they cannot rightly be fermed disobedient, neither
negligent in their duty. (...) Musonius. Touching other guestions, hamely,
what if the Magistrate degenerate into Tirannie? what if he would bring into
the country aliantes and straung its? What if he would seek ^o aban^on the
tru^e worshipping of God and receive (...) or (...) Religion? These (...) are
without the conipasse of thy^ my treaty (being a consolation for magistrates
only) and cannot be discoursed with any edification: neither do I find any
thing written absolutely thereof by the learned. And in deed, since that such
cases depend upon Gods especial dispensation, without the which, nothing can
be well enterprised, nor more happily achieved: it were not only perilous,
but very hard to prescribe any general rule in such cases. Whereof that worthy
Jewel late Bishop of Sarum, having very good occasion to write largely by the
provocation of his adversary master Harding, tempereth his style in such sort,
that albeit he stops the Papists mouths touching ye nobles of Scotland: yet
may the prudent reader very well In the defense of the Apology Fol. 20. and. 21
perceive his unwilling mind to wade far in that question. It is our parts
that be Englishmen, with all gratefulness of voice and heart, to praise God for
exempting us out of such miserable cases, and to pray for the continuance of
the same, under out tender and pitiful Lady and mistress the Queens most
excellent Majesty, who by her mild regiment takes away all occasion of such
questions. And surely, so long as she guides the stern of the ship, I have
good hope that we shall sail in the calm and peaceable sea. But it for our
sins to almighty God, and srowardnesse toward his majesty, she faint or
fail, then what will be out English tune, but woe worth, and wayle away. For I
see following her days, the lamentable times, not of Henry the sixth Edward the
fourth, and Richard the third, sor xij. or ^^^. years, when the world was
such, as the Colyer that denied his service The dangerous estate of this realm
of England.
to either part, and professed himself the Devils man escaped best: but the
bloody times of Ferrex and Porrex, in whom the line and of spring of Brute
ended, after whose days this land was rent into four factions, and for the
space of 51. years, there was no law, no justice no peace, but tumults,
vprorrs, civil wars, effusio^ of blood. etc. The remembrance of these
things, must needs beat a wonderful fear and horror into our bones and
bowels, and drive us to pros^rate our selves before his throne of Grace, with
deep sighing and groaning, to crave that he would auert and turn away those
sorrowful and ruthful days, or against those times provide for our comforts
some Gedeon or lepthe, under whose couerts we may hide our selurs from those
terrible s^ormes and tempests.

The fourth Consolation, of many examples out of divine and profane writers,
whereby we see, that good princes and magistrates have bin preserved from the
furious hands of their enemies abroad and at home.
IT is a great comfort for godly and Christian Magistrates, to have before
their eyes the worthy examples of Kings and Princes in the old Testament, and
to observe their famous and renoumed or rather miraculous acts, which they did
not by their own power and policy, but by the aid and providence of God.
Whereby they may both confirm and settle their confidence and faith in him,
and also have present admonition in all their distress, by the example of
others, what ways and means they may use to avoid perilles and dangers.
Abraham the father of the faithful, Abraham.
being driven into many grievous miseries and calamities, and tossed too and fro
with great carke and care: yet for that he perseuered firm in faith and hope,
he was never forsaken of God, but always deliuerd out of distress. Ind
moreover, God gave him glory in y^ day of batel. For when Lot his brothers son
was led Genesis 14.
away captive from Sodom, he brought out of the^ that were borne and bredde in
his house, three hundredth and eighteen persons, and pursued diverse Kings,
sinit them, destroyed them, and recovered Lot his family and his substance, and
placed him in his house again.

Joseph the Patriarche, breyng sold into Egypt, Joseph.
where he lived an alient and stranger, and afterward was cast into Prison:
yet trusting in the living God, he was not only set at liberty, but also
called to such honor and dignity, that under Pharao he was chief ruler of
the land of Egypt. Carnal reason would Genesis 41. and 42
think it impossible, that a seely poor Israelite, being sold to strangers,
and laden with bolts of iron in prison, should aspire to such authority. But
these are y^ wonderful works Psalm. 145.
of God, who is nigh unto all those that call upon him faithfully. And again,
The Lord Psalm. 23.
restores my soul, and leads me in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake. Yea, though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff,
they comfort me. Moses that notable Prophet, was Moses.
almost drowned in many grievous calamities, wherein man's reason could devise
no help, nor find comfort, especially, when be went before the children of
Israel, being preserved with a mighty army, hanyng before him the read Sea,
and the mountains on every fyde: but he both knew what God could do, and
believed also that God would cause the Sea to soake into the earth, or to stand
like a wall on both sides, whereby the Israelites might march through on dry
land, and that the same should return again to bys course, and drown all
the Egiptians: than in any one ^ote fail in his promises, or relinquish his
elect and chosen people. Gods word can not be false, and therefore the Prophet
says, Iere. 17.
Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose help the Lord is:
and in an other, place, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, Esa. 49.
and in a day of salvation have I helped thee, and I will preserve thee Joshua
succeding Moses Joshua.
casted many bitter cups before he was able to subdue and cast those seven
wicked nations but of the la^d promised unto the Jews bu^t resting upon that
joyful and sweet promise of God, (As I was with Moses so will I be with thee,
I will not leave thee nor forsake Iosu. 1.
thee) be vanquished his enimyes, and placed Gods people in the land of
Chanaan. Gideon judge of the Israelites; accompanied with Gideon.
three hundredth soldiers only went against y^ mighty army of the Madianites,
Amelechites Iudie. 7.
and other eastern people, who came into the land of Israel with their Tents
as thick as Greshoppers in multitude, so that they and their Cammelles were
without number: he vanquished them and put them to flight, for the spirit of
the Lord came upon him, and he believed the word of the Lord promising him
victory. Daniel by the malice and any of the Daniel.
Courtiers was cast into the Lions den, yet through gods protection he was
preserved safe and sound, the reason is expressed in the Text, Because he
trusted in his God: whereat the King wonderyng and rejoicing, commanded
Daniell his accusers, their wives and Daniel. 6.
children to be put in his place, and the Lions had the maistery over them,
and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the ground of their
den.

David entyrely beloved of God, elected according 1. Samu. 16 2. Sa. 2. and. 5.
to Gods own heart, and thryce anointed King of Israel, led yet a life
full of many miseries and calamities, contemned David.
of his wife Micholl, for that he seemed oue^ precyse in the obseruyng of
Ceremonies. Saul conceived deadly feude against him, and often sought to kill
him. Absolon his own son defyleth his bed, and rebelleth against him.
Besides this, what assaults sustained he the Phylistines, the Moabites, the
Syrians, the Idumites, great and mighty nations: yet he is patiente in his
house, constante in his Kingdom, and victorious against strau^ngers. For the
almighty was his refuge, his hope, and his Protector: and therefore it was
impossible for him to be confounded and destroyed. Which for that he approved
passing all humayne expectation, be sings after this manner: In thee O Lord
have I put my trust, let me Psalm. 31.
never be confounded, deliver me in thy righteousness: I will be glad and
rejoice in thy mercy, for thou haste seen my trouble, and thou baste known
my soul in aduersityes: And thou haste not shut met up in the hand of the
enimye, but haste set my feet at large. Asa King of Judah, abrogated Asa.
horrible Idolatry and superstition, and commanded Judah to seek the Lord
God of 2. Para. 14.
their fathers, and to do according to do according to his commandment, and
be took away out of at the Cittes of Judah the high places and the images:
therefore the kingdom was quiet before him, he built strong Cities in Judah,
and he had no war many years, because the Lord gave him rest. Afterward
there came against him Zerach of Ethiopia, with an host of ten hundredth
thousand men, and three hundredth Chariots. Then Asa went out before him and set
the battle in array, and cried unto the Lord his God, saying: Lord it is
nothing with thee to help with many, or with no power: help us O lord our
God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we come against this multitude: O
lord thou art our God, let not many prevail against thee. So the Lord smote
the Ethiopians before Judah and they fled, and the men of Judah, carried away a
mighty great spoil, and returned to Jerusalem. Iosaphat followed Iosophat.
his father Asa in clensing the temple, and reforming true religion: he set
Levites in Jerusalem 2. Para. 17. and 19.
for the judgment of the cause of ye lord: and he appointed Judges in the land
through out the strong Cities, and said unto them, Take heed what ye do, for ye
execute not the judgments of man but of the Lord: and there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of reward.
Wherefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand, and the fear of the
Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, and
they durst not fight against him, and strangers brought Iehosaphat presents
and gifts, and the Arabians brought him flocks of sheep and Goats, and he
prospered and grew up an high, and his kingdom flourished exceedingly. Amasias
the Amasias.
xij. King of Judah having war with the children of Seer, hired one hundredth
thousand men of Israel to help him in battle, but a man of god 2. Para. 25.
came unto him, saying, O King let not the army of Israel go with thee, for God
has power to help thee, and to cast down. Wherefore the King returned those
men according to the saying of the Prophet, and with his own people
courageously went to the Salt valey, and encountered with his enimyes and slew
ten thousands, and other ten thousand did the children of Judah take alive,
and carried them to the top of a rock, and tumbled them down headlong, and
they all burst to pieces. Ezechias. 2. Reg. 19. Iesa. 37.
Ezechias the xvj. King of Judah, with an earnest zeal embrased true religion:
and so perfitlye served the Lord, that after him was none like unto him among
all the Kings of Judah, neither were there any such before him, who being
meruellously tempted and (...) the huge and mighty army of the Assyrians, and
terrified with the blasphemous speech of Rabsaces, turned unto y^ Lord, went into
ye temple, and lay prostrate and said, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save
thou us out of their hands, yt all the kingdoms of ye earth may know yt thou o
lord art only god: which prayer ye lord harkeneth unto, and answers thus:
Because thou have prayed unto me concerning Synachereb king of Ashur, I will
put my hook into his nostrels, and my bridle into his lips, and will bring him
back again ye same way he came: he shall not enter this city, nor shoot an
arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a mount against it. And
ye same night ye Angel of ye lord went out, and smote in ye camp of Ashur an
hundred four score and five thousand: and when they roase early in ye morning,
behold they were all dead Synachereb
corpses. So Synachereb King of Ashur departed, and returned to Niniuie. And as
he was in ye temple worshipping of Nisroh his god, Adramelech and Sharezer his
sons slew him with the sword, and they escaped into y^ land of Ararat, and
Esarhaddon reigned in his steed.

Out of these histories I gather three obseruatio^s, Three notes or oh
sernations.
first yt God commonly tempts his chosen (...)ighty adversaries, yt their
faith may be more perfect tha^ gold tried with ye fire: Secondly, 1. Pet. ^.
that if they steadfastly trust in him he blesses their country with treasure
and riches, and replenisheth their land with great plenty of valiant soldiers:
Thirdly, yt God will not suffer the heathenish people and irreligious nations to
tread his children under their feet, but with small powers confounds their
ten hundred thousands in the day of battle. My first note 1 God tempts his
chose^ with many enimyes. King Edward the six, and queen Elizabeth.
appears plainly in ye reign of y^ late Josias, and presently in our Hester,
who laboring in ye new building of Gods tiple, good lord what a number of
subtle and bloody enimyes have whet their teeth against this little Island on
every side? but let us not be dismayed, for all ye papists in Europe adjoining to
the^ the Turk, are not able to come once to ye field with ten hundred thousand
me^, as Zerach of Ethiopia did against Asa: and if they were able to pass that
number, have we not legions of Angels under Christ his standerd against them?
Secondly, Asa and 2 God furnishes realms where he is served with many valiant
warriers.
Amazia Kings of Judah, fearing the living god, had under them a flourishing
common wealth, and were able to make three hundred thousand fighting me^. This
our country of england has wa^ted no temporal blessings, since god blessed us
with his word and gospel: neither do any momuments and chronicles of England
make record of so many England populous and p^entifull of good soldiers.
able men at one time, as are now to be found in this little Eland. I have
hard it reported of credible men, (who by commission had authority to make a
bewe of such things) that in the County of Deuon only, there has bin sound
forty thousand comely and likely men for the sield: so that if every county
in England do match the same according to their proportions, there is no
doubt but out powers will either surmount or answer that land whereof I spoke
before, in number of warlyke men. Lastly, bowsoeuer this little region 3 God
gineth victory not by many soldiers.
has bin stored with men of war heretofore, yet a small handful has
ouermatched a huge host, and most commonly (if I term it aright) a thin
Garryson has suppressed and surprised many and mighty armies of their
enimyes, as in Eoward the third his days at The victory of the English men at
Cressie. The battle of Poyters.
Cressy, where xix. thousand English men put to flight one hundred thousand
frenchmen, and slew xxx. thousand: at Poyters where the black Prince lauing
but a wing of men in respect of their enimyis, took prisoners, John the French
King, Phillippe his son, seven Earls, besides Barons and Knights. That
black Prince, as historyes declary, had the courage and heart of a Lion, they
might The constant faith of the black Prince.
as well have commended in him the constante faith and assured hope of a godly
and religious Captain. For seeing his power so far unequal to his
adversaries, and his meyny half sorrowful, he uttered such voices, as all
godly english Capitaynes in like case ought to express. Well syrs (says he)
albeit we be but sewe in regard to the multitude of our enimyes: let us not
be abashed therefore, for the victory lies not in the multitude of the
people, but where it pleases almighty God to give it. Therefore trust in him,
and take English men's hearts unto you this day: for if God will, this days
victory shall be ours: and if we dye, we have a good quarrel. With which words
he anymated and encouraged his souldyers. Henry the fifth having in all but xv.
thousand, discomfited the flower of France The denotion and zeal of Henry the
fyft.
at the battle Agincourte, where six French men men were in the field
against one English man: and at the end of the battle the nobl^ Henry
caused a retraite to be blown, and brought all his army together, willing them
to give thanks to God, by whose almighty power they bad received that
victory: and every one kneeling down swng, Not unto us Lord, not Psalm. 115.
unto us, but unto thy name give the glory etc. So that it evidently
appears, that this noble Prince had a perfect faith and trust in Flodden
field.
the aid of the lord, which heard his prayer and regarded his faith, and
miraculously in mercy gave him victory. In the days of the King of famous
memory Henry the eight, King James of Scotland the fourth, came into England
with one hundred thousand at the least, as all histories agree, and Paulus
Iouius notes P. Iouius.
the malaparte confidence of James in his host, that he thought himself able
with spearmen to hold up heaven, if it had bin slydying: but behold xxvj.
thousand English men encountereth him, vanquisheth his strength, and slew the
king with the most part of the nobility of Scotland at Brau^ston in Cheuiot.
Finally, Mouseleborough field.
ye field foughte^ at Mouscleborough is fresh in most men's memory, where God
punished the perjury of ye Scots, with the loss of xv. thousand soldiers, and
miraculously, without any great effusion of english blood (for there perished not
above one hundred on our side) gave unto our countrymen a tryumphant victory.
Such examples are plenty, but I have chosen a few, giving occasion unto noble
men thereby to fix their hearts upon Gods fatherly providence in all their
distresses, and to sing with divine Psa. 33.
David, The King is not saved by the multitude of an host, neither is the
Giant delivered by great strength. A horse is a vayn thing and shall not
deliver any by his strength: behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls, and
to preserve them in famyne.

And as God Defends good Princes against God never suffers rebels and
traytonts unpunished Chore.
soren enimyes, so does he most severely show his wrath, and power his borrible
and sharp punishments upon Rebels and Traitors at home. Chore, Dathan, and
Abiron rebelling against Moses, were swalowed into the earth quick, and
perished with a new and horrible kind of death. Absolon rebellyng 2. Sa. 18.
Absolon.
against his father was put to flight by David vis army, and seking to escape
through the woods. as his mule ran under a thick oak, his hear was
entangled in the boughs, and he taken up between the heaven and the earth,
and the mule that was under him went away, so Ioab the Captain came and ran
him through with darts. Sybas the son Sybas. 2. Psa. 20.
of Bochrus conspiryng against King David had a wretched end, his head (...)
of by the counsel of a prudent woman in Abela, and the same was cast over
the walls to Ioab. The act of Gaall
the son of Ebed is notable, Gaall.
who with a seditious oration styrred the men of Sichem to disobey Abimelech,
being Ind. 9.
in deed but a Tyrant, for he monstrouflye murdered about seventy of his
brethren, yet God favored not that cause, but suffered Abimelech to vanquish
those Rebels, and utterly to subvert then City. The enterprise of the
children of Ephraim against good Iephthe, Ephraim. Iud. 12.
had like event, for there fell of them by the hands of Gylead two and forty
thousand. Theudas Gaulonites. Act. 5.
Theudas Gaulonites made a show of earnest ^eale and love to deliver his
countreye from servitude: and therefore by his pleasant persuasions allured
many to arm themselves against Joseph. lib. 18. cap. 1.
the Romans, but he was slain, and his folowers (as Gamaliel declared) were
dispercled and brought to naught. And in our own country we may behold the
seditious dealings of VVatte Tyler, Jack Straw, John Watte Tyler, Jack
Straw. Anno. 4. Richard. 2.
Wall and others, who albeit they were fanored of the most part, and had an
army of 60. thousand men, yet being in their chief ruff, Watte was slain,
and they like sheep scattered a^road. Thomas Flamocke and Mighell Iosephe the
blackesmith, procured the Cornish Michael Joseph the blacksmith Anno. 12.
Henry. 7.
men to rebel against their Prince, and assembled such a company, that they
astonished al good and faithful subjects: but their power was discomfited at
Blackeheath, their chief Captain the Lord Audeley beheaded, Thomas Flamocke
and Mychaell Iosephe were drawn, hanged, and quartered, and their quarters
pitched on stakes, after the manner of Traitors, to warn others to beware of
like crimes and offenses.

Finally, the unhappy insurrectio^s in the days Rebellion in Engla^s in our
time.
of King Henry the eight, of King Edward the ^xt, and of our sovereign Lady
the Dueenes majesty, made under pretense of defending the faith and holy
church, and of deliueryng the common wealth from oppression, do with ruful
ruin of noble families, with savage spoil of goodly countries, with dreadful
executions of courageous personages, paynt before all men's eyes the hateful
hatred of almighty God against Rebels and Traitors, and there withal do
show Gods fatherly providence in assisting good Princes and noble men, being
environed on every side with enimyes, and oppressed with extreme miseries and
calamities.

Notwithstanding I grant some special Why God permits godly printes and
magistrates sometime to be oppressed by Tyrants.
examples may be found repugnaunt to the premises, and it comes to pass
now and then that wicked and seditious persons prosper and preuail, and that
good and lawful magistrates decay and perish: which things have wonderfully
astonished ye minds of mortal men, and moved them to think that either there is
no God, or at the least that there is no divine providence at all over earthly
things: for if there were any effectual care, the^ surely ye world should go
happily with the godly, and unhappily with the ungodly. Such fiery darts wound
even Christians reasoning thus with themselves: if almighty God do care for
earthly creatures, and especially for the church, why did godless Cain kill
godly. Abel? and why did y^ lecherous and filthy stru^pet oppress clean and
chaste Iosephe? why was the holy prophet Esaias given into y^ hands of cruel
Manasses? whi did not y^ piety of religious David touer him from so many
storms and tempests? why did God suffer y^ slinking Got Herodias to behead
him than who^ there was no greater amongst ye sons of women? why was y^
monstrous Tyrant and very froth of mischief Nero suffered to murder those two
notable disciples of Christ and tru^pets of true religion Peter and Paul?
Marcus Cato when tidings came unto him in^ Cicil, yt great Pompei through fear
of Caesar had forsaken Italy, he cried out saying, O immortal Gods, how obscure
and variable are your co^solations in humayne affairs? For unto this day have
you favored Pompei, not Pompelus magnus doubts of gods providence.
so exactly ministering equity and justice, but now in defe^ding common
liberty and in a most just cause of his country you have forsaken him. Pompei
himself scaping y^ sword in the field foughte^ at Pharsalia, sailed to
Mytelene where Cornelia his wife made her abode, and repairing to y^
Philosopher Cratippus, lamented much his adversity, and questioned whither
there were any providence at all. And now in France who sees not poyseners,
trucebreakers, Tyrants and bloudit French Tyranny.
Papists to ttiumph again, obedient and over c^edulous subieus oppreste,
professors of true religion murdered, honorable gray white heads are cleft
asu^der, y^ great bellies and wombs of Ladies and gentlewome^ are ripped,
infantes and sucking babes are with pykes perced, and finally, no kind of
cruelty unpracticed. Albeit, such lamentable calamities of good me^, and
savage liberty of wicked me^, both in churches and common welaths seem to
take away gods providence: yet god to remove such doubts, has set before men's
eyes, his works ordinary and extraordinary, and has added thereunto his
express and manifest word, thereby showing the properity and adversity come
not to men by chance, but to be disposed and distributed as it were with Gods
hand. And touching ye prosperity of the wicked, whom it pleases God to
advance even Why God permits the wicked to prosper. Exo. 9.
unto the highest step of honor and dignity, we have the cause alleged by
God himself, of Pharao, after this manner: For this cause have I appointed thee,
to show my power in thee, and to declare my name throughout all the world. In
this text God expresses plainly, that of his own purpose and will he anaunted
and obdured Pharao: which his will he proves good and just, by two reasons:
First to show his justice and power, secondarily, that his name might be
renoumed throughout the whole world: which two things had bin hidden hidden
time, if Pharao his strength and power had not bin famous among the nations
round about: and therefore that new and strange punishment in drownyng so
mighty an army of the Egyptians in the red Sea, and in saving his own simple
and unarmed people the Israelits, did note the same. The wicked then clyme
alofte by Gods appointment, that their great and beauye ruin may be more
apparent: and their worldly honor and glory is notable, that their shame and
dishonor may be more notable. Whereof The fall of Tirantes.
bessdes Pharao of Egypt, Nabuchodonozer of Babylon, Chusan of Mesopotamia,
Eglon of Moab, Synacherib of Assyria, Edward the second and Richard the third
of England do yield unto us firm proof and plain declaration, so that the
most mighty Empires of the world have their exaltation and declination: and
Tyrants have their fall, and are punished for their riottousnesse, pride,
oppression, and esfusion of innocent blood, even by the hands of bloody men:
and one wicked succeedyng another in a long tract and course of time, do
murder one another: until at last, the Empire come unto one virtuous Prince,
who with much a do dies naturally in his bed. The Chroniles of England,
make large mention of such punishments in this land, between the Kings of the
Saxons and Danes, from the reign of Brithricus, unto ye time of Swainus, by
the term of 255. years. And who can be ignorant (that has but a little
turned over our country histories) of a heap of such Tragical examples from
Edward the third unto Henry the seventh by the space of one hundred Tirants dye
seldom a natural death.
and five years. And if one Tyrante oppress not another, which most commonly
comes to pass, according to the Poet,

Ad generu^ Cere is, sine cade and sanguine pauci
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Then God sends either his destroying Angel, which happened to Senacherib,
Herod and Julian, or sharpneth their own daggers, which came to pass in
Saul, Zamry and Herod. Wherefore let good Princes put their affiance in God, who
alone is able to turn Tragedies into Comedies, sorrow into joy, and take away
the storms of calamity, and shine upon us with the beams of prosperity. God
knows best what is expediente for us, and how long it is profitable for his
people to continue in misery and thraldom, in Egypt and Babylon. He alone
has in his hand the hearts of Kings, and he it is that hardneth Pharao, The
continual welfare of wicked me^ in this world a sign of more grievous
damnation. Luke 16.
Senacherib, Holofernes, and again, that molifieth Cyrus, Nabuchodonozer and
Assuerus. And if God suffer wicked Tyrants with quietness and peace to descend
unto their grave, as he suffered the rich glutton, of whom we read in the
Gospel. It is an evident argument, that such one is reserved unto the pains
of the world to come, which never shall have Math. 13.
end, where weeping and gnashing of teeth shall be, as we see it chanced to the
foresaid glutton, unto whom God said, Son, remember tha^ than in thy life
time receyuedst thy pleasure; and contrariwise Lazarus received pain, but now
Hebr. 12.
be is comforted and thou art punished. The holy Apostle says, What son is he
whom the father chastises not? If ye be not under correction (whereof all are
partakers) then are ye bastards and not sons. A terrible end therefore
abides them, which in this world licentiausly and without punishment do sin,
for all such be bastrads and not sons, therefore have they no Sapi. 2.
part of ye haue^ly inherit^ce: And those vol voluptuous Epirures, which in
this world say. Come and let us enjoy the pleasures yt are, and le^ us some
use the creature, like as in youth. Let us fill our selves with good wine and
pyntment, and let there no flour of time go by us. Let us crown our selves with
roses, before they be withered. Let there be no fair meadow but our lust go
through it. Let every one of you be partakers of our voluptuousnes. Let us
leave some toke^ of pleasur in every place, for yt is our portion, else get we
nothing. etc. But such in time to come shall cry out in this manner and say, We
Sapi. 6.
have erted from the way of truth, the light of righteousness has not
shined upon us, We ^aue wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and
destruction. Tedious ways have we gone, but as for the way of the Lord we have
not known it etc. Such words shall they that have sinned, speak in the Hell.
For the hope of the ungodly is like a dri^ Thistill flower, that is blown away
with the wind. The felicity of the ungodly therefore in this life, is
extreme misery, and a sign of their A worthy history of polycrates. Strabo.
lib. 14.
heavy gretuous punishment in hell torments. The C^huikes also donbted the
end of such men ad continued long in great prosperity, and affirmed some
unhappy end to ensue, as Amasis writ to Polycrates. This Polycrates Sabell.
Eneid. lib. ^.
was chief governor of Samus, who was so happy in all his life, that he
seemed to be the very son and heir of good fortune. For he ^asting of
purpose into the Sea a ring most excellently wrought, wherein was set (as
He^^dotus writes) a Smargde, but Pliny calls it a Sardonichem, precious
stones of no Plinius naturalis histo. li. 23. cap. 1.
shall price, minding as some conjecture, with that great loss to preuente
and anoyde misfortune: It chanced within five days after, a fisher to take a
goodly great fish, which being Amasis King of Egypt.
bought for the King, and brought to the C^^^^ to be br^ssed, behold in the
drawing, the ^^ng was found in the belly of the fish, and was brought out
of hand to Poly^^^^^^. Whereof when Amasis. king of Egypt had^^ inte(...) by
the said king his letters, he answered again to Polycrates largely, and
^^mayling man's slipp^^^^ of that, among (...) things, (...) this divine
^^^^ence, (...) as lead their life in these world^^ all felicity ^^do end
their life in great misery. Which (...) in deed in Polycrates. For (...)
app^^^^nded by the policy of a King of the Persons, and being (...) abused,
was in the end most shamefully hanged. Hereunto agrees that history of S.
Ambrose, who S. Ambrose his judgment of continual prosperity.
trau(...) Rome, by the way went (...) rich man's housE to lodge, and in his
inter^^^^ment, there fell out communication of the rich man's ^^^ate, who
joyfully, and (...) less ^ostingly answrred: The world (...) fid wned upon
me, but all things have come to me even according to my hearts desire. Which
words, when that woithy Bishop heard, he spoke unto his company and say^^.
Away hence sins with all speade, God loves not this house, he has no mansion
here. And see the sequel: They were not gone far from that (...), hifore the
earth suddenly opened, and (...) up the man with all that eue^ he had, so
that nothing was saved, both (...) do (...) are, that God is not preseut, where
the (...) was absent, and (...) cannot (...) in firm (...), where God (...).
For Saint (...) the Apostle says: Ye have (...) on the (...) and in
wantonuesse, you have (...) you^ (...) in a day of (...) yt have (...) (...)
killed the iusti, (...) James. 5. ^ere. 12.
(...) you. The (...) O Lord if I (...) with (...), (...) with thee of thy.
(...) the may of ye (...) they in wealth, that (...) have ^^^^ted the (...) and
they have taken (...) (...) in their mo^^^, and far (...) their mints, but
(...) Lord pull them, out like (...) for the (...) and (...) them for the day
of (...)

And (...) Mala. 4.
is great diffedence in the days of (...) ye iust^ the ^^iust, speaking after
this manner: For behold the day conu^^th that shall burn as (...), and all
the (...), (...) and all that do (...), shall he (...), and the day that (...),
says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave then^ neither oote, neither branch,
but unto you that fear my name, shall the sun of righteousness arise, and
health shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth and growt up as fat
Calves. Let no good man thereforestumble at the prosperity of the ungodly, let
them not seek to have any part of the unhappy portion of the wicked. Since
that as David writes. In the hand of the Lord there is a c^^ and the wine is
red, it is full mixed, and he powers out of the same, surely all the wicked
Psalm. 75.
of the earth shall wring out and drink the dr^gges thereof.

Now as some wicked and bloody Tirants Examples of godly Princes murdered and
^ppressed. 2. reg. 12.
prosper and come unto a quiet end, so some good Princes and magistrates are
afflicted and cruelly murdered. Good Ionathas is slain of the Philistines.
Iehoas King of Judah walking in the ways of the Lord, is traitorously
inurthered by his own servants. Josias unto whom no king of Judah either
before him or after him, might be compared in 2. Reg. 23.
sincerenesse of heart and holiness of life, was slain by wicked Pharao Necho
king of Egypt at Megiddo. And if we consider our own stories, we shall read
of King Alu^^d who Alured.
was endued with great knowledge in all learning, as well profane as divine of
feruente zeal, and of a virtuous and godly life, yet he being oppressed with
more number of enemies than any other did lead an uncertain, troublesome and
unquiet life, and forsaken of his friends, wandered in the wood country of
Sommerset shire, and had skant to live withal. King John studying to repress
the Popish King John.
Tyranny in England, and to reduce the true knowledge of God, was poisoned by
Simon a Monk of Swinsteed. King Henry King Henry.
the sixth, surnamed the Saint, for that there was in him all virtues, and a
special study for the health of his soul, the saving whereof be esteemed to
be the greatest wisdom, and the loss thereof the extremest folly, yet was
he traitorously murdered in the Tower by Richard Duke of Gloucester. And even
now the most traiterous, lamentable and cruel murder of French Tyranny.
many thousand of Christ's members in France, as well high and low, men, women
and children, does preach unto us Gods wonderful dispensation in punishing
his Church. Albeit the causes of these calamities are many, yet I will not
thoroughly prosecute them, being not so pettinent to my purpose, but will
content my self with that which seems to me amongst the rest to be most
comfortable: namely, that they are signs and tokens of immortality and of
eternal felicity. For seeing God has promised to his children all good
things, and permits the ungodly to oppress them: notwithstanding he
confirms by expert and euidente witness, that he allows and approves
John Baptist, Paul and such like. It consequently follows, another time and
place to remain, when John and Paul shall be comforted: Herod and Nero
punished, according to the saying of Peter, The 1. Pet. 4.
time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God. If it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them which obey not the Gospel of God?
Gods chosen and elect children therefore are afflicted in this life, by gods
peculiar counsel. And again, the wicked seem to be blessed in this world,
but the elect have no portion in this world, nor the reprobate in the world
to come. Yet does not God always suffer his children to groan under the yoke
of affliction, but comfort and refreshes them (as Bernard says) God is
angry indeed, when he seems not to be angry: and The godly most perfect in
sorrow.
Chrysostom, As gold reteyneth still his color and brightness both in
water and fire: but Hay and Straw run abroad in the water, and are consumed
with the fire. Even so fares it with the godly and the ungodly, for when the
godly are in prosperity, they are as gold in the water, in adversity, they
are more brighte and beautiful, as gold in the fire. And again, the wicked
being in prosperity, are scattered abroad like water: and in adversity they
perish as Hay in ye furnace. Now if God do any long space try us in ye storms
of misery and calamity, whereas he is able every moment to relieve us, yet
does it not before he perceives us purified and prepared to repentance. For as
ye goldsmith takes not his gold out of ye furnace, before it be exactly tried
and cle^sed from the dross, so does not god take his serna^ts out of ye
furnace of afflictions, before he seth the^ cleansed from gross affections and
carnal appetites, and wholly bent to newnes and holiness of life.

If then Princes and noble men do taste at any Princes ought to call upon God in
their distress and not to despair of his (...) help.
time of miseries and calamities, they ought patiently to suffer the same,
seeing that they are Gods chastisement and correction, serving to their better
perfection. And moreover, in the middle of their troubles, they are taught by
ye examples of good and godly princes to flee unto the living God, by ardente
invocation and prayer: both for y^ there is no danger so great out of the
which God is not able to deliver them. And again, no accombrance, be it never
so light and small, out of ye which they are able to wind themselves, unless
God with a special care and providence put too his helping hand. It then ye
prince or magistrate his own person, be in danger of death through some
grievous ^^^hesse: let him call to his remembrance the example of Ezechias, let
him settle his hope in Examples of Gods deliverance, touching princes and noble
men principally.
God, let him bewail his sins with bitter tears, and God will send some
Esaias who shall administer unto him comfort, and salve for his grievous sore.
If a plage and Pestilence of his people astone him; let him follow king David,
and offer for his people ye sacrifices of an humble and lowly heart, and there is
no doubt, but the consuming pestilence shall cease. If famine and penury may
which thee can almost be no greater misery do affect his land, let him endeavor
to get some provident Joseph, to relieve the dear years of Egypt in his
country. If the earth (...) and become barraine, let him call upon God, and
some Elias by his prayers will open ye heavens to send down their moisture, or
some Elizeus, who will show unto I^^am and Iehosaphat whole rivers of water to
relieve them. If sword and fire in wars do make him tremble, or if in the day
of battle be despair of victory, let him record with himself, that it,
lies in Gods hand, to reskew him and his men, and to rescue him with good
Ezechias, who with prayer prevailed more than Sennacherib with his hundred
thousands. If it please God to throw him into ^riles, or into captivity, he
may not for all this despair, but with Manasses turning unto the Lord, let him
hope to be delivered out of the dungeon in Babylon, and to see his City
Jerusalem again. If his people rebel on every side, David teaches him to
say, The Lords will be done. Yet in yt mean time he ought to desire God to
infatuate the devises of his aduarsaries, and God will appoint some faithful
Chusu to bring to naught, the counsayls of tr^iterous Achitophell, and will
^asse by some (...) A^salon. I^ his (...) with the (...) (...) which
tribulation being (...) other most grievous) as David (...) when he saw (...)
murder: yet if he re^^^, God will (...) Nathan to ereste and comfort him. And
finally, what tribulation soever the magistrate taste of, whether it be
spitituall or corporal, public or private: let him make ye living God his
shooteanker, and look for consolation and comfort at his hand.

Now if they thus cleave unto almighty Why God does not always deliver his
servants from painful deths
God, let them not doubt, but he will succoure and deliver, if not the flesh,
yet the spirit: if not their bodies yet, certainly, he will not permit their
Soul to perish: for that GOD which delivered the three children out of the
fiery furnace, and Daniel out of the Lions den, suffered the Machabees,
Vincentius, and infinite Martires, to die in sharp torments, and yet he is the
God of the one and of the other. He therefore saves some miraculously, to
confound Idolatry: he permits othersome to perish in their bodies, that the
strong patience of Martirs may be seen, and that the torments of the ungodly
may be the heavier in August. psa. 33.
Hell fire. When Vincentius was rent and al to torn upon the rack, and after
cast upon Vincentius.
the hot coals, he spoke to the Tirant Dacianus, Show all furor and cruelty
upon me that Bergomensis in supplemento.
thou art able, by Gods power, I shall be more firm and patient in suffering,
than thou in afflicting. Whence came such courage and boldness? Surely all the
cogitations of the godly men, are settled upon the rock, the son of God.
Without him ye godly would shrink even into the quagmire of desperatio^, but
knowing their cause, they lift up their heads and march after their Captain
Jesus Christ. And being armed with the shield of faith, whereby they have an
assured estate in the life to come, they force not much what may Examples of
good men, not dying naturally in their beds.
come to their mortal bodies, neither do they think it a miserable end, if
they die with (...) sword, in the fire, upon the gallows, or by any other
ways, so it be for the name of the Lord Jesus. And if we consider examples,
it will evidently appear, that many of Gods elect died not in their beds a
natural death. Abel was murdered of his own brother. The Prophet being
sent to Hieroboam, was destroyed by a Lion. Esaias was sawen asunder through ye
mids. Jeremy, like as Stephen also, was stoned to death. James being thrown
down from the Pinnacle of the temple, was Heb. 11.
slain of a fuller. Peter was fastried to yt cross Paul was executed with ye
sword. Many such examples are extant. Besides these, ye famous men amongst ye
Heathen died miserably touching ye world. The good Socrates was poisoned,
Euripides was forne with (...) Sophocles was choked with a berrie of a grape.
Very sorrowful cumbrance and grief of mind killed Homer. But Socrates
accounted it comfort Socrates.
enough for good men to die innocently, and for good deserts to receive
undeserved punishments. Christ's Apostles accord with ye same, who rejoiced y^
they were found meet to sustain Acts. 5.
contumelies for ye name of ye Lord Jesus: the reason is thus: If we be spoiled
of our goods in this world, we have other treasures in heaven: if we be here
exiled, we are there received into gods family: if we be murdered, a door is
opened unto us to everlasting life. To remember the day of judgment, eases
the sorrows of the ungodly. Icza. 25. Reuela. 7.
wherefore let princes and noble me^ contemn such perils, and tolerate such
crosses, if it please god to lay the^ upon their shoulders. Which thing they
shall be able to do, if they set before their eyes y^ day when the Lord will give
unto his chosen a quiet kingdom, will wipe away al tears from their eyes, and
will voutsafe to make the^ partakers of his everlasting kingdom. But as for ye
ungodly which have flourished in ye earth, he will throw the^ into utter
destruction, where their plesures shall be reco^penced with payns, their laughing with
weping and grinding of teeth, their peace shall be unquieted with the worm of ye
conscience, and they shall behold ye godly whom they have persecuted and killed
reigning over them in all blessedness. For this is that justice, whereof 2 Thessalonians. 1.
the Apostle speaks, to ease those that be unjustly afflicted, and to punish
the oppressors of the godly, at that day when the Lord Jesus shall be reveled
from heaven. This surely, ought to comfort, not only noble, but all christian
men: and this is their triumph over the world, the flesh, the Devil, and all
his members, to fix their hearts and minds upon the resurrection: when the
Lord will pour upon his enemies fire and brimstone, storm, and tempest for
their portion, and will crown his own children with glory, honor and
immortality.

Only unto God be honor and glory.

