The Hunting of Antichrist. With a caveat to the contentious.

By Leonard Wright.

Jeremy 16. Verse. 16. 17. 18. 16 And after that I will send out many hunters,
and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of
the caves of the rocks.

17 For mine eyes are upon all their ways: they are not hid from my face,
neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.

18 And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double, because
they have defiled my land, and have filled mine inheritance with their filthy
carrions and their abominations.

Veritas non quaerit latebras.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1589.

To the courteous Reader.
THat ancient Poet Lucillius, was wont to say, that neither learned nor
unlearned, should read any of his doings: for that the one, was too ignorant
to understand his true meaning: and the other too wise for him to aunsweare
their expectation. Reading of books is aptly compared to eating of cheese: the
talant whereof, seems so diverse in taste: as amongst ten men, two, can hardly
agree in one judgment. One says it is too fresh: another thinks it too salt:
It is too mild (says he.) nay says his fellow, it is too strong of the
rennet for me. In like manner, my SVMMONS FOR SLEEPERS was no sooner published
abroad: but it seemed to have four several rellishes. First, it pleased the
wise and learned: courteously to pardon my imperfections, accept my good will,
and consture all things to the best. The second sort: judged it, rather to
proceed from natural or arteficiall gifts, then spiritual or divine grace.
The third company: finding the matter not fitting their fancy: began
maliciously to discredit and deface, both the author and the book. The man in
his young time (quoth they) delighted too much in hunting, shooting, and good
fellowship, to be studious or learned, and therefore sure it is but some od,
vain conceit, unworthy the view. The fourth crew, forasmuch as it was not
correspo^dent to their own seditious vain: condemned it straight for no
better then plain Papistry. Thus to recompense my painful labors, seeking
in some measure to discharge my duty, and profit my country: the whole race
of my former life was called in question: ripped up as an anotomy, and tossed from
post to pillar, as a tennis-ball. Whereupon I have taken occasion, not to rip
and lay open, the conditions and manners of that uncharitable brotherhood: for
loathing of honest ears, or uncovering their shame to the enemy: but rather to
spend a little more time in my old pastime of hunting. Not the wyly Fox, nor
harmeles Hare: but that seven headed monster Antichrist of Rome: and the three
headed Cerberus, bandog of Hell, and his whelps: the intolerable Sects of
Seditious Scismatikes, sprung up in our time: daily barking against the most
Christian and well reformed Ecclesiastical state of the Church of England. Who
seek together continually, like ramping and roaring lions, with tooth and
nail: to dishonor our God, extinguish his Gospel, and and devour his poor
saints. Not with cries of yelping hounds, to fray the^: nor strength of
coursing greyhounds to chase them: nor fangs of ravening mastiffes to bait
them: but the sound of godly Patriarchs, valiant Prophets, courageous Apostles,
and their invincible successors to destroy them: the breath of Gods holy
spirit, to subvert and utterly confound them: and the two edged sword of his
eternal word, to pierce and thrust them thorough, even to the dividing a
sunder of their iointes and marow. Beseeching thee in curtesy gentle Reader, to
judge charitably, censure without partialitye, make choice to thy profit, and
yield God the glory. Vale in Christo. Leonard Wright.

As for carping Zoilus with his peevish ^fsicophant whelps: I look for no
(...) at their hands, then my (...) found, and my self have ^^gested. To
whose spiteful objections, though wisdom do will me, not to cast a stone at
every barking dog: yet must I needs in mine own defense say somewhat.

First, as touching the title of learning, I reverently yield it over to my
betters, that woorthily deserve it: having nothing my self to boast upon, 2.
Cor. 11. 29.
but painful crosses, grievous afflictions, ^. Cor. 12. 6. 9.
sickness of body, troubles of mind, and wreastling with want and necessity.
Beseeching God to grant me patience, and his holy spirit, to use in some
measure, that little I have conceived by reading the holy scriptures, and
learned men's books. Exhorting all men even in christian charity, and the fear
of God: That though it were as simple a scholar as Balaam ass, that shall
justly reprove your wicked behavior, Number. 22.
and tell you the truth: do not strike him, but go about your own amendment:
least you seem to kick against the pricks, or strive with God: Gal. 6. 7.
who will neither be mocked, nor dallied withal.

Touching my recreation, I aunsweare with Spiridion Bishop of (...) demanded
why he durst (...) flesh in Lent: I dare freely (...) quoth he, because I am a
christian. So dare I freely hunt and shoot, for my health and recreation,
intime, place, and company convenient: because I am a christian: and know how
to use them, without offense toward God, Etheickes lib. 4.
or abuse to my neighbor. Requies and ludus, in vita necessari^, says
Aristotle. Both the body and the mind, are sometimes to be refreshed with
plays, says Peter Martyr: to make us afterward more prompt unto grauer
matters. upon the Judges cap. 14.
For as there is a time to weep and mourn, Preach. 3. Romans 12. 15
so is there a time to laugh and be merry. When God sent the prophet to comfort
his people of Jerusalem: amongst others his mercies, he promised them this
security: that their boys and damsels, Zach. 8. 5.
should sport and play in the streets. Mirth, joy, praise, and thankesgeuing,
Esaias. 51.
shall be heard in Syon, says the Lord. Defraud not thy neighbor of his
liberty, Eccle. 7.
says Jesus Syrach: neither despise him in his mirth. Take thy pastime at
home, 31.
and do what thou will (says he) so thou do none evil. 32.
When thou have discharged thy duty, Esaias 65.
sairh the prophet: sit down with the people and be merry. The Apostle
himself exhorts men, 1. Pet. 2. 17.
to love and delight in brotherly fellowship. And daily experience teaches,
that honest pastime, is a great occasion of friendly meetinges, And neighbourly
conference, the cognizance of humane society: A mean to foster and cherish,
concord and amitye amongst men. Whereas the contrary does rather engender
melancholic hatred and disdain. As for such grim churlish Timons, curious
Stoicall hipocrites, and wayward scrupulous fools: whose wills are too
obstinate for their senses: their wits too headstrong for their wisdom: and
their dumpish natures, too peevish, to enter league with reason: Are more fit
to live in Diogenes tub, or Trophonius den: then for humane society, amongst
honest men. And wot you what Master Tusser says: There is oftentimes seen no
more very a knave: then he that does counterfeit most to be grave.

THE HVNTING OF ANTICHRIST.
A brief description of the Church of Rome from the time of Christ, until our
present age.
AS the ungrateful Jews of an obstinate blindness, had most cruelly
persecuted, and condemned to the cross, that pure guiltless innocent, the
only Savior and Redeemer of the world: so after his triumphant Resurrection,
and glorious Ascension, the spiteful heathen Emperors of Rome, having the
whole power and jurisdiction of all Asia, Africa, The ten persecutions of the
primitive Church under ten heathen Emperors.
and Europe in their hands, intending utterly to abolish his name, and
extinguish his religion for ever, as before they had crucified the head,
sought still by all means possible with most grievous afflictions, painful
torments, and horrible kinds of death, to persecute his poor dispersed
members, for the space of 300. years together: till the Lord of his fatherly
affection, Anne. 320.
taking pity of his poor dispersed flock, raised up that godly and famous
instrument, Constantine the great. After their long and lamentable troubles, to
snaffle Satan and set them in quiet rest and safety. This Constantine the
first Christian Emperor, to confute the infectious heresies of Arrius, Anno.
300.
with his pestilent Disciples, and to set an uniform order in the Church
assembled at Nicene a City of Bithinia, Pope Pius. 2.
a general council of 318 grave and learned Bishops, himself being present:
where it was decreed, that the universal Church should be divided into four
Provinces: and four chief Bishops, Patriarchs or Metropolitans to be
hea^-Pastours and governors of the same: Namely the Patriarch of Rome, of
Alexandria, of Jerusalem, and of Antioch: and after in stead of Antioch, came
in Constantinople: and so long as the Church was governed in this order, though
in outward rites and ceremonies there was some difference, yet so well they
agreed in one Catholic doctrine, as it mightily increased and flourished, till
Satan the author of mischief had so greatly infected the mind of John
Archbishop of Constantinople, as at length he presumed to challenge unto
himself the proud title of universal Bishop, Pope, or Arch-father:
assembling a council to establish and ratify his throne. Anno. 420.
But Gregoris then Patriarch of Rome, Nic. Can. 6.
affirmed him in his challenge to be no other but the forerunner of Antichrist,
alleging the saying of Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
Quicunque episcoporum primatum in terra desiderabit, confusionem in coelis
reperiet.

Until the death of this Gregory the basest of all the Bishops before him,
and the best of all that came after him, the Sea of Rome remained in some
reasonable order, not presuming to exalt her self above her sister-Churches,
till Boniface the third succeeding in that sea within three years after his
decease, obtained of Phocas that wicked usurper (who of a common soldier, by
consenting traitorously to murder Mauritius his sovereign, with his wife and
son, aspired to the Empire) that he and all his successors should be called
supreme head of the universal Church. About this time began Mahomet to
conquer and reign in the East.
The same title which his predecessor had left for Antichrist. At which time
(as it is written) was heard a voice in the air, saying: Hodie venenum infusum
est Ecclesiae.

Afterward through the liberality of good Princes, especially one Mathilda a
noble Duchess in Italy (who made the sea of Rome heir of all her lands and
revenues) the Bishops began to grow in wealth and prosperity, and the more
they flourished in the world, the more they swelled in pomp and pride. And
the more they shut up and swelled, the more Gods holy spirit forsook them,
till at last they had cast of the laws of Simon Peter, Gal. 2. 9.
and were become in conditions and manners like Simon Magus, Caiphas and Judas,
so as that which was ordained to bring men unto God, was made an occasion of
falling from God: for riches begat ambition, and ambition destroyed religion:
or after S. Augustine, Augustine.
Religio peperit diuitias, and filia deuorauit matrem.

Now to open the filthy detestable doings of that Romish rabble, from the
time of their first corruption: what superstition they practiced, what heresies
they taught, what hypocrisy they used, what vice they maintained, and what
bloody wars they raised: setting Princes together by the ears, and the
son against the father, would not only loath honest natures, but also
infect the very air. Some Popes came in by Simonie, some by Negromancie, and
some by poisoning. It is written how Siluester the second, John Stell^ a
Uenetian.
a sorcerer, gave himself to the devil, conditionally that he would help
him to be Pope. John the thirteenth was noted for a wicked person, even from
his youth: namely a whooremonger, and a cruel tyrant. Of some of his Cardinals
he pulled out their eyes, of some he cut out their tongues, and of some their
noses. He made the Palace of Laterane a Stews, committed incest with two of
his own sisters: and in the end being taken in adultery, with a man's wife,
was slain of her husband.

John the three and twentieth, had these crimes proved against him, that he
was an heretic, an hypocrite, an inchanter, a murderer, that he had hired a
Physician to poison the Emperor, and was therefore by the Council of
Constance deposed.

John the two and twentieth, and Clement the seventh, were rank heretics,
openly denying the immortality of the soul.

In the space of nine years was nine Popes, one hoysting another out of his
place.

Again three Popes reigning and raging at once: as Benedict the first,
Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixth.

Though the Pharisees were not to be followed, yet were they to be heard:
^ar. 23.
but the Romish rabble whose doctrine stands chiefly upon lying visions, and
prodigious fables, are neither to be followed nor heard, the effect whereof is
this.

That it is possible for man to keep the law. This doctrine ^greeth with ^he
word of God like harp and harrow, ^onferre the places.
That all acts of charity deserve eternal life. That the works of Friars
do merit Paradise. That Saints can by their merits save all men that pray unto
them. That whosoever is buried in Saint Frances habit, is delivered from the
pains of Purgatory. That our Lady by her virginity can save all women that
call upon her: To. 10. 20. 28. Gal. 2. 16. 21. Luke 17. 10. Gal. 3. 10. 11. 1.
Tim. 2. 5. Ridiculous. Romans 10. 14. John 14. 6. John 6. 44. John 3. 16. 18.
Romans 6. 23.
attributing unto her that which in David's Psalms is spoken of the father and
the son. In thee, oh Lady, have I trusted: have mercy upon me, oh Lady:
The Lord said unto my Lady, sit thou on my right hand, etc. The absolution
they gave to their penitentiaries, is in this manner. The passion of Christ, and
the merits of the blessed virgin Marie, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and all other
he Saints and she Saints of Paradise, be unto thee in remission of thy
sins. In these and such like depends their whole religion.

Thus was the word of God neglected, true religion defaced, the right way to
salvation abolished: and vice under a show of virtue maintained. For under a
cloak of professed poverty, they possessed the riches of all lands. Under a
shadow of being dead to ye world, they ruled it at their pleasure. Under the
color of hearing the keys of heaven and hell: they crept both into men's
purses and their consciences. And like as the Scribes and Pharssies in bragging
so highly of the Temple of the Lord, destroyed in deed the true Temple of the
Lord: so these under the title of Christ and his religion, have indeed
persecuted both Christ and his true Religion. And under the name of Catholic
Church: In nomine domini, incipitomne malum.
have most cruelly oppressed the true Catholic Church. And coloring their
proceedings with in nomine domini: have put the true members of Christ to
death, pro nomine domini.

And like as in the Primative Church, Satan perceiving he could not prevail
against the person of Christ himself: turned all his force and malice against
his poor members. So being let loose again in this latter age, works still
what he can to hinder the glory of God, and salvation of man. Whose special
instruments, God and Magog, the tyrannous Turk and bloud-thirstie Pope, ruling
the world at their pleasure, have so vehemently conspired with all severity
and means possible to subvert, deface, and utterly abolish both Christ, his
Church and religion: as if either the fury and malice of Satan, the strength
and power of man, the wit and policy of the world, cruel torments, pains
of death, or hell gates, could have prevailed: no cruelty could ever be
invented, which has not been attempted. Yet so mightily has the Lord always
preserved his poor despised truth, and strengthened his afflicted members: as
no threatening, pains, or kind of death, could ever so fear or terrify
them: but that from time to time, they have always stood in defense of the
truth against the tyrants of the world, and prevailed. In whom both in their
lives and deaths appeared manifest tokens of Gods divine working, far beyond
man's reach: being so ready in their answers, so patient in their
imprisonment, so strong and constant in their sharp torments, so willing to
pardon their enemies, and so cheerful and courageous in suffering, that so
they might win Christ, they feared neither gallows, tearing their members,
pressing their bodies, nor all the grievous torments that wicked worldlings
could devise Having two special marks of Gods children: John. 16. 33
outward persecution, and inward comfort in the holy Ghost. In the world you
shall have affliction (says our Savior) but in me you shall have peace.

Thus was the Popes honor first begotten by presumption, borne by ambition,
nursed up by superstition, increased by violence, and defended by false
wresting the Scriptures. And from a rotten root arose rotten branches, which
sent their rottenness into every twigge: whose contagious infection, flowing
continually from one to another, is conveyed from the ancestors to the
posterity. Whereby Rome of a school of virtue, became a sink of all vice: of
a daughter of peace, a beldame of debate: of a loving mother, a hateful
stepdame, or rather a proud frantike whoose delighting in murder and
bloodshed, Act. 10. 25. 26
whose Pilots are turned to cruel pirates, Apoc. 22. 8. 9
rakers of riches, and co^tenders for worldly mastership.

That Rome is Babylon, and the Pope and his Clergy Antichrist.
NOw that Rome, or rather the Empire, Monarch or dominions thereof, is that
daughter of Babylon, Daniel. 7
the sea of Antichrist, so lively described of Daniel by 4. monstrous beasts,
containing both the cruelty of the leopard, the bear, and the Lion, Apoc. 13
and so lively painted out in the Apocalips by another beast, muth after the
same shape, color, and condition, having seven heads and ten horns. Apoc. 17
And also by that great purple colored whore, sitting upon many waters, it
appears plain and manifest, in that the Angel himself expounds that
purple whore to be that great City Babylon, Apoc. 5. 9
the mother of all abomination, which bears rule over the kings of the
earth. And the seven heads of the beast, to be seven mountains or hills,
whereupon the woman sits, which all writers, historiographers and poets
affirm to be a plain description of the City of Rome: which because of her
abominable filthynes, Apoc. 11. 8
is spiritually called Sodoma: for keeping Gods people in bondage and slavery,
Egypt: and for her likeness in conditions, Babylon.

That good smelling dog Tertullian, who lived about 200 years after Christ,
Tertullian.
discoursing of figures and things figured, says, that Babylon in the
Apocalips bears the figure of the City of Rome.

That sweet mouthed hound Chrysostom, feeling a hot sent of his game, calls
on to his fellows in this manner: Like as the Persians came in the psace of
the Caldeans, Chrysostom in his Commentaries upon the second Epistle to the
Thessalonia^s
the Grecians in the place of the Persians, and the Romans in place of the
Grecians: so shall Antichrist vsurp the Empire of the Romans.

That famous finder S. Augustine affirms, that at the same time when the
first Babylon, being always enemy to the City of God, De ciuitate Dei.
was destroyed in Caldea, least the City of God should want an enemy: the
second Babylon, which is the City of Rome, was erected in Italy.

The good shepherds dog Saint Gregory, Eregorie in his 4. book and Epistle.
38
having found out that monstrous Hydra, gives warning to his flock, saying, He
that shall claim to himself the title of universal Bishop, and shall have a
guard of Priests to attend upon him: that same is Antichrist.

That well flewed hound Saint Barnard, having found of his footing, Barnard in
his Epistle 125.
does spend his mouth in this manner. That beast of the Apocalips, to whom is
given a mouth to speak blasphemy, and make war against the poor Saints,
possesses Peter's chair, as a lion prepared to his pray.

That trusty and diligent searcher Ireneus having ranged the forest of ye
Apocalips, where it is said, that the number of the beasts name is 666. Ireneus
upon the 13. chap. of the Apocalips
says, that this Greek word Lateinos, the Latin man, was thought to be the
name of Antichrist, which being numbered by the Greek letters, after their
order and manner of accounting, makes just 666. And in the Latin tongue, Dux
Cleri, the Captain of the Clergy, does the same, as follows.

L L 30 D 500 A A 1 V 5 T T 300 X 10 E E 5 C 100 I I 10 L 50 N N 50 E 0 O O 70
R 0 S S 200 I 1

The generation of Antichrist.
FIrst the devil begat darkness, darkness begat ignorance, ignorance begat
error, error begat merits, merits begat the Mass, the Mass begat
superstition, superstition begat hypocrisy, hypocrisy begat lucre, lucre
begat purgatory, Purgatory begat abundance, abundance begat pomp, pomp
begat ambition, ambition begat the Pope and Cardinals, and the Pope and
Cardinals brought forth tyranny, murder of Saints, and license to sin, the
end whereof is death and utter destruction.

To conclude, forasmuch as Christ himself was accused of high treasen, against
the Roman empire, persecuted, condemned, and crucified, within the circuit of
the Romish dominions, by the Romish officers, and according to the Romish
laws: it must needs follow, that the same Empire which has so persecuted the
head, should bring forth that monster which should persecute the members.

Anselmus affirms, Anselmus.
that Antichrist shall come under a cloak of holiness, 2. These. 2. 4
and shall promise the kingdom of heaven.

The Apostle says that he shall sit in the Temple of God, and be worshipped
as God. But seeing there is none that exalts himself so high in the Church
of God: nor so like in all qualities, propertyes, and conditions unto
Antichrist, as the proud Pope of Rome, who takes upon him to forgive sins,
which is proper to the office of God only, to shut and open heaven gates at
his pleasure, and to be worshipped above all Kings and Princes: he shall
surely at this time, by my content, stand for the head: his greasy shauelings,
as Cardinals, Bishops and Priests for the body: and his rascal rabble of
Monks and Friars, for the venomous tail of that monstrous dragon. And if any
other Antichrist chance hereafter to be more manifestly revealed, I will then
recant and confess mine error. But if the Lions skin were once plucked off
from those wilful blind asses, they would soon appear in their lykenes, as
hypocrites, wolves and foxes.

The sweet and pleasant cry of Gods chosen Hounds in pursuing of Antichrist.
IT were too long to recite but even the most principal of those godly
instruments endued with learning, knowledge and judgment, to discern light
from darkness, truth from falshoode, and religion from superstition: Gal. 2,
^^. ^^
whom it has pleased the Lord of his fatherly kindness to move and stir up
both by preaching and writing, to rouse that seven headed monster out of his
den, and pursue him in chase. Who have not only ripped up and laid open to
the view of the world, the filthy corruption of that proud Romish sea: but
also by notable parables and similies prophesied the fall, ruin, and utter
confusion thereof.

In the year of grace 1160. Anno. 116^
One Peter Waldus Citizen of Lions, a man both rich and very well learned,
walking amongst others in their accustomed place of meeting: it chanced one of
the company to fall suddenly down and yield up the Ghost: which heavy
example so terrified the said Waldus, as thereupon he was stricken with a deep
and earnest repentance of his former life, and seeking with a seruent desire to
reform the same: began first to give large alms to the poor and needy.
Secondly, to instruct himself and his householde, in the doctrine of the
Gospel. Thirdly, to exhort all men that came unto him, to repentance and
amendment of life. And the more his fame spread abroad, the more did the people
frequent about him, some to hear his doctrine, and some to receive his alms.
Which gear coming at last to the ears of the Romish Prelates, they never
ceased vexing, and persecuting both him and his favorers, till at length by
violence they were all driven out of the City: who dispersing themselves into
diverse countries, were compelled to live poorly: some in Bohemia, some in
Germany, and some in the valleys of Angron, Lucern and Perousse in the
country of Piedmont, under the Duke of Sauoy. From those that dwelt in
Piedmont, came the people of Merindoll and Cabriers to inhabit in certain
desert places in the Country of Prouence in France: Anno. 1380.
some about Lions, and some at the foot of the Alps: being men of such honest
behavior, upright conscience, and virtuous conversation,: so just and constant
in their dealing, pitiful and charitable one to another, diligent and
painful to get their living with truth and honesty (offering that it all the
Uniuersities in Christendom, were able by the word of God to reprove their
doctrine, to yield and confess their errors) that their very enemies who
continually sought their destruction, could not justly accuse them of any
crime: save only for speaking against the corruption of the Romish Clergy:
and forsaking the Bishop of Rome his authority, cleaving only to the word of
God. For which cause they were so odiously detested and abhorred: that a law
was made utterly to destroy them all, both man, woman and child, as a people
unworthy to live upon the earth. Till it pleased the Lord after many horrible
murders, cruel conflicts and grievous persecutions for the Gospel, to fight
for them to the confusion of their enemies, and preservation of his truth. Some
called them Lowlards: some the poor people of Lions: but for that they were
the followers of Waldus, they were all called Waldenses till the time of
Luther, when they began to be called Lutherians and Protestants.

Amongst many others, I can not pass over that valiant Bohemian hunter Zisca,
who after he had been victor in defense of the Gospel, against that monstrous
dragon in eleven bloody battles, whose very name in the field was a terror
sufficient to quail the enemy: at last falling sick and ready to yield his
debt due unto nature, did valiantly comfort and cheer up his sorrowful
countrymen in this manner. When I am dead (quoth he) take my skin, and make
thereof a drum to use in your wars: for as my name was a terror to those
Romish woolues in time of my life, so will the very rattling of my skin,
enforce them for fear to run away when I am dead.

The author of the Plowmans complaint, was (no doubt) a most cunning and
diligent hunter, who in great vehemency of spirit painted Antichrist in his
colors, Anno. 1170.
and laid open to the world the intolerable corruption of his Romish rabble.

That trusty trailer Saint Barnard in his book of Considerations, Barnard in
his book of considerations
calls the Popes Court a den of thieves, wherein (says he) is left no
show of Peter's succession.

Petrarca Archdeacon of Parma, a good smelling dog, said in his time,
Petrarca in Epist. 20.
that the sea of Rome was become the mother of idolatry, the School of
error, and the Temple of heresy:

Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, Anno. 1254.
a well flewed hound, calls on against that seven headed Serpent in this
manner.

Eius auaritiae, totus non sufficit orbis, Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit
omnis.

John Wicklif an eger bloudhound, tied up in the University of Oxeford: Anno.
1370
so hunted and shaked that venomous Dragon in his time, as the wounds he gave
him, could never yet be cured: for the which by a decree in the Council of
Constance, he was taken up forty and one years after his death, and burned to
ashes.

When the Popes own darling Thomas Becket had been at Rome, Tho. Becket.
and perceiving the filthy corruption of that proud Sea: uttered his
conscience in a letter to his friend the Bishop of Mentz, in this manner: Matter
Roma (quoth he) facta est meretrix.

Pope Adrian himself, Pope Adrian.
seeming greatly to mislike the cruelty of his predecessors, brast suddenly
out in these words. Succedimus non Petro in pascendo, sed Romulo in
Parricidio.

Saint Briget, whom the Church of Rome has not only canonized for a Saint,
Briget. 1349.
but also a Prophetess, in her Book of Revelations calls the Pope a
murderer of Souls, a spiller of Christ's flock, more cruel then Judas, more
proud then Lucifer, more unjust then Pilate, and more abominable then the
Jews: whose sea shall be cast down (quoth she) like a millstone into the sea.
Apoc. 18. 12.


In the year of grace 1354. rose up two learned Friars, preaching openly to
the Popes face: that they were by a Revelation from God commanded, Anno. 1354.
to declare the Church of Rome to be the whore of Babylon, and the Pope and his
Cardinals, Antichrist, for which they with diverse others for the like offense
were committed to the fire, and burnt to ashes.

The ruin of that proud Sea, was long ago prophesied by a parable of a
certain bird, who being decked and adorned with the feathers of all other birds
in the field, became so hautie, proud and disdainefull, that she fell to
pounce and beat the rest of her fellows: whereupon assembling together, they
agreed with one consent, that every one should take again his own feathers
and so leave her naked.

Theodorius Bishop of Croatia, Theodorius. Anno. 1380.
in the year of our Lord 1380. did prophecy, that the Sea of Rome which was
so horribly polluted with Simonie and avarice, should be utterly subverted
and overthrown for ever: and that the true Church should flourish. Hereunto
agrees an old prophecy in these words:

Papa cito moritur, Caesar regnabit vbique, Et subito vani cessabunt gaudia
cleri.

Pope Leo the tenth, creating in one day thirty and one Cardinals: Anno.
1516.
at which time fell such grievous tempest, thunder and lightning, as in the
same Church where they were created, the image of Jesus was violently removed
out of his mothers lap, and the keys out of Saint Peter's hand: which many
did interpret to foreshew the subversion of that proud sea.

The Hebrew doctors or Rabbis affirm, that in the same night that Israel came
out of Egypt, all the Idolatrous temples of that country, by earthquakes and
lightnings were destroyed. When Lot was departed out of Sodom, by fire and
brimstone, it was utterly consumed: And so shall Antichrists Idols of error.
Go out of Babylon, oh my people, says the voice of the Lord, that you be not
partakers of her plagues: Apoc. 18. 4. 5.
for her sins are gone up to heaven, and god has remembered her wickedness.

All that will live godly (says Mantuan) be packing from Rome, Mantuan*
for there all things are lawful, but to be good it is not lawful.

About the time of Saint Briget, one John Hilton an English man did prophecy,
that in the year 1516, one should come and utterly subvert all Monkerie.

In like manner, Anno. 1145.
John Hus, and Jerome of Prage, being condemned to the fire by the council of
Constance, Anno. 1416.
for inueying against the abuses in the Church of Rome: at the place of their
execution, did prophecy that after an hundred years were come and gone, their
enemies should yield account to God and them. Which three prophesies were
verefied by Luther, who began to write in the year of Salvation, 1516. Anno.
1516.
just an hundred years after.

These with many other faithful witnesses, have boldly both preached and
written against that sink of sin, the sea of Antichrist, painting out those
Romish wolves in their colors: yet could they never prevail till the coming
of Luther, who as the rest had touched only their filthy living, he goes on
further and reprooueth their supersticious doctrine, not seeking the man, but
shaking the seat.

It chanced that Leo the tenth, They se^ heaven so fast unto others, that
except spedy repentance there will be no place left for themselves.
under the pretense of war against the Turk, had sent out his pardons into
all Realms christened, persuading the people that whosoever would give ten
shillings, should at his pleasure deliver one soul out of purgatory: but one
dodkin less the^ ten shillings, would profit nothing. Whereupon this famous
and sweet mouthed hound, taking then his fit occasion, so hunted his Bull, as
utterly spoiled his sale, so tossed his seat, as it could never stand steddie
after, Anno. 1516.
and set his triple crown so far awrie, as it will never be set straight
again.

Shortly after began to rowse our noble and valiant Lion of England, Henry. 8.
Ridley, Cranmer, Latimer, and Hooper, with others.
Henry the eight of famous memory: who taking his borespeare in hand,
vncoopling his trusty kenell of English hounds, our godly and learned
prelates well taught to choose and hunt their game, so coursed that venomous
Dragon, pearsed his body, razed his holds, and defaced his dens: as
enforced him with incurable wounds to retire to the sink from whence he came.
Who yielding at length his debt due unto nature, left off his line, that godly
and valiant Champion Prince Edward, Edward, 6.
who as eager and courageous as his father, pursued with might and maine, that
grievous enemy to Christ and his Gospel, till untimely death (to Englands woe)
bereeued us of that worthy and precious jewel. After whose decease (for our
sins no doubt) that bloody monster according to his woonted manner, began
afresh to rouse and rage against the poor members of Christ: persecuting his
truth, and putting out again the light of our souls. Till at the last, it
pleased the Lord in his mercy to send unto us that chosen vessel, Elizabeth:
the seventh, or rest of God, and fullness of his oath.
that famous wonder of the world, that noble Lioness, of the right royal
race of the English Princes, Elizabeth, his faithful anointed handmayde our
gracious sovereign Queen and Mistress. Whose very name: (the seventh of God:
the rest of God: and fullness of the oath of God) does signify unto us, that
as the blessings of God were accomplished in Henoch the seventh from Adam, and
David the seventh son of Isay: so in our Elizabeth borne in the seventh
month of the year, and seventh day of the week, our Christian Sabbath, the
Lord will perform the fullness of his oath and promise which he swear unto
our fathers, in heaping the treasure of his mercies upon those that fear and
love him: and execute the terror of his justice, on those that hate and loath
him. Being the seventh virtuous Prince since William the Conqueror: in whom as
in a mirror of virtue, do rest the fortitude of Joshua, with noble Henry the
second. The magnanimity of Gedeon, with valiant Edward the third. The
triumphant victories of Machabeus, with invincible Henry the fifth. The prudent
wisdom of Solomon, with her good grandfather Henry the seventh. The zealous
affection of Ezechias, with her noble father Henry the eight. And the godly
devotion of David, with her religious brother Edward the sixth. Who for the love
of that noble Lion of the tribe of Judah, that so wonderfully has preserved
her, from so many horrible and treacherous conspiracies, both foreign and
domestical: has most valiantly with honorable Judith, Judith. 13. Iudicum, 4,
cut off the head of proud Holifernes. With faithful Debora, delivered Israel
from the tyranny of Sisera. With virtuous Hester, endangered her own life to
save her people and defend the truth. With godly Iosia, cleansed the land from
Idolatry, 2. Chron. 94.
and restored Religion to the children of God. And by vncoupling her matchless
cry of sweet mouthed hounds: the grave godly and learned Prelates and
Pastors of our Church: has so hunted, tossed and chased that Romish
Antichrist, with all his superstitious trash and traditions, out of the forest
of England: as (except by stealth in privy corners) he dare not once he seen
to show his head. The Lord in his mercy still preserve, defend and keep her
Majesty's person in health, wealth, honor and prosperity, that to the joy and
comfort of all her loyal, true and faithful subjects: she may long continue,
live and reign an old mother in Israel: and he that from the bottom of his
heart will not say, Amen: I wish a halter about his neck to ease his grief.

Of seditious Schismatikes, sprung up in our time.
Now Satan the moulder of malice and mischief, seeking still with tooth and
nail what possible he can, to hinder the word of God, and salvation of man:
perceiving how his Romish instruments, so manifestly revealed to the whole
world: will no longer serve his purpose: has lately found out a new kind of
peevish impes, who under an outward show of vehement rowsers against
Antichrist, do rather in diverse points join with him. For if they be narrowly
noted, and with indifferent eye looked into: while they would seem most
sincere and simple, will be found in truth most crafty and subtle. And under a
color of pursuing the chase with open mouth: to run with the hounds, and hold
with the hare.

And here we have to note, that though in some places of the holy Scripture,
the name of dog be taken in the better part: as those gentle gaming hounds,
whose nature and property is to hunt and chase the wild and ravenous beasts
only: yet most commonly it is taken rather for the currish kind, whose
qualities are to bite and pinch, not the noisome woolfe, but harmless sheep,
and in stead of false thieves to bark and snatch at true men. According to
Saint Augustine, August in epist. 120. Phil. 3. 3. Erasmus Apothege.
Caneseos appellans, qui plerunque contra innocents latrant. And therefore
(says the Apostle) beware of dogs, beware of concision. Diogenes being asked
why every body called him dog (quoth he) because that of those, which give me
any thing, I am always fawning: and at the rest which give me nothing, I am
always barking. But a number of unmannerly puppies in our time, are always
barking, and snatching, not only at strangers which deny their desire, but
also their very fellows and friends, that wish them better then desert. Miche.
7. 6.
They hunt-conter much like Raguels maid, that slanderously abused Sara his
daughter, Tob. 3.
and that spiteful Semei that railed against David: 2. King. 16.
of which sort of dogs are diverse and sundry kinds.

Some are like the dog called Agaseus, the gass-hound, whose property is to
hunt only by the eye: so these, in spying out other men's infirmities, are as
quick and sharp sighted as Linx, The Lord knows who are his.
but in decerning their own faults, blind as betels, taking themselves only
for true Israelites, and the rest for Egyptians. 2. Tim. 2. 19.


Some are like the dog called Lunarius, the Mooner, whose nature is
continually to bark at the Moone-shine in the water: so these are never quiet,
but always barking, that neither prince, prelate, nor people, can either rest
for them, or know when danger is by them: and therefore better no dogs then
such balling curs. Ezech. 13. 3.
Woe be to such foolish prophets as solow their own spirits, and speak where
they see nothing.

Some are like the blind dog, who though he can see nothing himself, yet in
hearing others bark, must needs of custom brawle for company. Or like those
peevish waspes, which if one begin to sting, a number will sting for fellowship.
Against these the prophet David complains. Many dogs have compassed me,
they came about me like Bees, and were extinct even as the fire amongst the
thorns: Psalm. 22. 11^.
but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them.

Some are like the dog called a snatcher, whose property is in learing of one
side with a disdainefull eye, to bite or pinch privily. Luke 11. 53. 54
Such were those Pharasaicall hypocrites, that laid wait to trippe Christ in
his words: and those three crafty knaves, Mar. 14. 58.
that gave evidence against him.

Some are like those grenning dogs, which the Prophet David speaks of, Psalm.
59.
that run here and there for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied. Or
those sorrowful merchants in the Apocalips, Apoc. 18. 19.
that mourn with heavy countenance for the fall of Babylon, Math. 20. 12.
or those disdainful laborers that murmured against the good man of the
house, because he was more liberal to others then to themselves.

Some are like the little fisting hound, called folly, the whelpe of fancy:
whose studies are chiefly applied in seeking for novelties, to feed the
tickling ears of fine minsing Mistresses, and wanton coy-dames: who according
to the Apostles doctrine, 2. Tim. 4. ^.
do get them a heap of teachers after their own lusts, to Catechize them,
not in open place, but privy closets, as best shall like their dainty
appetites.

Some are like those flattering curres, Iere. 9. 6. 7.
that fawn when they intend to bite: Psalm. 20.
which speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their
hearts: as Ioab came to Abner, 2. King. 3.
and Amasa with a friendly countenance, and smote them under the small ribs
that they died. 2. King. 20.
Against these the Prophet himself complains, Psalm. 55.
It is not an open enemy that has done me this dishonor, but even thou my
companion and familiar friend.

Some are like the dog called Canis furax, 2. King. 15.
the theeuish cur, such were those whispering conspirators, Like Acteons dogs
that would not know their master though he cried unto them, Acteon ego sum,
dominu^ cognoscite vestrum.
that sought with Absalon, to steal away the peoples hearts from David. And
such are these murmuring co^plainers of our time, who privily in corners (and
where they dare in open place) seek what possible they can, to seduce her
Majesty's subjects, to co^ceyue a lothsomenesse and misliking of her godly
government, and order in religion established.

These are neither dumb, nor idle dogs, but diligent searchers, bitter
barkers, and painful laborers. But what seek they? Under an hypocritical
show of holiness, to stir up privy inutinies, secret grudgings, and civil
discordes even in the very bosom and bowels of our mother, Like the viper.
distracting her members, and like cursed Cham uncovering her shame to the
world.

To what purpose is their barking? to abuse with odious railing standers, the
most grave, godly and learned fathers of our Church, by whom the Gospel of
Christ, for the space of thirty years together, has been so plentifully
planted and taught, and taken such deep rooting in the hearts and consciences
of many thousands in England (to Gods honor be it spoken) as neither
Antichrist, nor his cursed members, can once seduce or remove them. They
labor painfully, but to what end? To confound that calling which in all ages
has stood next to the scepter: First the Prince, then the Priest: Moses and
Aaron in the common wealth of Israel: And the King and the Prophet in the
kingdom of Judah. And to control a state, which for prudent policy,
christian order, and quiet government, by our most gracious sovereign, and
her grave, wise and learned Council, in whom it is daily favored and blessed
of God, all the kingdoms of Europe cannot match: only themselves the blot and
blemish of our church: who because they are not made equal to our Bishops are
malcontent, and therefore gape for the spoil, crying with the peevish woman,
1. Sam. 3.
nec mihi, nec tibi, fed diuidatur. They would be governors and teachers of
order, that refuse to be governed by order. They would be judges of the law,
that disdain to yield obedience to the law. And would take upon them to be
reformers of Churches and states, that will neither be reformed themselves, for
Prince nor Prelate. I am verily persuaded, and so are mo then I, that Harding,
Dorman and Shacklocke, with all the rest of that Romish rabble, which have
written against the Gospel and Ministry in England, since her Majesty's
most happy reign, have not done more harm by all their pestilent Books,
then these and their factions by their peevish prating and pernicious railing.

When all Egypt was plagued for Pharaos offense, Moses and Aaron went not
muttering to the people, Exodus 4.
but told their message plainly to the king himself. When for Achabs offense
the whole country was like to starve for want of rain, 3. King. 18.
Elias went not murmuring to the people, but boldly to ye king him self,
saying, It is thou and thy fathers house that has brought this plague upon
Israel. When David had committed most grievous offense against God: 3. King. 1^
Nathan went not to discover it unto his subjects for fear of rebellion: but
to himself, saying, Thou art the man, it is thou that have done this deed.
When Herod had committed incest with his brothers wife, John Baptist went not
to open his fault amongst the Commons: but came to himself, saying, It is not
lawful for thee to have her. Mat. 14. 4.
Now if it be the property of true Prophets for fear of mutinyes,
tumultes, and divisions, to hide from the multitude most horrible crimes of the
Magistrate: no doubt such waywarde impes as dare obstinately resist and repugne
a godly and Christian government: must needs be most deuilish and false
prophets: their manners bewray their minds, Ex fructibus cognoscetis eos, and
ex vnguibus Leonem, and Asinam ex vmbra.

The fruits of whose doctrine, we find by experience, to be these:
presumption, and disobedience. Every hammering tinker dare now take upon him,
to control Stratonichus music. Every simple Cobbler: dare now presume to
correct Apelles picture. Every hairebraind fool, that have scarce tasted of
the school of humanity: dare now compare in judgment with the best Doctors
of Divinity. And every inferior Subject, dare now take upon him to control
the whole state, and prescribe laws both to Prince and Prelate. Surely this
kind of learning is too deep for my understanding. If it stretch beyond the
bounds of Christian duty and obedience to governors and teachers, it
passes my capacity, I cannot comprehend it. But this I have read, that
Nearchus for iangling the strings of Orpheus Harp, was torn in sunder of
dogs: Marsias, for proudly comparing his skill with Apellos cunning had his
skin plucked over his ears. Oza for presuming to meddle with the Levites
office, was stricken to death. And those rebellious Levites, who with Corah and
his fellows, resisted against Aaron the high Priest, were swallowed up in the
bowels of the earth. And sure in my judgment, such fat pampered Weathers or
Rams of the flock as will not be ruled, but resist and push against their
sheepeheard, break the hedge of their bounds, and run where they list,
would either be tied shorter, or committed to the butcher, for spoiling their
fellows.

That presumptuous Ass, which dares turn his heels and kick against the
noble Lion: is worthy of punishment. And that disobedient subject that dare
obstinately resist her Maiestyes laws established (against her crown and
dignity) what follows?

Those sheep that will not come into the fold by whistling, the sheepeheard
must bait in with his dog, Luke 14. 23.
or pull in with his hook. The guests that refused to come unto the Kings
feast by gentle entreaty, Christ himself confuted the Pharistes, yet could he
not put the^ to silence.
were compelled by extremity. And seeing that neither by learned confutation,
nor gentle persuasion, the Prelate can not prevail with word: the rest which
remains belongs to the Princes swoorde.

By the laws of Locris, a City in Greece, if any private person shall take
upon him to resist, gainsay or stand against any part or percell of that,
which either in the Church or common Wealth is by order established: the party
in the presence of the Magistrates and governors, must stand forth with a
Haltar about his neck, and there either prove and defend his assertion
against the best learned in the City, or else for his sauciness be hanged
up before he pass. And if we had that law in England, I doubt not, but that
our new fantastical reformers would soon be put to silence.

But me thinks I do hear, some inferior Magistrates and officers, put in
trust to see the Princes laws observed, discipline duly executed, and
conteptuous persons punished, to whisper in mine ear and say: they are so
backed and borne withal of some: and their cause so greatly favored, a we dare
not meddle with them. Truly sirs in mine opinion you are far deceived.
Though perhaps by reason of their hypocrisy and smooth glosing tongues,
rolling in the eighth liberal science: some even of the best natures and most
godly and zealous gospellers, may be greatly abused by such: but to back and
maintain them against law and order, I think in my conscience they will not.
But have you taken so great a charge upon you, and dare now deceive both
Prince and people that put you in trust? Do you prefer your own security
before the peace of the Church, or safety of the common wealth? 2. Tim. 5. 17.
Then sure in stead of double honor, you are worthy of double punishment: no
doubt the Lord himself in justice will revenge It. Do you not see how
greatly through your intolerable negligence their number is increased? and no
marvel, for the vulgar sort are always unconstant, wavering, desirous of
novelties, wishing alteration, and much delighted in hearing their superiors
reprehended, and themselves untouched, and easily drawn to follow tumultuous
persons. Corah, Dathan and Abiram had no sooner stood up against Moses and
Aaron, but they had their bands of men ready to take their part. John Leadon
in Munster had no sooner set abroch his pestilent doctrine, but he had a
multitude of followers, to the great disturbance of the Church: and so have
these (no doubt) whole swarms of Disciples to join with them: some having
riotously spent their patrimony, are tickled in the ears by hearing of the
spoil of Ecclesiastical livings: some pettiefoggers wanting work at
Westminster hall in hope to have their Clyents well increased, may gape for the
overthrow of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, with some Atheists, some Neuters,
some Anabaptists, and some Brownings, with the Family of love, and such like:
who if they might once have their purpose: would soon give us the gentle
thumpe: not only strippe the reverend Prelate into his dublet, and the
dutiful pastor into his shirt, but also rob the Prince of her title and
dignity, and bring the Church of England to utter ruin and misery: being in
many places of this land already grown to this ripeness: as it is more
offensive to speak in defense of her majesty's supremacy in causes
ecclesiastical, and her book of common prayer, then disobediently to inueigh
against them.

This ought not to be my good brethren and countrymen of England: and
therefore now at the last for our better agreement, let us rather give eareto
the Apostle: who in most loving and charitable manner exhorts us to cease all
bitter contention, 1. These. 4. 11.
and study to be quiet: it becomes not the servants of God to be
contentious, 2. Tim. 2. 24.
neither to seem wise in their own conceits: but peaceable unto all men. If
you bite and devour one another (says he) take heed lest you be consumed one
of an other. Romans 12. 16.
Gal. 5. 15.
Let every soul therefore in the fear of God, humbly submit him self unto
the authority of the higher powers: Romans 13. 1. 2. 5
not only for fear of vengeance, but also because of conscience: Heb. 13. 17.
knowing that whosoever resists power, 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14
resists the ordinance of God.

The authority of Princes, and duty of Christian subjects.
THe civil magistrate is a minister armed with laws and sword: Augustine to
Boniface Epist. 50. Esaias. 49.
appointed of God, as a nurse to the Church, and a father to the common wealth:
to defend the guiltless, punish the guilty, execute justice, and keep
outward discipline: as well in causes ecclesiastical as temporal. Moses a
temporal Magistrate, received the whole order of religion at Gods hand, Exodus
20.
and delivered it unto the people, and sharply chastised Aaron the Priest for
making the golden calfe. 1. Chro. 13.
David brought home the Arc, and restored religion, which Saul had destroyed.
1. King. ^.
Solomon removed Abiather the Bishop, and appointed Zadock in his stead.
Ezekias brake the brazen serpent when he saw the people fall down to worship
it. 2. King. 11.


It is therefore the duty of every good Christian subject, obediently to
submit him self unto all public government and ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the king, 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14
or those that be set in authority under him, not only touching civil
policy in the common wealth: but also external discipline, decency,
ceremonies, orders, rites and fashions in the Church: which are not
particularly expressed in the holy scriptures, but left generally (as things
indifferent) to the disposition of the same: whereof the prince next under God
is supreme head: at whose commandment they are to be used and refused as time
and place both require: according to the Apostle: 1. Cor. 14. 40
Let al things be done after a decent order. Hereunto agrees the saying of S.
Augustine: In his rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina,
Augustine.
mos populi, dei, vel instituta maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt.

And in another place: quod neque contra fidem, neque contra mores iniungitur,
Ad Ianuarium
indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum inter quos viuitur societate
seruandum. Epist. 118.


Notwithstanding, if the magistrate shall command any thing against the
substance of religion, concerning matters of faith, doctrine, remission of
sins and eternal faluation: we ought then with Peter and John, Act. 5. 38.
25.
rather to obey God then man. The Prince is but Gods inferior officer: and if
God command one thing, and the prince another, Daniel. 6.
the higher is always to be obayed before the lower: so Daniel prayed, and
Peter preached contrary to the magistrates precept: Act. 5. 18. 19.
and as the Lacedaemonians being conquered of their enemies, were commanded
certain things against their religion: no (quoth they) we had rather dye then
be commanded things harder then death. Mat. 22. 21.
So our bodies, lands, and goods are at the commandment of our Cas^r: but our
souls and consciences partaine to God only. But for as much as our gracious
Sovereign, is a most virtuous, godly and christian Princess: a most faithful
professor and loving imbracer of the Gospel of Christ, without halting in any
one point of religion, being so provident to preserve it, so careful to defend
it and so desirous to have all her loving subjects learn and use it: as to
resist her Majesty's proceedings, is to resist against God himself.

Of the office, titles and dignities of Bishops and Archbishops
TOuching the honorable titles and dignities of our Bishops: I wonder why they
should seem offensive to any: seeing I partly know by that which I have read,
and great Clearkes have taught, that the best and most principal pillars of
the Church, since the time of Christ until this day: 1. Tim. 3.
have taken the same upon them. Titus. 1.
The Apostle himself sets down the office of a Bishop: 1. Tim. 5. 19.
and I do find in Ecclesiastical Histories, that James was Bishop of
Jerusalem, Peter of Antioch, and Mark of Alexandria.

We must weigh and consider the order of the Lords proceedings in his Church
from time to time: and make a difference between the infancy and strength of
the same. As first unto the children of Israel, Moses was sent only with a
rod in his hand, Exodus 4.
and had Aaron given him for his mouth. When the people were delivered from the
bondage of Egypt and came into the wilderness, Exodus 18.
Moses by the counsel of Iethro his father in law: appointed Captains over
hundrethes, Exodus 20.
fifties and tennes. When the law was given, the Arc and ornaments thereunto
belonging, with ceremonies, sacrifices, the Priests office and garments was
ordained. And after the people were settled in the land of promise, were kings
and prophets appointed. So when Christ himself was sent down from his father,
he made choice of his Apostles, who after his ascension according to their
commission: Mat. 28. 19.
went forth and preached through the whole world: Act. 6. 5.
ordained Elders and Deacons in every congregation. And after when the Church
grew to more ripeness, were Bishops appointed to have the charge and
oversight of the rest, And as it appears by the Apostle himself, there was
great difference between a Bishop and an Elder: the Bishop was taught, not
sharply to reprehend an Elder, but gently to admonish him, and to receive no
accusation against him under two or three witnesses: 1. Tim. 5. 1. 19
but we read not that the Elders were permitted to reprehend or receive
accusation against a Bishop.

And as for Archbishop, Patriarch or Metropolitan, being titles of equal
degree, they are very ancient, even since the time of the Primative Church,
as before is mentioned.

But say some, they were not called Lord Bishops: sure I think so, because
the people of those countries could speak no English: but rather in the Lattin
tongue, Domini, which signifies Sir or Lord. The Elders that rule well (says
the Apostle) are worthy of double honor: 1. Tim. ^. 17.
especially they which labor in the word and teaching. And why should we be
more curious, in yielding unto our godly and reverend Bishops those titles of
honor: then Hanna a figure of the Church was, in giving the same unto Ely. the
high Priest, who perceiving her lips to move and her voice not hard, 1. King.
^
thought she had been drunk: Not so my Lord (quoth she) I have drunk neither
wine nor strong drink: I am a woman of a sorrowful heart, and have poured out
my soul before the Lord. Again when that good man Obadia ruler of Ahabs
house, did meet with the Prophet Helia, 3. King. 18.
he fell down before him, and said: art not thou my Lord Helia: who did not
reprove him for giving him that title of honor, but answered: I am he.

But the chief thing which these do shoot at, is their large Revenues. They
keep (say they) too great a state. Here we are to consider, in godly policy,
which is the handmaid of religion, that the nature of us Englishmen, is not to
esteem either of civil or ecclesiastical governors, according to their
virtue and graces as they deserve, but rather in respect of their outward
countenance, pomp, and wealth. Which as it seems by Ecclesiasticus, was a
great fault in his time: for says he, though a poor man speak wisely, yet
can it take no place: but when a rich man speaks, every man holds his
tongue: Eccle. 13.
And look what he says, they praise it unto the clouds: and if a poor man
speak, they say, Wealth is taken for wisdom.
what fellow is this? which is the very fashion of the world at this day. Exodus
39.
When Aaron the high Priest stood before the people to worship, he was
commanded to be decked with rich and sumptuous ornaments of gold, silk, and
precious stones: not that God himself was delighted with such external glory,
but in respect of man's infirmity: the more to move the people to honor and
reverence him, as the minister of God: in which divine regard (as I take it)
do Christian Princes honor their prelates, whom God has honored, Prou 22. 4.
with gifts meet for so high a calling: who as he has not bestowed them in
equal measure unto all, but given to some five talents, Mat. 25. 15.
some two, and some one: and called some to be Evangelists, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
some governors, some pastors, and some helpers in his Church: Ephe. 4. 11.
so are they not all to be had in like honor and estimation: but every one
according to his wisdom, learning, gravity and discretion: without which
learning is but as a sword in a mad man's hand.

Finally, suppose that such a pettie-Doctor as our new Reformers would allow
of: were now in his Consistory with his company of Elders about him: of which
(you must imagine) there is good choice to be had in every parish in Enland: and
being without that state and countenance, which our common wealth affords our
Bishops, should there proceed with his discipline against some mighty man in
authority within the compass of his jurisdiction: he should well see and
feel his Consistory and discipline to be little regarded. It would soon be
said unto him: What, Doctor hedgecreepe: dare you take upon you to control me?
and much worse I warrant you: so as he might with the Bedels of London, command
beggars to the stocks: but he must not bind Bears, nor once touch the high
Cedars of Libanus.

And by the way: my masters of the Clergy, which are so vehemently set on
fire to seek alteration: whatsoever you think of me, I wish you wise,
without experience of your own folly. It is an old proverb, A man warned, is
half armed.

The story of Aereus, who under a pretense to frame a pure unspotted Church,
did separate himself (as you now do) drawing a sort of unstable people after
him, from Churches to Chambers, and from towns to woods (till in the end by
the judgment of Epiphanius, they were brought to be as holy a Congregation as
that procession where the devil bears the Cross) persuades me, Epiphanius
that the people by your wished reformation, would mend as fast in all virtue
and godliness, as sour Ale in summer. And not only the Abbey-lands, so well
pretended to be employed to the enriching of the king, maintaining of schools,
and relieuing the poor, but also the example of your fellow reformers in
Scotland (who by altering the ancient state and property of ecclesiastical
livings, have brought their Clergy so bare and beggarly, as for want of
maintenance, a number are glad to pike their croms under other men's tables) may
be a warning sufficient to teach you: not to be ouerhastie in excommunicating
your Church-liuings, least your selves be the first that repent and soonest
smart for it. Yea, if those which now seem in favoring your follies, to
smile full smoothly, might once obtain and get that they gape for, their
countenance no doubt would soon be altered: so as your selves, your wives and
children might lie in the streets and sterue for all them: and you in the end
have greater cause to lament your own reserved misery, then now to exclaim
so vehemently against a state, which for good government all the realms in
Christendom can neither mend nor match.

These things considered (my brethren) and forasmuch as we are all members of
one body, redeemed with one blood, and partakers of one common faith, Romans 12. 5
remission of sins, and eternal salvation, Apoc. 5. 9. ^^*
depending wholly upon Gods free and general pardon in Christ, Acts 10. 43.
Romans 6. 23. Luke 17. 10.
without our deserts, and shall all appear before his judgment seat, Romans 14.
10
where every one shall bear his own burden, Ezech. 18.
and receive reward according to his own labor. Romans 2. 6.
The Apostle erhorteth us in the fear of God, to judge charitablie one of
another, Romans 14. 4.
to be of like affection one toward another: Mat. 7. 1. James 5. 6.
to comfort and pray one for another: in giving honor to go one before
another, To. 12. 10. 16*
and every one to esteem another better then himself: Phil. 2. 2. 3.
that nothing be done through strife or vaineglorie, but in all humility and
meekness of mind: that there be no dissension amongst us, but that we be
knit together in one mind, and one judgment, and to speak all one thing. 1.
Cor. 1. 10.
Seeing we do agree about the kirnell, let us no longer contend for the shell:
seeing we vary not about matter and substance, let us not strive for Asses
shadows, and Goats wool: seeing we hold the doctrine of one God, one
religion, and one hope of salvation, as faithful Christians: let us in all
humility touching external things, show our duty and allegiance to our
gracious sovereign, as obedient subjects. Math. 5. 16.
That with one heart, one mind, and one voice, 2. These. 1. 10. 1. Pet. 2. 17.
we may together glorify our heavenly father, 1. Cor. 4. 1. 3.
honor his Prince, and reverence his Prelates.


