RVNNE FROM ROME. OR A TREATISE SHOWING THE necessity of Separating from the
Church of Rome.

Disputed in these Terms: EVERY MAN IS bound upon pain of Damnation to
refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome.

By ANTONY WOTTON. B. D.

REVEL. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not Partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

LONDON, Printed by W. J. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the South side of the Royall-Exchange. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD DENNY OF WALTHAM, MY ESPECIAL GOOD LORD.
Right Honorable,
WHen the great God of heaven and earth proclaimed by his Prophet to Eli, 1.
Sam. 2. 30 that he would honor them that honor him; he therein implied, both
an example and a charge for all men to do the like. Therefore is this actio^ of
honoring the^ that honor God, one of those whereof the holy Ghost made
choice, Psalm. 15. 4. that he might by them give us notice of those men which
shall abide in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell in his holy hill. It is my
desire to perform this duty to God, by this service to your Lordship: wherein
I feel and confess, that I receive far more then I can possibly give. For by
desiring to honor our Lordship for your zeal in honoring God, I increase
mine own hope, that I am of their number, who have obtained already some part
of his grace, and shall hereafter have entrance into his glory. Give me leave
(noble Lord) to forget, in this respect, my particular obligation to your
Honor, for your continual bounty to me, and good opinion of me, that I have
an unfeigned desire to maintain the truth of God, professed in this famous Church
of England, against the subtle and dangerous errors of the Romish Synagogue.
For I truly and willingly profess, that the consideration of your Lordships
fervent zeal for the glory of God, zealous love of his truth, and true
detestation of Popery, have so possessed and ravished my heart with a longing
after your Honor, that it will not suffer any other of your noble virtues
(though many and great) either to come into comparison with it, or to have the
least place in my thoughts, while it is in presence. This (in my apprehension)
is as much to true honor, as in Demosthenes opinion, pronuntiation was to true
eloquence. Let them, that will dote, upon their worldly greatness, as the
Peacocke is in love with his own feathers. It is true honor to be honorable
in his sight, who only is worthy of honor; and yet graciously vouchsafes to
give and to command that honor be give to his faithful servants. This is the
foundation of your Lordships honor in my heart, and upon this ground will I
daily offer up my poor prayers to God for your good Lordship, your noble and
truly virtuous Lady, and hopeful of spring, that it would please him to shewer
down every day more and more the comfortable dew of his grace and blessing
upon every one of you, to the increase of all honor in this life, and
happiness in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord:

In whom I shall ever be at your Lordships service to be commanded, Antony
Wotton.
Tower Hill May 3. 1624.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe Council of Trent confirmed by the Pope, is the chief Oracle of the
Church of Rome: from it she receives all doctrines necessary to be believed
unto salvation; Romish Catholics hold it for a principle, that whatsoever is
delivered therein for doctrine, is an article of faith, and must steadfastly be
believed upon pain of damnation: he that does not, is pronounced an Heretic,
and is made liable to a (supposed) heavy curse. What little reason there is
that Papists should yield such blind obedience to the Canons of that Council,
may appear by a plain (but true) testimony which was given thereunto by a
Bishop, a member of that Church and Council, who was present thereat; This
testimony I have thought good to prefixe to this my Treatise, because in it I
dispute against the doctrine of faith delivered in the said Council.

Andraeas Dudithius Bishop of Quinquecclesiae, Quinquecclesiae, is acitty in
Lungarie, calle^ in German ^uns^^rchin in Turkish ^nden or (...).
and Ambassador in the Council of Trent for Maximilan the second Emperor: in
an Epistle to the said Emperor, (wherein he delivers his judgment about
granting the Cup to the Laity, and the marriage of Priests,) writes thus of
the Council of Trent.

WHat good could be done in that Council where voices were taken by number,
not by weight? If argument, if reason might have prevailed, if we had had some
and those not many to take part with us, though we should have bin but a few:
yet had we overthrown the gre^at forces of our adversaries: but when all
stood upon number, wherein we were much inferior, we could not get the better,
though our cause were the better. The Pope was able to set an hundredth of his
against every one of ours: and if an hundredth were not sufficient, he could
upon a sundaine have created a thousand to succor them that were ready to
faint and perish. Therefore we might see every day hungry and needy Bishops,
and these for the most part beardlesse younkers, and wastfully ryotous, come in
flocks to Trent, hired to give their voices according to the Popes humor,
unlearned indeed and foolish, but of good use to him for their audaciousnesse
and impudency. When these fellows were ioyued to the Popes old slatterers,
then iniquity got the upper hand and triumphed: neither could any thing be
decreed but according to their liking, who thought it the highest point of
religion to defend the power and royot of the Pope. There was in the Council a
grave and learned man who could not endure this indignity: but the Council by
terror threatening and bayting him as one that was no good Catholic, drew him
to yield to that which he did no way like of. In a word, things are brought to
that pass by their dishonesty who came prepared and made for the nonce, that
it seemed to be a Council not of Bishops, but of puppies: not of men, but of
images, who (as it is reported of Daedalus Statues) were moved not by their
own but by other men's nerves, and muscles. Those hireling Bishops most of them
were like Country Bagpipes, which must have breath blown into them before
they can sound. The holy Ghost had nothing to do with that Couenticle, all
things were argued by human policy, which was wholly employed in maintaining
the immoderate, and indeed most shameless Lordship and Domination of the
Popet. From thence were answers looked and waited for, as it were from the
Oracles of Delphos or Dodona: from thence the holy Ghost, who (as they brag) is
President of their Council, was sent shut up in the Carriers budgets and
packes, who (a thing worthy to be laughed at) when the waters were up as it
falls out many times, was feign to stay till they were down again before he
could repair to the Council. By this it came to pass that the Spirit was not
carried upon the waters as in Genesis, but along besides the waters. O
monstrous and incredible madness! Nothing that the Bishops as it were the Body
of the Church resolved of, could be of any force, unless it came first from
the Pope as the head of the body.

Epigramma G. B. de Rome et papa.
Non ego Romulea miror quod Pastor in vrbe
Sceptra gerat, Pasto^ conditor vrbis erat,
Quumque lupae gentis nutritus lacte sit Author,
Non ego Romulea miror in vrbo lupos.
Haectantum superat nostrum admiratio captum,
Quomodo securum praestet ovile lupus.
The same translated.
It is not strange a Shepherd reigns in Rome.
For he that built it, was a Shepherds Groom.
Nor is it strange that wolves in Rome abound.
He sucked a wolse, that did the City found.
But this is strange, and far above my skill,
How wolves should keep the flock secure from ill.
CHAP. I.
Declaring by way of Preface to the Reader, the matter and manner of this
Treatise.

Ulysses companions, have their ears stopped with the wax of prejudice, and
their eyes sealed with blind obedience, that they can neither hear nor see in
what case they are. I must therefore be content to let the mole think, that no
creature can see better then she, and apply my waters and powders to their
eyes, who are rather weak sighted, then stark blind.

the Church of England: they have a strong persuasion that popery is to be
de^ested, but they see not clearly what it is tht makes it detestable. Iosuah
and the people of Israel perceived that the Lord was offended with Ibsua 7. 7.
them, but could not find out Achan that had provoked his displeasuie. Behold,
by Gods gracious assistance I have found him out, attached, indicted, and
brought him to the bar, that all men may see the Babilonish stuff which he
has conveyed into the camp of the living God, and hidden there in such sort,
that he has notwithstanding a long time been taken for a true Israelite. Oh
that it would please the Lord God, who only can work wonders, to give him an
heart and tongue to glorisie the Lord Jesus by confessing of his theft, and
restoring him his honor: whereof under a color of doing him service, he has
trai^erously robbed him.

The proof of this treason I leave to the ensuing disputation and discourse,
with hope that I shall thereby (through Gods blessing) both inlighten the
understanding, and inslame the affection with detestation of popish errors. It
remains, that (as briefly as I can,) I give an account of the course I have
taken in debating so weighty a matter. I have herein gone a little out of the
common highway, into the by path of Schoole-learning: into which I either
slipped, or thrust my self, partly of choice, and partly of necessity; Of
choice, because this kind of writing in matters of this nature does best
content me; Of necessity, because I was asraide, least in so wide a sea I
might loose my self, and either over shoot my port, or fall short of it.

But why should I delight in such thornie and unbeaten ways: daily experience
shows how hard a thing it is to give a reason of liking, and misliking. All I
will say is this. It is in studies as in apparel. There are that think large
discourses like loose garments, and regard neither the finenesse of the stuff,
nor the neatness of the workman-ship, but only the fitness for the body it
must serve. These consider what aptness and force there is in that which is
delivered, to manifest and prove that which is undertaken. Othersome cannot
abide to be kept to the point in question, no more then to be pinioned in a
straight doublet; these men seem to love daintiness and easiness more then
warmth and lasting: so that which they read or write, please for the present,
they care not greatly whether it be little or much to purpose. Both nature and
education have bred in me another humor, that I had rather read or writ that
which may truly inform my understanding, tha^ that which may tickle my
affection. In these things I conceive the Heathen said well, that Nature is the
best guide. For he that sets him self to that, to which he has no fitness
by nature: does like him that swimmeth against the stream, who being not able
to hold out, is either driven back or drowned.

What means all this? may some man say. Nothing else but this, that I may the
easier be excused for following that course, to which I find my self inclined,
rather then that, which of it self might procure better liking. And this I
trust, I shall the sooner obtain by signifiyng, that my breeding strengthened
my inclination. For it pleased God, that at my first coming to Cambridge, I
should be entered into the Kings-colledge, by that worthy and learned gentleman
Sir William T^mple, who in his Logic readings, always labored more to fit
us, for the true use of that Art, then for vain and idle speculations, and
earnest wranglings about trifles of no profit nor certainty. Thus have you the
reason of my choice: may it please you to take knowledge also of the necessity
of this course.

Custom is said to be an other nature; and is commonly called a tyrant:
because many times it inforceth a man to that of which in his own disposition
he has no manner of liking. As I was brought up rather to the profitable use
then vain oftentation of that noble Art of Logic: so (as new vessels do)
keeping a tang of the first liquot, wherewith I was seasoned, I applied my
self in the reading of Philosophy, History, Oratory, Poetry, to make use of
that Instrument of instruments, as (Aristotle calls it,) in every piece of
work I undertook. By this means it came to pass, that I began to think,
(as men commonly do account highly of that, wherewith they are most in love)
that Logic was if not the only, yet the principal Art, for the obtaining of
true knowledge in any kind of learning whatsoever. If I lighted in reading upon
any thing that was hard, that I seemed to be in a Labyrinth, Logic was like
Ariadnes clew of third, to guide me in it and to bring me out of it. Was I
desirous in any exercise of learning to take the right course in speaking or
writting? Logic, like Mercuries Statue poynted me out the way, and showed me
all the turnings and windings in it. To conclude, my continual practice in
this Art, has given it such power over me, that with the Hebrew servant, my
Exodus 21. 6.
ear is fast nailed to the doro post, so that I can nether stir from it, nor
willingly hear any sound without, that may draw me from thinking on it. This
is the first degree of necossitie by which I am bound to this kind of writing.

Logic as to an Oracle. By that I am instructed to take the frame in sunder,
to view every part by it self; to try how every tenant and mortuis is fitted
each to other, which principals are too weak, which pieces are too long, which
too short, whether they will serve in that building or no? if they will, how
they must he ordered. If any man be able without this labor, at the first
sight of a building, to say all is right and well, I would entreat him to
bear with my slownes and backwardnes, upon promise, that I will not repine at
his quicknes and forwardnes.

Seneca (as I remember Mendyrides) who would yawne and stretch, when he saw an
other man labor, as if he had been wearied therewith himself. Long experience
above 40 year, has made me fearful and suspicious. I have many times
persuaded my self of the strength and goodness of an argument, which upon
trial I have found to be weak and naught. Many times I have thought I
understood a thing at the first reading very fully, wherein upon the review I
perceived I was deceived, In this disputation it had not ben possible for me to
have discerned the weakness and sophistry of the Papists arguments, if I had not
brought them to the beam, and weighed them parcel by parcel as I have done.
But if I had now forborne to run this course, and written more plausibly to
every man's apprehension, yet I must have been feign to come to it hereafter,
whenever the adversaries shall assay to make good their arguments against my
answers. If this course be followed in examining Popish books, we shall save
them and our selves a great deal of labor: for they will be afraid to come to
such a trial, as will not suffer them to run the wild-goose chase, but will
tether them, that they shall be kept within compass, as if they were coiured
within a circle; By this sifting we shall sever the flower from the bran, that a
bushel will be brought within a peck: that in a book of twenty sheets, there
will be no more to be answered, then may well be contained in five or six.

But this course will be too hard for ordinary men's understandings: it will,
till they be acquainted with all, as strange things commonly use to be: perhaps
they will not at the first be able to conceive fully of every answer: if they
will but take the pains to pause upon it, they may learn more by a few lines
often read, then by a great many once posted over; besides if they understand
not all: yet I dare undertake, they shall by this course understand more, and
more certainly in reading 3 leaves, then by iunning over 13 in a loose
discourse. Logic (beloved,) is nothing else but the perfection of reason: it
is not a devise of Scholars, but a plant of nature: every man uses it daily
in his speaking or writing: the terms are unknown; so are the terms of
war, of Navigations, of husbandry, and of the meanest trade and occupation:
till they be known they are hard, when they are known easy. If I might find
so much favor with you, as to get you to make a trial, I make no doubt but
this course would soon have entertainment, and your knowledge thereby grow
beyond your expectation.

At the least, let me crave and obtain pardon of you for making so bold with
you, in a matter (as I take it) so fit and needful. I hope it shall not fall
out with us (reverend fathers and brethren in the ministry) as it did with
Aristotle and Isocrates, they were both Platoes Scholars: but followed diverse
professions: the one giving himself to Philosophy, the other to Oratorie:
each of them was so carried away with the pleasure he took in his own course,
that he wholly despised the other. As it becomes me, I leave every one to his
own judgment and practice, desiring to be directed and advised by any man,
that can and will do it. At some of you I wonder with delight, other I
commend: there is none but I excuse, as I desire to be excused my self. Great
wits may make a shift without artificial Logic: ordinary men shall find
extraordinary help by it. The Lord in mercy so direct us all, that we may
seek and procure by his blessing, the manifesting and maintaining of his
truth, to the glory of his name, the good of his Church, and our everlasting
salvation in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. II.
Of the state of the question to be disputed.

THE Heathen taught by Plato, always held them for bad commonwealths men, who
in a civil broile, when their country was in an vproare, would not labor to
inform themselves whether part had the right, and join with them, but keep
aloof from both, that they might strike in with the conqueror to their most
advantage. And what kind of Christians shall we account those men, that seeing
all on fire ever since they were borne about matter of Religion, have not all
their life resolved what is true, what false, but are still to make their
choice whon they are nearer their burial then their baptism? May we not
justly rank them with those lukewarm Revel. 3. 15. 16.
Laodiceans, that were neither hot nor cold, fish nor flesh? And may not they
certainly look for the event which our Lord Jesus threatens, that he will
spue them out of his mouth? It is high time therefore for all men 1. Reg. 18.
21.
to resolve themselves, whether they will follow God or Baal, Christ or
Antichrist, and not to continue halting betwixt two opinions.

I cannot reasonably conceive whence this want of resolution should proceed, in
them that are not desperately careless, or profainely politic, but only
from ignorance, of the necessity of being separated from the church of Rome.
The clouds of this ignorance I desire and purpose to scatter by the light of
truth, that all men, which will not shut their eyes against the beams thereof,
may see both the way wherein they are, and the place it leads them too. Now,
to the end I may the bettor understand my self, and be understood by them that
seek for resolution, if they doubt, or confirmation if they be resolved; I
will labor to speak as plain as the matter will give me leave to do,
desiring to have that I deliver rather judged of, then wondered at. And because
we are accused by the Church of Rome sometimes of heresy, sometimes of
schism, I will apply my disputation and discourse to the justifying of our
forefathers in separating from the popish religion, and our selves in
continuing that separation.



Every man is bound upon pain of damnation, to refuse the faith of the Church
of Rome.

This proposition or sentence has two things in it to be proved; That 1. The
faith of the Church of Rome is to be refused. That 2. It is to be refused upon
pain of damnation. These two I will handle severally. First, by showing the
necessity of that refusal; Secondly, by setting out the penalty if that
faith be not refused. And that nothing may be wanting, which may help the
simplest to conceive and judge aright of that which shall be spoken, (before I
come to debate the point) I will declare the meaning of the terms in which I
have delivered it, as shortly as I can with plainness.

Rome, I mean the Doctrine of the said Church delivered by it in certain
Articles, propositions or sentences, to be believed by all men that desire to
be saved as matters revealed by God to that end. This their faith I consider,
as one individual or singular thing. For although it may indeed be divided
into many several Articles, of which it consists, and is as it were compacted
or framed; yet it is conceived by themselves as one entire body: because they
are all knit together by the same bond, namely by being assented to, or
believed upon one and the same ground or reason, which is the spirit of that
body: and are all to be received a like under pain of the same Auathema or
curse, if they be not received: and this is especially to be observed, as the
maine point in this iuquir.

That the faith of the Church of Rome is so to be conceived of, it appears
manifestly by Mr. Fisher the Jesuits Mr. Fisher. Trealise of says, under the
name of AD.
treatise of Faith, under the name of A. D. wherein the whole fourth chapter is
spent to show that Faith must be entire. Faith (says he) must be entire, whole
and sound in all points: and it is not sufficient to believe steadfastly some
points, mis-beleeuing, or not believing obstinately other some, or any one. The
reason thereof follows a little after, where he says, that Not to believe any
one point whatsoever, which God by reualing it, does testisie to bo true, and
which by his Church he has commanded us to believe, must needs be damnable; as
being a not able injury to Gods verity, and a great disobedience to his will.
To the same purpose writes the titular Archbishop of Spalato, that All Articles
of faith determined by Spalato Consil. (...) page 20.
the Church are fundamental, and that none of them may be denied without
heresy.

Rome, must as steadfastly and resolutely believe the least point of relics,
and Images delivered by the Council of Trent, as the greatest mysteries of the
Godhead, the Trinity, the Redomption of the world by the Lord Jesus, and that
if he deny any of the former, he is no less an heretic, then if he did
refuse to believe any of the latter: yea, though he believe all they propound
to be believed, save some one small matter, he is, for want of believing that
one, (if he know the Church propounds it to be believed) a miscreant, and
mis-beleeuer; the reason of this is, that if the Church may err in one thing,
it may err in an other, and so can be no sure foundation of faith.

Rome? surely nothing else, but not to acknowledge the doctrine delivered by
the Church of Rome to be true: but to abhoire it as false; I speak not of
every particular point, but of all jointly together, according to my former
exposition. For I do freely and willingly confess, that the Papists hold many
great mysteries of divinity truly and soundly, wherein also we agree with
them; but yet I say, we may not at any hand receive their faith for true, as it
is delivered by them for one entire body of divinity, revealed by God, to be
acknowledged by all men that will be saved. So then to refuse the faith of the
Church of Rome, is not to believe that it is true: or to believe tht it is
false; and this I say is required of every man upon pain of damnation. The
exposition of the second point, upon pain of damnation, I refer to the place
where it is to be handled, after I have dispatched that which is first to be
debated.

CHAP. III.
Of the Authors that have formerly hold the proposition handled in this
Treatise.

THere are not a few that look more after the man, then after the matter, and
inquire rather who is the writer, then what is written. Therefore least the
meannesse of my condition and abilities, should bring some prejudice to the
truth I search for, give me leave I pray you in the first place to show, that
the point I intend by Gods gracious assistance to prove, is no new conceit or
devise of mine, but a matter advisedly resolved of, and set down by more then
one of the worthies of our church and nation.

Amongst whom, the first in time and authority was that rare and precious
Jewel, Bishop of Salisburie. They B. Jewel des. apol. paro ^, cap, 22. divis. 1.
have no cause (says he of the Papists) to complain of our departing, and to
call us again to be fellows and friends with them; If we should content our
selves to turn to the Pope, and to his errors, it should be a very dangerous
matter both to kindle Gods wrath against us, and to clogge and condomne our
souls for ever.

And in another place he speaks thus to the same purpose. As for us, we have
not fallen from the Bishop of Rome cap. 20. dirts: 2.
upon any matter of worldly respect: but so the case stood, that unless we
left him, we could not come to Christ.

Dr. Reynolds, another shining light of the University D. Renolds.
of Oxford, shows us the same truth in another manner; viz. in his verses upon
the third conclusion, handled in the Schools Nouemb. 3. 1579.

If that ye seek eternal life, see that you Rome forsake.

Of the same mind was Dr. Whitaker, a man for his learning, whether we respect
reading or judgment, known and approved of the Churches of Christ, especially
this of England. We say, (says he) that the Church of Rome must be D.
whitaker, de Eccles. cont. qu. 6 cap. 1.
forsaken of all men that desire to be saved. And a little after he adds, that
There can be no salvation hoped for in the Church of Rome.

Lastly Mr. Perkins, in knowledge and zeal a worthy Scholar of so excellent
a Master, treading in his footsteps concludes: that All those that will be
saved, must depart M. P^rlins Reformed Chath. n^ the prolog sed. Thus then
and separate themselves from the faith and religion of the present Church of
Rome.

We have seen the judgment of these learned and reverend Divines, and therein
the consent of both the Universities Cambridge and Oxford; for their books,
especially the three last, were allowed for printing by the principal Doctors
of the several Universities then resident in them; neither is it to be taken
for the judgment of the Universities only: but also of the whole Church: as
appears evidently by the continuance of it from time to time, in the writings
of these famous learned men successively one after another. It was first
propounded by that reverend Father in defense of the Church of England, to
justify our departure from that strumpet of Babylon; diverse years after
proclaimed openly in the public Schools by Dr. Reynolds; ratified afterward
by Dr. Whitaker in his public lectures of Divinity; and last of all confirmed
by Mr. Perkins: and by every one of these published in print, with the
approbation of our Church and State.

Rome; Not of a bodily departure (says Mr. Perkins) in respect of cohabitation
Peform chathol. in Prol gu^.
and presence, but of a spiritu^all separation in respect of faith and
religion. It cannot then reasonly be denied or doubted, but that our Church
generally, holds separation from the Church of Rome to be a matter of great
consequence, yea of absolute necessity: especially if we remenber, that every
Parish throughout the whole Land is enjoined to have the Book of Bishop Jewel,
with the rest of his works in their several Churches, for all men to read,
and that they were all new printed to that end.

CHAP. IIII.
wherein the necessity of separating is proved.

YOu see from whom I take the point that I have undertaken to maintain: from
the same men will I ferch the grounds of my disputation. What is the reason by
which these worthy, learned, and godly divines did justify the separation of
our Church, and her continuing separated from the Romish faith? let us hear
themselves speak: We have departed from that Church (says thereuerend Father
B. Jewel) whose erro^rs were proved and made B. Jewel Iuf. apol page 4. cap.
11. (...). 1.
manifest to the world, which Church also had already departed from Gods word:
and yet we have not departed so much from it self, as from the errors
thereof. What errors? They are generally implo^yed in these words of his:
chap. 10. diuis. 2. Ignorance, error, superstition, idolat^^ (...) inventions,
and the same commonly disagreeing (...) the holy Scriptures. And again: These
men have broke ^ in pieces Apolog. p^ 5. cap 13. divis. 1.
all the pipes and conduites: they have stopped all the springs, and choked up
the fonntaine of living water with dirt and mire. And again: We have
renounced that Church wherein we Cap. 15. divis. 2. Apol.
could neither have the word of God sincerely taught, nor the Sacraments
rightly administered, nor the nam: of God duly called upon: and wherein was
nothing able to stay any wise man, or one that has consideration of his own
sasetie. To conclude, we part 6. chap. 22. divis. 2.
have departed from him (says that learned B. of the Pope) who has utterly
forsaken the Catholic faith. For (as Dr. Bilson Dialogue ^^t 3.
Bilson says most truly) No Article of the Church of Rome, wherein we dissent
from them is Catholic.

D. Reynolds speaks not so plain, yet gives us sufficiently to understand,
that he therefore concluded the Church of Rom^e was to be forsaken, because she
was no sound member of the Catholic Church, nor held the right faith. Her
unsoundnes he thus sets out. The Church Reynolds conclu. 5.
of Rome is not distempered with a little ague, such as hinders not the
functions of life greatly; but is sick of a canker, or rather of a le^prosy,
or rather of a pestilence, in so much that she is past hope of recovery,
unless our Savior Christ the heavenly physician do give her wholesome
medicines to purge her of permcious humors. Conclus: 5.

And in his presace to his six conclusions? he writes thus. Since ^^ the
fellowship of the Church of Rome it was not In Preface, at the 6. ^n. ^as^on.
lawful for us, either to serve God with a holy worship, or to believe God
with a holy faith, as God has commanded: s^^h the Church of Rome being taken
with contagious diseases and a frenzy, did put her Counselors to the fire,
friends to the sword, brethren to cruel death, and stained the faith of Christ
with reproaches, creatures with the Lords honor, Gods service with Idolatry:
we went away from Papists, not willingly as from m^n; not unwillingly as from
heritickes. But D. Whitaker, and M. (...) deecc^e^. co^^o 2. quist. 6. cap. 1.
Perkins are most plain. W^ affirm^ (says D. Whitaker) that the Church of
Rome is to be shuned of all men, and that no salvation is to be hoped for in
it; yea we say it is to be cond^m^ed as a deep pit of heresy and error.

M. Perkins avoucheth our departure for the same reason. Perkins in prolog.
Resor. Catho.
The cause of this Separation lies in the Church of Rome, namely the cup of
abomination in the whores hand, which is their haereticall and schismatic
religion.



Every erroneous faith is to be refused. The faith of the Church of Rome is an
erroneous faith. Therefore the faith of the Church of Rome is to be refused.
Can there be any question made of the first part or proposition of this
reason, when the holy Apostle Saint Jude exhorts all men without exception of
person, time or matter, to strive for the faith delivered to the Saints? Iudev.
3.
But how strive we for that faith which is the revealed truth of God, if we can
be content to believe errors which are against the truth? Yea, what do we
else by holding errors for truth, but add to the divine revelation given by
the Lord God himself, contrary to his charge? Deuteronomy. 4. 2. You shall put
nothing to the word that I command you.

The second part which we call the assumption or minor, Deutr. 4. 2.
is that wherein all the doubt lies: for what is the Church of Rome the worse,
for granting that an erroneous faith is to be refused, unless their faith can be
proved erroneous. And whereas I say in my question and disputation erroneous,
rather then heretical, I do it od of purpose, because I would shun all
needless wrangling about the word: for it seems to many somewhat doubtful
what is properly to be called heresy; For my part I can not see that any false
proposition delivered for an Article of faith, can be less then heresy: I
doubt not but a man may think something to be true which is false, and be no
heriticke: bu^ he the shall obstinately hold such a point for an Article of
faith, necessarily to be believed by all men upon pain of damnation, cannot
for ought I see, be freed from heresy. As for the errors of the Papists, Dr.
Reynolds, Dr. Whitakers, and Mr. Perkins, (as we have seen,) make no doubt to
call them heresies.

Rome be erroneous or no, we must enquire how the truth and falsenesse of faith
is to be discerned: which we cannot do either better or otherwise, then by
considering how the Article of faith, or proposition enjoined to be believed,
agrees with the divine testimony concerning that point or Article; for the
divine testimony is the thing or rule, to which the Article must be applied,
and by which it must be squared; so that if it agree wholly with it, it is true:
if in any part it differ from that testimony, it is false and erroneous. This
Sess. 14. ca^ Decret de necessitate satiffaction is Dec^ct. de sacram
paenitentiae can. 6.
description of error and falsehood in matters of faith, is warranted by the
Council of Trent, where they make falsehood consist in differing from the word
of God: and That which differs from the institution of Christ, is called an
humane tradition, and therefore is erroneous.



That faith which has a false and ertoneous foundation, is false and erroneous.

Wherein first I take it for granted, that Faith must have an extrinsecall
foundation out of the shings themfelues which are to be believed. This outward
and extrinsecall foundation is the credit and authority of him, that delivers
those things for true, and requires assent or agreement to them.

Secondly, I hold it for certain, and agrred upon by all, that faith is true
or false, according to the foundation whereon it stands: as the divine
restimonie begets a divine faith, an humane testimony breeds an humane, which
may thus appear. What makes the faith of the ancient heathen, and the now
heathenish Turks, and all sorts of Infidels, who believe that there is but one
God, to be humane false and erroneous; and the faith of Christians concerning
the same point, to be divine and true: but the diverse foundations of these
faiths, the former depending upon the conjectures and testimonies of men: the
other arising out of the witness of God himself. To come nearer home; why do
the Papists deny that we are of their faith, although they confess we hold
the very same Articles of the Creed that they profess, and aagree with them in
most points of religion: but for that we have not the same foundation of our
faith, which they have of theirs? It is then the goodness or badnesse of the
foundation that make the faith good or bad: so that where the foundation is
false, the faith whatsoever it be cannot be true.

The proposition thus proved, I will add the assumptition to it: The
foundation of the faith of the Church of Rome is false and erroneous: For the
foundation of their faith, is the authority of the Pastors of their Church, as
it Sect. 4. Decret. de edit. scriptur. sect. praeterea.
is manifest by the Council of Trent: It is the office of the Church (says
the Council) to give sentence of the true meaning and sense of the Scriptures.
Now by the Church, they mean the Pastors of the Church, as their continual
practice declares, no man being suffered to give a voice in any Council, but
their Bishops, whom only they hold to be the Pastors of the Church. By true
sense and meaning they understand the doctrine of faith, which is nothing else
but the Word of God, truly understood. By the Scriptures, they mean every
particular place of Scripture; for, if they should mean some places only,
there could be no certainty in this their decree, unless they had determined,
what particular places they are, whereof the Church may give sentence.

These things thus declared, I dispute thus:



But the Church has the office to determine which is the true faith: as it
appears by the words of the Council ere-while recited.

Therefore the authority of the Church is the foundation of their faith.

That the Church of Rome claims this authority, it may further appear by
those titles whcih it usurps in the said Council, that, The Bishop of Rome
is Gods Vicar on Sess. 6. de reformat. cap. 1. and Sess. 14. de poenitentia.
cap. 7. Sess. 7. de Baptism. Can. 3. and Sess. 22. de sacrificio missae cap. 8
De verbo dei lib. 3. cap. 3. S^ct. Tota igitur. Cap. 5. Sect. Ex his.
earth. The Church of Rome is the mother and mistress of all Churches. Yea,
every man may plainly see, that Bellarmine teaches the same things of the
church of Rome. The Church is the judge of the true sense of the Scripture, and
all controversies. By Church, he understands the Pope with a Council: and
this, he says, is expressly to be found in the Council of Trent, Sess. 4.
which is the place I alleged ere-while. It is committed singularly to Peter
and his successors, that they should teach all men what is to be held
concerning the doctrine of faith. For the expounding whereof, he says a little
after, Sect. Si etiam; that, The Lord speaks of a singular office of teaching
the whole Church, by appointing and decreeing what is to be believed of all men.
And again, he says; that The Councels, and Popes execute the office of a
Judge committed Cap. 10. Sect. Respond. aliud est.
to them by God. What the Office of a Judge is, he shows in the same place a
few lines before: To explication after the manner of a Judge, there is
authority required: A Judge delivers his sentence, as a thing that
necessarily must be followed. To conclude, he tells us in the same tenth
chapter; that, Sect. Septi^um argumentum.
Christians, who are sure the Church cannot err in expounding the doctrine of
faith, are bound to receive that doctrine, and not to doubt whether those
things be so or no.

This matter Bellarmine makes plain to all men, by showing the manner of this
Office, in this sort; The Scripture for Cap. 10. Sect. Responde^, Christus.
It self needs not the witness of men, for it is most true in it self, whether
it be understood, or not: but for our sake it needs the witness of the Church,
because otherwise we are not certain, what books are sacred and divine, nor
what is the true and proper meaning. In the same Chapter he gives us to
understand, what manner of foundation the testimony of the church is. The word
of God delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, is the first Sect. Respondeo, Ad
hoc.
foundation of our faith, for, therefore we believe whatsoever we believe,
because God has revealed it by his Prophets and Apostles. But we add, that
besides this first foundation, there is another secondary foundation needful,
to wit, the testimony of the Church: for, we know not certainly what God has
revealed but by the testimony of the Church. Therefore our faith cleaves to
Christ, the first truth, revealing those mysteries, as to the first foundation:
It cleaues also to Peter, that is, to the Pope, propounding and expounding
these mysteries, as to a secondary foundation. And to make the matter yet more
plain, he speaks thus in the same tenth chap. Sect. Respondeo, verbum. We are
to know, Sect. Responde^, verbum.
that a Proposition or article of faith is concluded in such a Syllogism as
this.

Whatsoever God has revealed in the Scriptures is true. But this God has
revealed in the Scriptures. Therefore this is true.
Of the first of these Propositions no man makes any question. The second is
held for certain truth amongst all Catholics, for, it is grounded upon the
testimony of the Church, that is, the Council, or the Pope. By which it
appears, how little Mr. Fisher understands the doctrine whereof he makes
profession, or how unadvisedly he delivers his opinion. For, whereas
Bellarmine will have a twofold foundation, primary, and secondary, Mr. Fisher
will acknowledge but one, namely; the authority of God, speaking by the mouth
of the church: Christian belief (says he) ought only to be Treat. of Faith
in the Preface. Sect of which point.
grounded upon the authority of God, speaking by the mouth of the Church.

Bellarmines opinion of this matter: which indeed agrees very well with the
words of the Council, where it challenges the office of interpreting the
Scriptures. For, in that claim it presumes, that the divine truth is already
revealed, and that it is the first foundation of our faith; to which the office
of the Church is added, which is but a secondary foundation. Now, by these
places of the Counce^l, and Bellarmine, it is clear, that;

The foundation of the Romish faith, is the authority of the Church.

This foundation of faith (say we) is false and erroneous: That our Savior
Christ and his Prophets and Apostles are the foundation of faith, we believe
and acknowledge, and in this we and they agree. That secondary foundation which
lies in the authority and testimony of the church, we refuse as false and
naught, and in this lies the true difference betwixt us and them in this
point: as besides other, De Script. quaest. 5. cap. 3. Apol. part. 2. chap. 3.
diuis. 2. 11
Dr. Whitaker has noted, and the reverend B. Jewel. And this indeed is the
main reason why we may not ioyn with them.

If they demand of us, Why we receive not this authority of the church, for a
foundation of faith? We answer; Because we find no commission in the word of
God, whereby any such office is conveyed unto it. Neither deal we herein any
otherwise then reason and law direct men to do in the like case. For, is any
man so destitute of reason, or so ignorant of the law, that he would receive a
man for L. Chancellor, L. Treasurer, or Lord Chief Justice, that were not
able to show any commission for the having and executing such an office? And
shall we in a business of such importance, that concerns our freehold, not
only for our present being of the church, but for our future becoming heirs
of glory in heaven, give credit to men upon their bare word, without sight of
their commission? VVerfore does our Lord and Savior so often in the
Scriptures, plead his authority from God, warranted by the old Testament: and
vpbraid the Jews with lightness and folly, for being ready to receive one
that should come in his own name? If then the Papists would have us believe,
that their church is appointed to be a foundation, let them show their warrant
for it, and we will accept it, and build our faith upon it.

But we look that their commission should be very plain and certain, because
it is of such a matter as no natural reason can conceive to be true. For who
would imagine or believe that the Apostles, who had a little before received
full power of order and jurisdiction jointly and equally with Peter, (as
Bellarmine himself confesses) should suddenly De Romans Po^t. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Sect. vt autem.
have their authority abridged, and be made subject to Peter: yea, to his
successors too, as it fell out with S. John, to learn of them which we books
of Scripture, and what was the meaning of the several places or texts; and
what was true, what false in Divinity.

Besides, the matter it self is of such importance, by their doctrine, that
without the constant belief thereof, and obedience according thereto, there is
no possibility of salvation. For, Whosoever (says Bellarmine) will not be sed
by Peter, De verb. Dei. lib 3. cap. 5. Sect. quartum.
that is, learn of him or his successors as judges and determiners, what he is
to take for matter of faith, and what is the sense of the Scripture, is none of
Christ's sheep.

CHAP. V.
Of the course that is to be followed in this disputation.



by God, or no, as Bellarmine himself puts it in the assumption of his
Syll^gisme, set down by me Chap. 3. number. 9. The church of Rome says they are,
and call for obedience thereto accordingly. We deny that they are revealed and
enioyn^d by God, and therefore refuse to give assent to them. Who sees not
that the very nature of this difference betwixt us, lays upon them a
necessity of proving, that those points or articles are propounded by God, to
be believed as matters of faith revealed by him?

This made the reverend and learned B. Jewel, in his Apology, 3 B. Jewel
Apol. part. 1. chap. 10. diuis. 1.
tell the Doctors of the Romish church: that, It was their part to prove
clearly and truly, that the Romish Church is the true and right instructed
Church of God. And in his second answer to Dr. Cole, let. D D. E E. to
affirm: that, It was unreasonable for that Dr, to call for the proofs of our
doctrine. And therefore as it appears in that answer, let. O. he stands upon
the negative (as he speaks) and puts the Papists to their proofs, because
they press us to receive those points for articles of faith.



Bellarmine, out of John 21. 15, 16, 17. Ioh. 21. 15, 16. De verbo dei. lib. 3.
cap. 5. Sect. quartum testimonium, and seqq.
Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon the son of Jonas, love thou me more then
these? He said, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. He said unto him, Feed
my sheep, etc.

From these words Bellarmine disputes thus:

Feeding of Christ's sheep, Ioh. 21. 15. is a singular office of teaching the
whole Church, by determining and judging what is to be believed of all men.

To Peter and his successors the feeding of Christ's sheep is committed. Ioh.
21.

Therefore to Peter and his successors, a singular office of teaching the whole
Church, by judging and determining what is to be believed of all men, is
committed.

Upon this conclusion Bellarmine infers: that, he that will not be thus
taught by Peter, is none of Christ's sheep.



1. In those words, Ioh. 21. 15. a singular Office is contained. 2 Feeding
there, signifies teaching. 3 Feeding Christ's sheep is, teaching the whole
Church. 4 Teaching the whole church is, by way of determining what is to be
believed of all men.
All these are contained in the Proposition, and every one of them so
necessarily required to the truth thereof, that if any one of them be untrue,
the Proposition of necessity must be false. How then shall the conclusion be an
article of faith, as the Papists will have it? I will therefore examine every
one of them severally, and then go forward to consider of the Assumption.

CHAP. 6.
Of the two former points of the four.

In the words rehearsed, Ioh. 21. 15. a singular office is appointed.

That Bellarmine speaks of a singular Office, the words themselves show: that
he must needs be understood of appointing such an office, not of disposing of
one already appointed, it is manifest: as well because there was no office yet
ordained, but that which was common to Peter with the rest of the Apostles; and
therefore not singular: as also for that it will not serve Bellarmines turn to
speak of an office common to all the Apostles, since he endeavors to settle
such an office upon Peter, as was proper and peculiar to him, and such as no
other Apostle ever had. This may farther appear by another place in
Bellarmine, where he says, that that very thing is really given John 21. 15.
which was promised, Mat 16. 19. I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven: and as he there says, given to the same Simon, to whom Bellar. de Romans
Pont. lib. 1. cap. 14. Sect. Ac primum and cap. 12. Sect Et propterea.
before it was promised: he says, that the keys were promised Math. 16. 19.
and ^eliuered John 21. 15, 16, 17. Thus have we the first point in Bellarmines
proposition, now let us try the truth of it.

Bellarmine has not once attempted to prove it; although he could not chose
but see, that there was necessity of proving it: for it is not so plain and
manifest in it self, that it needs no proof; and the conclusion drawn out of
it is an Article of their faith; yea such an article, as, like Atlas, bears
the weight of the whole body of their faith. Besides, Bellarmine knew well
enough that we deny it to be true. For he brings Luthers words to that
purpose. Martin Luther (says Bellarmine in his book de potestate Papae)
affirms that by the word Feed, John 21. there is no new power given, but only
the duty of loving Bellar. de Romans Pont. la. ca. 15. Sect. Iam vero.
and teaching enjoined Peter, who was made an Apostle before.

Peter is commanded to feed. But this charge does not so much as imply the
appointing of an office: because feeding is many times enjoined, where there is
no singular office ordained, but the executing of an office commanded, which
had before been appointed. So the Apostle Peter, 1. Peter 5. 2. charge
th(...) were already 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Ministers, to feed the flicke of God. And the Apostle Paul, Acts 20. 28. gives
the like charge to the Elders or Ministers of Act. 10. 28.
Ephesus, Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, to feed the Church
of God. And this Dr. Reynolds well observed, Dr. Reynolds against ^art, Chap.
3. diuis. 2.
and urged against Heart, You say true, we might therefore with good reason
refuse this proposition, till it be proved. But I will deal more kindly with
Bellarmine, and show that Luther truly affirmed, there was no new office
erected by those words, but the execution of one formerly appointed, enjoined.

If this feeding be the teaching, for which all the Apostles had commission,
Mark. 16 15. Go ye into all the world, and Mark. 16. 15.
preach the Gospel to every creature: John 20. 23. Whose sins soever ye
remit, they are remitted to them: then is it not the erecting of a new office:
for this was at our Saviors third appearing to his Disciples, John 20. 13.
that, at his first, Ioh. 20. Ioh. 20. 19. Bellarm. de pont. Romans lib. 1. cap.
12. Sect. Dices etc.
19. 20. when (as Bellarmine affirms) they had power given them both of
iudisdiction to govern, and of order to execute their sacrificing Priesthood.
And it had been a thing not beseeming our Saviors wisdom, to give a new
Commission when there was no need, nor occasion of so doing. Yea, to say the
truth, it had been altogether in vain, because the former being as sufficient
and in force, there could be no place for this later.

But this feeding, Ioh. 21. 15. is the teaching, for which they had commission
Mark. 16. 15. Ioh. 20. 23. For we find no other kind of feeding but this one
practiced by the Apostles in the new Testament, namely, feeding by way of
revealing. This appears touching the Scriptures, Bellarm. de Council. authorit
lib 2. cap. 12. Sect. Obseruandum, etc. and Sect. Di^untur Counc. Trent. Sess.
4 decretde Canon. scripturatum.
2. Tim. 4. 15. The Scriptures were given by inspiration. 2. Pet. 1. 21. Holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: as Bellarmine also
confesses: The Scripture is the word of God immediately revealed. The holy
writers had immediate revelation, and writ the words of God. As for traditions,
which the church of Rome makes a second part of the divine testimony, or word
of God, by their own confession, they are also by revelation, for so says the
Council of Trent: Traditions were either received by the Apostles, from the
mouth of our Savior, or delivered by themselves, the holy Ghost enditing them.

feeding, Ioh. 21. 15. is nothing else but an exhortation or charge for the
performance of that duty, which was enjoined in that Commission, Mark. 16. 15.
That it was such an exhortation, the manner of delivering the words shows,
which is, by repeating the same thing three several times. For this course is
very fit to make an impression of a duty commanded, no way beseeming the giving
of a Commission Besides, it answers to Peter's denying of his Master thrice:
as Cyril notes in Ioh. Because Cyril supra Ioh. lib. 12. cap. 64.
he denied him thrice at his passion, therefore there is a threefold confession
of love required of him. A threefold confession (says S. Austin) answers to
a threefold negation, that the tongue may Aug. Tract. in Ioh. 123.
express as much love, as it did fear. Add hereunto, that our Lord calls for
the performance of this duty, as a proof of Peter's love to him, wherein he
had failed more then the rest, because he had made more protestation of it then
the rest. For thus lies the reason. If thou love me as thou have professed thou
do, show thy love by the performing of the duty of feeding. But what proof
had it been of Peter's love to our Savior, to become the visible Monarch of
the whole Church? Well might the giving of such an office argue our Saviors
love to Peter, but the taking it upon him, could not testify any great love of
his to our Savior. For, who would have refused such an offer? The burden of
teaching was laid upon the other Apostles, as well as upon him; the honor of
the Supremacy (if this were true) was appropriated to him; yea, the rest of the
Apostles, who before were equal to him, were now made inferior and subject to
him.

Mat. 28. 18, 19. All power is given to me in heaven and earth: Go therefore
and teach all nations, Ioh. 20. 21, 22, 23. As my father sent me, so send I
you, receive the holy Ghost: whose sins, etc. But here, although (as they say)
it is the only place that speaks of this commission, there is no authority,
either expressed or employed: only as Cyrill says, It was a duty of love to
feed, as it had been formerly a proof of fear to deny. What else then can
this Feeding be, but the teaching, which was enjoined all the Apostles at our
Saviors first appearing to them? Whereupon I may safely conclude, that the
word neither necessarily, nor in any likelihood of reason imports, the
erection of any new office in the Church.

Bellarmines proposition of a new office appointed, Ioh. 21. 15. is false,
because the first point contained in it, of a singular office here ordained, is
neither true nor likely. The thing now to be discussed, is this:

Feeding Christ's sheep, Ioh. 21. 15. is teaching.

This sentence is plainly delivered by Bellarmine, in that proposition, as he
that looks upon it cannot choose but see, and proved also by two reasons: the
former; that, Reasonable sheep are fed by teaching: the latter; that The Lord
says by Jeremy, I will give you Pastors according to my heart, which Ier. 3.
15.
shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. But these proofs might have
been spared; for we acknowledge, that Feeding is Teaching.

Bellarmine, as we saw, chap. 4. numb. 9. tells us: Teaching is double: by
revealing, or propounding things revealed. We say, that the teaching here
spoken of, is by revelation, not by propounding matters already revealed, as
they would have it. But if they will have us yield to it, they must prove it,
and not take it for granted, as Bellarmine does. For, without it be proved, as
I signified chap. 6. numb. 6. his proposition cannot be true. It is therefore as
easy and reasonable for us to refuse his argument, grounded upon that, which
we deny, as for him to affirm that he cannot prove.

which is, that, None of the Apostles did ever use any other kind of teaching,
then revealing. If they deny this, let them show, that any Apostle did ever
inform the Church, that, This or that book was scripture: that, this or that
tradition was by divine authority: that, this or that place, had this or that
sense. And that this information of theirs, was not by way of revelation: that
is, of immediate inspiration and motion from God: whereby they were freed from
all error. If they cannot do this, as I am out of doubt they cannot, it must
needs be granted, that they taught only by revelation, not otherwise.

Act. 15. 7. but in vain: For the Apostles do not there expound any place of
Scripture formerly written, or propound matters already revealed by God: but by
the immediate inspiration of the holy Ghost, resolve and enjoin what was to be
done in that case. So that their determination was a law then first given by
way of revelation from God, not by way of interpreting and propounding what the
Lord had formerly delivered. For it is manifest, that the Lord has no where
taught in the old Testament (and the new was not then written) that the
Gentiles converted to the faith, were to abstain from strangled things, and
from blood: to the forbidding whereof, the holy Ghost directed them immediately,
upon that occasion, for that time. From which after a time he freed them by the
like direction and revelation given to the Apostle S. Paul, and by him to the
Church, Romans 14. And that this decree of the Apostles was made by revelation
and inspiration of the holy Ghost, De Romans Pons. lib. 4. cap. 25. Sect.
Responde^ ad primum.
Bellarmine himself grants.

James and Peter, the old testament absolutely Act. 15.
freed the Gentiles converted from the ceremonial law. Why tempt ye God,
(says Peter, Verse. 10.) to lay a yoke on the Disciples necks, which neither
our fathers nor we were able to bear? Yet the Apostles by this decree of
theirs, bind them to part of that law, by enioyning them, Verse. 20. 29. To
obstaine from blood, and that that is strangled. Which they might not have
done, if they had propounded matters already resolved of, and not followed the
immediate revelation and direction of the holy Ghost. To this I may add, the
manner of this charge, given by the Apostles, which is by inspiration from the
holy Ghost, whose authority in this case they allege, It seemed good to the
holy Ghost: not, thus says Moses, David, or the Lord by this or that Prophet.
Therefore in that Council, the Apostles did reveal what was to be done, not
propound what formerly had been revealed. And yet this is the only place in
all the new Testament, wherein there is any show of Feeding by expounding and
propounding, otherwise then by revelation.

CHAP. VII.
Of the two latter points in Bellarmines Propositions.



Feeding Christ's sheep, Ioh. 21. 15. is teaching the whole Church.

There has been enough said already to discredit and disable the proposition:
yet I will go forward, that it may appear what truth there is in it.
Bellarmine labors De Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap. 16.
much to prove, that by Christ's Sheep in this place, all Christians whatsoever
are signified. But what needs all this ado? We never meant to deny it,
neither does our granting, or his proving of it, any thing at all help them,
or hinder us. For, there is nothing meant in this place by teaching, but
revealing, as I showed in the former chap. numb. 10, 11, 12. But this the
church of Rome claims not, but strives tooth and nail for such a teaching as
consists in expounding and propounding things revealed: yea I will grant him
both proposition and assumption in the terms wherein they are delivered.
Because the whole Church was to be instructed by the feeding here spoken of,
and no man had or has liberty either to refuse as untrue, or not to obey as
needless any thing that should be delivered according to this commandment,
Feed my sheep.

Bellarmin wrong us, in saying, that we deny that the whole Church is meant by
the name of sheep in this place. For whereas our Divines say that Peter was
made a particular not an universal Bishop: they mean not thereby to deny his
authority to teach all Nations whatsoever, and all congregations in all
nations, as occasion was offered, but only to signify, that he had no
commission given by those, or any other words to be sovereign Bishop of the
whole Church, as they speak in the words going a little Sect. Primum.
before. As for that of John 21. 15. they show, that those words can argue no
such authority, because then Paul might not have had the same office among the
Gentiles, which Peter had among the Jews: so that the universality denied in
that, and other places by our Divines, is an authority of feeding those, who
were joined with him in the same commission of feeding, and had equal
authority with him to reveal the truth of God, to all the sheep of Christ
without exception: which Calvin expresses thus, If the Calvin. Institut. lib.
4. c. 6. n. 4.
same authority be granted to all which was promised to one, wherein shall he be
above his fellows in office? As for n. 7. which Bellarmine quoteth, Calvin
does neither mention nor signify that place, John 21. 15. therein.

seeding Christ's sheep, John 21. 15. is teaching by way of judging or
determining what is to be believed of all men. This also is expressed in plain
terms, and is of as much importance, as any of the other three. His proof is,
that we cannot better understand it then in that sense.

I see not, why I may not grant him this without any inconvenience. For indeed
the Apostles feeding, either by word of mou^h or writing, was by way of
sentence, so that no man might deny or doubt of any thing, which they
delivered. Neither was there any higher court, to which there might be any
appeal from their sentence, but all men were absolutely bound to believe and
obey whatsoever they taught and commanded. This we grant, and herein we would
agree with Bellarmine, if this were all he means.

a difi^itiue sentence declaring and determining what is revealed, and what the
sense and meaning of it is, as I showed chapter 4. numb. 7.

To this must his proofs be applied, which lie thus.

If feeding John 21. 15. be not teaching, by way of determing, what is
reue^led, and what the meaning of it is: Then we must understand it of
preaching or writing commentaries.

Go teach all Nations, Mark. 16. 16. and John 20. 23. as was declared c. 4. n.
4.

But admit a man should say, it is meant of preaching or writing: how does
Bellarmine refute him? By telling us that if we so take it, we must condemn
many Popes that have written nothing at all.

Bellarmine. Why so? because the Pope cannot preach to all: no, not diverse
Popes to any at all: For as their own Histories confess, some of them did not
so much as understand their Grammar. But what if the Pope cannot? no more could
any of the Apostles, nor Peter preach to all: yet had they authority to preach
to all, as occasion might happen; and were not restrained to this or that
congregation, diocese, province, nation, or Country; and in that respect were
universal Pastors of the whole Church, yea every one of them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Assumption of Bellarmines syll^gisme. c. 3. n. 5.

John 21. 15. whereon the strength of Bellarmines conclusion principally
depends. I will now set my self to the sifting of the assumption or second
part of his syllogism, which is.

To Peter and his successors that feeding John 21. 15. is committed.

As the proposition, so the assumption also, contains four several points,
distinctly to be considered, that

1 Those words John 21. are spoken to Peter. 2 The office of seeding is
committed to Peter. 3 Peter has his successors. 4 The office of seeding is
committed to Peter's successors.
Bellarmin. It is said to Peter only, Feed my sheep. Bell de Romans Po^. l c. 14.
Sect. Hacten^.
Who denies this, if it be ^ightly under?

The speech was directed immediately to Peter with whom our Lord then talked:
but not so to Peter, as if the duty, to which he is exhorted, belonged to none
but to Institut. lib. 4. cap. 6. n. 4.
him. Therefore Calvin truly says, that as Peter received mandem^m of (...)
John 21. 15. so all other ministers are exhorted to feed the sheep, 1. Pet. 5.
2. and by so saying he grants, that those words were spoken to Peter, but
he tells the Papists withal, that if they will prove, that they avouch,
they must show that whosoever are commanded ^o feed Christ's s^eepe, to them the
power over the whole Church is committed: In which words he denies the
consequence of the proposition, which he does not express; but acknowledges
the assumption contained in those words, To Peter Bellar. de Romans ponl. lib. 1.
c. 14. Sect. Sed co^tra.
only Christ said, feed my sheep. By which it is manifest, that Bellarmine
does Calvin great wrong, in charging him with the denying, that those words
John 21. are spoken to Peter only: and spends his time and strength in vain
to prove by seven arguments against Calvin, that which Calvin never denied.

Bellarmines meaning is, that the words are so spoken to Peter, that the thing
signified by them belongs not to the rest of the Apostles. And in this sense
we say it is false, that those words were spoken to Peter only. If Bellarmine
can not prove them true in this sense (as I am sure he cannot) his argument is
nothing worth. For how shall that prove for Peter and his successors, against
the rest of the Apostles, which was spoken to them, as well as to him: yet it
is not to be wondered at, that Bellarmin goes not about to prove it in that
sense. For indeed there is no show or color of proof for it, because the Word
of God no where makes any distinction betwixt this feeding, John 21. 15. and
that teaching, Mat. 16. 16. John 20. 21. which was enjoined Peter, and the rest
of the Apostles equally and alike, as Bellarmine De Romans Pont. lib. 1. c. 12.
Sect. ^ices.
confesses. The keys were given, John 20. and 21. For when our Lord said,
(John 20. 19.) Peace, be unto you, as my Father sent me, so send I you, then
he gave them the power or key of jurisdiction. For by those words he made
them as it were Legates and Governors of the Church, in his name. But in the
words following, Receive ye the holy Ghost: whose sins ye remit, etc. he
gave them the power of order: And thus much of the first proposition of the
four.

The second follows, namely:

The office of feeding, Ioh. 21. is committed to Peter. This is affirmed in
plain words; and must be understood of Peter alone, not of him and the other
Apostles. For that will not serve Bellarmines turn, because it proves nothing
for the Popes power, or against that we defend. Besides, Bellarmine strives
here for an office proper to Peter, because he calls it a singular office. But
how can that be proper to Peter which is cominon to the rest of the Apostles
with him? This also we deny, as Calvin did long since; In this word Institut.
lib. 4. cap. 6. n. 4.
feed (says he) nothing is given to Peter, more then to the other. Bellarmine
should have proved that this conueyeth a proper office to the Pope, and not
have taken that for granted, which he knows we always deny. But he does not
so much as offer to make any proof of it, either de verbo Lib. 3. cap. 5. Lib.
1. cap. 14.
Dei, or de Roman. Pontif. in both which places he professedly disputes the
point. Indeed in the latter place, he proves that the words, Feed my sheep,
were spoken to Peter only. But what is that to prove that feeding, John 21. is
committed to Peter only.



If those words, feed my sheep, were spoken to Peter only, then the feeding
is committed to Peter only; as if it were all one,

To require or exhort Peter to feed, and To commit the feeding to Peter only?
Put case a man that has many servants to go about a piece of work, reaping,
or the like, should say to some one of them whom he might suspect of idleness,
Look that you reap clean and fair: Will any wise man conclude hereupon,
that by these words he gives him an office to ouer-see and judge of his other
fellows work, or makes him the only worke-man? And yet it cannot be denied
that he speaks to him only.

Peter only to feed, and did not commit that feeding only to him, then there
was no end or reason of his speaking to him only; but it were absurd, yea
blasphemous, to say of our Savior, that there was no end or reason of his
speech. It were certainly blasphemous for any man to say of the Lord Jesus,
that any action or speech of his was without reason, or not to good purpose.
But it were also a bold and blind presumption, for any man to affirm, that
there is no reason or end of our Saviors speech at all, because there is none
known to men. What if I know not the end or reason of it, may I conclude, that
therefore there is none? So then if we should grant, that there can no reason
be given by us, of our Saviors speech, unless thereby such an office be
bestowed upon Peter; yet it might well be, there was some reason thereof
though unknown to us.

Peter only, though he meant not to place him in any office thereby. First
therefore we say, that our Lord speak to Peter thus particularly, that he
might give him occasion to make profession of his love to him, which he had
brought into question, by denying his Master with swearing and cursing. And
because there was no means more effectual to prove the continuance or renewing
of Peter; love to our Savior, then the feeding of his sheep, therefore our
Savior presses him with this duty above the rest, because there was more need
to have his love showed, then the others, who had not made their love to him so
doubtful. Let me add to these two a third, that it was needful for Peter
himself, that the execution of the commission formerly given should be viged
on Peter, because it might seem, that by so soul a fall, he had wholly been
put out of commission: which doubt is fully removed by our Saviors charging
him to go forward in the execution thereof. We shall not need then to make any
such construction of the Lord Jesus words, as if he had intended by them to
seal a commission to Peter for an office to be newly erected; for fear it
should be suspected that those words were to no purpose, or without reason. Nay
rather most unreasonable is that consequence, that would have those things
infer each other, betwixt which there is no kind of agre^ment.

CHAP. IX.
Of Peter's successors.



Peter has his successors, which is manifestly employed, For he that says,
The office is committed to Peter's successors, supposes that Peter has
successors. This sentence is thus to be understood; Peter only has his
successors, so as none of the other Apostles have. For so Bellarmine expounds
himself. De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 9. Sect. Respondeo, Pontificatum.
The chief ecclesiastical power was given to Peter, as to the ordinary
pastor, who was always to have successors: to the other Apostles as to the
delegates, who were not to have successors. And he says, that The Bishop of
Rom^ succedeth Peter properly L. 4. c. 25. Sect. Respondeo, magnum.
as the ordinary pastor of the whole Church, but the Apostles were
extraordinary, and as it were delegated pastors, and such have no successors.

That Peter has successors in the ministry of the Gospel, we confess, and
profess: but we add, that this is common to him with the rest of the
Apostles. For the farther explication whereof we say, that to succeed the
Apostles, is either to succeed them properly, as one King succeeds another,
or in similitude or proportion, as Bellarmine truly says. We grant that all
the Apostles have De Rom Pon. l. c. 15. Sect. Dicun^ur.
successors in a proportion; namely, such as preach the Gospel, as they did,
though not by revelation; and that also have power of ordination and
jurisdiction fit for the good government of the Church. But we say none of the
Apostles have any successors of the second kind. Therefore Bellarmine might
have saved his labor in proving that the Apostles De Romans Pont. l 4 c. 25.
Sect. sta vero.
have no such successors.

Peter has successors properly. This he propounds in these terms.

Some must succeed Peter in the Bishopric of the whole De Romans Pont. l. 2. c.
12. Sect. Primum ergo.
Church.

Which he does more plainly declare, where he says, that the Bishop of Rome
succeeds Peter properly, not as an Apostle, lib. 4 c. 25. Sect. Respond^^,
magnum.
but as an ordinary Pastor over the whole Church. This we utterly deny, that
Peter was to have any such successor in the Bishopric of the whole Church.
Our reason is, that Peter himself had no such office. But let us see how
Bellarmine would prove, that he had such successors.

Bellarmines proof of this point is set down, and is thus De Romans Pont. l. 2.
c. 12. Sect. Nos ergo ^tramque.
to be framed.

Either Peter has successors in Episcopal office over the whole Church, or
that office perished at Peter's death.

But that office perished not at Peter's death; for that office was ordained for
the good of the Church, and the Church has had, and shall always have no
less need of it, then it had while Peter lived.

Therefore Peter has successors in the Episcopal office, over the whole
Church.

Bellar. takes that for granted, which he should prove, namely that Peter had
such an office while he lived? For he was not ignorant that all Protestants
deny it? What is this else, according to Aristotle's Topicorum l. 8. cap. 13.
Philosophy, but to beg the question? He (says Aristotle) that takes that as
granted which he ought to prove, manifestly beggeth the question. As for the
proofs he has formerly brought, touching this office of Peter, I have
showed, that they are weak and vain, so that the point is still as
questionable as it was before. Therefore Bellarmine is also guilty of a second
begging of the question, because his proofs are by-matters, as doubtful, or
more doubtful then that is which he would prove by them. And of this manner of
begging the question, speaks the forenamed Aristole, Begging of the question
is, when the proof is from things less Prio. Analyt. l. 2. Cap. 16.
known, or equally unknown. And this is not (says Aristotle) to demonstrate
the question.

Bellarmine that which he cannot prove, that there was such an office: yet may
we nevertheless deny his assumption, and say that;

The Episcopal authority over the whole Church, perished at Peter's death.

Will he tell us that it was ordained for the good of the Church? What then? It
will not follow thereupon that it must be perpetual, unless he can show, that
our Lord appointed it should continue for ever by succession. For the whole
course of publishing the Gospel, and bringing men to true faith in Christ,
depends wholly upon the ordinance of God, who being able to make any means
effectual to his purpose, is not tied to use any, but what please him.
Therefore if Bellarmine cannot show that it was the ordinance of God, that such
an Episcopal function as he imagines Peter had, should be continued always
in the Church, it is no inconvenience to hold, that it perished with Peter's
death. And of this first argument enough.

Sect. secundo, and it is thus to be disposed.

If in the time of the Apostles there was one supreme Governor of the church,
then there ought to be so now, because the form of the Church may not be
changed, seeing it is one and the same at all times.

But in the time of the Apostles there was one supreme Governor and head of
the Church.

Therefore there ought to be so now.

The assumption, or second part of this Syllogism, is as doubtful as the
conclusion inferred upon it, and therefore it is a begging of the question, not
a proof of the former Syllogism. But were it never so true, he were never the
nearer; for the consequence of the proposition is naught, because there is no
necessity, that the Church should always have that office, which at any time
it has had. For, this necessity (if there were any such) must spring out of
the nature, either of God himself, or of the Church, or depend upon the decree
of Gods will. To say there is any necessity in the nature of God, or of the
Church, which may enforce the continual being of that which once was, were
absurd. It remains then, that there must be some act of Gods will, by which
it is decreed, that whatsoever office has once been in the Church, shall be in
it for ever, as I answered numb. 5. Wherefore Bellarmine must show us some
ordinance of God, for the continuance of such government (supposing there was
once such an one) or give us leave to reject it.



If the Church be one and the same at all times, then the form of it may not
be changed.

But the Church is one and the same at all times.

Therefore the form of it may not be changed.

In the antecedent part of the proposition, and in the assumption, by One,
Bellarmine means essentially one: by form in the consequent part, he
understands, form of government. According to this sense we say, the
consequence of the proposition is naught: for the form of the government of
the church, is not of the essence of the church, as Bellarmine here vainly
supposes, and falsely affirms in his D^ Eccles lib. 3. cap 2 Sect. Nostra
autem.
definition of the church. The assumption rightly understood is true. The
Church indeed is always one with Christ the head, because of one and the same
spirit in him, and every particular member of it. It is also one in faith,
because the true faith is one. But Bellarmine means that the church is one
and the same, in respect of the government and officers thereof. This we deny,
and look for better proof of it from him, then his bare affirmation, in a
matter of faith to be believed upon pain of damnation.

Sect. tertio, after this sort.

If the Sheepe-fould endure to the end of the world, then successors to Peter
in that his chief pastoral office must endure to the end of the world: For
the office of the Pastors in the nature of the thing, must endure as long as
the Sheepe-fould continues, because it is an ordinary and perpetual office.

But the Sheepe-fold endures to the end of the world.

Therefore successors to Peter in that chief Pastoral office must endure to
the end of the world.

Bellarmine keeps his custom to beg the question. For here again he takes
it for granted, that Peter was Pastor of the whole church. But say it were so,
what gets he by it? For, the consequence of his proposition is naught,
neither can the proof he brings make it good. The Sheepe-fold may endure to
the end of the world, and yet that pastoral Office not continue. Because they
do not go together in their nature; for if they did, then the one must be of
the essence or being of the other, as a reasonable soul and man are: or arise
out of the principles of the nature of the other, as speech does from the
re^son^ble soul, which no man will say. Neither is there any ordinance of God
for the joint continuance of them together. Bellarm. seems to tell us, that
there is some ordinance of God for the knitting of them together. For he says
in proof of his consequence, that, That pastoral Office is an ordinary and
perpetual office: as no office can be in the church, but by the divine
ordination. If he had showed us withal, where we may find that ordinance, he
had said somewhat to purpose: Since neither he has, nor we can find any such
in the word of God, he must give us leave to take it for no article of faith.

Touching his assumption, I answer; that, If by Sheepefold, he mean a company
of people separated from the world by the profession of Christian Religion, and
united together in obedience to the divine revelation: We grant that there
is, and shall always be such a Sheepe-fold. But, if he dream of any other
Sheepe-fold, he must prove his assumption, ore we can believe it.

Bellarmine has not done, but sets upon us with a fresh charge, in the same
twelfth chapter, Sect, quinto: which is thus in due form.

Either some must succeed Peter in his Pastoral office over the whole church,
or the church must be without an head at Peter's death and after.

But the Church must not be without an head at Peter's death, and after.

Therefore some must succeed Peter in his pastoral office.

Here Bellarmine perceived, that we were like enough to deny the proposition,
because the disjunction in it is naught, for that Christ the head of the
church, continued to be the head thereof at Peter's death, and shall do so for
ever. Therefore he tells us, it is not sufficient for the Church to have
Christ for head; but that the Scripture makes mention of another head of the
Church, his reason lies thus:

The head, 1 Cor. 12. 12. is not Christ, for that head 1 Cor. 12. 12.
has need of the members, which is not true of Christ.

The head, 1 Cor. 12. 12. is the head of the Church:

Therefore there is some head of the Church which is not Christ.

Bellarmine needed not have troubled himself to prove it; especially since his
proof is no better. For, our Savior, considered as the Mediator, the head of
the Church, cannot say to the Members, which make the body, I have no need of
you, although, as he is God, he has absolutely no need of any of them.

The assumption, that the head, 1 Cor. 12. 12. is the head of the Church, we
refuse, as false. And how does Bellarmine prove it? As he does many other
points, by saying so. But this will not serve our turn in a matter of faith:
Belike he looks we should disprove it. Though it be no orderly course of
disputation, yet I say in a word, the head in that 21 verse. in which the words
quoted by Bellarmine, signifies the natural head, to which the principal
members in the church are resembled; which, as principal as they are, cannot
be without the feet, that is, the meanest members: And this interpretation is
warranted by Chrysostom and Theophilact, who by head, understand, those which
had received greater gifts. So that indeed, the place contains a comparison,
wherein the conjunction of the parts of the mystical body, is declared by the
like in the natural body.

Sect. Sexto, and Sect. Denique: the one is drawn from the succession of the
high Priests in the old Testament: the other from the necessity of monarchical
government in the church. But they are so slight and idle, that I should but
wast time, labor, and paper to meddle with them: where-I thus end this third
point and this Chapter.

CHAP. X.
Of Feeding committed to Peter's Successors.

THe fourth and last point to be considered in Bellarmines 1 Chapt. 5 number. 5.
and chap. 8. number.
assumption, is this:

Feeding, Ioh. 21. is committed to Peter's Successors also.

This we say is untrue; and will make it appear to be 1. Ioh. 21. 25.
so, by answering the arguments he brings to prove it. Bellarm. leverbo De,
il. b. 3 cap 5. Sect. Quartum.
The first whereof is in this manner:

Either our Savior, when he required Peter to feed his sheep, Ioh. 21. spoke
also to his successors: or else he provided for his church for twenty five
years only, and not to the end of the world.

But when he required Peter to feed his sheep, John 21. he provided for his
Church, not for five and twenty years only, but to the end of the world.

Therefore, Ioh. 21. he spoke also to Peter's successors.

Peter to publish the Gospel by revealing it. Now this revealing or preaching
of the Gospel by revelation, is and shall be of great use to the Church, in
all ages and times, so long as the world shall endu^e. And in this sens^ I
grant the assumption: but in Bellermines sense, that our Savior provided for
his Church by instituting such an Office as he fancieth, which the whole
argument presumes, I deny the assumption and proposition too.

Indeed, the proposition is utterly false: our Lord provided for the Church to
the end of the world, though he spoke not at all in that place to Peter's
successors. For in those words he took order for the revealing of the
Gospel, which revelation of Peter's, contains provision for the Church to the
end of the world.

Bellarmines to the same Bellarm. do Pont. Romans l. 2, cap. 12. Sect. quinto.
purpose.

In which words Christ committed all his sheep, both for place and time to
Peter; in those he spoke to Peter's successors also: for Peter was not to live
always in the flesh.

But in those words, Ioh. 21. Christ committed all his sheep, both for place
and time to Peter. For, it behooved our Savior to have no less care of us,
then of our Predecessors.

Therefore in those words, John 21. Christ spoke to Peter's successors also.

Of the assumption, which speaks of our Lords committing his sheep to Peter,
by those words, there has been enough said already in the former chapter,
which needs no repetition.

The proposition I reject as false. For our Savior might well by those words
commit all his sheep, for place and time, to Peter's Feeding, by the doctrine
of the Gospel to be revealed, which was to continue, as by Gods blessing it
has done, and shall do; no less to us and our posterity, then to our
predecessors, from time to time, whereby he shows his care of us, as well as
of them.

John 21. 15. I will propound a reason or two out of the text it self, by
which it shall appear, if not necessarily, yet with as great likelihood as any
thing Bellarmine has brought in this question, that our Lord spoke to Peter
only, and not to his successors also.

Of them to whom those words were spoken, our Savior demanded whether they
loved him, or no.

Of Peter^ successors, Christ did not demand whether they loved him or no: for
they neither were there in presence, nor at all in being in the world.

Therefore to Peter's successors those words were not spoken.

He to whom those words were spoken, had given occasion, that our Savior
should repeat this question thrice. For it is not likely that our Lord would
have repeated them so often, if there had not been occasion given: and we
find just occasion of repeating them thrice, in Peter's denying him thrice.

But Peter's successors had given no occasion of the threefold repetition: for,
they neither were at that time, nor had been before in the world.

Therefore to Peter's successors those words were not spoken.

Bellarmines, with all the proofs of every several part thereof, whereby it
has appeared (I doubt not) to every judicious and impartial Reader, that
there is no force in it to prove, that the Church or Pope has a commission
from our Lord Jesus, to teach the whole Church by way of judging and
determining, what is to be believed of all men, and what is not. It will be
looked for perhaps, that I should proceed to the discussing of some other, that
are brought for the proof of this question. But I think it would be but lost
labor: for Bellarmine, who was as able as any Popish writer, that has dealt
with this matter, and had allowance of that he wirt (especially in a point that
so nearely touched the Popes freehold) if not from the Consistory immediately,
yet with the knowledge thereof, from the office appointed for that purpose in
Rome, sets up his rest upon that place in John and tells us confidently;
that, Then only Peter received the keys of the kingdom, as principal
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 1. c. 12. Sect. vt autem.
and ordinary governor, when he heard those words, Feed my sheep: and then
also (as he says) the charge of the rest of the Apostles, his brethren, was
committed to him.

office should be erected, no reasonable man can doubt, if he consider, what
himself would do, if any man should challenge to himself the authority of
the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Treasurer of England: would he take his word
without knowledge of his commission under the broad seal? And why then should
we be so simple, as in a business of such importance, to take the word of a
Cardinal, for the Popes prerogative.

Fisher the Jesuit, after some other Papists, alleges for the proof of this
commission, Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all Nations. But Bellarmine has disclaimed
and disproued all commission in that place: and that not without reason. For
(he says) Then only he received the keys of the Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 1.
c. 12. Sect. Vt autem.
Kingdom, as principal and ordinary governor, when he heard, Feed my
sheep. In this he disclaimeth it, his disproofe is, that the commission, Mat.
28. 19. is all one with that Ioh. 20. 21. as that which by Bellarmines
confession Sect. Dices. contains power both of order and jurisdiction: which
is also conveyed to the Apostles, Math. 28. 20. Go teach and baptize. And this
Master Fisher must needs acknowledge, if he will have that place be a
commission for the Popes authority. As for that John 20. 21. the power there
was not committed severally to Peter alone, but to all the Apostles, as to
Legates, not to ordinary pastors; as Bellarmine notes. All other Sect. Vt
autem.
places of Scripture brought by the Papists to this purpose, are of the same
kind, and concern all the Apostles as well as Peter: wherefore all this
considered, I hold it altogether needless, to meddle with those other eight
arguments of Bellarmines, which indeed are of another kind; and persuade my
self, that I have said enough of that weak foundation of the Papists faith,
the authority of the Church in person of the Pope for the time being. Whereupon
I infer my former conclusion, that

The says of the Church of Rome is erroneous and false, even in the very
foundation of it; and therefore to be refused and rejected of all men.

CHAP. XI.
Containing a second proof, that the faith of the Church of Rome is erroneous
and false.



If some of the Articles of the faith of the Church of Rome be false and
erroneous, then the faith of that Church is false and erroneous.

But some of the Articles of the faith of the Church of Rome are false and
erroneous.

Therefore the faith of the Church of Rome is false and erroneous.

Anathema or curse, which seizes on all them which are not of the faith of the
Church of Rome. Wherefore I may presume without presumption, that the
consequence is good, seeing every Article is equally and alike a matter of
faith.

Trent diverse Articles of the Romish says, which are false and erroneous: and
these they are,

1 The saving verity [or truth] taught by Christ and his Apostles, is contained
in written books, [or Scriptures] and unwritten traditions. Council. Trident.
Sess. 4. decret. de Canon. Scripturae.

2 The books of Judith, Tobit, Ester [chap. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Daniel] chap. 3. 13, 14. Macchabees 1, 2. are
canonical scripture. d. decret. de scriptur.

3 The whole books of Scripture, and every part of them, as they are in the
vulgar Latin edition, are to be received for sacred and canonical. d. decret.
de scriptur.

4 It is the office of the Church to judge of the true sense, [or
interpretation] of the sacred [or holy] Scriptures. d. sess. 4. de edit. and
vsu librorum sacrorum, Sect. insuper.

5 The Bishop of Rome is Gods Vicar on earth. Sess. 6. decret. de reform. cap.
1. and sess. 14. de poenitentia, cap. 7.

6 The Church of Rome is the mother and Mistress of all Churches. Sess. 7. de
baptis. can. 3. and sess. 13. de extrem. vnct. cap. 3. and sess. 22. de sacrif.
missae. cap. 8.

7 Grace [bestowed in baptisme] does take away whatsoever has the true and
proper nature of sin. sess. de pec. orig. can. 5.

8 Concupiscence in the regenerate is not truly and properly sin. d. canon.
5.

9 Man does freely assent to, and cooperate [or work together] with Gods
exciting and cooperating grace, so that he can also reject [or refuse] the same
grace. Sess. 6. de iustif. cap. 5. And dessent if he will. can. 4.

10 The only formal cause of justification, is justice [or righteousnesse]
inhaerent. d. sess. de iustit. cap. 7.

11 By keeping the commandments of the Church, a man does increase in the
justice, which he received by the grace of Christ, and is more justified. cap.
10.

12 The just in some actions do not sin venially. cap. 11.

13 By every mortal sin a man falls away from the grace of justification,
which he had received. cap. 14, 15. and can. 23.

14 By the Sacrament of poenance the grace of justification, which was lost, is
recovered. cap. 14.

15 The good works of a man that is justified, are his merits. can. 32.

16 The just truly deserve everlasting life by works wrought in God. cap. 16.
and can. 32.

17 unless a man faithfully and firmly believe the Catholic doctrine of the
Council of Trent touching justification, he cannot be saved. cap. 16. Sect.
Post hanc.

18 Some that are not predestinate receive the grace of justification. can. 17.

19 The Sacraments of the new Testament are neither more nor fewer then 7, to
wit, 1 Baptism, 2 Confirmation, 3 The Lords Supper, 4 Poenance, 5 Extreme
Unction, 6 Ordination, 7 Matrimony: and every one of these is truly and
properly a sacrament. sess. 7. de sacram: in genere, can. 1.

20 Baptism, Confirmation, and Ordination imprint in the soul a character
that cannot be blotted out. can. 9.

21 The sacraments of the new Testament, contain the thing they signify, and
bestow it upon them, that hinder it not. can. 6. And upon all as much as is
required on Gods part. can. 7. And that by the work wrought. can. 8.

22 After the consecration of the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, our Lord
Jesus Christ true God and man is contained, truly, really and substantially
under the shows of those sensible things, sess. 13. de sacram. Eucharist. cap.
1.

23 The holy Eucharist is to be reserved in the Chancell, and carried honorably
to the sick. cap. 6.

24 The tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet, is rent in sunder and made
two by the Council of Trent. sess. 14. de poenitentia, cap. 5. and can. 7.

25 The time of Lent is holy and most acceptable. sess. 14. de poenitentia,
cap. 5.

26 No man that knows himself to be guilty of mortal sin, how contrite
soever he seem to himself to be, may come to the holy Eucharist, without
sacrament all confession going before. d. sess. 13. cap. 7. and can. 11. that
is, Until he have confessed all and every one of his mortal sins, and also
those circumstances, which change the kind of the sin, sess. 14. de sacram.
poenitentia, c. 5. And that to a Priest in secret. can. 6. 7.

27 Power [or authority] was given to the Apostles and their lawful successors
to remit and retain sins for the reconciling of such of the faithful as
fall after Baptism. sess. 14. de sacram ent. poenitentiae, cap. 1.

28 It is utterly false and differing from the word of God to say, that the
Lord God never remitteth the fault, but with all he pardons the whole
punishment. d. sess. 14. de poe^it. cap. 8. and can. 12. and sess. 6. de
iustif. cap. 14. can. 30.

29 Neither the Lay^y, nor any Clergy man that does not consecrate, is bound by
any Commandment of God, to receive under both kinds. sess. 21. de sacram. sub
utraque specie, cap. 1.

30 The Church has decreed it for law, that all the Laity, and the Clergy,
that do not consecrate should receive under one kind only. d. sess. cap. 5.

31 We may make satisfaction to God through Jesus Christ by temporal
afflictions laid on us by God, and borne patiently by us. sess. 14 de sacram.
poenitent. cap. 9. and can. 13.

32 The Priesthood was not to be abolished by the death of Christ, sess. 22.
de sacrif. missae. cap. 1.

33 Our Savior Christ by these words, This do in remembrance of me, charged
his Apostles and their successors to offer his body and blood under the signs
of bread and wine, d. cap. 1.

34 Water is to be mingled with wine in the Chalice that is to be offered, d.
sess. cap. 7.

35 The names of Subdeacons, Acolytes, Exorcists, Lectors and Doore-keepers,
and the proper office of every one of these, has been ever since the
beginning of the Church. sess. 23. de sacram. o^dinis, cap. 2. and de reformat.
cap. 28.

36 Matrimony contracted, not consummated is dissolved by the solemn
profession of religion by either party. sess. 24. de sacram. Matrimon. can. 6.

37 There is a Purgatory, sess. 25. decret. de purgat.

38 The souls which reign with Christ do offer up their prayers to God for
men. sess. 25. decret. de innocatione sanctorum.

39 It is good and profitable humbly to call upon the saints forenamed, and to
fly to their prayer, help, and furtherance, for the obtaining of benefits, [or
blessings] from God by his son Jesus Christ our Lord. d. decret. de inuocat.

40 Veneration and honor are due to the relics of the Saints Sess. 25.
decret. de inuocat. venerat. and reliq. sanctorum.

41 The Images of Saints, and other sacred monuments are not honored without
profit, etc. The memories [or monuments] of the Saints are not frequented in
vain for the obtaining of their help. d decret. de venerat.

42 The Images of Christ, and the Virgin Mary, and other Saints are to be had
and retained especially in Churches, and due honor and veneration is to be
given them, d. sess. 25. de sacris Imaginum.

43 The power of granting indulgences was committed by Christ to the Church,
and the use of them is helpful to Christian people. d. sess. 25. decret. de
indulgent.

CHAP. XII.
That many Articles of the faith of the Church of Rome are false and erroneous.



The aforesaid Articles or propositions are false and erroneous.

The aforesaid Articles or propositions are articles of the faith of the Church
of Rome.

Therefore some of the Articles or propositions of the faith of the Church of
Rome are false and erroneous.

Touching these propositions, that they are articles of the says of the Church
of Rome, it is evident, because we find them in the Council of Trent,
propounded to be believed of all Christians. Are these all, will some man say,
wherein we dissent from them, and which we reject as erroneous? No, there are
many other and some of them of no small moment. But I hold these only needful
to be debated: because the other so depend upon these, that if these be false,
none of them can be true. For example, It is said article 36. that there is a
purgatory, if this cannot be proved, then it is false, that the Saints in
Purgatery are helped by the suffrages of the faithful, or sacrifice of the
altar: which yet is delivered as an article of faith in that decree. Again, it
is affirmed article 32. that Christ appointed his Apostles and their successors
to offer his body and blood under the signs of bread and wine. If there be no
such commandment of our Saviors, then 1 There is no Mass. 2 The virtue of
the bloody sacrifice is not applied by the sacrifice of the Mass. 3 The
sacrifice of the Mass is not truly propitiatory. All which are propounded for
Articles of says by the forenamed Council, sess. 22. de sacrificio Messae. I
might say the like of many other points, but these may suffice.



The saving truth [or verity] taught by Christ and his Apostles Council. Trid.
Sess 4. decret. de Can. Script.
is contained (says the Council) in written books [or in the Scriptures] or
in unwritten traditions.

In this proposition or Article we must understand, that the Scriptures and
traditions are made diverse parts of that record, wherein the saving truth is
contained: so that neither of these parts contains all, but the one some, the
other some, which appears plainly by the Council it self, where, describing
Traditions, it says, that They are not written, that They were received by word
of mouth from the Apostles and were delivered to them either by our Savior, or
by his spirit, and have been so conveyed from hand to hand to the present
Church. And indeed if this were not the Councils meaning, they said nothing at
all against us: who make no question, but that the Christians, which lived
presently after the Apostles, did truly gather diverse points out of the
Scriptures, which have worthily been received and maintained from time to
time. Such for instances, were these points; that our Lord Jesus is true God,
that the holy Ghost is true God, that our Savior Christ consists of two
distinct natures, that He is but one person, not two. These points the
Christians rightly drew out of the Scriptures. For they be not expressed there
in so many words: and these were acknowledged to be Articles of faith by the
four first general Councils against Arius, Macedonius, Eutiches, and
Nestorius. Of this kind there are many traditions in the Church, and will daily
be more, as it shall please God to bless the labors of his servants in the
reading and understanding of the Scriptures. Of these we dispute not, but only
of such, as are not comprised in the Scriptures.

truth, but saving truth: which, in all likelihood, was put into the decree,
because we grant that some things concerning rites and ceremonies, were
delivered by Bellar de verbo Dei non scripto l. 4 c 3. Sect Secundo dissidemus
our Lord or his Apostles, which are not recorded in the Scriptures, as
Bellarmine confesses.

the saving truth, taught by Christ and his Apostles, we must inquire whether
they mean universally and wholly whatsoever our Savior and his Apostles
taught, not any one sentence excepted; or only so much, as was intended for
the perpetual use of the Church: That it means absolutely all saving truth
so taught, it may be probably gathered out of the very words of the Council.
For it says, that The preaching of Christ and his Apostles is the fountain of
all saving truth; and by and by adds, which truth is contained in written
books and unwritten traditions: which is all one, as if the Council should
have said in plain terms, All saving truth taught by Christ and his Apostles
is contained in written books and unwritten traditions.



1 All saving truth taught by Christ and his Apostles, is recorded for future
ages.

2 Some saving truth is contained in written books.

3 Some saving truth is comprehended in unwritten traditions.

The two latter propositions, viz. the second and third, are manifestly in that
article of the Council: the first of the three is necessarily employed: For if
some things taught by them remain not to posterity, then all saving truth so
taught, is not to be found in the Scripture and tradition, because some of it
is not at all recorded. In the second proposition: that, Some truth taught by
Christ and his Apostles is contained in the Scripture: we wholly agree with
them, and say farther in particular: that, All such truths are containd
therein, as the Lord appointed for the salvation of the Elect in all ages. And
this is the meaning of our Divines, when they say; that, All things necessary
to salvation are comprehended in the Scriptures. Which is manifest by Dr.
Reynolds: for, D. Reynolds proface to his six conclusions, at conclusion
first. D Whitaker de script. q. 6. c. 6.
saying; that, The Lord teaches the Church all things necessary to salvation,
he expounds necessary to salvation, thus; which lead the faithful to
salvation and life. And Dr. Whitaker, propounding our opinion of the same
matter, in the same manner, interprets, necessary to salvation, in these
words; by the way of life: signifying thereby; that, Those things are necessary
to salvation, which teach us the way to everlasting life. Reverend B. Jewel
speaks to the same purpose; B. Jewels Apol. part.. 2. c. 9. diuis. 1.
that, The Scriptures do fully comprehend all things whatsoever be needful
for our health: and that they be the very might and strength of God to attain
to salvation.

Bellarmine dealt falsely and De verbo Dei non scripte l. 4. l. 3. Sect.
Controversia.
deceitfully when he propounded the question. The controversy (says he)
betwixt us and the Heretics, is, that we say, The whole doctrine necessary to
faith and manners is not contained in the Scriptures expressly; and therefore
besides the written word of God, there is also an unwritten word of God
required; that is to say: Divine and Apostolical traditions. Wherefore I will
leave Bellarmine with his frauds, and debate the point as it is delivered in
the Council of Trent.

All saving truth, taught by Christ and his Apostles, is recorded for future
ages, Bellarmine brings no proof: and yet he could not choose but see, that
there is no necessity in the point it self, why we should take it for true.
For it might well be, that our Savior and his Apostles taught some things,
which tended to the salvation of some particular men, not of all men, and
therefore might be left vnrecorded without any loss, or damage, to the Church.
Therefore we may justly call for proof of a point so uncertain, that is made
by Bellarmine a matter of faith.

Some saving truth is comprehended in tradition. For the better understanding
and clearing whereof, we are first to learn, what unwritten traditions are.
Which the Council of Trent teaches us. Unwritten traditions, are things
endicted by our Council. Trident. Sess. 4. decret. de canon script.
Savior, by word of mouth, or by the holy Ghost, and kept in the Church by
continual succession. We may content our selves with this description, without
seeking any explication out of Bellarmine. or any other, because Bellarmines
definition, that, A tradition is a doctrine, not written by the first author
thereof, is so far from making the meaning of the Council of Trent plain,
that indeed, it does rather more obscure Bellarm. de verb. De^l 4. c. 2. Sect.
Vocatur.
it. The Council sets down no distribution of traditions but this; that,
some of them concern faith some manners. But Bellarmine, wearieth himself and
his Reader, with a number of distrib^^ions, which, as I said of his
description, are of no use, but to darken the question. Tradition being thus
understood, I say, that third proposition is false, and the contradictory
thereof, true. No saving truth, taught by Christ or his Apostles is contained
in unwritten traditions: which may thus appear: If no part of the Scripture
refer us to tradition, for some part of Gods word, not contained in the said
Scriptures, then have we no reason to seek for any part thereof in tradition.
For the Scriptures do send us to the scriptures for the knowledge of saving
truth, Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life. And the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 15. says: that, The 2 Timothy 3.
15.
Scripture is able to make us wise to salvation. And would not the scripture,
trow we, have sent us to tradition for supply of that which was wanting in it,
if there had been any supply to be had therein? For, it was as easy and as
orderly for the Scripture to refer us to tradition, as to it self: and as
well beseeming the wisdom and providence of God, to have sent us to both parts
of his word by the Scriptures, as to the one of them: yea, it was a great deal
more needful, For no man could doubt, but he was to have recourse to the
Scriptures, because they were known to be the word of God. But who could have
imagined that the Lord God, teaching us so plentifully in the Scriptures, would
leave out some part of the saving truth, and not so much as give us any inkling
thereof, nor direct us where we might find it.

Bellarmine: Bellarm. de verb. Dei non scripto l. 4. c. 5. Sect. Ac primum.
who made choice of the best places, that had been, or could be alleged in
this matter. The first whereof is thus to be concluded.

Those things which our Savior spoke of, Ioh. 16. 12. and Ioh. 16. 12. and 21.
25.
21. 25. Act. 1. 3. are comprehended in tradition. For they are not written:
and it is not credible, that the Apostles which heard them did not deliver them
to the Church. Surely they were neither so envious that they would not, nor so
forgetful that they could not.

But those things which he spoke in those places, were saving truths.

Therefore some saving truths, taught by Christ, or his Apostles, are contained
in tradition.

at the most probable, as they are.



Either our Sauiors speeches the^e mentioned are contained in tradition, or
else they remain not at all to posterity.

But they remain to posterity: for the Apostles did not omit the recording of
them, since they were neither envious nor forgetful.

Therefore our Saviors speeches there mentioned are contained in tradition.

Bellar. does but play the sophister by begging the question, and proves
nothing. Secondly, I answer, that if I should grant him that he beggeth, yet
his p^oposition would be false. For the disjunction is naught. What if I say,
those speeches of our Savior neither perished, nor remain in tradition, but
are recorded in some part of the Apostles writings in the new Testime^^. For
since our Savior promised Ioh. 16. 13. to send them his spirit which should
lead them into all truth, and Ioh. 14. 26 bring to their remembrance all
things, which he had told the^. and performed what he promised, Acts 2. 3. It
is more then likely, that they did commend the things to posterity, which he
caused the^ to remember: for why else were they brought to their remembrance?
But we find no other course, that eu^r they took to deliver the Gospel to
posterity, but writing. Why then should these points be kept unwritten? Su^ely
they are neither greater mysteries, nor smaller matters, then some that are
written.

Bellarmine tell whether those matters be recorded in any of the Apostles
writings or no, unless he know what they were, as he will not for very shame
say he does.

But If we doubt of it, he would make us believe we accuse the Apostles of
envy or negligence. God forbid. We will grant him any thing almost, rather
then lay such an imputation upon those glorious instruments of our salvation.
We have a better way to answer then so, namely, that Bellarmine comes short
of his reckonig, either of negligence or envy. What needs that? It may well
be, that they did not record every one of our Savior speeches, because they
had no commission to leave them on record: and they were to do according to
their commission; being to deliver the word of God, as they were inspired by the
holy Ghost, not to set down every thing they could remember, as men do that
follow their own natural discretion.

Bellarmine any way make good the assumption of the principal Syllogism
negative, that Those things, which our Lord spoke of in those places, were
saving truths, except he can certainly tell, what they were.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Bellarmines second and third Arguments to prove unwritten traditions.

BEllarmines second argument in the place above named, must be thus ordered. a
Bellar. de verbo Dei non script. lib. 4. cap. 5. sect. Secundum test^. mon^im.


The ordinances which the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 11. 2, are not written;
for they concern the manner of praying and receiving the Sacraments: and these
we find not written any where.

The ordinances which the Apostle there speaks of, are saving truths; for he
commends the Corinthians for keeping them.

Therefore some saving truths are contained in unwritten tradition.



Well, admit it were true: yet is, the proposition uncertain, as the proof
shows; For out of doubt, it is no^ manifest of it self. The proof lies
thus.

Whatsoever was delivered to the Apostles, and is not found written any where,
that is kept in unwritten tradition. The ordinances the Apostle speaks of,
were delivered by him, and are not found written any where. Therefore the
ordinances the Apostle speaks of, are kept in unwritten tradition.


Bellarmine. For every precept of the Apostle, the keeping whereof deserves
commendation: it is not therefore a saving truth. Obedience to any
commandment, or advise of an Apostle touching but a rite or ceremony: yea the
smallest matter that can be imagined, though it be no saving truth, deserves
due commendation: and Bellermin has nothing else in this disputation that may
be applied to the proof of that point.

But say we grant Bellarmine, that the precepts signified verse. 2. are saving
truths. (as we may do with great likely hood, understanding thereby the
doctrine delivered in the former part of the Epistle to that 11. Chapter.) What
will it avail him, seeing the assumption then will convince the proposition of
falsehood, because the precept is there written? Therefore this second argument
is to as small purpose, as the former.

Those things which the Apostle disposed, 1. Cor. 11. 34. Bellar. de verbo Dei
non scripto. lib. 4. cap. 5. sect. alteram quastio^em.
are contained in tradition; for we find them not written any where. But the
things he there disposed were saving truth. Therefore some saving truth is
contained in tradition.
Both the faults of the former proposition are in this also; first, that he
takes it for granted, that whatsoever the Apostles taught is recorded: which
we always deny. Secondly, that he says confidently, these things are not
written, and yet knows not what they are: so that he may find them, and not
know of it.

Let us pass by the proposition: yet will Bellarmine come short of his
conclusion, because the assumption is full of doubt; for how will he be able to
prove that the things disposed by the Apostle, were saving truth. He confesses
that some of them were matters belonging to rits and ceremonies: but he telleh
us, with all that Catholics worthily think that he delivered also some greater
matters, concerning the ordination of Ministers, the sacrifice of the Alter,
and the matter and form of other Sacraments: and he adds, that The
heretics cannot disprove them.

Bellarmins Catholics: we will set his reason in frame.

Whatsoever Catholics worthily think, and heretics cannot disprove, that is
to be holder. for true. But that the Apostles disposed of those weighty
matters Catholics worthily think, and the heretics cannot disprove.
Therefore that the Apostles disposed of those weighty matters, it is to be
holden for truth.
A stout argument, and well worthy such Catholics who sees not the
absurdity of the mayor? Truth is not to be measured by their affirmation or
conceit, and our unableness to disprove, but by the adaequation or full
agreement of the thing,, and our apprehension of it. For a man then only
speaks the truth of a thing, when he speaks as the thing is indeed.

But the assumption presumes we cannot disprove it. That were hard. Why should
not our saying, we think he did not mean those matters, be as good a
disproofe of it, as their saying you think he did, is a proof? Such answers
are good enough for such arguments. But surely me thinks, we may bring some
likelihood of reason for our opinion. For who would imagine that the Apostle
would spend so many lines as he does in this chapter, about matters of so small
importance, as long hair, and bare heads, which were not for the perpetual
practice of the Church, as experience shows: and put off matters of so great
weight till his coming to them, which might have been never.

Bellarmins Catholics worthily do, let them hear what Chrysostom says upon
the place. He Chrysostom. Homil. 28. ad 1. Cor. 11.
means either some other things, or the same that he has mentioned. For
seeing it was likely that they would bring other cases and he could not
redress althings by letters: Let those things (says he) that I have
admonished you of be observed; and if any other thing need redress, let is be
referred till my coming. He speaks (as I said) either of the same thing, or
some matter not greatly urgent.

He speaks (says Theophilact) of some other faults of Theophilact. ad 1.
Cor. 11.
theirs, which had need of correcting, or of some which he had mentioned. It is
likely (says he) that some men are praparing to defend themselves against that
which I have said, but in the mean time let thom observe that I have charged
them to keep, ad 1. Cor 11.

When he had written of those things that were more necessary, he reserueth the
rest, for his praesence with them.

The Interlinear gloss expounds it thus: Other things concerning the
Sacrament I will order when I come; but you might not be without direction for
those things that I have delivered. ad 1. Cor. 11.

Other things (says Lombard) which perteine to order in the same Sacrament. I
will order when I come. ad 1. Cor. 11. Other things which are not of so great
danger, I will order ^^resence. Thomas ad 1. Cor. 11.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of some other Arguments of Bellarmine to the same purpose.

LET us see if Bellarmines fourth reason be any better then the former.

That which the Apostle commanded the Thessalonians to Bellar. ubi supra Sect.
tertium.
keep, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. is contained in tradition: for it was not written, but
delivered by word of mouth.

That which the Apostle commanded the Thessalouians to keep, was a saving
faith.

Therefore some saving truth is contained in tradition.

Bellarmines begging. We must deny as before, that whatsoever the Apostles
taught is recorded and come to posterity.

To the proposition I answer in particular, that being understood of that time
when the Apostle writ that Epistle, it is true: he had then delivered some
things by word of mouth, and not written them: and those he commands them to
keep. But what proof can Bellarmine make, that those things were not written
afterward?

The assumption is not easily to be proved, that those things were saving
truth. Why does not Bellarmine tell us what they were? Me thinks he dares not
so much as guess at them: otherwise he would let us know at the least, what
his Catholics worthily take them to be. Would any man dally thus in a matter
of faith, to be believed upon pain of damnation?

Bellarmine will make amends for the want of weight in his reasons, by the
number of them: and he propounds his fifth thus to be delivered. Bellar. ubi
supra sect. quaitam.


That which was committed to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 20. and 2. Tim. 2. 1. 2. is
contained in tradition.

That which was there committed to Timothy, is a saving 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. Tim.
2. 1. 2.
truth.

Therefore some saving truth is contained in tradition.

Here he beggeth again as before: but we cannot grant, that whatsoever the
Apostles preached, is remaining upon record to posterity.

If that were granted: yet should I think the proposition no sufficient
warrant for an Article of faith. Therefore Bellarmine offers proof of it on
this manner:

That which Timothy had heard of Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 6. 20. and 2. Tim. 2. 1.
2, and was to deliver to faithful men able to teach other also, that is
contained in tradition.

But that which was committed to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 20. and 2. Tim. 2. 1. 2,
he had heard of Saint Paul, and was to deliver to faithful men able to teach
other also.

Therefore that which was committed to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 20. and 2. Tim. 2.
1. 2, is contained in tradition.

Bellarmine tells us, that by those things so heard, and so to be committed,
the understanding of the sense of the scriptures, and other doctrine is
signified: so that the whole force of his Argument lies in this
interpretation, which he never offers to prove. Therefore unless we will
take his bare word for proof, we are as far to seek, as we were before.
Now that we have no reason to do so, I think it may appear by those things,
which I will now propound to the consideration of all reasonable men.

First then, I would know o^ Bellarmine whether by Understanding of the sense,
he mean general rules for the understanding of it, or the sense of particular
places? Secondly, I demand whether he delivered to him the sense o^ every
place of Scripture, or of some only? Whether he answer this or that; I ask
thirdly: what is become of those rules and expositions? How will he prove to
us, that they have been continued from time to time till now? If they have not
been continued, what have we to do with them, who dispute only of such
traditions as are in the possession, and use of the present Church?

Fourthly, is it likely, even in Bellarmines judgment, that Saint Paul would
take upon him to instruct Timothy in the sense of any place of Scripture, when
as the office of interpreting the Scripture is committed by the Council of
Trent to the Church, that is (as Bellarmine expounds it) to Peter and his
successors? Did he mean ambitiously to usurp Peter's office, or to send him
to Peter or his successors, to learn of them whether the interpretation he
had given were true or no. Those things which were committed to Timothy, were
saving truths: Bellarmine says nothing: which argues that he knew not what to
say. What reason have we then to imagine that they were saving truths, or that
this argument concludes any thing for the doctrine of the Council of Trent
concering traditions?



Those things which John had to write, 2. Ioh. 11, and Bellar. ubi supra Sect.
ultimum testimonium.
3. Ioh. 14. are contained in tradition; for he says, he would not write them.

But those things which he had then to write, were saving truths taught by the
Apostles.

Therefore some saving truths taught by the Apostles are contained in
tradition.

I am enforced here also to repeat my former answer: that Bella^mine still
takes it for granted, that whatsoever the Apostles taught is continued to
posterity; which we deny: and no papist can prove.

His assumption or minor is to weak to bear up the weight of an Article of
faith, unless he be able to ^^ll (...) certainly what the things were which
the Apostle would not write: and to whom he did, or at the least, that he did
afterward deliver them to some body, from whom the Church has received them.
Till we know what they were, how shall we be sure they were part of the saving
truth?

CHAP. XV.
Of two other arguments of Bellarmine.



That there are Scriptures: that these we have he they is ^. Bellar de verbo
Dei non scripto cap. 4 Sect. quarto, quinto, Soxio.
contained in tradition; For we cannot find them in the Scriptures.

But that there are Scriptures; that these we have are they, is part of saving
truth taught by Christ and his Apostles.

Therefore some saving truths taught by Christ and his Apostles, are contained
in tradition.

Bellarmines arguments, that he can find no place of Scripture, that sends us
to tradition for any part of saving truth, taught by our Lord or his Apostles;
We might therefore conclude, that there are no such traditions, without
troubling our selves any further. But that we may dit up the mouths of the
Papists, we will bestow a little time and pains in these arguments.



There are Scriptures: These we have be they, are formally, that is expressly
contained either in the Scriptures or tradition; But this say we is false: they
are contained formally in neither; where then shall we find them? Radically
and originally in the Scriptures themselves: which of themselves afford just
occasion to all men to conceive, both that There are Scriptures, and that These
are they; They are contained formally in the apprehension of every man's
understanding that believes them: and that this belief is divine faith, not
humane conjecture it appears, because it is wrought in men by a special
providence of God, which persuades and draws men to acknowledge the things
to be as they are in themselves: and is farther grounded upon the divine
authority, vertually affirming that they are both true indeed.

Bellarmine slandereth us: and Bellar de verbo Dei non scripto lib. 3. cap. 5.
Sect. Norum and cap. 9. sect. quod (...).
after him Mr. F^sher, and other. But we only attribute to that special
providence the office of in lightening, and moving the understanding in
lightened, to give assent to the books of Scripture, that they are the word of
God: as indeed and truth they are. Now to this assent it moves us by many
reasons fit and effectual for such a work: as namely by the continual
consent and testimony of the Church: by the matter delivered in the books
them selves: by the style or manner of delivering it, and the like as diverse of
our divines have showed at large; and that this assent of ours is a true faith,
it is very manifest: because it conceiueth of the thing delivered as in truth
it is: which is the very rule of truth, and wherein the nature of truth
consists.

S. John, who out lived them all, and writ after them all. As for S. John, he
neither might nor could do it, because that was only Peter's office or his
successors, to declare which were Scriptures, and which were not, as we learned
out of Bellar. Chap. 3. 11. 9. P^^ar. ubi supra sect, d^nique.




This Proposition, There is no word of God besides that which is written, is
contained in tradition not written.

This proposition is a saving truth taught by Christ and his Apostles.

Therefore some saving truth taught by Christ and his Apostles, is contained in
tradition not written.

First it is to be considered, that Bellarmine brings this assumption as a
proposition of ours, and from thence concludes for the Church of Rome against
us; For if he brought it as his own, and acknowledged by him for true, he
should thereby gain say the Council of Trent, affirming that There is some
part of the word of God contained in tradition, which is not to be found in the
Scriptures. But in this Bellarmine does us wrong: for although we say, that
there is no word of God but that which is contained in the Scriptures, as
Rellar. de verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. adipsi.
Bellarmin alleges out of Calvin. Instit. lib, 4. cap. 8. ^. 8.
Calvin; yet we say uot, that this proposition is a saving truth taught by
Christ and his Apostles: neither indeed need we say so; For by that proposition
we only deny that which the Counsel affirms, and set it down as a
contradictory thereto: and Bellarmine himself in the place for enamed brings
it to the same end. The reason of our denial is, that the Scripture does no
where send us to tradition, nor has any word to that purpose; as has appeared
in the former disputation. And this reason is very sufficient: because nothing
is to be received for an Article of faith, but that which is taught in the word
of God.

Bellarmines judgment, then the doctrine of the Church of Rome in his
judgment is salfe. For the Council of T^ent teaches, that There is some word
of God contained in tradition; but this proposition affirms, that There is no
word of God besides that which is written. If Bellarmine would father it upon
us, he accuses us falsely. For we never sai^ nor thought that that proposition
was contained in tradition; but perhaps he thinks it will follow upon that
we say: but in so thinking, he thinks idly; for we do no more hereby, but
deny that which they say: and neither do nor need affirm that it is
contained either in the Scriptures, or in tradition. It is enough for us in
matter of faith, to refuse whatsoever is not taught in the Scriptures.

There is no word of God besides that which is written, is either true or
false; we grant it: because it is certainly true, that in every contradiction
properly so called, the one proposition is true, the other false. What of this?
It will farther be said; If it be false, then the contradictory to it which we
hold, is true. We grant this too: what more? If this be true, it is contained
either in the Scripture, or in tradition. This we deny; It may be true, and
yet contained in neither of them; For the truth of this proposition is not
positive, whereby one thing is affirmed of, or joined to another: but negative,
by which one thing is denied of, or severed from another. Now propositions of
this kind are then true, when the things comprehended in them are indeed
severed the one from the other: for then the proposition speaks of the thing
as it is. Therefore it is enough to make this negative proposition true, that
the Scripture is silent in that which they affirm, and does not join Heb. 1.
5.
them together, as they do. And this is the ground of those negative
disputations we find in the Scriptures P. Jewels answ. to D^. Coals second
(...). let. O. P.
especially, To which of the Angels said be, etc. He that desires to see more
of this, may read the reverend Bishop Jewel in his answer to Dr. Cole.



CHAP. XVI.
An answer to those things which the Church of Rome brings against the
necessity of separating from it.

have thought good to examine two principal motives of theirs, by which they
mis-lead many that are simple or careless; and in handling of them, I will
take the same course that hitherto I have followed, for the more plainness and
certainty in judging what is true, what false.

The former of the two is this:

Every man must receive his faith by the teaching of the Romish Church

That it may appear what force there is in this to conclud any thing for the
Church of Rome against the question hitherto disputed, I will apply it to the
matter in question, and answer to it accordingly.

They that must receive their faith by the teaching of the Church of Rome, must
join in faith with that Church.

Every man must receive his faith by the teaching of the Church of Rome.

Therefore every man must join in faith with the Church of Rome.

The proposition or first part of this reason I acknowledge for true: because
the teaching of the Church of Rome gives being to the faith of that Church.

The assumption is false, being grounded upon that false foundation, that The
Pope of Rome is to feed the whole Church as Peter's successor, by determining
what is matter of faith, what is not. But this appeared to be manifestly false,
chap. 8. and 10. wherein I propounded and handled the question.

The second devise is commonly delivered by way of question. Where was your
Church before Luther? Now this question implies a negation; as if they should
say: The Protestants Church was not before Luther. This must be applied to the
point in question, after this sort.

Every man must join in faith either with the Church of Rome, or with the
Protestant Church.

But no man may join in faith with the Protestants Church.

Therefore every man must join in faith with the Church of Rome.

Let the proposition pass for true: to which we may justly add an assumption
contrary to theirs; No man may join in faith with the Church of Rome: and this
assumption is already made good by the foregoing disputation, through this
whole treatise: which has showed that the faith of the Church of Rome is false
and erroneous.

Every man is bound to join in faith with the Protestants Church. For our
faith is nothing else but Every article or proposition to be assented to, or
believed as true upon the authority of God the reuealer of them by his holy
servants the Prophets, and Apostles. The Articles which we assent to or believe
in this sort, are either expressly set down in the Scriptures in direct
words, so that the sense of them cannot reasonably be doubted of: or else
gathered, and concluded from such places by necessary consequence: so that if
the one be true, the other must needs be true also. Whatsoever proposition is
not of this nature, we allow not for an article of faith, how likely soever it
seem to be. Now in this faith of ours there can be no danger: seeing
whatsoever proposition is plainly expressed in the Scripture, or necessarily
concluded from it, is undoubtedly the divine revelation, which is the only
foundation of true faith.

More particularly I say touching the said assumption, that it must be
understood of the Protestants faith, so far forth as it differs from the
faith of the Church of Rome, else by it they should dissuade men from the faith
of their own Church.

Besides, It is to be considered that this assumption supposes, that the
Protestants have a faith opposite to the faith of the Church of Rome; Which is
utterly false. All the opposition we make to them is, by refusing their faith,
not by delivering any of our own, and by ansswering to their arguments: so
that we hold the negative part of the contradiction, in all points, wherein we
dissent from them, although in some we add a contrary affirmative, where the
Scripture affirms that which they deny. For example, they say The Pope is
Gods Vicar. This we oppose by saying, that The divine revelation does not teach
us, that the Pope is Gods Vicar. Again, they deliver this for an Article of
faith: that Concupiscence in the regenerate, is not properly sin. To this we
answer by way of opposition as to the former: The divine revelation does not
say, that Concupiscence in the regenerate is not properly sin; Yea in this
point we say further: the Scripture says it is properly sin: but our
opposition to them in this point stands in this, that the Scripture does not
say it is not properly sin, so that though there were no word to the
contrary of it in Scripture, yet that propos^^on of theirs were utterly false.
By which it is manifest, that in those things wherein we dissent from them, we
have not articles of faith contrary to the articles of faith which they
propound: but only deny, that Those they would thrust upon us are articles of
faith.

Stapleton and Wright do,) that Our religion is negative; we answer, that if
they mean we hold no articles of faith which are affirmative, they charge us
untruly; for we consent with them in many affirmative articles of faith. As
for those points wherein we dissent from them, it is no fault in us to hold the
negative; for there is no other way for us to oppose the errors they bring for
matters of faith, but by denying them to be matters of faith.

So the^ this is that they avouch in the former assu^ption:

No man may join in faith with the Protestants Churches, in those points
wherein they dissent from the Faith of the Church of Rome.

The reason is, because the faith of the Protestants in those points is false;
which they thus prove:

The true faith has been professed so publicly in all ages since the
Apostles, that the professors of it from age to age may be named.

The Protestants faith has not been so publicly professed in all ages since
the Apostles, that the professors of it from age to age may be named.

Therefore the Protestants faith is not the true faith.

Where as Divine and infallible faith is not built upon deduction out of humane
history, but diuene revelation; as is well observed by the learned and
reverend D. Featly And how can that be any foundation of divine faith, when it
is not divine authority, nor free from error: but humane only, and subject
to error: yea among all kinds of humane authority of least credit? Our of
doubt then the Papists would never have pursued this course so eagerly, but for
some especial advantage to their cause, which in all likely hood is this; that
they saw well enough, it was not for their religion to abide the trial by
Scripture in those articles of faith. But what says the Prophet Isaiah? If
they refuse the Law Isa. 8. 20. 8
and the testimony, it is because there is no light in them.



For proof of our denial we allege the experience of all ages: by which it
is manifest, that some articles of faith have been obseru^ed and concluded out
of the Scriptures from time to time, and were not all known and believed for
articles of says at once. I may bring for instance those great points debated
and determined in the 4 first general Counsels. For certainly if The
godhead of our blessed Savior, and the holy Ghost, the distinction of the
divine and human natures of our Lord Jesus, the Unity of his person, had
Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches, and Nestorius would not have durst to speak of
them so wickedly and heretically as they did; neither would the Church have
assembled Counsels to advise of the points, but have cast out those wretches
as enemies of the faith. The like might be said of Pelagius touching grace: and
of many other points of no small importance.

To come nearer to this our age, there is no Papist of any reading and
judgment, but will confess that diu^rs propositions in tholate Council of
Trent, which ended since I was borne, were never received for articles of
faith, till they were never received for articles of faith, till they were
propounded for such by that Council.





The professors of the Protestants faith in such things As they dissent from
the Church of Rome in, cannot be showed in all ages from time to time since our
Savior Christ and his Apostles.

If we call for a proof of this: they bid us show a beadroll of their names
that were professors of our faith; what if we cannot? will they conclude
thereupon that it cannot be done? there may be a Catalogue, though we cannot
show it; Which cannot seem strange to any man that shall consider, that the
Papists had for many years, yea, ages the whole sway and command of
Christendom, and labored all they could to make away (if it had been
possible,) not only the writings, but the memory of all such as made any kind
of opposition to their doctrine or proceedings; Yet by the gracious and mighty
providence of God it has come to pass, that the registers of their own bloody
persecutors have by the worthy pains of some of our writers, afforded the world
a view of the names, of many holy Martyrs and confessors, which from time to
time have refused as we do now, to acknowledge many of the points wherein we
dissent from the Church of Rome: and it cannot be looked for, that we should
show that all of them have been denied, because many of them were first bred
and hatched in the late Council of Trent, and were never articles of faith
till then. Wherefore to return to my first conclusion: since the faith of the
Church of Rome is erroneous, both in the foundation of it: which is the
authority of the Church, and in many particular articles thereof; I may boldly
affirm, that it is to be shunned as a perilous rock, whereon many have
suffered shipwreck of their eternal salvation.

CHAP. XVII.
That the faith of the Church of Rome is to refused upon pain of damnation.

Upon pain of damnation: and then prove, that the faith of the Church of Rome
is to be refused upon so grievous a penalty.

Upon pain of damnation, are not so to be understood, as if I took upon me
to pronounce sentence of condemnation against all that believe as the Church of
Rome teaches: but I would thereby give all men to understand, that the
believing of that doctrine as matter of faith, is a thing in it self damnable,
and such as makes a man liable to damnation. How it shall fall out with
particular men in the event, I neither know, nor mean to enquire. Only I say
again, that their mis-beliefe is a sin, which sets them in the state of
damnation.

an erroneous faith is damnable. Wherefore else do they thunder out so many
I^ai. 8. 20.
curses in the Council of Trent, against all that shall conceive otherwise of
the matters of faith determined by that Council, then is therein decreed?
Notwithstanding that I may the better persuade all men to keep good watch, for
fear they be suddenly surprised, or unawares intrapt by the great army of
locusts, the Priests and Jesuits, which have almost covered the Land from sea
to sea, I will bestow a little pains to give them warning of the danger.



That which makes a man unclean in Gods sight, has a fitness to procure
damnation. For unclean things are unmeet for the presence of God: and
consequently are meet for damnation.

But the faith of the Church of Rome makes a man unclean in the sight of God.

For it is erroneous in so high a nature, that it makes a man guilty of
treason against God, by installing the Pope in the Throane of God, giving him
power and authority to determine as a judge what is matter of faith, what not,
without commission or warrant from God, as I have showed in the former part of
this disputation; Neither do they only give him authority to interpret the
Scriptures: but also allow him to set up a forge, where he hammers what he
list, and venteth it to be received upon pain of damnation, for the word of
the ever living 2. These. 2. 4.
God. What is it To sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God,
if this be not? And are not they accessaries to this high treason that
acknowledge this authority, and yield obedience to it? How can it then
reasonably be denied, that there is a worthiness and fitness in the faith of
the Church of Rome to procure damnation? hereupon it follows, that every one
that joins in faith with the Church of Rome is liable to damnation.

You shall put nothing to the word which I command you. The penalty is
expressed. Deuteronomy. 4. 2 and 12 30. Revel. 21. 18.
If any man shall add to those things, God shall add to him the plagues that
are written in this Book^. But more plain. The Lord shall send them strong
delusions, that they 2. These. 2. 11. 12.
should believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the
truth. Behold the Lord wrappeth them up in damnation, by his sentence that
believe lies: (that is) false and erroneous doctrine not agreeable to the
truth, which they ought to believe. What is wanting then to make the faith of
the Church of Rome damnable, and the professors thereof liable to damnation:
when both the thing it self deserves it, and the Lord has decreed, that they
which believe it, should have according to their desert?

and secretly to undermine the very foundation of our salvation: namely the
Mediatorship of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But this (as I take it) will
more plainly appear, and be more thoroughly enforced against them, in the
particular handling of the several Articles; to which I reserve it.

John to spend so many words in delivering prophecies for some three years and
a half in the end of the world, and leave so many years betwixt unspoken of,
wherein such strange matters have befallen the Church.

take himself to be either God, or any man sent from God. This appeared
plainly in that cousening compannion Mahomet: who yet was not so mad, as (in
their opinion) Antichrist will be, to require that all men should acknowledge
and adore him for God.

CHAP. XVIII.
A conclusion of the whole Treatise by way of exhortation, to separate from the
Church of Rome.

I Said a little more in that matter of Antichrist, then I purposed to do when
I entered into it: for it was my meaning only to touch it by the way: and that
rather because I thought it would be looked for, then that I found it greatly
necessary; for what need I seek any other reasons to enforce a necessity of
separating from the Church of Rome, then those I have already alleged?
Therefore I will now add a few words of exhortation, and so end both the
readers, and mine own labor.

It is reported by Irenaeus, and by Eusebius, of the holy Apostle Irenaeus
contra hares. lib. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Saint John, that when he spied Ceri^thus the heretic in the bath where he
was, he made all the have he could to be gone, thinking it dangerous to be
under the same roof with him. Yea the very Heathen (as Tully says) being at
sea in a sore storm, were much afraie they should Tully de natura Deorum lib.
3.
have been cast away, because they had Diagoras the Atheist abord amomg them.
I would to God some Protestants were as charie of their souls, as, (I say not
the Apostle) but the Heathen of their bodies: and had as much care to provide
for their eternal salvation, as they had to procure their temporal safety;
neither the Apostle, nor the Heathen had any thing to do with the impiety of
Ceri^thus or Diagoras: and yet both he and they doubted some evil might befall
them, because they were in in the company of such profane wretches. And can
any Protestant imagine that he may be free from danger, though he join in
faith with the Pope of Rome? It cost Iehosophat dear, though he were otherwise
a good King, for going to war with Ahab against a common enemy. What said
Hauani the Seer? Would thou help the wicked, 2. Chr. 19. 2.
and love them that hate the Lord? therefore for this thing the wrath of the
Lord is upon thee.

What then may they look for, who like the Ladiceans Reu. 3. 16.
are lukewarm neither bote nor cold, altogther indifferent, whether they be
Papists or Protestants? They are in better case, yet not safe neither, who are
persuaded that Popery is erroneous, but do not think it so dangerous a
matter to be a Papist, that a man need flee out of the Romish Church, as Lot
did oun of Sodom. That I may pluck or thrust these men out, as the Angels did
Lot, I have undertaken this discovery of the danger, by laboring to inform
their judgment with the knowledge of the truth. I must now proceed to inflame
their affection with detestation of error. The glory of the understanding is
truth: the height of the affection zeal. To be zealous without knowledge, is
to fight without arms, like the Israelites, that had not a shield nor spare
amongst forty thousand of them. Judges 5. 8. To have knowledge without zeal,
is to have arms without courage, as the Ephraimites had. Psalm. 78. 9. Who went
up armed with bows, but turned their backs in the day of battle. In this
fight against Popery, you have need of know ledge; because your enemy is
subtle to deceive; of zeal, because your quarrel is great. For you are to
fight, not for your wives and children only, but also for your God, and your
religion: not against an error or two that disgrace your profession, like a
wen in a fair body: but against such an heretic, as like the disease in the
heart, will undermine and overthrow the whole state of the body.

For as Judas kissed his Lord and Master that thee might betray him; so the
Pope of Rome under a show of humility, has taken the honor of God to
himself, and pretending to be his factour, intends to rob and undo him. Will
he with the stubborn Jews in Mallachy ask me wherein? I will not answer him
as the Prophet does, In tithes and offerings. What are tithes and offerings to
supremacy and sovereignty? This, this is the robbery, the Sacrilege whereof we
accuse the Pope of Rome. If he had but taken from his fellow Bishops, and
appropriated to himself the honor and authority that is common to them with
him, we would have holden our peace: although this proud Haman could no way
have made recompense to the Church of Christ, for the loss she sustaineth
thereby. Yea, though he have with the evil servant in the Gospel imprisoned,
beaten, murdered his fellow servants for doing their masters work, we would as
we have done, in dure it with patience and silence. Shall I say more? Albeit he
had maintained, as he does, diverse foul and gross errors against the truth
of God, we would have contented our selves with dissenting from him therein,
without breach of the band of peace. But now so stands the case, that he has
claimed and usurped the prerogative of the great God of heaven and earth.
Should we now forbear to speak? Should we in such a case look for
commendation of modesty, and peaceablenesse? Have we no more zeal of the
glory of our father, our King, our God? Has the love of our most dear Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, deserved no more kindness at our hands? If we could be
so monstrously unthankful, the very stones in the Church walls, and the
becames in the roofes would cry out against us and him.

Ioh. 21. 15.
Bellarmine,) The rest of the Apostles were made subject to Peter, and his
successors the Bishops of Rome. O ridiculous conceit! O presumptious ambition!
was it not enough for you to trample on the necks of other Christians, many of
whom were (at the least) equal to the best of your Popes for learning and
pi^tie, but that you may bring the Apostles heads under your Idols girdle?

John lived by the record of Histories, till the year after our Lords birth
100; Saint Peter was (as it is also written) martired at Rome in the year 68:
therefore there were 32 years betwixt the death of Peter and John. In these 32
years (not to reckon Linus, who is thought to have bin Pope) there were 4
several Bishops of Rome, Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus, and Euaristus. By popish
divinity S. John was so subject to these successors of Peter, that he was to
receive from them assurance of the truth that he delivered: of them he was to
know whether his own Epistles were the word of God or not: yea whether they
were his own Epistles or not: they, or some of them were to assure him from
God, that his Revelation was from God, and not from the devil: if any doubt
arose about any sentence in his Gospel, Epistles, or Revelation he could not
know by divine faith, what the true meaning of the place was, but was to learn
that of Euaristus then Pope: whose office it was to deliver an interpretation
of the text to the Apostle, or to allow of the interpretation made by the
Apostle, if he judged it to be true. Poor S. John was an underling in all this
business, the Pope was Magister fac totum.

Peter, to whom before he was equal in authority and dignity: but also to
appoint him to lacky, (if occasion fell out) upon four Popes one after
another, to learn of them what was divine revelation, or the word of God, what
was not? Wherefore did thou solemnly promise thy Apostles, and John amongst
the rest, that thou would send them the comforter, the holy Spirit, to lead
them into, and to direct them in all truth? Alas it was a poor comfort for
them so to be taught by him, that they must be feign to travel or send to
Rome, to know whether he had taught them right or no. But who can be patient in
this indignity offered to the holy Spirit? Shall a wretched and ignorant man
(that I say no worse) sit in judgment to give sentence of thy divine Majesty,
whether thou have inspired thy servants with truth or no? Did thou instruct
the Apostles, as the devils amongst the heathen did their counterfit prophets,
that they either knew not what they uttered, or could not be assured what they
meaned, without the Pope like an Oracle made them understand themselves; as
Daniell told Nebuchadnezar his dream, and the interpretation thereof?

S. Peter (says Bellarmine) was made by Christ ordinary pastor of the whole
Church: his ossice was to determine what was matter of faith; The Bishops of
Rome. Peter's successors, have the same authority of ordinary pastourship
which he had; Whosoever will not be thus fed by Peter and his successors,
belongs not to the sheepefold of the Lord Jesus. This is the arch, whereon
the Popes supremacy is built. For the upholding of this, all the Romish
Clergy are in arms. If you hold not this, whatsoever you hold, you can be no
true Roman Catholic.

Bellarmine) consists in this very manner of government. This is the bo^d,
these the ligame^ts by which the whole body of their Church is coupled and knit
together. From the Pope thus feeding (that is teaching and governing) as from
the head, all life and motion is conveyed into the rest of that huge chaos;
take away the head, all life and motion cease, and the parts fall asunder one
from another, that it can no longer be accounted the Church it was, nor as they
hold any Church at all. We see the prophecy of the Apostle Paul fulfilled. God
has sent these men strong delusions to believe lies. 2. These. ^. 11.
For what greater delusion can there be, then for a man to believe that of
every Pope, that no Pope ever believed of himself, or of any of his
successors.

you away from opp^rtunity of study; the Lord in mercy to you, has commanded
us to labor in it: that your want may be supplied by o^r abundance. Now
especially he looks for this duty of us, because he will now especially
make trial of your knowledge and constancy.

Dothan, while you seek for the Prophet, whom you know not if you meet him.
As he that walks into the fields, where there grow as well poisonous weeds as
wholesome herbs, if he know not the one from the other, may as easily light
upon that which shall kill him, as that which shall nourish him. So he that is
ignorant what is true, what false in matters of faith, is as like to be led
into error that shall damn him, as to be taught truth that shall save him.

If then there be any desire in us to obey the commandment of God; if any
fear of erring to damnation; if any care of believing aright to salvation, let
us labor to understand the mystery of iniquity in the Romish faith: that
knowing it, we may abhor it, and may avoid: avoiding it we may embrace the
love of the truth, and be saved. What is it that leads thee out of the way to
destruction? does the glorious outward show of the Popish Churches blind or
dazzle thine eyes? It may perhaps admit some excuse in children, that they have
been deceived by such toys and gewgawes; But it is ridiculous and
intolerable for men to run after sights and shadows. Surely if thou had
lived in our Savior Christ's days, or his Apostles times, thou would have
chosen the Temple and the beauty thereof, with the Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, rather then the barren mountains or wilderness with our Lord and
his Disciples.

What shall it profit a man though he win the whole world, if he loose his
own soul? Antigone Math. 8. 36.
in Sophocles was so wise, that when her sister Ismente demanded of her how she
durst bury her brother Polinices body against Creons commandment, she answered
her resolutely, like a noble Lady, that she knew it was a duty acceptable to
the gods, with whom she was to live longer, then upon the earth with men: and
therefore had more care to please them. Shall not this Lady, this heathen,
condemn many men, many Christians, that choose rather to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, then to reign eternally in the glory of the Lord Jesus
in his heavenly Kingdom?

with a few that followed our Lord, for all his preaching, to the end of his
life; what greater consent could there be? all the Jewish Clergy, Priests,
Levites, Scribes, and Pharisees agreed as one man, to maintain their own
superstitions, and keep down the religion of our Lord Jesus; These men the
people depending upon them, were, and had been time out of mind the visible
Church. Oh that they had been as wise and learned as our papists now are, to
have called to our Savior for a Catalogue of their names, that had from time
to time professed the Religion which he sought to bring in, contrary to that
they held. doubtless he must have been feign (unless he had used his divine
knowledge) to confess, that at the least, for the last 300 years, there was
no such beadroll of names to be found. I confessest Saint Luke in the
geneallogy of our Savior, rehearses the names of his ancestors, who were
questionless holy and religious worshippers of God, and trusted in the Messiah
to come. But I suppose it could hardly have been made plain by any record of
the Jews (and yet they were more diligent and careful in such matters then
Christians have been) that the points wherein our Lord dissented from the
Scribes and Pharisees, were distinctly known, and publicly professed by them
one after another

their approches, and discovering their works, to the defeating of all their
enterprises. The greatest matter of all is, that you would embrace the love of
the truth, and resolve with your selves, as those glorious martyrs I spoke of
did, rather to endure torments and death, then to forsake the religion of the
Lord Jesus, or to join in profession with the Church of Rome.

Joshua, will march on the head of your troops, and be as a cloud to refresh
you in the heat of Summer, and as a fire to warm you in the cold of winter:
your swords shall eat the flesh of your enemies, your pikes and bullets shall
be drunk with their blood: one of you shall chase a thousand, and an hundred
of you put ten thousand to flight: Babylon shall be cast like Math
a millstone into the sea, and be found no more: you shall reward the
scarlet-colored strumpet, as she has rewarded you, and give her double
according to her works, and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her
the double; to the glory of God that has appointed her this punishment, the
increase of religion, the safety of the State, and your honor in this life,
and everlasting salvation in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God in three Persons, be all
glory, praise, obedience, and thanksgiving now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

