SERMONS UPON A PART OF THE FIRST CHAP. OF THE GOSPEL OF S. JOHN.

PREACHED BY ANTONY WOTTON, in the Parish Church of Alhallowes Barking in
London, and now by him published.

2. COR. 5. 20. Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ: as though God did
beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to
God. AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for SAMVELL MACHAM, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. An. 1609.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, INCREASE OF KNOWLEDGE AND OBEDIENCE.
I Have at the last yielded to the request of some friends, for the publishing
of those Sermons, which I preached some years since. Of what use they will
prove to the Church of God, his blessing upon the careful reading thereof,
will in time discover. For my part, I have labored, by the penning and setting
of them forth, to bring some help to the better understanding of the Gospel,
to clear such matters, as offer themselves to be considered; and to further all
men, that will vouchsafe the reading of them, in the knowledge of the mystery
of our redemption, and in the fruits of true sanctification. If any man, that
heard them delivered by word of mouth, find some difference betwixt that,
which then I spoke, and this, which now I write; it may please him to
understand, that I had but some very short notes of my former Sermons; and
happily my second thoughts have afforded me by the blessing of God some better
knowledge of the Evangelists purpose and meaning. Their extraordinary length
must be imputed to the swiftness of my speech. If I go forward in the
expounding of this Gospel, it is my purpose to do it rather by way of
Commentary for instruction, then by discourse for exhortation: unless it do
appear that this manner of writing, which I have now used, be of greater
profit to the Church of God; to the service whereof, I have vowed my poor
labors. The same God, of his infinite mercy, vouchsafe his gracious blessing
upon them, to the glory of his own name, the furdering of the salvation of his
children, and the increase of my comfort in the faithful discharge of that
duty, which I am desirous to perform, to the uttermost of my small power.
April. 11. 1609.

Thine assured in the Lord Jesus, ANTONY WOTTON.

THE FIRST SERMON upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
John, Chapter 1. Ver. 1. 2. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.

2. The same was in the beginning, with God. etc. 3. 4. 5.


THE whole Scripture, contained in the books of the Old, and New Testament,
2. Pet. 1. 21
being penned by holy men, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, must needs
be in every part, of like authority, and certainty. For what difference, in
these points can there be reasonably imagined, where one and the same Author,
God himself, gives immediately both warrant to write, and direction in
writing? Add hereunto, that the maine matter of both, and the chief end of
the Lord, in both is all one; namely, the knowledge of our Redemption, by the
sacrifice of the promised Messiah Jesus Christ. Only herein does the later
excel the former, that it 2. Pet. 1. 19
delivers this great mystery of Reconciliation, more particularly, and more
clearly. In this respect is Mat. 11. 11
the office of John Baptist preferred before the calling of all the Prophets,
that went before him, and yet made inferior to the ministry of the Gospel,
that was to follow him. John was more then a Prophet; yet he, that is least in
the kingdom of Heaven, is greater then he. Then are we utterly without excuse,
if the measure of our knowledge, in the doctrine of our everlasting salvation,
be not answerable, in some proportion, to the means thereof, in this clear
light of teaching. Let us therefore I beseech you, with reverence and good
conscience, stir up both our souls, and bodies, to the learning of that,
which does so nearly concern us, and is so plainly, and plentifully
manifested by our Savior, and his Apostles, in these books of the new
Testament.

Of which (that I may, in this entrance to my labor, say somewhat of them all
in general) some are historical, some doctrinall. The historical books
declare matters

1. Now, as for those books, which we call the Gospells, we are to understand,
that the general matter of them all four, is an history of those things, that
Jesus did, and taught, while he continued here in the world; as it is evident
by Act. 1. 1
S. Luke, and this our Ioh. 20. 30. and 21. 25
Evangelist. But whereas they name (expressly) no more, but his sayings, and
doings; we must know, that his sufferings, or the things that befell him in
this life, are also comprised in them, according to the course of an history.
What is more common in the books of kings, then such speeches as these: 1.
King, 14. 19
Ieroboams acts; 29.
Rehoboams acts; and 15. 31
The residue of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not written in
the books of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel? Yet, who is ignorant,
that these histories contain also, besides their deeds, a rehearsal, as of
other matters concerning them, so namely of their death, either natural, or
violent?

2 But let us come nearer to this our Evangelist; First to the title of the
book, then to the history it self. Touching the former, although Tertullian.
lib. 4, contra Marcian. cap. 2
I do not hold all the titles of the books of the new Testament to be (as
those of the Psalms are) parts of the Canonical Scripture, endited by the holy
Ghost; but only directions added by men to give notice of the Authors, and to
show (in general) of what kind they are: yet surely they are (for the most
part) taken out of the books themselves. The writings of the Apostles have
warrant of that name Epistles, not only because (...)
the Grecians so call the Letters sent from one to another, such as those are,
but also from 1. These. 5. 27
S. Paul himself; who according to common custom, calls them by that title.
So does 2. Pet. 3. 1. 16
Saint Peter term his own, and the Apostle Paul's writings. But of these, and
the other titles of the Acts, and Revelation, an other time, if God will. This
book, and the other three of the same kind, are called Gospells. (...)
The word in the Original signifies as much as good tidings, or a message of
some good; applied by the holy Ghost to the doctrine of the Gospel, according
to the manner of the seauenty two interpreters, who translating the old
Testament out of the Hebrew into Greek, expressed (...).
the preaching of salvation by (...).
a word of the same nature, and kind Esai. 52. 7.
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him (...).
that declares and publishes peace etc. says the Prophet; where the Greek
has (...).
Euangelize peace, as it is alleged by the Romans 10. 15.
Apostle, and applied to the preaching of the Gospel. And that the doctrine of
salvation by Christ is signified by that name, it may farther appear by Gal. 3.
8.
the same Apostle, where he says, that the Scripture preached the Gospel to
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. But what need many
proofs in so plain a matter? Especially since the first messenger of that
joy, after our Saviors birth, the holy Angel, delivers his embassage in the
very same terms. Luke, 2. 10
Behold, (...).
I bring you glad tidings of great joy. Yea, our Savior himself has
authorized, and as it were sanctified the word, to that purpose, by saying,
Matthew. 26. 13
Verily, I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached, throughout
all the world, there shall this also, that she has done, be spoken of, for a
memorial of her.

If any man demand yet farther reason, for applying this title to the History
of our Savior; Let him hearken what Mark, 1. 1.
Saint Mark says. The beginning of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. Upon this
warrant from him, these four books are lawfully and worthily called the four
Gospels. Now it has seemed good to them, that have translated the new
Testament, out of the original greek into other languages, to retein the greek
word in their several translatio^s, either wholly without any change, as the
Syriack does or else framed after the fashion of their speech. So is it in the
Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, and Printed 1555
the old Flemish, yea in the Scottish to; only our ancestors the Saxons have
used their liberty, to express the meaning of it in their own tongue. and have
changed Euangelie into Gospel. And yet they have not made this alteration in
the Titles, (where they keep the Latin altogether) but in those parcells
which were shared out for the service of some special days; and in Math. 4.
23. and 26. 14 Mark, 1. 1. and 14. 9
the text it self, where the Greek word is used by the Evangelist. The word
then, both in the Original, and in our english, gives us to understand, that
the matter of these Histories, or books called Gospells, is a message of joy,
and gladness; yea, of suchioy, and gladness, as neither eye has seen, care
has heard, nor the heart of man is able worthily to conceive.

And shall I need to use any one word of exhortation, for the stirring of us up
to hear these joyful news of peace and salvation? This is that kingdom of
Heaven, which, in the days of our Savior Christ's preaching Mat. 11. 12
suffered violence: while multitudes ran together in heaps, thronging, and
thrusting to hear such gladsome tidings. If the Examples of men be of small
force to move us; yet let the testimony of Angels weigh some. what with us
Luke 2. 10.
Behold (says the Angel) I bring you glad tidings of great joy, that shall be
to all the people. And that we might the rather be persuaded thereof, we have
not only thereport of this one Angel, but the practice and example of a whole
army of Angels, Ver. 13. 14
Praising God, and saying Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace on
earth, and toward men good will. Shall the holy Angels of God, whom these
things in a manner concern not, so triumph, and glory, for this happy news;
wondering at the infinite mercy of the Lord, and rejoicing for our glorious
felicity? and shall we (for whom all this is done) remain senseless, and
careless? At the least, let this dullness, and deadness work so much with us,
as to make us see, how unworthy we are of so unspeakable love, how unwilling
to receive the gracious means of salvation, provided for us, and offered to us,
yea thrust upon us by the Lord, that will not suffer us to perish. Is it
possible we should be so unthankful to God, so unkind to our selves, so
injurious to our posterity, as to neglect drive away from us, and them, the
only means of our, and their everlasting salvation? Do you think those
reprobate spirits the Devils, if the Lord had vouchsafed them so great a
mercy, would so desperately have resused it, or so faintlie accepted of it?

Say not to me, you are contented to be saved by Jesus Christ; when you show
your selves so retchless, and backward to learn how you may be saved by him.
Give me leave to reason a little with you. If an estate in some temporal
possession were bestowed on you, by way of Legacy, would you satisfy your
selves; or would it serve the turn, for you to profess, that you accepted of
the gift: would you stay at home, and wait till the Executours should draw
you out, to go take possession? No, no, you would seek from one Court to
another, make all the friends you could, bestow your pains, time and charges,
to have livery and seisin of a frail and uncertain in heritance. But in this
bountiful, and large grant of interest to heaven, we have not so much care,
as to know what claim, or title, we have to it. And yet it is a mystery: 1.
Tim. 3. 16
Great is the mystery of godliness; 1. Cor. 2. 8
which none of the Princes of this world have known. The excellency, and
gloriousness of it inflames 1. Pet. 1. 12
the Angels with a desire to look into it; and do we set light by such
wonderful knowledge? let it suffice us, hitherto in our ignorance we have
been so careless: Now, at the last, let us put on other minds, and by our
continual diligence (as it were) make amends to our selves, for so long
continued negligence. To which purpose I have especially made choice of this
piece of Scripture. If any man pretend the hardness of the matter; what is
more easy, or more pleasant then a story? If any man despise the plainness
of it, as a thing not worth his labor, because a story; what is more strange,
or mystical then such a Story? The Gospel is the easiest part of the New
Testament. But the Gospel of Saint John, is the hardest part of all the
Evangelists writings: yea, I dare boldly say it, because I am sure I shall
speak it truly, there is no one part of all the Scripture, (setting
allegories, and prophecies not fulfilled, apart) that conteines matters more
needful, or more hard to be known, then this present Gospel, or message of
joyful tidings, brought to us by the holy Evangelist, the beloved Disciple of
our Savior Christ.

2. Of whom that I may speak a little, for the farther inciting of us to
hearken diligently to that he writes; first I will entreat of his person, then
of his writing. That which 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21
the Apostle Peter says of the old Testament, that no prophecy of the
Scripture is of any private interpretation, but that holy men of God spoke, as
they were moved by the holy Ghost, is also to be applied to the writings of
the new Testament, which proceeded from the same spirit of God, by the like
inspiring, and directing; as it is confessed by all, both Protestants, and
Papists, that make any profession of Christian Religion.

For the Apostles of our Savior Christ, were the Penners of all these books
save The Gospells of S Mark, and S. Luke, and the Acts.
three: and Ioh. 16. 13
to them the holy Ghost was both promised by him, to lead them into all truth,
and Act. 2. 3. 4
accordingly sent; so that there can be no question, but the new Testament, as
well as the old, is the certain truth of God, equal in authority, superior
in plainness, and knowledge of particulars belonging to everlasting salvation.

But you will demand perhaps, how we may be assured, that the Apostles were the
immediate Authors of these books. First, we have the same proof of the new
Testament, that we have of the Old, the joint consent of Christians, in all
ages from time to time. Secondly, who sees not the admirable providence of God
in preserving these books in such glorious reputation, maugre the power and
malice of the mighty ones of this world, and their great master, Satan?
Thirdly, who can be so shamlesse, as to deny or suspect the credit of those
ancient Christians, who, living in the Apostles times, might and did
certainly know, either by Gal. 6. 11 Col. 4. 18. 2. These. 3. 17 1. Cor 16. 21
the hand, or by some marks, which the Apostles used (as it were signing and
sealing) or by inquiry of the Apostles themselves, that those books were
indeed of their writing? From them this knowledge came to their next
successors, and successively to us, that now live, by such a general consent
of so many thousands in all ages, that it were more then impudency to make
question of the matter; howsoever our Papists, in these days, to make all men
depend on them (that they may show themselves to be Antichristian) will have
the assurance of this point, as of all other matters of faith, to be fetched
from them that now live, from the authority of the Church of Rome, that now is.
I may say the like of those other 3. Books, the Gospels of Mark, and Luke, and
the Acts of the Apostles; which were acknowledged by the first Christians to
thaue been endited by the spirit of God, and (as August. prolog. in Joan.
it is recorded by some) to have been approved for such by the Apostle S.
John; who doubtless, living till after the decease of all them, that are
said, and believed to be the writers of these, and the other books of the new
Testament, would have disclaimed the authority of the^, and informed the Church
against them, if he had not certainly known, that they were all the holy Ghosts
own enditing.

But it is not my purpose, nor is it necessary to that I have in hand, to
dispute this question: only it seemed to me not amiss to speak thus much, in
this entrance, as it were by the way, to prevent such objections, as might
perhaps disquiet the minds of some, not so thoroughly settled. For whose better
satisfaction, I will add that, which is of most importance: namely, the matter
contained in these books; which is apparently such, for the substance of it, as
the heart, and head of man were never able to devise: yea such (witness 1.
Cor. 2. 9. 10
the holy Apostle Saint Paul) as neither ey has seen, ear has heard, nor
ever came into any man's heart; But God has reueiled it to us, by his Spirit,
which searches all things, yea the deep things of God. This strangeness of
the matter is seconded in them, that believe to salvation, by an vnspeakeaioy,
and comfort in their souls, conceived upon a feeling of the pardon of their
sins, and a certain hope of everlasting happiness in the life to come. In the
last place comes the testimony of the spirit of God: which (as it were the
broad seal) makes up the assurance both of the matter, and the books: in
which it is comprised.

If you ask me how I can discern the witness of the Spirit, from the illusion
of Satan, and the imagination of mine own brain, give me leave also to demand
a like question of you; How could the Prophets (whose ministry it pleased the
holy Ghost to use) from time to time make a difference, betwixt the motions of
the Lord himself, and the suggestions you mention? were they any more able to
express this power of discerning, then the faithful now are? I grant they
could make proof of their calling, and the revelations they had, by a
miraculous foretelling of things to come. But neither were those prophesies any
certain proofs, till the event confirmed the truth of them, and my question
remains still unanswered; How they could discern, that the things which they
prophesied of, were revealed to them by God, and not suggested by any
deceitful working of the devil. Bear with me I beseech you, if I a little
forget my self in a matter of such importance, and difficulty: wherein I would
be yet more bold, with your patience, but that I trust and purpose to handle
this point more at large, upon some iuster occasion hereafter. The conclusion
is, that no reasonable man, much more, that no Christian, may, without great
inciuility, or weakness of faith, make any question of the truth of these
books: which have continued in estimation, and authority, by the space of so
many hundred years, in despite of so many, so learned, and so mighty enemies;
whereas the doctrine it self, by which, through the power of God it has, and
does prevail, is so contrary to the desire of flesh, and and blood; taking
away all manner of glory from man, and covering him with shame, and ignominy;
yea, stripping man of his greatest pride, the freedom of his will: without the
comfort whereof, he has (naturally) no joy in any of his actions whatsoever.

The holy Ghost then is the enditer of these books; Men, especially authorized
by him, the Penners. Amongst whom this our Evangelist was not the least; a man
singularly affected by our Savior Christ, and therefore often thus described,
Ioh. 13. 23. and 19. 26. and 20. 2. and 21. 7. 20
The Disciple whom Jesus loved. That this Gospel was of his writing, it
appears by the end thereof, where it is said; John, 21. 24
This is that Disciple, which testifies these things and wrote these things.
Now what that Disciple was, the twelfth verse shows. Then Peter turned about,
and saw the Disciple, whom Jesus loved: upon that sight of him Peter took
occasion to question with our Savior about him; and in the end of that
conference, set down by the Evangelist, follow the words I recited before,
This is that Disciple. But how shall we know, that This beloved Disciple. was
John? Surely the Gospel no where expresses who it was: as you may see in the
places before alleged; where there is no signification of his name: and, other
place, wherehee is called the beloved Disciple, there is none. We are
therefore in this point also to have recourse to the perpetual judgment of
all Christians: who have (without any doubting) delivered this upon their
credit, as it were from hand to hand. Whereof we may the better be persuaded,
if we remember and consider, how easy it was for them, that lived in this
Evangelists time, and were (as we shall hear anon) the occasion of his
writing, to inform themselves most certainly of the Author of this Gospel. It
may be, some man will yet doubt, whether the Apostle John were the penner of
this Gospel or no, because he has not named himself, as he has done in the
Revelation. For the satisfying of which doubt, it may please him to understand,
that this book is an history, as those of the Kings are, that of Ester, of Job,
and such like, to which the Authors of them have not set their names. But the
other of the Revelation is a prophecy, as the writings of Isay, Jeremy,
Ezekiel, Daniel, and the rest; every one of which has the Authors name
particularly rehearsed in it.

Now for the name it self, if it may add any credit to the person, or signify
any part of his nature, or grace bestowed upon him, whom may we prefer before
this our Evangelist? whose very name John, in the original Hebrew, sounds
out grace, and favor. To which if we adioyne that testimony of the holy Ghost
so often repeated in this Gospel, that he was the Disciple whom Jesus loved,
what can be thought wanting, that might commend him to us? For howsoever the
love of God be no proof of any excellency in the party beloved, from which this
love should arise; yet it is a most certain demonstration of some great worth
in him, after he is beloved: Because Ezec. 16. 3. 6. 7 13. 14
the love of God always bestows on him, whom it once embraces, some assured
testimony that he is beloved of God. It finds nothing worth the loving, but
it gives something: it makes the party lovely, though of himself he be worthy
of hatred.

And surely if ever this effect of Gods love appeared in any (as it shows it
self in all, that are beloved of him, more or less) it was evidently to be
seen in this our Evangelist, Matthew. 4. 21
who of a poor Fisherman ignorant, and young, became in a short space
admirable to all the world, for variety, and certainety of all divine wisdom,
and knowledge; insomuch that Basilius homil. in Ioa. c. 1.
the most learned and excellent of all the Philosophers, are reported, to have
wondered at the mysteries contained in the beginning of this Gospel, which
August. de ciuit. dei lib. 10. cap. 29.
they thought worthy to be written in letters of Gold. And yet, poor souls,
they wondered at that, which they fully understood not. If they had been
vouchsaf't that honor, and happiness, whereof the Lord in his infinite mercy
has made us partakers, To conceive, and feel the truth of these mysteries to
our everlasting salvation, oh how would they have triumphed? And is it
possible, we should so lightly esteem it? Therefore shall they be our judges,
if we stir not up our dead affections to embrace, as it were with both arms,
the kind offer of so glorious, and wondrous knowledge, delivered by him, who
was of all other most dear to our Lord, and Master Jesus Christ.

Whereof, if any man desire to see more particular proof, let him look upon
this our Evangelist, Job. 13. 23. 24
laying his head lovingly, and familiarly in the bosom of our Savior; and
behold Simon Peter, a man in no small favor with his Lord Jesus Christ,
beckning to him, as one that might be most bold, to ask that, which (it
seems) none of the rest durst demand. He knowing the interest he had in his
Lords affection, makes bold to ask the question, who it was that should
betraie him; and presently without any second request, receives a plain and
sufficient answer. And that it may yet more plainly appear, what opinion the
other Disciples had of our Saviors especial love to him, remember I pray you
the question moved by Peter, John, 21. 21
Lord, what shall this man do? By which it is manifest, that the disciples
persuaded themselves, that our Savior had a principal care of him above the
rest: therefore also did they so interpret their masters speech, that it was
commonly held amongst them, V. 23
that John should not dye. But there can be no greater argument of our Saviors
entire affection to him, and of his strong persuasion of John's extraordinary
love, then Ioh. 19. 26. 27 28
the commending of his dearest mother to the keeping of John, and John's
readiness and willingness in accepting, and entertaining her: which is yet
the more apparent, if we consider, that James, and Jude were of the blessed
Virgins, and our Saviors kindred by blood, and John only by alliance, because
of her marriage to Joseph Page 14. line 21. etc.
Only I mustadde a word, or two of that title, which is commonly set before
the names of those, that were the penners of the books of the New Testament:
The Gospel according to S. Matthew, S. John, The Epistle of Saint Paul, Saint
Peter, Saint James. This title or Epithet, though it be both common and
ancient, yet questionless was not annexed by any of these writers; as not
agreeable to true Christian discretion, and modesty: yea perhaps it was also,
if not injurious, yet likely to prove offensive to all other believers, that a
title common to every Christian, should be made proper to some few, though
principal members of the Church. You will object (it may be) that these
writers style themselves Apostles; as if they desired to have their dignity,
and office known to all men. True it is, that they do so indeed, in their
Epist. But neither did that name belong to all the faithful, or to any, but
some certain men: and it was necessary for the authorizing of their writings.
How then? Do I condemn the title, or the first Authors, or the continuers
and users of it? Nothing less. For I gladly acknowledge, both that the
Apostles, and Evangelists had especial interest in that name, and that there
could be no danger of scandal; seeing it was not taken by themselves, but
given to them as an honor, by the consent as it were and with the liking of
all true Christians: whose purpose it was, not to make them Mediators of
intercession, betwixt God, and men upon earth; but to show the reverend
opinion, they had conceived, and did hold of such worthy, and holy men. And to
say the truth, what does the word signify but (...).
Holy. How often is it given, in the Scriptures, to all, that are members of
the true Church, in their several Congregations? It shall suffice therefore (to
shut up all in one word) that we mean not, by this title Saint, to note any
office of mediation, but only to testify our respect, and reverence of those,
whom it pleased our blessed Savior to choose, and employ in so excellent, and
glorious a service. In this sense, I desire to be understood whenever I use
that title; and to be excused, in your charitable construction, if, according
to that liberty, which ancient, and later Divines have lawfully used, I
sometimes omit it, in naming this Evangelist, or any other of his fellow
Apostles or Evangelists.

I may not forget to adioyne to that, which has been spoken, a few things
more, which the Scripture has recorded of him, namely that he was Matthew. 4. 21
the son of Zebede, and brother of James, called with him to be a Disciple of
our Savior, and afterward Luke, 6. 14
specially chosen with the same his brother, to be one of the twelve Apostles.
All these things are so plainly delivered in the Scripure, that it is enough
to name the places, without any more ado. But of his mother it is needful to
speak more particularly; because it is not so clear, who she was, though it be
as certain: we are then to understand that his mothers name was Salome; which
is thus to be proved. Matthew. 27. 56
Saint Matthew reporting the history of the women, that stood afar off looking
upon our Savior, when he was crucified, writes thus of them. Among whom was
Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James and Ioses, and the Mother of
Zebedeus children. Now Zebedeus children were James the elder, as he was called
for difference sake, and John. But how shall we know that this woman's name was
Salome? Mark, 15. 40
Saint Mark tells us so in these words. There were also women which beheld
afar off, among whom was Mary Magdalen, the Mother of James the Iesse, and of
Ioses, and Salome. Who sees not, that she, whom the former Evangelist called
the Mother of Zebedeus children, the later names Salome?

So that our Evangelist was the son of Zebedeus and Salome; upon him as upon
the rest, Acts, 2. 3.
the holy Ghost descended, like fiery cloven tongues, induing them with the
admirable gift of understanding, and speaking all strange languages. Neither
was he only thus qualified with the rest, but as it should seem of greater
account in the Church then most of the rest. Therefore Gal. 2. 9
the Apostle Paul reckons him with James, and Peter, as one of the Pillars of
the Christian Church. Yea, our Savior himself in his life time was wont to
admit him, as it were into his private counsel: Mark, 5. 37
when he went to raise up Iairus daughter from death, was not John one of the
three, whom he made choice of, to take with him? Matthew. 17. 1
was not he one of the 3. witnesses of his glorious transfiguration in the
mount? To conclude, in Mark. 14. 33
that his grievous agony in the garden, our Evangelist was one, with whom our
Savior would be accompanied. And for the person of John this may suffice,
unless perhaps some man look, that I should add hereunto, as a farther proof of
our Saviors love to him, the mention of those wonderful revelations, wherein
the estate of Christ's Church upon earth, to the very end of the world, is
lively and certainly discyphered. As for other things, which are recorded
touching him in the Ecclesiastical histories, I will crave leave to omit them,
because they little, or nothing concern the matter, we have in hand; and I
know there are but few present, that are able to search the authors, as Acts
17. 11.
the men of Beroea did the Scriptures, to see whether those things be so or no.

I come now from the person, to the writing: where first, for the occasion, and
time of penning this Gospel, I will only say thus much, Eusebius. hist. eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 21
that it is commonly thought to have been written, after the return of the
Evangelist out of banishment, from Pathmos; both to supply that which was
wanting in the other three, concerning our Saviors doings, and sayings,
before John Baptist was imprisoned, and also to satisfy the request of the
Christians in Asia, especially the Ephesians, that it might be a counterpoison
against those heresies, which Cerinthus, and Ebion had hatched, and whereby the
Godhead of our Lord, and Savior was called in question. Wherein, if any man
shall persume to think, that our Evangelist has not taken such a course, as
was fit for the refuting, and suppressing of those heresies; let him learn,
first that the holy Spirit, of whose enditing this Gospel was, is not to be
taught by the blind conceits of proud ignorant men. Then let him farther
understand, that it was not the Evangelists purpose, nor indeed a matter
beseeming the authority of him, whom the Lord used for his Secretary, to
dispute by writing, with profane, and blasphemous Apostates: but to instruct
the Church of Christ in the truth formerly delivered. And this he has
performed with such majesty, and authority, that we may see in him the grace
answerable to that name Mark, 3. 17
, which his Lord and Master gave him, even power to thunder. For who is not
astonished with admiration of those wonderful mysteries, concerning our Savior
Christ's eternal divinity, which this son of thunder as it were ratleth out?
Therefore did August. Prolog. in Ioa. Theodor. prodromus in distich.
the ancient writers compare him to an Eagle, as one that mounted up above the
pitch of the other three Evangelists, even to the height of the Godhead, and
that unsearchable mystery of the most glorious, and blessed Trinity.

There is indeed some diversity of opinions amongst the Latin Fathers, to
which of the Evangelists the other 3. beasts, Ezech. 2. 5 Reuelat. 4. 6.
Ezech. 2. 5. Revel. 4. 6. should be severally referred: but it Although
Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 11. makes John the Lion, and Mark, the Eagle.
is generally agreed upon, that the Eagle belongs to John, for the reason above
named. Art thou then desirous to understand the great, and high, points of
divinity? Cast thy self upon the wings of this Eagle, who will carry thee up,
as it were into the bosom of God, and acquaint thee with such matters, as, but
by revelation from God himself, could never possibly have bin discovered, or
imagined.

And that we may the more be ravished with the love of this holy Gospel, let me
put you in mind of that variety, the mother of delight, which is easy to be
seen therein. How sweetly has our Evangelist tempered, and as it were
allayed, the hard points of profound knowledge, with enterlacing of delightful
Histories? If at any time he soar aloft, that he may seem to be almost out of
sight for the height of those admirable mysteries of our Saviors divinity, he
comes down again ere long, and feeds our eyes, with making us see the use,
and comfort of those glorious instructions. And besides this variety of
matter, which shines in comparing one part of this Gospel with another; there
is yet a farther consideration, to the singular commendation thereof. Who is
there, if he have any sense of Gods mercy in Christ, but takes great pleasure
to read one and the same thing, diversely recorded by the other three
Evangelists? And what marvel? Seeing it is, even in profane histories, a
matter of no small use, and delight, to have the memory renewed, and the
affection quickened by the variety of discourse, as it were by the diverse
cooking of some one dainty kind of meat. But our Evangelist, to the
diversity of handling, has added also great store of new matter, not once
touched by any one of the other; the LORD having reserved, for him, the
perfecting of that knowledge, which the rest did begin and further.

Many excellent things are recorded, by Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and S.
Luke, concerning the Sermons, and miracles of our Savior: yet are there but
few of these proper to any one of them. Only S. John affords us, as in so
short a Treatise, great plenty of new, and unknown variety; Piscator in
prooem. ad Joan.
10. Sermons, four miracles and that zealous prayer, full of love and comfort.
The sermons (that I may speak a word, or two, of every one of them, in
particular) are these: First, Job. 3. 1. 2. etc
that kind dialogue with Nicodemus, and those worthy instructions, concerning
regeneration; whereby we are taught, that our natural estate is fleshly, and
incapable of grace, and glory, till the spirit of God by the waters of the
Scriptures, have bredde in us a new and heavenly conception. In the second
place follows Ioh. 4. 7. 8. etc.
that sweet, and comfortable discourse, with the Woman of Samaria, concerning
the water of life: which being once received into the soul, turns into a
spring, that can never be dried up, but sends forth continually abundance of
fresh liquor, to cool, and moysten the heart, in all heat of tentations.

Ioh. 5. 19. 20 etc.
The next Chap, presents us with the third Sermon: wherein upon occasion of the
stiff-necked Jews murmuring against our Savior, for willing the man, whom
he had cured, having been thirtie-eight years bedrid, to take up his bed,
and walk, though it were the Sabbath day, we have a glorious assurance of
our Lords eternal Godhead, and equality with God his Father. But that, which
exceedes in all heavenly comfort, is Ioh. 6. 26. 27.
the fourth Sermon; in which, our blessed Savior, as it were thrusts himself
into our mouths, to be eaten, and drunk; giving us full assurance, that the
eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, that is, believing in him,
shall feed us without hungring, or thirsting any more, to everlasting life;
which he, according to his Fathers will, and charge, shall most certainly
bestow upon all them, that by true faith become one with him.

The Ioh. 8. 3. 4. etc.
fifth Sermon affordes us a worthy example of our Lord, and masters wisdom,
and authority to discern and confound the subtle malice of his wilful
enemies. With what divine judgment does he look into the depth of the
Pharisees deceit, who sought to entrappe him about the woman taken in
adultery? With what admirable discretion does he drive them away, to their
perpetual shame, and dishonor? With what a majesty does he, a little after,
convince and reprove them, for their wilful blindness, and proud conceit of
the knowledge, they bragged of, but had not? Let us come Ioh. 10. 1. 2. etc.
to the sixth of those Sermons, which our Evangelist only has recorded. In no
place does our Savior more plainly avow himself to be the Messiah: where
have we the like certainty of his care, and love delivered? He gives his life
for his sheep, and casts himself into the very jaws of the Wolf, that his
mouth might be stopped: And to the singular comfort of us, that are not by
nature Jews, he tells us, that we also belong to his sheepfold. Into which
when we once are received, and acknowledged for sheep, no power of sin,
Satan, or death, shall be able to wring us out of his hands; because the
Father, with whom he is in nature all one, is stronger then all.

The former six Sermons contain especially those benefits whereof we are
made partakers by our Savior Christ in this life: but Ioh. 11. 25. 26 etc
the seventh expresses our final triumph, over our last and greatest enemy,
Death himself. Those help both to arm us to the fight, and to encourage, and
further us in fighting; but this crowns us after victory. If the body shall
rise again to glory, we may truly, and safely challenge Death and sa^e 1.
Cor. 15. 55
Oh Death, where is thy sting? oh Grave, where is thy victory? For if our
bodies be made immortal, where is the power of Death become? Who then can
faint in a battle? the issue whereof will be so certain, and happy?
especially if he remember, what gracious promises he has from God in Ioh. 14.
and 15. and 16.
the eight Sermon, of the continual assistance of the holy Ghost. For,
howsoever, those glorious matters principally concern the Apostles, yet has
every Christian his interest in them, according to a certain proportion. The
Apostles could not err in any matter of Doctrine. No true Christian shall so
err in matters necessary to his salvation, that he shall be cut off from
being a member of JESUS CHRIST; but shall have his measure of Instruction,
Peace, and Comfort, according to the trialls, that his heavenly Father has
appointed to make of him.

The two last Sermons do especially concern two of the Apostles; but were
written for our learning, and consolation. In Ioh. 20. 26. 27. etc.
the former, our Savior instructs Thomas, with a mild reproof of his not
believing, and a sensible demonstration of that he doubted of. To which he
adds (to our unspeakable comfort) that Verse, 29
all they, which having not seen, nor felt, as THOMAS then did, yet believe,
are trewlie blessed.

Neither is Ioh. 21. 15. 16
the later of the two so appropriated to Saint Peter, but that it affordes us
also this excellent lesson; that the strongest proof of every Ministers love
to his Lord, and master Jesus Christ, is the faithful, and careful feeding
and directing of the sheep, and lambs committed to his charge. And these are
the ten Sermons, which none of the Evangelists, but John only, has
mentioned. I deny not, that the points of divinity, contained in them, may be
gathered (more or less) out of the other three; but neither are the Sermons
recorded by them, nor the matters (therein delivered) so plainly, and fully
handled, as in this Gospel.

Wherefore, as if we come to a Fair to buy any commodity, which we need or
desire, we content not our selves, to stay in such a shop, or booth, as can
show us only one piece, and that made up so close, that we can hardly look
into it; but seek thither where we may have choice, and see the wares opened
to our full view: So let us make haste to this Gospel, in which many, and so
goodly matters are unfolded, and eue^ory bolte, and pleight laid open. As for
the miracles, whereof I will say very little, they are such as are not once
pointed at, nor signified by any other Evangelist: Who besides Ioh. 2. 3. 4.
etc.
Saint JOHN, gives us any the least inkling of water turned into wine, at a
marriage, by our Savior, CHRIST? Had not Ioh. 5. 5. 6. etc.
that famous miracle, by which the man, that had lain bedridden xxxviij. years,
was cured, so that he presently rose and carried away his bed, been altogether
unknown, and unheard of, if our Evangelist had not committed it to writing?
None but he, tells us of Ioh. 9. 1. 2. etc.
the man, that being borne blind, and having continued so, many years, had
sight given him by such a means, as in man's reason, was fitter to have put out
his eyes, if he could have seen. But he that made dust, and spittle, can by
dust, and spittle, do whatsoever pleases him. The Ioh. 11. 38. 35 etc.
last miracle, is the raising of LAZARUS from the dead, not as Mark, 5. 42
IAIRVS daughter was restored to life, lying in her bed, after the breath
was departed from her, nor as Luke, 7. 15
the Widows son had life put into him again, as he was carrying to be
buried; but even then, when he had continued till the fourth day in the grave,
and, in his most kind sisters judgment, could not choose, but stink.

Admirable and glorious are these miracles, and such as ought to assure us of
his divine power, who was able to do things so impossible to men, and Angels.
But as 1. Cor. 2. 2
the holy Apostle Paul preferred the knowledge of Christ crucified, before all
other glorious mysteries, because therein (properly) stands the justification
of a sinner: so have we very good cause to value Ioh. 17. 1. 2.etc.
that loving and fervent prayer of our Savior, above all his miracles
whatsoever.

For if ever his love and care of us appeared in any thing, he did, or spoke,
(except his passion) in that it shines and shows it self most clearly Verse,
20
With what zeal does he commend every one, that at any time believes in him,
to God his Father? Ver, 21. 22. 23
How does he repeat, and double his request to God, that we may be made one
with God? But I may not stand long upon these points; especially since they are
to be expounded at large hereafter, if it please God.

Now the sum of all is this, that seeing it has pleased the Lord, so
graciously, and plentifully to vouchsafe us the certain knowledge of such
excellent mysteries; and that by one so highly in the favor of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and so assuredly directed by the holy Ghost: we in like sort,
should bestow all pains, and diligence, that this knowledge may be rooted in
our hearts, and bring forth abundance of fruit, in our whole conversation, to
the glory of his Name, and our endless comfort, in the same our Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ. Neither let it discourage, or offend any man, that our
Evangelist was no learned Divine, trained up in any University; nor fitted
for such a piece of work, by any extraordinary parts of nature, or study. Yea
rather let it encourage, and strengthen him in faith; considering how
impossible it is, that a poor Fisherman, should have the head to conceive, and
the heart to utter, such mysteries, with confidence, and assurance, against the
judgment, and liking of almost, all the learned, and mighty of the world.
Could these admirable mysteries be of a Fishermans devising? What is there in
Aristotle, Plato, Pythagoras, or any of the great learned Philosophers, so
strange, or profound, as many points, that are common in this Gospel, which
of the heathen writers, ever spoke so boldly? or with such authority, as our
Evangelist? how doubtfully and uncertainly does the In Apolog. Socrat. Plato in
Timaeo and passim.
learned of them write, when he coms to deliver matters, that concern God,
and religion? Surely he, that wisely and heedfully considers the discourses of
the best Philosophers, touching these points, shall plainly discern, that they
labored to make other men believe those things, whereof they were not able to
persuade themselves: and rather meant to assay, whether they could draw men to
such opinions, then to enjoy the belief of them, as a certain truth. But our
Evangelist thunders out most admirable secrets, and that without all doubting
in himself of the truth thereof, and threatens assured damnation to all them,
who refuse to give absolute credit to whatsoever he has delivered. What
remains then, but that with all assurance, and reverence, we address our
selves to the learning, and doing of those things, which we find to be taught,
and commanded in this Gospel?

In the expounding whereof that we may proceed the more orderly, we must
divide the whole Gospel into certain parts, for the help both of
understanding, and memory. But, may some man say, Will you not first deliver the
general argument of the book, and purpose of the Writer? If that, which
hitherto has been spoken touching these points, either were not understood,
or be not remembered, in effect it was this; that our Evangelist undertook the
penning of this Gospel, partly that he might finish, and perfect the History
of our Savior Christ's doings, sayings, and sufferings, all the time of his
abode here upon the earth: partly, that he might confirm the Faithful in
the true Doctrine of his Godhead, and leave his Gospel as a preservative
against the poison of blasphemous heretics. So was it intended by him, so it
is to be used by us, that as he comfortably speaks, Ioh. 20. 31 1
We may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and believing, have
life, through his Name.

Now let us return to the dividing of this Gospel: Whereof we may
reasonably and fitly make these two parts; the former, Saint John's description
of ^ Ioh. 1. 29 to he end of the Gospel.
our blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST, whose History he undertakes to pen, Ioh.
1. to verse 29
from the beginning The History it self; in the rest of that Chapter, and all
the other to the end of the Gospel. In the description, our Savior is set
out, partly by Our Savior described, 1. by things propre to in; 2. by the
tetimony of John
certain things, that properly belong unto him, partly by an outward testimony
of John the Baptist. The former are His natures; Divine. ver. 1. 2 Humane,
verse 14
either his natures; divine ver. 1. 2. humane. ver. 14. or His actions; of his
Godhead. His mediatorship. 2
his actions. His actions proper to his Divine nature, as those of creation
ver. 3. or common to both, as those of mediation verse 4. 5. John's testimony
signified. ve. 6 Expressed. ver. 15 16. etc.
John the Baptists testimony is first signified v. 6. Afterward expressed verse
15. 16. 19. As for the other verses from the 6. to the 14. and from the 16. to
the 29. they contain certain explications, which the Evangelist ads, upon
occasions; and belong to some one part, or other of the former divisions, as in
due place shall appear.

The History it self is partly The former part of the History from chap 1. 29.
to chap. 19. 31.
a discourse of such things as JESUS did, spoke, or suffered, before his death,
and to the time of his death, from the first Chapter, Verse, 29. to Chapter 19.
Verse, thirty one: The later part from thence to the end.
and partly a report of those matters, that are to be known, and believed to
have been done or said, after his death, from Chapter 19. verse 31. to the end
of the Gospel. Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 39. sed praecipue, 1. Chemnitius
prolegom. in harmon. cap. 3.
Now the history it self, cannot be better divided, then Division of the
history, according to the years of our Saviors preaching, after his baptism.
according to the years of our Savior, after his baptism, and the beginning
of his ministry. Whereunto it may well be thought the Evangelist himself,
as it were leads us by the hand, because he does so particularly mention
the feast of Passe-ouer, from year to year. The first Passe-ouer, after our
Sauiors Baptism, is named in John 2. 13.
the second Chapter; Chap. 5. 1.
the second in the fifth. For it shall appear, when I come to expound the
place, that there is great reason, why we should take that feast to be the
Passover. Chap. 6. 4.
The third we have in the beginning of the 6. Chap. and that in express words.
Chap. 13. 1. 2
The fourth, and last was (as every man knows) at the time of his death,
Chapter 13. So that I think it best thus to divide the whole history. Our
Savior at his baptism, as we learn out of Luke 3. 23
Saint Luke, was newly entered into the thirtieth year of his age, and began
his ministry with the beginning of that 30. year, more or less. The 30.
year of Christ's age, the first of his prea^hing: from cha. 1. 29. to chap. 4. 1.
The first part therefore of this Gospel, for the history it self, begins at
the 19. verse of the first Chapter, and continues to the beginning of the
fourth, containing the 30. year of our Saviors life. The 31 and 2. from
thence to chap. 6. 1.
There begins the 31. year, and second part of this Gospel; which ends at
Chap. 6. The 32. and 3. to chap. 10. 22
From whence we reckon the third part and 32. year to Chap. 10. verse 22. The
33. and 4. to chap. 19. 31
where the fourth part, and 33. year, take beginning, and end with the life of
our Savior, Chap. 19. 30. But this 33, year was cut off in the midst,
according to Dan. 9. 27.
Daniels prophecy reueald unto him by the Angel Gabriell, that the Messiah, in
the midst of the 62. week should cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.
Namely, by offering up the true sacrifice, his own body, whereof the sacrifices
of the law were but shadows, and could have no longer use, nor place when the
body it self was sacrificed; as the Apostle proves at large in Heb. 10. 12.
the Epistle to the Hebrews. The things, that happened after our Saviors death,
and are to be known, and believed by us, are either his burial. Chap. 19.
verse. 31. to the end, or his Resurrection manifested, and proved diverse ways,
Chap. 20. and 21. The particular distributions I reserve to their several
places: now to the text.

1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with Verse. 1. 2.
God, and the word was God; The same was in the beginning with God. Cyrill.
prolog. in Joan.
All, that come up out of diverse Shires and Countries to London, enter here
into one, and the same City, and have the general view of it, and the places
of account therein: yet are some more easily, and daintily lodged, and dieted
then other, and admitted to a more particular sight of the principal
buildings, and goodly ornaments of it: yea perhaps, made acquainted, some what
more specially, with the estate, and government thereof. In like manner
whosoever reads, or hearetl^ any one of the four Gospels; is vouchsafed the
knowledge of the same history of our Sauiors life and death, and the same
doctrine of salvation by him. But he, that bestows his time and pains in this
Gospel of our Evangelist Saint John, is as it were entertained in a more
stately, and beautiful lodging, and admitted to the hearing, and understanding
of the very secrets, both of his nature, and office, touching his own Being,
and our redemption. This appears plainly in the very beginning of the
Gospel, where the great mysteries of Christian religion are delivered.

These two first verses contain a description of our Saviors divine nature;
propounded in the first verse, and repeated in the second. In the former, he is
set out to us by that, which concerns the nature of his Godhead, and his
person in the Godhead. For his nature, he is first said to have been eternal.
In the beginning. Secondly to be God. And the word was God. Touching his
person, he is called the Word, or Son. In the beginning was the Word. Secondly
his distinction from God the Father, and yet his equality with God the father
is signified, when it is said, that, He was with God. In the second, 3. of the
five points are repeated, jointly in one sentence. That the word was eternal,
equal to God, and distinct from God. O glorious, and admirable mysteries!
Where are they now, that lewdly, and profanely scoff at Christian Religion,
because forsooth it teaches nothing, but that, which is common, and ordinary.
Common and ordinary? So strange, and extraordinary are the secrets of the
Gospel, that no man of himself, is able to devise them, by his wit, or to
believe them with his heart. Take the deepest points of natural Philosophy
(so they be indeed true) and a man of good capacity, will quickly, and easily
be brought to give assent to the truth thereof: because he has in him the
light of natural reason, whereby they may certainly be discerned. But the
secrets of Christian religion are such, and so far above the reach of humane
reason, that although you make a man understand them never so perfectly, yet
you cannot possibly make him acknowledge them for truth. Truth in philosophy
is such, as that reason, if a man suffer himself to be directed by it, will
enforce him to believe it. Truth in divinity is such, as that the more we
hearken to our natural reason, the less we are persuaded of the mysteries of
religion. It is for him, and for him only to incline the heart to the belief
of those secrets, who first revealed them to be believed.

But what do I? While I labor to set out the excellency of the Gospel, by
showing, that it contains many strange, and hidden mysteries, it may be
feared, that I drive men away from the hearing, and reading of it, by the
darkeness, and profoundnesse of these secrets. But be not discouraged
(brethren) I beseech you. If they were more obscure, and deep, then they are,
yet who could despair of sounding the depth thereof, as long as he may have so
skillful, and able a Pilot? What though they be mysteries? 1. Cor. 2. 10
Yet has God revealed them to us by his spirit, even by that spirit, which
searches all things, yea the deep things of God. Could not he ( John 11. 37
say the faithless Jews) that opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that
Lazarus should not have died? And cannot he (may we confidently say) that
Psalm. 8. 2
Out of the mouths of Babes, and sucklings has ordained strength, because of
his enemies, that he might still the enemy and the auenger, subdue the
Rebellion of our corrupt reason, and bring it into obedience, to believe his
holy truth? Wherefore has he revealed it, but that it might be known, and
acknowledged? For your farther encouragement, let our Evangelist S. John be
taken as an example. Art thou young? Hieronym. Catalog. script. in Ioann. and
ad Dan. cap. 9 and contr. Ioui. lib. 1.
So was our Evangelist; when it pleased our Savior to call him to the
profession of the Gospel. Witness the continuance of his life sixty eight
years after his Lord, and Masters passion. But thou have not been brought up
to learning. What teaching, and education had he (think thou) who Mark. 1.
19
was trained up under his father a poor fisherman, to get his living in the
sweat of his brows by fishing? What time could he have to go school whose
maintenance depended on his labor, and to whom all the pains, he could
possibly take, would hardly afford some small means of a poor living? You will
say, This favor was extraordinary. Yet so that it was common to him with
Matthew. 4. 18
his brother James, and John 1. 44
with two other brethren his Countrymen, Andrew, and Peter. But what speak I
of two or four? Many, and many thousands continually, from time to time, for
almost these one thousand and six hundredth years, have been brought to the
knowledge, and belief of these mysteries. Is the Lords hand now shortened?
Does he not still in mercy vouchsafe us the means of knowledge, and believing?
What do we then, with these doubtful thoughts, and unthankful hearts? Away
with them Away with them; let us desire, and and endeavor to learn, and Ioh.
6. 45.
we shall be all taught of God: Yea, with such a teaching, as shall enlighten
our understanding, incline our hearts, confirm our memory, reform our
affections, and continually assure us both of the truth, that we believe, and
of the constant love of God to us, in our perseverance in believing. With this
desire, and confidence, let us, in the fear of God, address our selves to the
hearing understanding, and believing of these glorious mysteries.

The first whereof (for I will handle them as they lie in the Text) is this,
that The Word was in the beginning. Wherein, for your better understanding and
memory, The course, that is held in these Sermons.
I will first give the sense of the Text, 1. by expounding the words, and 2.
delivering the meaning of the Evangelist. 2. then I will handle the doctrine,
by 1. proouing the truth of it, and 2. adding exhortation accordingly, where it
shall be needful. And this course (if it please God) I will follow in all the
rest of the Gospel.

In seeking out the sense of this Scripture, we must enquire, 1. who is meant
by the Word; then we must consider 2. what the Euangeli^^ ^aith of him. In
the former, we must see how this term the Word belongs to him, of whom it
is spoken. Secondly, why that name is given him in this place. In the later
part, these 2. points are to be delivered, why it is said, The Word was,
rather then Has been. 2. What is meant by those words, In the beginning. The
exposition of the words. Who is meant by the Word.
The first point, who is meant by the Word, is easy and manifest: namely he,
of whom the whole Gospel is written; Jesus Christ h Epiphan. haercs. 51.
August. de haeres. cap. 8. 10 Theodor. haeret. fabul. lib. 2.
the Son of God, the promised Messiah. Him, the Heretics Cerinthus, and
Ebion, denied to be God; blasphemously auouching, that he took his first
beginning of his Mother the Virgin Mary. Against their false, and poisonous
doctrine, the holy Evangelist teaches the Church, that The word was in the
beginning. But let the Text it self speak; Is Ioh. 1. 1.
not he called the Word, of whom Verse 7. Verse 4. Verse 7.
John came to bear witness? At the 4. verse, he is said to be the light of
men: In the 7. verse, that John came to bear witness of the light: of whom
did John bear witness, but of the Messiah Jesus Christ? John sees Jesus Verse
29.
coming to him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin
of the world. And a little after, he Verse 33.
professes, that it was revealed to him by God, which sent him to baptize,
that he, upon whom John should see the spirit come down and tarry still on
him, was he, which baptiseth with the holy Ghost. Now upon Jesus Verse 34.
did John see the holy Ghost light and settle, and thereupon confidently
affirms, that he is the Son of God. I might add hereunto that he is the Word,
by belief in whom, we have the prerogative to be the Sons of God. Verse 12.
And who knows not that he is Christ? Gal. 3. 26.
we are all the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; That Ioh. 1. 14
the word which was made flesh, and dwelt among us, was no other, but Jesus, of
whom John bare witness. But what should I stand heaping up needless proofs in a
matter that is out of question? The conclusion of the first point is this, that
the Word, of which our Evangelist speaks, is Jesus Christ It follows that
we should inquire, how this name The word belongs to our Savior. In which
inquiry if I should but even recite the conceits and subtilties of diverse
writers, I should spend all the rest of this hour in that only, and weary my
self, and you, to small purpose. Therefore, to make short, I will commend to
your farther meditation, some few reasons of this name, which to me seem the
most likely. These reasons co^cern our Savior, eitheras he is the Son of God,
or as he is the mediator betwixt God and man. For the former, the Nazian. lib.
2^ de filio. Athana sius. Hilarious. Ambrosius. Augustinus. Cyrillus etc.
ancient, and later Divines, that have labored to shadow out that unspeakable
mystery of the holy Trinity, have thought it fit to give us a little glimse
of this dazzling light, by comparing God the Father to our understanding, God
the Son to that, which inwardly our understanding conceiueth. I will
endeavor to speak as plain, as possibly I can, to the capacity of the
simplest. When a man inwardly discourses, and reasons with himself, it is
sure, and cuident, that he frames in his mind a certain kind of speech, or
sentence, and as it were a word without sound, which is called the conception
of the mind. If he desire to communicate this conceit of his to other men, he
forms some outward speech, and words, either uttering them with his mouth, or
writing them with his pen. Thus does he del^uer out a Copy of that, the
Original whereof he reserueth still within, where it was first bred. Let us,
according to the weakness of humane capacity, apply this to the unsearchable
mystery of the Son of God. Confider them reu^rently, and humbly, that God
being from all eternity infinite in wisdom, has always had some conception
in him, as a man has, when he discourses in his understanding. This
conception in man, though it remain in the soul, yet is not of the substance
of the soul. But in God, that is most simple, and without all manner of
composition, there can be nothing that is not of his Divine substance. This
conception of God is the second person in Trinity, the Son of God. Would any
know, why the like conception in man, is not the Son of man? Let him
remember, that the Son must be of the same nature with the Father; as our
conception is not without understanding; but Gods is of necessity, because (as
I said ere while) there can be no composition; I add, nor imperfection, in
the divine Nature. The first reason then, why the Son of God is named the
Word, is this, that he is begotten by his father in such manner, as our inward
word, or conception is framed in us. These things I confess seem to me,
somewhat curious, and subtle, that I can hardly persuade my self, they were
intended by the Evangelist: neither would I have adventured to propound them to
you, but for reverence of Dionys. Roma apud Athanas. Athanas. de de finit.
Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. lib. 7. cap. 4. Hilar. lib 2. de Trinitate etc.
very many learned Divines, who from time to time have continued this
exposition.

But there is more likelihood, that the holy Evangelist, in giving our Savior
this name, had respect to his mediatorship; Origin lib. 1. in Joan Clem.
Epiphan. haer. 73 Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Joan. Euthymius ad hunc locum.
either because it is he, that reuealeth the knowledge of the father unto us,
or for that he was promised to be the Messiah. That the former is a part of our
Savior Christ's office, and has been performed by him, from time to time, it
has bin held, time out of mind; and may be proved, for these later times, out
of the Scripture. Who (almost) is ignorant, that Tertul. contr. Iudae. cap. 9.
the ancient writers were of opinion, and the later have received it, as it
were from hand to hand, that the second person in Trinity appeared oftentimes
to the Fathers in the old Testament? even as often, as he, that appeared, is
specified by the holy Ghost to be Jehovah. I shall not need to quote the
several places. Begin at Genesis 12. 7. and so go forward: and where you find,
that the Lord appeared to Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, or any other of the
Fathers in the old Testament, there make account you see, and hear the Son
of God declaring some part of his fathers will to them, to whom he speaks. If
we come to the New Testament, whom have we there preaching, but the Son of
God? Heb. 1. 1.
At sundry times, and in diverse manners, God spoke, in the old time, to the
Fathers, by the Prophets: in the last days he has spoken to us by his Son:
whom also he has commanded us to hear. Mat. 3. 17
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. And indeed
whom else should we hear? since Ioh. 1. 18
No man has seen God at any time: but the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him Fitly then may he be called the
Word, who is the Ambassador of God his Father, to make his will known to
mankind, by word of mouth, in his own person, and by the ministry of them,
whom it pleases him to employ to that purpose. To make this opinion the more
likely, Joan. Maldon. ad hunc locum.
a popish Interpreter, in his Commentary upon this place, confidently
affirms, that the Chalde Paraphrast translates Jehovah by this word Memar,
(...)
which signifies a word, as often as there is any mention of Gods speaking to
man, helping man, or being conversant with him: but he neither brings example
of it, nor quotes any place; only he boldly avouches, that the learned shall
find it to be so every where, and the unlearned must take it upon his word,
and knowledge. They, that will, may give credit to his report: but I am sure,
he, that will compare the Original Hebrew, and the Chalde Paraphrase together,
shall not find one place in 20. so translated, if any at all be. It is usual
with the Paraphrast, to put w, for Jehovah, not Memar. I thought good to note
this by the way, that all men may know what credit such authors deserve, upon
their word; and yet he is otherwise one of the best interpreters, that I have
read of the Papists. But though the Chalde Paraphrast do not always, nor
perhaps often, or ever, so translate the word Jehovah: yet he puts Memar
sometime, where God, perchance the second person, is signified. Gene. 22. 16
By my self have I sworn, says God to Abraham; The Hebrew is so, and so the
Apostle expounds it; Heb. 6. 13.
when God made the promise to Abraham, because he had no greater to sweareby,
he swore by himself. Here the Paraphrast has Binenni, by my word. In an
other place, where the Lord assures Jacob, that Gene. 28. 15
he will be with him, and keep him, the Chalde has, My word shall be thy
help. A gain when Laban pursued Jacob, Moses tells us, that Gene. 31. 24
God came to Laban the Aramite in a dream by night and said. The Chalde says
Memar, The, or rather a word came from the face of God. But none of these
places, unless perhaps the 2. need to be, or may be expounded of the 2. Person
in the Trinity, our Savior Jesus Christ.

There remains the last, and not the most unlikely reason, why our Savior
should be called the Word: namely because he was so often spoken of, and
promised by the Lord. Now a promise, as in our ordinary speech, so in the
Scripture, is commonly called a word: and the septuagint translate it (...),
which is the name, our Evangelist here uses. Psalm. 105. 8.
He has remembered his covenant ( (...).
his word) that he made to a thousand generations. (...). And in Psalm 119. 25.
119. Psalm. often, Quicken me according to thy word. Verse 49.
Remember the promise, or word made to thy servant. Verse 65.
Thou have dealt graciously with thy servant, according to thy word. Verse 74.
I have trusted in thy word. Verse 76.
According to thy word, to thy servant. Where the Chalde has the very word
(...)
Memar. So psalm. 130. 5.
Ps. 130. I have trusted in thy word. The main promise the^ being the Messiah,
and that indeed, whereupon al other, that are truly blessings, and favors,
depend; it is no marvel, that the Jews, should speak ordinarily of our
Savior, as of him, that was promised, by the name word; or that the holy
Ghost, should direct our Evangelist to make choice of that title for him, by
which the Jews that translated the old Testament, out of Hebrew into Greek, so
often expressed the promises of God.

Hereupon it follows, that although diverse Tertullian. de Trinit. saepe.
Cipria. ad Quirin. lib. 2. cap. 3. 6. Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 2. Erasm. Caloni.
Beza. etc.
ancient, and later Divines have translated the Greek by the Latin, Sermo,
speech: yet it seems better to call it Verbu^, the word. For a man's promise is
not termed his speech, but his word. But this reason of the name is excepted
against, by Maldonatus ad hunc locum.
a learned Papist, as well because of the authors thereof, who, in his
Pharisaicall censure, are heriticks, as also for that it has in it no
liklihood of truth; if al, that he speaks, be oracles. Let his slander go: let
us hear his reason If the Son (says he) be called the word, because he was
promised; in the beginning he was not the word, because he was not promised. As
if our Evangelist said, He was the word in the beginning, and not rather The
word was in the beginning: that is, as I will say anon, when I deliver the
sense of the Text, He that was promised for the Messiah, had already his being,
when all created things began first to be. Therefore we may boldly conclude,
that this respect of the promise is either the true, or (at least) a likely
reason of the name, whosoever mislike, or co^demn it. If any man be of opinion,
that the Greek should rather be translated, Wisdom, or Reason, the^ word; as
indeed it signifies the one, as well as the other, Michael de Palatio. in.
Joan. cap. 1. enarrat 1.
we may think, that S. John, in this place, alludes to that in the Prou. 8. 22.
Proverbs, where the Son of God is brought in under the name of wisdom,
speaking in this sort; The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
before his works of old; I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
before the earth, etc. This may seem the more likely, because as here, so
there also, after the description of the word and wisdom, follows a discourse
of the creation. Here it is said, that Ioh. 1. 3.
all things were made by the word. prou. 8. 27.
There Wisdom affirms, that she was present, when God prepared the heavens,
and set the compass upon the deep. Neither only was she, with him, but as
Verse. 30.
a nourisher, she maintained and preserved all things: which effect of
preserving, and nourishing, diverse interpreters think to be signified in this
chap. by those words, John 1. 4.
In it was life. All which notwithstanding, I had rather follow the
translation, which is most generally received, especially since it is grounded
upon such great likelihood of reason, and that the Son may well be signified to
be the wisdom of God, because he is the word of God, both conceived in the
Father, as the word, and Isai. 9. 6.
revealing to us the wisdom of the Father, and promised, 8. Cor. 1. 30.
and made to be wisdom to us. Therefore then is the Messiah fitly called the
Word, because he is in God, as our inward conceptio^ in us; because he has
declared, unto us the will of his Father, and whatsoever else it seems good to
the Lord to acquaint us withal, as it is manifest in this Chapter; John 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time: but the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. And lastly, because he is the
promised seed; of whom, as it is also in y John 1. 45
this Chapter, Moses and the Prophets did write.

Some man perhaps will inquire yet farther, why he is called simply The word,
and not the word of God; To who^ Theodorus Mopsuest. in Cate. graec.
we may shortly, and truly answer, that it was meet to leave out that
addition, for distinction sake. For it is well known to all men, that by the
word of God in the Scripure, either some commandment from God, or some
revelation, or some part of the doctrine of the Scripture, or some such thing
is signified. Therefore, that the Messiah might be understood to be here spoken
of, it was convenient, and in a manner necessary, to call him the word, and not
the word of God; yet I would be loath to stand too much upon this reason,
because our Evangelist Revel. 19. 13
other where doubts not to call him the word of God.

But you will ask, why the Evangelist would call him the Word, and not rather
The Son of God, or The Son. was he affraide ( Basilius homil. in haec
verba. Leontius incomment. Theop. Euthym. ad hunc locum.
as some think) Least if he had named him Son, some men, as the Arians
afterward did, would have conceived grossly, that He must needs have a mother,
as well as a father; and that He was part of his fathers nature, and such
absurd, and blaspemous fancies, as the Turks Alcoran is stuffed withal? If
he would not call him the Son, yet he needed not have named him the word,
seeing he had such choice of titles to give him; The wisdom of the Father,
the Light, the Brightness, and many other of the like kind, as is plain in
the Scripture. It is likely therefore, that there was some especial reason of
that choice. What might that be? Surely it is not unlike, that the Messiah was
commonly so termed among the Jews; or that the second person in the Trinity
was known best to them, by that name. And this later point may the rather be
credited, because Philo. in lib. quod deter. infid. meliori and de opific.
mundi.
Philo a Jew, and no Christian, who lived within the first hundred years after
our Saviors birth, never calls the second person by the name of the Son, but
as our Evangelist here does, (...), The Word. Hence also it was, perhaps,
that Mercur. Trismeg. in Pimandro. Plato in Timaeo. Cicero de vniuersitate
rerum.
the old Philosophers, who fetched their knowledge out of Egypt, speak of a
second nature, which they term (...); yet (I think) they rather conceived him
to be Reason, or Wisdom, then the Word, as a man may see in their writings.
But the promise of the Messiah, being so often renewed, and his coming,
according to promise so continually, and earnestly looked for, if I say it be
likly, that the Jews knew him generally by that name, I suppose I shall say
nothing, which may not reasonably be coniectured. It may be also thus, if the
Chalde Paraphrast (as some affirm he did) usually translated the word Jehovah,
where he thought it belo^ged to the second person, by Memar a word, the Jews
learned of him by the direction of their Rabbis, to call the Messiah by the
name of the Word. But I do not certainly know whether ever he so
translate, or no; that he does not always, I am very sure: and he, that will,
may see as much, in many places of Genesis, I sai, and Jeremy: I forbear to
recite the particulars, because it were to small purpose for this Auditorie. We
see then of whom the Evangelist speaks; let us hearken what he says of him.

The Word was; where partly ignorance, and partly curiosity has bred a
needless, and fruitless question: which though I might not well omit, yet, I
will speak as little of it, as possibly I can. The Evangelist says, He was;
why not Has been? If the question were of the English, every man could, and
would readily answer, that it were no good speech: because Has been is
never spoken, but of that which has an end of being, unless we add some
limitation of time; as when we say, He has been there these two hours, days,
months etc. But the Greek admits no occasion of any question in this case.
For (...)
the Verb which our Evangelist uses, has no such difference of tense, or
time; but whether the matter, or thing, you speak of, be as it was, or be not,
the same word may be used. I will go no farther then this Gospel for proof
of that I say. Ioh. 1. 44.
Philip was of Beth-saida: John. ^. 1.
There was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus. Ioh. 4. 6. 46
There was Jacobs Well. There was a certain Ruler. John 5. 35.
John was a burning, and shining Candle. But what name I so many Patriarchs?
Every Chapter affords proof sufficient. Wherewithal we may observe, that our
English has also the like liberty in the word Was, as the examples I
alleged evidently show. Indeed the Latin may seem to give some warrant, for
the moving of this question; because there are Erat, suit.
two diverse words of the same verb used by the Translater in this verse of
our Savior, and in the sixth of John Baptist. But neither is there any such
difference observed by good Latin Authors in the use of the words; and the
translater, it should seem, intended no such thing. For in another place,
where the same word is in the Original, and the same matter handled, by the
Evangelist, he puts the word fuit (which here he uses) of John; and not
erat, which we have in thy first verse, of our Savior Christ. Ioh. 1. 1.
That, which wa^ from the beginning; fuit, says the vulgar Latin. Wherefore
leaving this conceit, as more subtle, then true let us content our selves, to
understand, that the holy Ghost means to teach us by this word, that even then
when all creatures began to be, the word was, or had his being already. Which
I so speak, as not intending thereby to prejudice Origin. in diuer. hom. 2.
Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 3.
their judgment, who are of opinion, that the word it self may learn us in
this place to consider, that the VVo^d was eternal. Only I take it to be
plain, that no such thing can necessarily be drawn out of the nature of the
word (...).
Was.

But when was this Word? In the Beginning, says our Evangelist. Here grows
a new question, what should be meant by The Beginning. Clem. Alexandr. in
protrept. Origin. in Joan. tract. 1. Cyril. in Joan. lib, 1. cap. 1. Greg.
Nystem. ^d Simplicium.
The Father, as some think, in whom the Son was, and is. But the word Beginning
is never so taken; and it is not fit, except necessity require it, to give a
strange sense to a word often used. And therefore we may not admit Orig. in
Joan. lib. 1. Athanas contr. Arian. quod verbum e^ Deo sit.
that second interpretation, which by the beginning understands God, who is
no where so called in Scripture. Both these expositions, for the matter of
them, are true, but not warrantable by this place. There are two other
explications of this word, which agree for the sense of the place, that our
Savior eternal being is here signified; though they differ much, in the
meaning of the word it self. The former will have the beginning to be taken
for Eternity; the later referres it to the first creation of all things.
Against the former, some take exception, because they say the Word Beginning is
never found in that sense, in the Scripture. But that may well be doubted of;
because it is said of our Savior, that John 6. 64.
He knew from the beginning, who they were that believed not, and who should
betray him; Now this he knew from all eternity. For Hb. 13
nothing is hid from him, who is God everlasting: but all things are always
open in his sight. Therefore the word may sometimes be taken for eternity:
But that will not serve the turn, unless we can show some place, wherein it
must necessarily be so understood. Such as that of John is not: nay rather we
are directed by the Evangelist himself in another place, to conceive, that by
the beginning the calling of the Apostles is signified. John 16. 4
These things said I not unto you, from the beginning; that is, I never told
you of this matter, from the first day of my being conversant with you. That
place Colos. 1. 18
to the Colossians, He is the beginning, and the first begotten of the dead,
may also reasonably, and more fitly be referred to our Savior, as mediator,
then as God everlasting. So can not that in the Revelation, where it is
certain by the first, and last part of the verse, that the Lords everlasting
being is described. Revel. 1. 8.
I am A and O the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which
was, and which is to come. Here though beginning do not, of it self, note
eternity; yet with the ending it does. There is yet a plainer, and certainer
Text to put the matter out of doubt, where 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13
the Apostle says, that God has from the beginning chosen the Thessalonians
to salvation. What is from the beginning, but as the same Apostle speaks in
the like manner in Ephesians. 1. 4
another place, Before the foundation of the world? It cannot therefore be
doubted, but that by The beginning, Eternity is sometimes signified; yet it is
not plain, or certain that it must so be conceived in this place. But we
may reasonably persuade our selves, that if our Evangelist had meant to have
the beginning taken for Eternity, he would have said, as the holy Ghost does
in the Scripture, (...)
From the beginning. For indeed it is no fit speech, to say of any thing, which
we would note to be eternal, that it is in Eternity, but that it has
been, or was from Eternity. Neither if we understand Eternity by the
beginning, will this speech of John suite so well witl that of Moses, Genesis 1. 1
In the beginning God created heaven and earth. To which it is out of question
our Evangelist alludes, and in which Eternity cannot by any means be
signified.

What else then can be meant by the beginning, bu^ the first creation of all
things? For what can any man more easily, and readily understand, when he
reads or hears, In the beginning, then the beginning of time at the creation
of the world? Which also, the rather to direct us to this interpretation, the
Evangelist presently adds, Ioh. 1. 3
By him were all things made; so shall Moses and John agree, and our Savior
most fitly be kept out of that lump in the creation, within which the
blasphemy of heretics would include him: yea more then that, he shall easily
be conceived to have been from all eternity, if he be excepted from the
general creation, wherein all things, that are not eternal, had their first
beginning.

Whereas then our Evangelist says, In the beginning The sense of the
Evangelist.
was the word, it is all one, as if he should thus have spoken; When all
things, that have not an everlasting being, of their own nature began first to
be, by the almighty power of God, the Creator, who made them of nothing, even
then, he that is the eternal Word of the Father, he that from time to time
has declared the will of the Father, he, that was appointed, and promised by
the Father, to be the Messiah, bad already an everlasting being, not by the
will of a superior power, as a thing created, but by the necessity of his own
divine nature, through the eternal generation of God his Father. This is that,
which by our Evangelist is employed in those few words. This is that, which it
concerns all the faithful to believe, without doubting: This is that which
blasphemous c Ebio^, and Cerinthus denied. This Epiphan. Au^. Theodoret. vbi
supra.
is that, whereby their wicked heresy is condemned. Thou tellest us (wretched
heretic as thou art) that JESUS CHRIST had no Being, till he was conceived in
the womb of his mother the blessed Virgin. The holy Ghost says, He was in
the beginning. Thou will have him younger then Mary; the holy Ghost makes him
elder then Adam. In a word thou would persuade us, that he had his first
beginning almost 4000. years after the world was created: the H. Ghost enioyns
us to believe, that he had never had any beginning. For even then already he
was in perfect being, when all things, that had any beginning, became something
of nothing, of not being began to be.

Shall I need to note the doctrine of this text? Who sees not, that it
teaches us the eternity of our Savior Christ? Shall we suite it with other
places of Scripture? The word of the holy Ghost in any one place is
all-sufficient. But let us yield somewhat to humane weakness; that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses, all excuse of infidelity may be utterly cut
off. Hearken then what he says in Reuelat. 1. 8
the Revelation. I am A and O, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come. Does it trouble thee, that is,
was, is to come, note a kind of succession in being? If in our weakness we
could otherwise have conceived of euerlastingnesse, the holy Spirit of God
would have spoken otherwise. But who then should have understood him? Surely,
not every poor soul, whom he purposed to teach by the Scripture. But if
mysteries delight thee, listen to our Savior in Ioh. 8. 58.
this Gospel. Before Abraham was, I am; what is this, I am, before he was? I
understand, I was, before he was or before him. And, I am before him: but I am
before he was, passes my understanding. Yet by this, our Savior would teach
us; that in respect of his nature, he is always one, and the same; not like
us, first Infants, then Children, afterward youths, in the strength of our
age and life, men, in the decay of it old men, and at last no men. Thy years o
my God ( Psalm. 102. 24
says the Prophet) are from generation to generation. Thou have before time
laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure: even they all shall wax old as
does a garment; as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. That this is
spoken of our Savior Christ, Heb. 1. 10
the Apostle shows, by proouing his Godhead, from that place.

To speak truly, and properly, we can not say of God either that He was, or
that he is to come, but only that He is. Therefore when Moses would needs
know his name, God answered, Exodus 3. 14 So rather, then by the future.
I AM that I AM. Also he said, Thus shall thou say to the children of Israel;
I AM has sent me to you. It is he only, that is; as well because he is of
himself, without dependence upon any other, as also for that he is
absolutely, without any change in himself whatsoever. As for us, we so are,
that, in a manner, we are not; because we never continue any time in the same
estate, without some alteration. If we could as plainly see, and as certainly
judge of the inward parts of a man, as we can of his outward countenance, we
should soon perceive, that he is continually waxing, or waning: so that
hardly can we think of any man that He is, but while we are thinking, he is
not in the end of our thought (as short a moment as it is) altogether the
same, that he was in the beginning thereof. But our most glorious Savior JESUS
CHRIST, being eternal, without beginning, without middle, without end, is
always most perfect^y the same; was, is, and is to come, are in him without
all kind of difference, though to our weak capacity, it has pleased him to
vouchsafe so to speak of himself, for our better instruction. Come now, thou
that desire to be for ever, join thy self to him, of whose days there
shall never be end. They, that by faith become one with the Lord Jesus, shall
be sure to be one with him in continuance: look not back what thou have not
been heretofore, but look forward what thou shall be hereafter. Father Ioh. 17.
24
(says the sameour Savior) I will that they, which thou have given me, be
with me even where I am. But where was he, when he spoke this? In his humane
nature upon earth. And there the Disciples at that time were, as well as he.
But by his Godhead, he was even then also in heaven, where he will have all
to be with him, who believe in him, Ioh. 3. 16
that they may not perish, but have life everlasting.

This testimony of the Evangelist concerning our Saviors eternity, was
sufficient to stop the mouths of those first Heretics, and to settle the
faithful in the true belief thereof. But Satan (not discouraged by this fail)
Anno. 290
some 200. years after, stirred up the turbulent and pestilent spirit of Arius,
a man of Alexandria in Egypt, to call the Godhead of our Savior again in
question. It is (...) Father. The Word, that became flesh, showed himself by
his glory, to be the Son of God. Is it not the Word, of whom it follows;
The only begotten Son, Verse 18.
which is in the bosom of the Father, has manifested God Verse 3.
unto us? By the Word all things were made. By the Son ( Heb. 1. 1. 3
says the Apostle) He made the world. And again, Col. 1. 16
By him were al things created, which are in heaven and which are in earth.
What need more words? Our Evangelist shows through the whole Gospel, that he
speaks of no other word, then the Son of God. These things are written (
Ioh. 20. 31
says he) that ye might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST, the Son of God.

Leave we therefore these shifting blasphemies, and let us labor to settle our
hearts in the assured belief of our Savior Christ's divine eternity. To which
purpose, it shall be sufficient for us to remember that, which we heard ere while
out of the Psalm. 102. 27
Psalm. Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail: and that testimony
of Christ himself, Reuelat. 1. 8
I am A and O the beginning, and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, even the Almighty. What can the sottish
heathen, the stubborn Jews, or the brutish Turks now say? Come ye that deride,
and persecute the true religion of the Lord Jesus; you great wisards, that
despise all men as barbarous, in comparison of your selves. Are not you they
that worship stocks and stones, instead of the true God? Are not the Parents of
your greatest, and auntientest gods, easily to be known, and named? I am
ashamed to speak it, but your folly will not suffer it self to be hidden;
Tertullian in Apolog. cap. 25
Were not the sepulchers, and graves of your soueraign god Jupiter, and the
rest to be seen, for many years, by all men, when you sottishly honored them
for gods in heaven, whose carcases lay rotting amongst you in the earth? But
our God is eternal, without beginning, without middle, without ending. He
became man in time; he was God before all time: he died and was buried. But he
overcame death, and rose again, and ascended (in his body) visibly up to
heaven. Look not my brethren, that I should discourse at large of these
matters; I have bin too long already, and I shall have fitter opportunity
hereafter, if God will. Let the Jews with all their malice, and the Romans with
all their power, devise what untruths, and practice whatsoever cruelty they are
able; our God sits in heaven, and laugheth them to scorn, causing his
religion to continue in despite of both, and thereby assuring us of his own
eternal being for ever and ever.

As for the Mohammedan; though he be incredibly shameless in lies, and
blasphemies: yet he is driven to confess, and that often, in his senseless
Alcoran, that Jesus our God, was holy and virtuous, wonderful in miracles, and
a great Prophet of the Lord. Would the wretch Mahomet have yielded so much to
our Savior, if evidence of truth, continued so powerfully, had not wru^g it
out of him? But how could he be holy, or not most profane, if he made
himself the Son of God, and were not? we should be as void of sense, as his
absurd Alcoran, if we should (upon his words) doubt of the holy Evangelists
credit and doctrine, that had been so many hundreds of years continued, and
confirmed by so many glorious Martyrs with their blood, and maintaitained
against all the wisdom, and power of the world before Mahomet was ever heard
of. And yet what brings he, but ignorance, and impudency against the eternity
of our blessed Savior? All he can say is this, that if God have a Son, he must
needs have a Wifeto; not understanding, in his wilful ignorance, that the Lord
God has no more need of a Wife to the begetting of his Son, then of hands
to the making of this world. Yea, if comparison might be made, it is easier
for God to beget a Son like himself, which is natural to him; then to make
the World, which depends upon his will, and has no other necessity of being.
Thus we are feign to speak, according to our poor understanding: we know
that God has a Son; how, himself knows.

As for the Jews, we will send them to be taught of their own countryman
John the Baptist; whom they worthily magnify, as a man sent from God. He it
is Ioh. 1. 27
(says John, of our Savior) that comes after me, which was before me, whose
shoo-latchet, I am not worthy to unloose. But if their own long continued and
grievous calamity, with the destruction of their own City and Temple, in which
they trusted, be not of force to draw them from the blasphemous errors of their
wicked ancestors, surely there is no possibility for any man to persuade them.
Therefore we will leave them to the gracious mercy of God, to be converted to
the truth, in his good time, Phil. 3. 21.
By that mighty power, by which he is able to subdue all things unto himself;
and commend our selves to his fatherly blessing, that we may be strengthened
in faith against all the assaults, and practices of Satan, and his instruments,
and may never doubt of the eternity of our most glorious Savior; but always
ascribe to him with his Father, and the holy Spirit, one true, immortal,
invisible and only wise God, all glory, power, obedience, and thanksgiving,
for ever and ever, Amen.

THE SECOND SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
John, 1. Verse, 1. 2. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God.

2. The same was in the beginning with God.


IT is generally thought, and I think not untruly, that the blasphemous
heresies of Anno, 85
Ebion, and Anno 95
Cerinthus (who denied that our Savior was God, or had any being, before he
took flesh of the holy Virgin his mother) was one especial occasion of
writing this Gospel. To root out that impious conceit, and to establish the
faithful in an assured belief of our blessed Saviors eternal Godhead, our
Evangelist, truly, and with Apostolical authority affirms, that the Word
was in the beginning. Neither does he content himself therewithal: but for
the further instruction of them that believe, he adds, that The Word was
with God, and was God, yea that The same Word was in the beginning with GOD.

The first point of our Saviors eternity, was expounded (as it pleased God to
enhable me) in my former exercise: I am now (by his gracious assistance) to
go forward with that, which follows; The Word was with God. Wherein for the
words themselves, first we must enquire, what is meant by God, then what the
Evangelist would teach us, when he says, The Word was with God.

1. Orig. in Ioa. lib. 2. Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 2
God, when the word is properly taken, not applied to a creature, signifies
either the Divine nature in all three persons, The Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, or only the first of the three, The Father. Examples of the former
are in every leaf, and page of the Scripture.

Let us allege one or two out of this Gospel. Ioh 4. 24
God is a spirit. Not God the Father only: but the Son also, and the holy
Ghost. For this spiritualnesse is a property of the divine nature, not of any
one person therein: else should not the other two be spiritual. The Ioh. 16.
2.
time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think, he does God
service. Surely no man, that kills Christians, for believing in CHRIST JESUS,
can think he does service to the Trinity. For our Savior CHRIST is one of
the three. But the idolatrous heathen, and the superstitious Jews make
account, that they perform acceptable service to God, namely to the divine
nature, when they destroy them, that acknowledge the three persons to be one
God, or deny that there are more Gods then one, or worship our Savior Christ
as God.

Of the later, the old Testament affords us few examples or none, the new very
many: and to make short, wheresoever God and the Son or Jesus Christ are
mentioned together, there by God, the Father is signified. Ioh. 3. 16
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; God? what? not
the divine nature. For that has no Son to give: else should the second person
have a Son, and the third to; because both the Son and the holy Ghost are
the divine nature or God, no less then the Father. But every man's own reason
teaches him, that the Son is the Fathers Son. So that by God, which gave
his Son, God the Father is understood. The same Father is also meant by the
name of God, when he is mentioned with Christ. Romans 1. 8
I thank my God (says the Apostle) through JESUS CHRIST, even him, whom in
the next Verse before he had called God our Father; Verse, 7 Verse, 9
and whose Son in the ver. following he makes Jesus Christ. God is my
witnessewhome I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son. Of the same
kind are all those places, where there is any mention of praying to God, in,
or thorough CHRIST. For, to him has our Savior taught us to pray. Luke, 11. 2
When ye pray say, Our Father which art in heaven, Ioh. 16. 23
Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name he will give it you.

Now let us see, in whether of these two significations the word God is to be
taken, in this place. Surely, not in the former, because then The Word should
have been with himself: which is no reasonable speech. For who understands
not, that every thing which is said to be with an other, is diverse from that,
with which it is said to be? Therefore if the Word vverewith God; the Word
was not God. But the Evangelist directly avouches, that the Word was God:
What remains then, if by God we will have the Divine nature to be meant, but
that we must confess, there are two Gods? The Word, and he, with whom the
Word was. But it is certain in Religion and reason, that there is but one
God. And therefore God may not at any hand be conceived in this place to be
put for the Divine Nature or Godhead. If it seem to any man, that the Word
may be said to be with God, though it be God, as a man's soul is said to be
with him, whose soul it is; August. de Trinit. lib. 6. cap 2.
I must desire him to consider, that the reason is not alike. For the soul is
part of the man, with whom it is said to be; but the word is not part of the
divine nature: which is most simple, and free from all kind of composition.

It is easy then for any man to conclude, that God in this part of the Verse,
is the first person in the Trinity, God the Father. And that it may the rather
appear, unto us, that we rightly understand and expound the Evangelist, we
have his own warrant; where speaking of the same our blessed Savior, he
says of him, that 1. Ioh. 1. 2
He was with the Father: I forbear to enlarge the matter. Every man may
easily perceive that our Euange. list handles the same point in both places,
that he need not doubt, but that God, (...)
with whom the Word was, is God the Father. What shall we say then of that
collection, that some make upon the Article, which is used by the Evangelist,
in the Greek? He says not simply, God (say these men) but The God, giving us
thereby to understand, that our Savior was with the true God; not with him who
was God, but only by favor, and not also by nature. That, they say concerning
God, is true and certain. But we have learned, that the person is there
signified, and not the nature. And therefore it could not be the Evangelists
meaning to note unto us the truth of the divine nature by that article.

Neither (I think) was there ever any heretic found, who denied that God,
with whom the word is said to have bin, was God by nature; what the^ means
the article? Doubtless, either it is added only according to the custom of the
greek tongue, whereof there are infinite examples in all authors, and namely in
the new Testament; or else (if any thing were intended by it) the Evangelist
meant to show, that in this clause of the sentence he put the word God in
another sense, then he does in the clause following, where the article is
omitted: but I rather persuade my self, that there is nothing intended therein
by the holy Ghost; but the manner of speech observed, according to the nature
of the language.

Some man perhaps will yet farther demand, why the Evangelist did not speak
plainly, as he meant, and call him the Father, rather then God. To whom I
answer, that the Evangelist, having in the former part named The Word, and not
The Son, does here more fitly mention God, then the Father. For so the
nature of the things seems to require; The Son of the Father, the Word of
God. Besides, it helps that elegancie, which the holy Ghost uses in this
place, making the last word of the former clause, the first of the later. In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the
Word. For so lie the words in the Greek, whereof anon. Now if in the second
clause, he had said, The Word was with the Father, the grace of the speech
had been lost, because he could not have repeated the word in the beginning of
the clause, that follows. For it cannot be truly said, that the Father is the
Word, or the Word the Father: but to say, God was the the Word, is a true
and an elegant speech. What if we add hereunto, that in the old Testament,
where the Messiah is spoken of, there (ordinarily) not the Father, but God is
named? when the first inkling of the promise was given, who gave it but God?
Then Genesis 3. 14. 15
the Lord God said to the Serpent. Come to the express making of the promise,
to which the holy Ghost calls us, Romans 4. 13. 16 Ga^. 3. 14. 16
when he speaks of the promise by name, and which Gal. 3. 8
the Apostle Paul terms the preaching of the Gospel: Was it not God that
said to Abraham, Genesis 12. 1. 3
In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed? To be short look from
the beginning of Genesis to the end of Malachy, and see how often you find any
distinct mention of the first person, under the name of the Father. Therefore
he that made choice of such a name for our Savior CHRIST, as he was well
known by, among the Jews, could not do better, then by the like wisdom, so
to speak of God the Father, as his speech might be best approved, and
understood.

God then, in this second part of the verse, signifies The Father. But what is
the Evangelists meaning when he says, The Word was with God? What is it to
be with the Father? Many and diverse have been the conjectures of the
learned, concerning this matter. That the unity of nature in the Father, and
the Son, was hereby signified. But that is sufficiently manifest, by the last
clause, where the Word is affirmed to be God For seeing there can be but one
God, and that the Son is avouched to be God, as well as the Father, who sees
not, that they are both one and the same God, and so all one in their divine
nature? But this and most of the other opinions, which I will not trouble you
withal in this kind of exercise, are rather consequents that follow upon
that, which our Evangelist intended, then the very point it self, which he
did intend. First therefore let us search out the principal drift of these
words, and afterward as need shall be, pursue those points, that are
necessary. What may then be the sense of this word with? what should we
seek far? Basil. homil. in haec verba.
take it as it commonly signifies, and it will agree with Saint John's occasion
and purpose. He had said in the former words that The Word had already his
being, when all things, that ever were created, began first to be. What would
a man reasonably doubt of hereupon? Was the Word before the world, before the
creation, before there was any time or place, wherein he might be? where was
he then? To this, our Evangelist answers plainly and readily. The Word was
with God. As if he should have said: Do you doubt whether the Word were in
the beginning or no, because you cannot imagine, where he should be, when as
yet there was no world to be in? Can you conceive, that God was, who is the
Father of the Word? Look then where he was, and there was the Word. For
the Word was with God. Even as the inward conception or word, which the
understanding of man frames within him, is with the man, where he is: so the
Word of God, is with God. This I take to be the plain and certain meaning of
the Evangelist, and that according to the true judgment of some ancient and
later writers.

Here Arius bestirres himself, and hearing that our Savior The Word was with
God, he dreams, that He was nothing else, but a created Spirit, created
indeed before the world, but yet created; as (says he) it may evidently be
gathered, because The Word being with God, was not God, with whom he was. Who
is so blind, as he, that wilfully refuses to see? Every child can answer
Arius, that The Word was not God the Father, with whom he is said to have
been: yet was the same God: distinct in person, all one in nature: so then he
was truly with the Father, as another Alius, nou aliud
person, not of a diverse nature from the Father, a^ another God.

Give me leave here, I pray you, to begin a short examination, and
refutation of our Rhemists annotations, upon their Testament; I will take them
in my way, as I go, from verse to verse. Genebrard. d^ Trinit. lib. 1.
Lindan. dialog 2. Petrus Cams le Ioa. Baptista in praesat.
Some of the Papists, of more reading then judgment, raised a slander of
Calvin, as a blasphemer, because he denved CHRIST to be God of God the
Father, and affirmed, that being Jehovah, he was, in that respect, of
himself. This our Rhemists lay hold on, and boldly enough censure him for
blasphemy. I have no purpose to dispute the question with them; neither
indeed, do they so much as offer, either to refute Caluines opinion, or to
confirm their own. If shall be enough therefore to control their malapertnesse,
and to ouer-waigh their presumption, that Bellarm. tom. 1 de Chrisio. lib. 2.
cap. 19.
Cardinal Bellarmine, where he disputes the point of set purpose, after he had
considered all that the authors of that slander bring out of Calvin, and
examined Caluins writings himself, refuses to condemn him of any such
heresy, as Genebrard, Lindan, Canisius, and these Rhemists charge him withal.
Yea, he proceeds to allege proof out of Calvin, that he conceived truly,
and writ accordingly, of our Savior Christ's divine nature and person. The
sum of that which Calvin holds touching this point, is thus delivered by
Bellarmine: that our Saviors divine nature is so of himself, that if you
remove from the Son, all relation to the Father, there will remain nothing,
but the divine essence, which is of it self. That is, in plain words, If you
consider our Savior as GOD only, not as the Son, he is not of the Father,
but of himself. This is that dangerous heresy, for which our judicious
Rhemists have given sentence against Calvin, as a blasphemer. Bellarmine
cleares him of the fault, and condemns only the terms, wherein he delivers
his mind. But it were easy to justify both the one, and the other, by the
writings of See Thom. de error. Graec. cap. 4. Guliel. Occha^. Centilog.
Theolog. conclus. 62 Holkot in detec. q. 5. art. 2. ad 6. contra 1. concl. and
q. 10. art. 3.
the most subtle Schoolmen, if it were fit for this place, and auditory. In
private I will be ready to give any man satisfaction.

But to leave these matters whereinto the peruerseness of men has drawn us,
and to return to the Evangelists purpose: It is to be held for an undoubted
truth in divinity, that our Savior, the Word, was with God before the
beginning of the world: will you hear him say as much of himself. prouer. 8.
27 Ver. 29. 30
When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set the compass upon the
deep. A little after, when he appointed the foundations of the earth, then
was I with him; Not only rejoicing to see the glory of God his Father, but
being himself full possesser of that glory: which shone so bright, that when
he came into the world, ouer-shadowed with the darkness of our humane nature,
yet all the Angels of God discerned it, and Heb. 6. 1.
fell down to worship him.

The comfort of a poor distressed soul is in 1. Cor. 2. 2.
Jesus Christ crucified: But the glory of a Christian is in Jesus Christ
reigning with God his Father. Therefore when the end of his life approached,
John 17. 24.
He prayed that all which his Father had given him, might be even where he was,
that they might behold his glory, which God had given him. But what glory
means he? Any new honor of late vouch saf't him? No, no. It is the same
glory, which he always had, and shall have. Glorify me thou Father, with
Verse. 5.
thine own self, with the glory, which I had with thee, before the world was.
Let me speak now to thee poor soul whosoever thou art, that find thy
self grievously vexed, and daungerously assaulted by Satan, concerning these
great mysteries of Religion: would he have thee doubt, whether our blessed
Savior was before his mother or no? The holy Ghost assures thee by the pen
of our Euangeiist, that The word was in the beginning. Does he press thee
farther, to tell him, where he was, as if he could not be, because there was no
world for him to be in? Herein also the wisdom of God, has prevented him.
The Word was with God. Thou art persuaded assuredly, that God was before the
world: else, how should he have created the world? Can thou tell me where he
was? or do thou think he is any where now, where he was not then? This
goodly frame of the world, which thou beholdest, and wonderest at, not without
great cause, is not any new house built for God to dwell in; but a fair piece
of workmanship, that thou might see a little shadow of the workemans skill,
power and glory. God is a Spirit, infinite in all perfections, that cannot
remove from one place to another, because he is every where. If thou can
believe these things, which the very light of Nature can teach thee, thou have
wherewithal readily to answer Satan; The Word was with God. If thou Satan,
dare not, nor can for very shame deny or doubt that God was before the
foundations of the world were laid; where thou see God, I see the Word my
appointed Savior with him.

This I take to be the true and natural sense of the words, and the very proper
meaning of our holy Evangelist, S. John. Now let us add the other
observations, rather then interpretations: which, as before I signified, are
not directly intended, but necessarily follow upon the former doctrine. And
first we will consider that, which shows our Saviors Divine Nature: then we
will deliver those points, which concern his person; both, shortly, and
plainly, as it shall please God to vouchsafe assistance. Now the Divine Nature
or Godhead of our Savior Christ appears in this, that being with God, when as
yet there never had bin any thing created, he culd be no other, but God. For
how is it possible, that when there is nothing but God, that, which is then,
should not be God? If you say with Arius, that he was created; you deny that
the beginning of all creation is truly described by Moses when he says, Genesis
1. 1.
In the beginning God created heaven and earth. For if that you say be true,
the most excellent part of the creation was already past, namely the making of
him, by whom all these things afterward were created. Who taught this strange
Divinity? Where is any such thing recorded in any part of Scripture? Who is so
shameless, as to say he has it by revelation? Who so senseless as to believe
him, that will say so? This is our wisdom, to know what it has pleased God
to reveal to us in the Scripture, either expressly, or by consequence, and to
account nothing else a matter necessary to be believed. So then, when we read
or hear that our Savior was with God, we learn thereby, that he is
himself God. For what can be be but God, that had his being before, and
without all creation?

The word perhaps troubles thee, because he is said to have been with God, and
therefore as it may seem, not God, but an other. An other? Thou say well.
Tertullian. contra Praxea^ cap. 8.
For he is indeed in person (as I answered once before) another. But where
thou say not God, thou ^rt deceived, unless by God thou understand the
person of the Father. With God signifies distinction of person, not diversity
of Nature.

Therefore i some learned Divines, by with, think the holy Ghost meant to note
his conjunction with Hilar. de Triit. lib. 2.
God the Father, whereby they are one in unity of the same Divine substance.
To which also, they apply that which follows in this Chapter, where John 1.
18.
The only begotten Son, is said to be in the bosom of the Father, and that
Ioh. 14. 10. 11
Chapter 14. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; yea Epiphan. ^aeres. 93.
says one, He is so with God, that he is in the substance of God, and his
very nature. Wherefore if at any time thou be disquieted by the word with, as
if it ^mplied some difference betwixt God and the Word, remember that God
signifies the person of the Father, from whom the Son is truly and really
distinguished; ^et not by the nature of his Godhead, which is one in both, but
by the property of his being the Son, in which the Father and he are always
not one but two: ^he one the Father, the other the Son.

And this last point, concerning our Savior Christ's person, Tertullian. contra
Praxea^ cap. 12.
is manifestly, and undoubtedly proved by this part of the verse. For it
cannot be imagined, that any thing being in all respects, one and the same,
should be said to be with it self, or in it self. The word was with God:
If there be no distinction betwixt the word and God, how can it be conceived
that the word was with God? I shall need to spend the less time and pains in
this matter, because none but August. de haer. cap. 4.
the Sabellians, ever made question of it. They deceived themselves and other
men, with an unlikely fancy, against evidence of Scripture, that God was but
one person; called in diverse respects, sometimes the Father, sometimes the
Son, and sometimes the holy Ghost. But what respect can make this speech
reasonable, if there be but one person in the Godhead? Let us consider the
point a little better. David was in regard of his government a king, in respect
of his son Solomon a father, in relation to his wife Bersheba an husband, for
his general nature a man. May I say of him, because of these diverse respects,
that the father of Saelomon, was with David; or with the man, meaning David?
Would not a man laugh at the absurdity of such a speech? It cannot be then,
but that he, which was with God, was really distinct, or was truly and indeed
another from him, with whom he was. No respect will free the speech from a
just imputation of absurdity, if the party spoken of, be one and the same,
as well for person, as for nature. I reserve the farther handling of this matter
till I come to the end of the verse following, where I purpose if it please
God, to deliver the doctrine of the holy Trinity.

It may also farther be gathered, that the Evangelist in saying, The word was
with God, would have us to understand, that he, Gal. 4. 4.
which, in the fullness of time appointed by God, took flesh of the Virgin
Mary, was till that time with God, though unseen and unknown to the world;
not as if he were not there still, (for even while he was here upon the earth,
he was also at the same time continually in heaven; Ioh. 3. 13. and 17. 23.
The Son of man, which is in heaven: and I will that they be, where I am) but
because he came into the world, where before he had not been in the nature of
man. Heereto belongs that, which is other-where written by the 1. John. 1. 2.
3.
same Saint John. We declare unto you the eternal life, which was with
Father, and was made manifest to us. He was with the Father from everlasting,
he appeared in the world, at the appointed time. So is he now again with God,
because he is no longer visible on earth, as sometimes he was.

We may also add hereunto, that Ambros. de incarna. domini Greg. Nysten. de
fide ad Simplic. Rupertus a^ hunc locum Cyril. Hieorosol. Cateches 11.
this being with the Father implies the glory, he had, and has with him: as if
he should have said, The word which was in the beginning, was at the right hand
of God, in the glory of the Father, equal to the Father. Why seek you the
Creator amongst the Creatures? If you desire to know where the Word was,
consider that he was at the right hand of God the Father, partaker of that
glory, which the Lord neither will, nor can give to any, which is not the same
God with him. But of this enough. Let us come to the last part of the verse.

And the Word was God; or as the Greek words lie, God was the Word: but our
tongue will hardly bear that kind of speech, unless the sense be altered. For
if you say, God was the Word, an English man will conceive that you tell him
what God was, and not what the Word was. The Greek, and Latin may well bear
such placing of the words, the English will not: yet perhaps it had been
plainer even in the Greek, to have set the words in order, as the sense of
them was intended, and to have said, The word was God.

But the Evangelist (as I noted once before, upon occasion) followed an
elegancie of speech, which had bin lost, if he had kept the natural order of
the words. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God
was the word. The like figure also has Moses. Gene. 1. 1.
In the beginning God created heaven and earth, and the earth was without
form. But our Evangelist affordes us more examples of it. John. 1. 4. 5
In it was life, and that life was the light of men. And the light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. Can any man doubt, that the
holy Ghost intended to keep the elegancy of the figure? Are not the Sermons of
our Savior himself beautified with flowers of Eloquence? Does not the
prophecy of Esaie flow with streams of Rhetoric? I dare boldly say, It is
a very hard matter, to match the beginning of that book, for variety and
force of Eloquence, out of the writings of any of the heathen Orators, Greek
or Latin, quantity for quantity; That we may justly blame the ignorance, and
boldness of them, who think it a dishonor to the Gospel, that the preaching
thereof should be graced with humane Eloquence.

I would know of these men, what it is, they call humane Eloquence: and what
Eloquence there is in the Scripture, which may not bear that name, without any
disgrace thereunto. Are there not the same tropes, and figures, both of the
word and the sentence in the writings of men, yea of heathen men, which are in
the Scripture? Or if the Scripture have any, which men have not yet observed,
may they not learn from thence, asto live holily, so to speak eloquently? If
any man imagine, that the holy Ghost has either appropriated any ornament of
speech to himself, in the Scripture, or that he devised new tropes and
figures, for his own Secretaries the holy Prophets and Apostles; the writings
of the heathen (wherein all those elegancies are to be found) will give
evidence against his ignorance. I deny not, that there is a certain majesty
shining in the Scripture, which no man can worthily express by imitation, or
by meditation conceive sufficiently. But this arises, partly from the matter
it self, and partly from the skill of using those Rhetorical ornaments,
wherein, as in all things, the holy Ghost, that taught them, is perfect;
whereas men have but a shadow as it were of his perfection. But I may not spend
too much time in this matter: only thus much, I will add; that he, which in
his public ministry shall either willingly refrain, or carelessely neglect
to use the help of human learning, and namely of Rhetoric (whereof only
we have now occasion to speak) shall both fail in his duty to God, and
come short of that worthy effect of preaching, whereby the love of God to us,
is most gloriously set forth, and our love to God most ardently set on fire.
It is the spirit of God, that begets faith and obedience: But not without those
means, by which he has enabled his servants to teach, and persuade. The
principal thing, is the matter, as it were the dart or arrowe that pierces
the heart of man, by the power of the Spirit. But speech is, as it were the
arm; and Eloquence, the thong or string, whereby it is sent with force to the
mark it aims at. He that trusts in Eloquence, makes flesh his arm. He that
despises Eloquence, takes strength from his arm. It is our duty to use the
means. It is Gods blessing that the means take effect: and of this, upon this
occasion, enough.

Now in expounding the words, ere I come to the meaning of the place, I will
first touch a cavil of August. de doctrine. Christia. lib. 3. cap. 2.
the Arians, whereby they endeavored to void the evidence, that is brought in
here for our Savior Christ's Godhead. What could be spoken more plain, then
for the Evangelist to say, The Word was God? Yet would they shift off the
matter, by mangling the sentence, in this sort. God Was; say the Arians; what
shall then become of the Word? That (say they) belongs to the next verse, which
must thus be read; The same word was in the beginning with God. I told you
before, that the order of the words in the text is, God was the Word. In our
language, word may not be put before this, or this same: In Greek it may, and
so in Latin. How then shall we answer the Arians? Plainly, and truly; that
there was no reason, why the Evangelist should tell us, that God was. For
neither did any man doubt of it, and he had said sufficient to that purpose in
the former clause, when he affirmed that The Word was with God: with whom the
Word, could not be conceived to be, but that the being of God must of
necessity be presupposed. Besides, the holy Ghost in the Scripture, never
speaks of God, to show his being by Was, but either by Is, the present tense
or time, as we call it; Exodus 3. 14
I am sent me: or by all three times; Revel. 1. 8.
Is, Was, Shall be; which was, which is, and which is to come: yea the very
clauses of the verse might have taught them, that the Word must needs belong
to this verse. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. Cut off the Word from this last clause, and you make it
altogether unlike the former, and spoil the grace of the speech. Let the
Arians go then with their foolish shift, and go we forward in our exposition.

Wherein we are first to learn, what the Evangelist means by God, then to
show how the sentence it self is to be understood. In the former clause one
person of the Trinity, even the first, God the Father was signified, by the
name of God, which is common to all the three. Here the same word is taken in
the proper sense, nothing the Divine Nature. There needs no other proof of
this matter, but only to make you see that if you vndersta^dit of any one
person, you avouch somewhat which is untrue. For example, will you say God the
Father is the Word, or the Word was the Father? By this manner of speech you
confound, and so destroy the persons, whose very being necessarily requires,
that the one be not the other. Neither may we say, that the holy Ghost was the
Word, or the Word the holy Ghost. For the same errors ensue thereupon, and the
Trinity of persons is overthrown thereby. It cannot be then, but that God, in
this last part of the verse, must of necessity be taken for the Godhead or
Divine nature; whereupon it follows necessarily, that our Savior Christ is
God.

Against this the Sabellians (who acknowledge no distinction of persons)
except; and labor to persuade us, that the Evangelist is rather thus to be
expounded: God was the Word, that is (say they) That God the Father, with whom
the word was, was nothing else, but the word it self. How false, and foolish
this exposition is, if any man see not by himself, he may thus easily
discern. To what purpose could it be, for the Evangelist to tell us, that the
Word was with God, if he were nothing else, but God, in no respect truly and
really distinct from him, with whom he is said to have been? Had it not been
readier, and fitter for him, to have added this last clause to the first, and
to have left the middlemost out? If you doubt where This Word was, who I say
was in the beginning, he was God: who can look for any better answer? For it
were a senseless blasphemy to ask, where God was, whom all men grant to be
infinite. But that middle clause, The Word was with God, troubles the whole
sentence, darkens the sense, yea to say the truth, leaves no sense at all, if
there be no distinction of Persons. For (as I showed erewhile) no man can
either truly say, or reasonably conceive, that any thing, because of some
diverse accidental respects, is with itself. Our Evangelist Saint John was an
Apostle of our Savior Christ, the Disciple, whom Jesus loved, the brother of
James, the son of Zebede; I might add many other such differences. But,
might I therefore say of him, The Disciple, whom Jesus loved, was with the
Evangelist John, and that Disciple was John? It is one thing to be the
Evangelist John, another thing to be with the Evangelist John. That agrees to
none, but to John himself: this may belong to any, but to him. Therefore
howsoever these later words, God was the Word, might of their own nature admit
such an interpretation; yet considering the former clause, to which they are
joined, it is absurd so to expound them. What if I add herunto, that the holy
Ghost himself seems to tell us, that the word God is not to be understood, in
this last clause, as it was in the former, because it is put here without the
Article? Surely the Sabellians shall have nothing to answer, but that which
will confirm the distinction of the Father, and of the Son, as two persons.
But of this, by and by.

The order of the words in English, shows the sense; in Greek it does not so:
but that word, which is first in place, oftentimes is last in the meaning of
the writer, or speaker. God was the Word, says our Evangelist. Yet Basil.
homil. in haec verba Hilar de Trinit. lib. 7.
the first word God in sense follows the last, as if he should have said, The
Word was God: How shall that appear, since the words will bear as well the
one as the other? It shall appear by these reasons. First the question was not
of God, whether he were before the beginning of the world or no, for that was
neither denied, nor doubted of by Christians, or Heretics. But the eternal
Being of our Savior Christ, and his Godhead were impugned by Cerinthus, and
Ebion, which gave our Evangelist some occasion of writing this Gospel. It was
fit therefore, that he should teach the Church, and confound the Heretics by
saying, that The Word was God. Secondly, we have direction for the expounding
of this clause, from both the former: wherein The Word is still the first part
of the sentence; and look what is affirmed, it is affirmed of the Word. The
Word was in the beginning: The Word was with God; In like manner, the
Evangelist, continuing his discourse, must needs be understood to say, The
Word was God; which indeed was the very thing, he meant to avouch of him.
This is farther confirmed, by that, which follows All things were made by it,
and without it was made nothing, Verse, 3. 4
that was made. In it was life, and so forth. Do you not perceive, that all
these particulars, here spoken, are spoken of the word? If then both the
clauses that go before, and the sentences, that follow after, belong to the
word, and not to God, what show of reason is there, to take that one piece out
of the midst of the rest, and apply it to God, contrary to the whole course
of the matter, and intent of the writer? I will not add farther (as I might)
that not only this beginning of the Gospel, but the whole frame of it, and the
maine scope of it, is to teach us, John, 20. 31
That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. If any man be so perverse, as that
all, which hitherto has bin said, will not satisfy him; yet let him be
persuaded by the Evangelist himself, who leaving out the Article before (...)
God, and putting it before the Word, leads us to begin at the end, for the
sense of that he writes. This cannot be expressed in English, nor will be
conceived by them, that have no skill in the original Greek: but in the text
it self, the difference is very manifest.

We have then the true meaning of the holy Ghost in these words, The Word was
God. He, that was in the beginning, and was with God, was also himself God.
Here arises a doubt, why the Evangelist adds this clause; seeing the Godhead
of our Savior might be certainly, and necessarily concluded out of the two
former branches, as it has manifestly appeared in the opening of them. He,
that had a being, when as yet there was no creature, and was with God, when
there was nothing that was not God, could not possibly be any other then God.
Why then is it added that The Word was God? Surely (as I take it) to prevent
that objection, which might arise in the conceit of some; If he were with God,
it may seem, that he was not God. To which, the Evangelist thus answers in
effect. Though he were with God, in respect of his person; yet, in regard of
his nature, he himself was God. This I grant was implied in the former: but
in a matter of so great moment, it pleased the holy spirit of God to have a
gracious regard of our weakness, and to speak so, as the true^l might be
evident to all men, and so high a mystery of Religion have a clear and sound
demonstration.

The point then, which is here delivered, is this; Jesus Christ, the promised
Messi^h, is God. And because, the matter is of especial importance, and no
place so fit, as this, for the handling of it, I think it best to follow it
somewhat largely: the rather because I mean to do it now once for all; but as
occasion shall be offered, for the clearing of some textes, here and there, in
this Gospel. The first proof that our Savior Christ is God, may be taken
from those places of Scripture, where the names, that are proper to the true
and only God, are given to Jesus Christ. For it is out of question, that
howsoever some of those titles are, now and then, ascribed to men, with some
addition, or in some respect; yet no creature is absolutely called God, Lord,
the most high, or by any other such name. Of all these the most common, for
ordinary use, is God; which we find often in every leaf of the Scripture,
where the true God Jehovah is spoken of. How often is our Savior called God?
Thomas acknowledges him to be so, when he says unto him, Ioh. 20. 28.
My Lord, and my God; allnding questionless to the ordinary title, which is
given to God, in the old Testament; The Lord thy God. Exodus 20. 2.
I am the Lord thy God. Leuit. 19. 10.
I am the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
The commandments of the Lord your God. And in a word, the same Chapter
affords us the like examples 15. or 16. times. So does Act. 20. 28.
the Apostle Paul call him. Take heed to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost
has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood; Who purchased the Church with his blood, but Jesus Christ?
Him therefore does the Apostle call God. And ^n another place he doubts not
bodly to affirm, that Christ is God over all, to be blessed for ever. Of him
it is that Romans 9. 5. Heb. 1. 8.
the same Apostle says, Thy throne (O God) endures for ^uer; not only calling
him God, but professing him to ^e that God, which in the beginning created
heaven and Verse 10
^arth. Thou Lord in the beginning laydst the foundation of of the earth. I will
end, with that in the Revel. 4. 8.
Revelation; The four beasts ceased not day, nor night, sying, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God almighty. But how should we be assured, that by this Lord God
Almighty, Jesus Christ is signified? That, which follows, will put the
matter out of doubt Chap. 14. 8.
which was, and which is, and which is to come. For this ^^ ^he Title, which is
given to our Savior twice in the first Chapter of the same book. This also
the 24. Elders presently after confirm when worshipping the same party, whom
the four beasts had honored, they speak thus; Thou art worthy (O Lord) to
receive glory, ^ap. 4. 11.
honor and power: for thou have created all things. Ask the holy Apostle S.
Paul, who is the Creator of all things. He^ ^ has answered already, that the
Lord, which laid the foundation of the earth, is JESUS CHRIST, the Son of
God. The same testimony of him gives our Evangelist in the next verse same
one; Heb. 1. 10.
By him were all things made. John. 1. 3.
What should let then, but we may conclude, that Jesus, being so often called
God in Scripture, is in deed very God?

The like I say of the title Lord, by which the 70. translate (...)
that name Jehovah; which is never attributed to any in the Scripture, but
only to the true God: neither indeed may it in any sort. For it signifies
him This is spoken not the Greek, ^ut of the Hebrew word.
that has his being of himself, that gives to all things, whatsoever being
they have: yea it implies such a being, as is always one and the same; even
eternal, without beginning, without ending, without change, without
succession. Now if this name be ascribed to our Savior by holy Ghost, how can
it be doubted, but that he is very God? And does not Iere. 33. 16
Jeremy ascribe it to him, when he says, This is the name, whereby they shall
call him, The Lord our righteousness? or, as it may better be read, He, that
shall call her, is the Lord our righteousness. It is out of question, that the
Messiah is there spoken of, whom the Prophet called Jehovah The Lord: Or if any
man will needs apply it to the Church, he shall call her The Lord our
righteousness (which yet has no warrant, nor any great reason) let him
remember, that the Church cannot have this title, but only in respect of
Christ her husband, and head; as she is also called Christ. 1. Cor. 12. 12.
As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body
which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body; even so is Christ,
that is the Church of Christ; which being considered with her Head Christ, is
vouchsafed his name, because she is his body. Let us come to the new Testament:
and leaving those places, where the Disciples, and such as entreat favor (for
their curing) of our Savior, call him Lord; because neither their word is any
warrant for doctrine, and it may be said they spoke to him by that name, as we
ordinarily do, when we say Sir; which indeed was common among the Grecians:
Let us take such textes only as can admit neither of these exceptions. Of
which kind are the salutations used by the Apostles in the beginning of their
Epistles. Romans 1. 7.
Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. Where not only our Savior is termed Lord, but acknowledged to be the
Author, and giver of Grace and peace, with God his Father. But it were a vain
thing to heap up many testimonies to this purpose. No man can look into the
writings of the Apostles, but he shall see them in every page. Being the Lord
then, he must needs be God.

What should I stand upon every particular at large? Who is the God of glory,
but Jehovah the great God of heaven and earth? For so is he called, that
appeared to Abraham Gene. 12. 1. 2
in Genesis; The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, Act. 7. 2.
says the holy Martyr Saint Steven. Ask the enemies of Christ the Jews, and
they will tell you with one voice, that this was the great God of Israel. And
yet the Apostle Paul gives this title to our Savior Christ; where he says,
that if the princes of this world, had known the wisdom of God in the
mystery of our redemption, 1. Cor. 2. 8.
They would not have crucifi^d the Lord of glory. Hereto belongs that Title; 1.
Tim. 6. 15
the King of kings, and Lord of lords. And whereas some vain men, governors
of some small part of this little spot of earth, doting upon their own
imagined greatness have either given themselves this unlimited title, or
accepted it, being given by the palpable flattery of their base vassals; yet
always the wiser sort took just occasion thereby, rather to scorn their
presumptuous folly, then to be drawn into any admiration of their glorious
power. But the Lord Jesus, our blessed Savior, has this name by good right;
as he, of whom ^ll the Kings of the earth, hold their Crowns and Prou. 8 15.
16
Scepters. By me (x says he, that is the wisdom o^ God) Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and the Nobles, and all the Judges
of the earth. Psalm. 2. 8. Verse 9.
For to him has God given the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the earth for his possession. He shall crush them with a Scepter of
Iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Therefore are they
advised, and charged to kiss the Son, least he be angry, to their destruction.
Verse 12.
There is good cause then, why he should be styled, the Lord of lords, and King
of kings. What though he be the Lamb, meek and tender; yea bound, and slain?
yet Revel. 17. 14.
shall he overcome the 10. kings that fight against him. For he is the Lord of
lords, and King of kings: yea, Revel. 19. 16.
he has that name written upon his garment, and upon his thigh, The king of
kings and Lord of lords. His glory and his strength show him to be no less.
And can we doubt whether he be God, or no? If I should recite the Attributes
or Epithets, which being proper to God, are belonging to our Savior Christ: If
I should but name those admirable effects of his, which are above the strength
of any and all creatures, the time would sooner fail me, then variety of
matter; which does offer it self to me so plentifully, that it is harder to
find, where to make an end, the^ what to say. Do you wonder at the eternity of
God, as a thing not to be reached unto by the conceit of man? Behold him, that
is Revel. 1. 8.
A and O, the beginning and the ending, which was, which is, and which is to
come. What say I, was, is, is to come? Thus indeed has it pleased our gracious
Savior, to speak of his eternal being, to our capacity. But let us hear him
speak more like himself, that is more like God: John 8. 58.
Before Abraham was I am. This is a speech better beseeming his majesty. For
nothing can be properly said of him, concerning his being, but only that he
is. That, which was, either is not at all, or at the least, is not, in all
respects, the same, that it was. That, which is to come, as yet either has no
being at all, or surely no such being, as is signified it shall have in time to
come. But what stand I repeating that, which before I delivered? Let us pass
from this infiniteness in time, which we call eternity, and come to another
like attribute: which wants a name, but belongs to quantity; and might be
termed Immensitie, if our ears and understanding were acquainted with it. As
eternity signifies the infiniteness of God in time, so does Immensitie in
greatness. Isai. 61. 8.
Thus says the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool.
There is no number of years that can express the Lords Eternity: no compass
of place that is able to contain his Immensitie. Psalm. 139. 7 Verse 8.
Whither shall I flee from thy presence? says the king of Israel, that had
choice enough of room, wherein to hide himself. If I ascend into heaven, thou
art there. If I he down in hell, thou art there. Let me take the wings of
Verse 9. Verse 10.
the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea: yet thither shall
thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. But what need many
particulars? He that is present in heaven and in earth, can be shut out of no
place, whatsoever: our Savior is ascended into heaven, yet is he still present
with his children here in earth: Matthew. 28. 2^
Behold I am with you, till the end of the world. By his power (you will say)
not by his presence. Doubtless an infinite power, such as protecteth the
Church of Christ, cannot be in a finite nature. Let us hear him speak more
plain; Matthew. 18. 20
Whersoeuer two or three are gathered together in my name there am I in the
midst of them. Or if this also may applied to power; yet that place is without
exception: John 3. 13.
No man ascends up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of
man, which is in heaven. He came down from heaven, because being God, he
became man: he was for all that still in heaven, because being man, he ceased
not to be God. Therefore also, while he was alive on earth, before his passion,
he doubted not to avouch, that he was even then in heaven. John. 17. 24
Father, I will that they, which thou have given me, be with me, even where I
am, that they may behold that my glory. Where is that to be seen, but in
heaven? For so has our Savior said himself, before in that prayer; And now
glorify me (thou father) with thine Verse 5.
own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. Not as
if heaven, or never so many heavens were able to contain that his infinite
glory, which can be no way bounded by any means, but because there i^ shows it
self most appara^tly. Shall I need to add hereunto his power, or rather
Almightinesse? Revel. 1. 8
I am A and O, the beginning and the ending says the lord, which is, which
was, and which is to come, even the Almighty. And twice afterward in the same
book, he is called Reu. 4. 8. and 11. 17.
The Lord God Almighty. But if the Scripture had not said any such thing of
him, yet his admirable works sound out his power and glory. The heavens ( Psalm.
19. 1
says the Prophet) declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows the
work of his hands. Yea the signs, which he did in the sight of his friends and
enemies, were so high above the power of man, that they may assure us, Ioh. 20.
31
that our Savior Jesus Christ was the Son of God. But of these in the
Gospel oftentimes hereafter, if it please God; even God the Son, JESUS
CHRIST, of whom we speak.

But ere I proceed any farther, I must again encounter the Arians; who bend all
their forces to overthrow the Godhead of our Savior Christ. Do you not
perceive (say they) that although he be called God: yet he is not so indeed by
nature, but by favor? Have you not observed, that in the second clause, where
the true God is spoken of, there the article is added in the text; (...)
The Word was with the God? as you would say, The true God; but here in the
third part, the same article is omitted: as if the holy Ghost would have us
know thereby, that he has his Godhead, such as it is, only by grace: and
that diverse from him, that is the true God. O, that foolish men should take
such pains to kick against the pricks, and to procure their own destruction!
Can there be more force in the omitting of one poor letter, to make you deny
our Saviors divine nature, then in so many reasons to wring out of you a
confession thereof? Origin. in Ioa. lib. 2
Too much curiosity, in an opinion of this learned observation, has deceived
you. Is not Jesus Christ the true God, because the article is not added? Or is
the article never omitted, where the true God is spoken of? I will go no
further to confute this error, then this present Chap. Was it not the true God,
that sent John Baptist before the Messiah? Is not he called the Lord of hosts
by Ma^ach. 3. 1
the Prophet Malachy? Behold I will send my messenger. Who will send? In the
latter end of the ver; Behold he shall come, says the Lord of hosts. And yet
of him Ioh. 1. 6
says our Evangelist, There was a man sent (...).
from God, where there is no article: Shall we believe the Prophet of the
Lord, or this false Prophet Arius? The one says the Lord of hosts sent John
the Bap. the other tells us, He, that sent him, was not the true God, because
the article is not set before God. This one place were sufficient to confound
that vain and false exception, especially being in the same Evangelist, and
within so few lines after the former. But I will briefly note some other, to
make it more clear, if it may be. It cannot be doubted, but that God, whom no
man has seen at any time, is the true God. Exo. 34. 20. 23
Thou can not see my face, says the true God, to Moses: thou shall see my
back parts, but my face shall not be seen.

Does not S. John speak of the same true God, when he says, Ioh. 1. 18
No man has seen God at any time? Is not (...).
the Word in this place also, without an article? So is it there, To them he
gave prerogative, to be the sons of (...).
God. The like examples are every where to be found, in this and the other
Evangelists, and in the writings of the Apostles.

And surely, if the addition of the article be sufficient to prove, that the
true God is signified, wheresoever that is set before, the Arians are
manifestly convinced by that place of Romans 9. 5 Chrysostom. in Ioa. hom. 3.
Theophil. a^ hunc locum.
Saint Paul, who is God above all: which is spoken of our Savior Christ, and
yet has the article, though not immediately before it. If you enquire more
particularly, why the article is put in before God, in the former clause, and
left out in the later: First I say the Evangelist might use his liberty, as
all, that write in Greek do, to take it, or leave it, at his good pleasure,
where the matter did not require the presence of it. Secondly, it was fit
rather to put the word without it, then with it: because (as I signified
before) God, in the former place, notes the person of the Father, who is the
first of the three in order; but in the later, the nature of God, which is
common to all three persons. If he should have left it, or used it in both, the
sense would have been more dark, and the distinction of the persons not so
easily observed. Thirdly, it could not have been so plain or certain, that
the word was to be taken ^or the former part of the speech; but it would have
been much doubted, whether the Evangelist meant to tell us, that God was the
word, as the words lie, or that the word was God, as some have understood him.
Therefore there is never a word, nor letter in this first verse, whereby our
Christian faith, touching our Saviors God head, can be weakened.

Nor any thing, says Arius, whereby it may be strengthened. No? Does not the
holy Ghost avouch, that ^e is eternal, having his perfect being already, when
all things created began first to be? Is it not affirmed that He was with God,
when nothing had any being but God? your vain and frivolous exceprions have
bin proved void. Let all this pass. Can any thing be plainer, then this
direct affirmation, that the word was God? The word (says Arius) was God: but
no otherwise then some men are called by that name. The true God Exodus 7. 1
said to Mo^es, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh: yea to all them, to whom the
word of God came, he says as much, Psalm. 82. 6.
I have said, ye are Gods. A poor shift; The very sight of the place affords
a sufficient answer. Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 7.
Moses is made Pharaohs God; and those Rulers were said to be Gods. Does the
holy Ghost say either of Moses, or any other, that they were God simply, as
our Evangelist does of the Word. If the Word had been made God, or if the
Lord had only affirmed of him, that he had called him God, there might have
been some occasion of doubting; because there are some such like speeches of
other men in the Scripture. But what wilful wrangling is it, to call so plain
a matter into question, upon so unlike a manner of speech? Moses was God to
Pharaoh, not simply God. They were vouchsaf't the name of gods. They were not
simply gods. There was no danger in either of both those speeches. He that
reads, I have made thee God, can readily conceive, that this made God, is not
the true God. And as easy is it for any man to assure himself, that those
rulers are not God indeed: as well because they were many (but God is one) is
also for that they are presently threatened, Psalm. 82: 7
that they shall dye like men: But simply to name him God, whose eternity was
before avouched, whose presence with God, before the world, was affirmed, and
to whom afterward the creation of all things is ascribed; had been the realy
way to fill the hearts of men with idolary, if Jesus had not been indeed very
God by nature. Therefore it is not possible to persuade any Christian man,
whose eyes are not blinded with the mist of prejudice and error, that the holy
Ghost would open such a gate to impiety, calling him God, without addition,
limitation or exposition, who had affirmed as much of himself, and of whom the
whole Christian world was so persuaded, when this Gospel was to be written.
Nay rather he would by all means have refrayned to give the ^east suspicion of
such a conceit, by which men might have been drawn into so horrible, and
dangerous an ^eresie. But no truth of reason, no authority of Scripture, could
reform the error, or stop the mouth of that wretched heretic, till the Lord
Jesus himself, our God, utterly destroyed him by a most fearful judgment.
For Ruffin. hist. eccl. lib. 1 cap. 3
at the very time when he was ready to go to the Chruch to maintain his
blasphemous heresy, being forced, by necessity of nature, to go aside into a
common place, appointed for that purpose, as it might be Queen hithe here in
London, he voyded (with reverence be it spoken) his very entrails, and so
ended at once, both his life and his blasphemy.

Do we tremble, at the horror of this judgment? Oh then let us take heed,
my brethren, how we like of his doctrine, of whose punishment we are so
afraid. And yet, what was this extremity, in comparison of the intolerable
wrath of God in the fire of hell? where there is neither ease of pain, nor end
of misery. Psalm. 2. 12.
O kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way. 1. Cor. 10. 22
Do we provoke the Lord to anger? Are we stronger then he? Revel. 6. 15
Do not the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief Captains, and the mighty men, hide themselves in dens, and among the
rocks of the mountains? Do they not Verse, 16
cry out most lamentably to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb? Oh miserable and comfortless wretches! Flee you from the Lamb? It is
he Ioh. 1. 29
that takes away the sins of the world. If there be ny drop of mercy, it is by
the blood of the Lamb; if there be any hope of comfort, it is in the
gentleness of the Lamb. They are absolutely without al possibility of the
least relief, that can find no favor at the hands of the Lamb. If the Lamb
frown, who will look cheerfully upon us? And dare any wretched miscreant nourish
in his heart, doubtful thoughts of our blessed Saviors eternal Godhead? For
it is almost incredible, that any man should be so desperate, as blasphemously
to deny it. If we could hear (but as it were a far off) the hideous shreeks,
and most woeful lamentations of that wretch I spoke of ere while, our hair
would stand upright on our heads with horror, and our hearts sink in our
bodies, for fear. Ioh. 5. 22
Has not the Father committed all judgment unto him? Must we not all stand
before his throne, to receive sentence from him, either of life or death? Oh I
where will thou bestow thy self, poor, naked, miserable distressed soul? It is
impossible for thee to hide thy self. To behold the wrathful countenance of
the Judge, it is intolerable. Oh! how will thou tremble, when thou shall hear
that dreadful voice, Luke 19. 27.
Those mine enemies, that would not that I should raigneouer them, bring them
hither and slaie them before my face? Slay them? I: but so, that they shall
always be dying, and never dye. For so is that ^eatefull ^entence, which will
loose the ioints, and make the knees knock together, when it shall be heard:
Mat. 25. 41
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels. Is it not better for us then, to acknowledge Jesus
Christ to be God, while we live here, and may learn it, then to be driven to
confess it, when it shall avail us to nothing, but to increase our just
damnation? I am sorry and a shamed, that in this clear sunshine of the
Gospel, any man making profession of Christian religion, should make doubt of
so main a ground thereof. Neither would I have wearied you and my self, with so
large an exhortation, but that I know too well, there is too just occasion of
it. Yet I may not forget my self too much. That, which has bin said is
sufficient, with the blessing of God; without it, nothing that can be say de.

Let us now come nearer home, and betake our selue^ to that, which is more
proper to our calling. For as the Angels that are ministering spirits, though
they be feign oftentimes to oppose themselves, against the malice and fury of
satan, and his instruments; yet have not this office properly assigned unto
them, but as it furthereth their principle charge, to help them forward which
shall be heirs of salvation: so the ministers of the Gospel must account it
their especial duty to instruct and comfort them that are the true members of
the body of Jesus Christ. To you therefore beloved in the same our Savior, will
I now address my speech, even to all you, that believe in Christ to
justification. Have you learned, that the Messiah your Savior is God almighty?
Do you firmly and steadfastly believe this, without wilful gainsaying or
doubting? Assure your selves, the holy Ghost has set you in the way to
everlasting life. But me thinks I hear some poor soul, sighing in himself,
and striving if it were possible, to conceal his own thoughts from his own
heart. What is it thou do so labor to suppress? what art thou so affray de
to be known of? Be not dismayed, nor discouraged: If thou tremble like Mark
5. 33.
her, that heard our Savior ask, who has touched him, remember with what joy
to her self she was discovered. Promise thy self no less from him, who will
certainly Mat. 11. 28
refresh all them, that being heavy laden come unto him. What? Those, that have
(now and then) some doubt in them of his eternal Godhead? I: even those; in
despite of Satan and all his treachery. Let me reason with thee a little.
Do thou not believe, that the scripture is the undoubted word of God? yes:
thou do. Art thou not persuaded, that the same Scripture teaches thee, that
thy Savior Christ is very God? Thou art. But thou have many times some
doubting of the point within thy heart. What? Do thou doubt willingly, as one
that either thinks it not to be so, or at the least, that was never resolutely
persuaded, that it is so? Let me say more to thee. Would thou have him be
God or no? If thy affection desire to honor him, all that may be, if thy weak
faith labor to overcome this doubting; Satan would have thee doubt, and makes
thee afraid thou doubtest, but indeed thou do believe. It is not a property
of the most sanctified men to be without tentations, but not to yield to them
with joy and liking. True faith may be weak, though perfect faith cannot.
Weakness of faith will admit occasion of doubting, but not give place to
doubting. Do thou not find it in thy self? thy doubting neither brings
forth denying, nor receives any kind entertainment at thy hands: then art
thou wholly free from wilful gainesaying, or doubting.

Satan can not make thee believe, that thy Savior is not God. Only he makes
thee afraid, least he should not be God. And how comes he to this advantage?
Surely by no other means, but by driving thee to examine the point by reason.
There can be but one God: which is he, that sent Jesus Christ into the world,
and not Jesus himself. If thou tell him of the three persons, he demands
further, how thou can conceive, that there should be three such persons, and
all they but one God; As if 2. Cor. 5. 7.
we walked here by sight, and not by faith. I know it is possible to beat the
Devil at his own weapons, and by the force of reason to maintain against
him, that there is a Trinity of persons; though that mystery, by discourse of
reason, could never be attained to, without revelation from God. But this is
not the armor a Christian trusts to. Thy bulwark must be the shield of faith,
borne up, and held out by some strong rest of holy scripture. The word was God:
Says our Evangelist. By it were all things made. Let Satan cast his fiery, and
poisonous darts against us: This shield quenches the fury and kills the
strength of their fire and poison. As for his distinctions and respects, whereby
he sweats, and tyres himself to prove, that our Savior is but God by favor,
not by nature, because he is employed in such an office, not because he is
eternally begotten of God his father: they are sparkles that keep a cracking,
with more fear, then hurt; and venom that raises a few Pimples, in the outer
skin, with more trouble then danger. Keep thee close under the shield of
faith: and though Satan make thee stagger, yet he shall never overthrow thee.

Being then thus armed at all points, with an assured persuasion of our Savior
Christ's divine nature, and having beaten the enemy that charged us with such
force and fury; let us peaceably, and carefully consider with our selves, what
use we may have of that fort which we now possess in safety. Is this Savior
of ours God eternal, infinite in wisdom, in power, in holiness, in all worth
and perfection? Surely then may we truly and bodly say, that Psalm. 89. 19.
God has laid help upon one, that is mighty, more mighty to rescue his people
out of the hands of sin and Satan, then David was to free the people of
Israel from the Philistines, and all other that oppressed them. Are they
mighty, that are against us? He that is with us, is more mighty. Do you not
hear the Apostle, as it were defying all the world, in confidence of this
assistance? r If God (says he) be on our Romans 8. 31.
side, who can be against us? What though he speaks of God the Father? Is not
the Son our Savior the same God, of the same power? Me thinks I am
encouraged by this meditation to dare Satan, and to bid him battle to his
face. Let him not spare to magnify the justice of God, to amplify the
grieuousnesse of my sin, to lay out to the uttermost the furiousness of Gods
displeasure, to set before me the weakness of my estate, to reckon up as it
were on his fingers, the huge sums of my debt; what is all this, If Jesus
Christ be God? Though the justice of God will not be corrupted, by fear,
pity, bribery, or flattery: yet it will be satisfied. If the wrath of God be
infinite against my sin, an infinite sacrifice may appease it. I have nothing
to pay. But he, that is God, is all-sufficient. Mic. 67.
Will not the Lord be pleased with thousands os Rams, nor with ten thousand
rivers of oil? Heb. 10. 4. and ^^. 12.
Is it impossible that the blood of Bulls, and Goats, should take away sin?
Yet Act. 20. 28.
has Jesus Christ, who is God, by his own blood entered once into the holy
place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. God (x says the Apostle) has
purchased the Church with his own blood. What though M^c. 6. 7.
the Lord will not accept my first borne for my transgression? Will he also
refuse the sacrifice of his own first begotten, yea Ioh. 1. 18.
of his only begotten, which is in his bosom? No, no, he has proclaimed him
from heaven Mat. 3. 17.
to be his son that beloved one, in whom he is well pleased.

Now, the sufficiency of this worthy sacrifice, arises not from the blood of
man, though it be more excellent then that of bulls or goats, but from the
inualuable worth of the person, whose blood is sacrifice. Could the blood of
Isaac, of Abell, or of Adam, while he was innocent and holy, have been a
sufficient ransom for sin, committed against the infinite majesty of God?
Look how much it lacks of infiniteness in value, so much it lacks also of
worth to make satisfaction. For no finit sum can discharge an infinite debt. But
as God himself, so sin against God is infinite. Multiply any finit nu^ ber,
though never so great, that which proceeds of it will be but finit. And
whatsoever is finite (imagine it as great as you can in number or measure) is
no nearer infinitnes, then the least point or fraction, that can be conceived.
For there is no kind of proportion betwixt them: else should finit and infinite
be al one. Because that which has any part of it finit, being compou^ded of
finite parts put together, must of necessity it self be understood to be
finite. For the parts make the whole: and that takes it nature from these.
Now, who knows not that the holiness, and nature of man is finit? Such
therefore would the whole lump be, if all that is, or can be in all men, were
gathered together into one. How then can a sacrifice, which is but finite, make
due satisfaction for sin, that is infinite? And that, which I speak of men, I
would have understood also, of all creatures whatsoever, Angels or other. For
since their nature and worth is finit, it is as far from infiniteness (be
what it will in comparison of the value of other finite things) as nothing is
from all; that which is, from that which is not.

There is then nothing at all left, wherein we may have any trust, or hope of
having satisfaction made to God for us, but only the inualuable sacrifice of
our Savior Jesus Christ; Heb. 10. 14
Who with one offering has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.
Ioh. 1. 29.
Behold (says he that was sent to show him) the lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world. But whence has our blessed Savior this inestimable
value? I know not (says one) neither will I trouble my head about it. I
believe his sacrifice was sufficient; and that serves my turn, without any
further ado. Oh my brethren: let us not be so unkind to our blessed savior,
so unthankful to God the father, so contemptuous against the holy ghost, so
retchlesse of our own salvation. Is it not monstrous unkindness, to have so
incompatable a favor done thee, and not to labor to know that, which is most
honorable to him that did it? How shall thou worthily lift up thy heart to
praise, and magnify the Father that sent his son for thy redemption, if thou
neglect to understand how glorious he was, whom he sent? At the least despise
not the wisdom, and providence of the holy spirit: as if he had troubled
himself in vain, with setting his Secretaries on work to pen the particulars
of thy salvation, for thy full satisfaction and comfort. Well, let all this
go: If thou be not ashamed of so unreasonable unkindness, unthankfulness,
contemptuousnesse; yet be afraid, least thou lose that, which thou think
thou have. Art thou so grounded and settled in assurance of sufficient
satisfaction made by Christ, that it is impossible thou should be (I will not
say cast down, but) shaken? Take heed this conceit of thine, be not like that
of the Pharise, Luke. 18. 11.
Lord I thank thee, that I am not like other men. Look about thee on every
side, and behold the spiritual battle, that is against thee.

Take a view how thy fellow soldiers are entreated. Thou may see many a one,
that has bin as confident as thou art, and yet now is to seek for comfort.
Belike thou have had hitherto either no assault at all, or but some weak
battery against thy soul. If thou be once wholly charged, and hardly pursued,
thou will find thy self to stand in need of all the aid, that may possibly
be had. Then thou will begin to see, and feel, that if Christ were not God,
thy trust in him might easily deceive thee. Be wise therefore, and while thou
have fair weather, provide for the storm, that either is coming, or may
come: least if it fall upon thee, and take thee unprovided, it drive thee on
the rocks of despair, to the wrack or hazard of thy precious soul.

But I am persuaded better things of you my brethren, that you hunger, and
thirst after the word of God the food of your souls: that you long to vnde
stand the mystery of your glorious redemption, that you think nothing unworthy
your learning, which the H. Ghost has thought worthy of his teaching. Let us
proceed then, in the fear of God: you, with this resolution in your selves;
I, with this persuasion of you. We see with what excellent wisdom our holy
Evangelist has begun his Gospel; and we find our selves as it were double
armed by this blessed instruction, against heretics, that would corrupt our
judgment, and against Satan that would overthrow our faith. Hearken not to
either of these, at any hand: but rest thy self steadfastly upon the authority
of the holy Ghost, who tells thee plainly and truly, that The word was God.
Being settled in this belief, thou art prepared against the assaults of the
devil, when he shall marshall thy sins against thee, and charge thee with
them. The greatness of sin cannot make any man despair, that knows the price
of his redemption to be the blood of God infinite in value. The more Satan
extolleth the justice of God, the more he does assure us of salvation. For
since the satisfaction, which was made for us, is so inestimable, the iuster
God is, the more he holds himself satisfied. If we had to deal with an
unjust tyran, that regarded not justice and equity, whatsoever our satisfaction
were, we could hardly be out of danger. But our most just God, that valewes
all things aright, finding the sacrifice to be sufficient, clearly acquites all
them, for whom it was offered; yea, holds himself so fully contented, that he
will never remember their transgressions any more. But of this matter, and of
this verse enough. It follows in the next.

This was in the beginning with God. The knowledge of the words leads and
directs us to the understanding of the matter. But there is no word of
importance in this verse, which has not been already expounded in the
former; as I doubt not, but every one of you perceive at the first sight or
hearing of them. Yet to make a clear way to the interpretation of them, we
must consider to what the first word This belongs: and also how this verse
depends on the former; The original Greek gives us just occasion of this in
quiry, because in it This may be referred either to the word, or to God. The
English affords the like cause of doubting, though the Latin do not. But this
question is easily answered, that the Evangelist means this word and not this
God. For neither was there any reason to say, This God was with God;
understanding that, in the last clause, it signified the divine nature: and if
it note the person, out of doubt the Evangelist would never have changed his
former speech, being so plain and easy, for a doubtful, and hard word. It is
not nothing, that, in all the 3 clauses, The Word is ^till the party, that is
spoken of, and that the verses following are also of him, and not of God. This;
namely this World, of which I have written so excellent things.

The other question is a great deal harder. I will be as short, and plain,
as the matter will let me. I say then that this second verse may be either a
repetition, and exposition of the points (all or some) formerly deli^ered, or
an addition of some new matter to the same purpose. If we add, that it both
expounds what was said before, and declares also some further matter, I think
we shall leave nothing unsaid, that may reasonably be coniectured. To repeat
that, which went immedi^tly before, in so few words, and so plain, without
adding somewhat, is neither usual in the Scripture ^or agreeable to the
wisdom of our Evangelist. Therefore, that we may be sure to omit nothing,
which the holy Ghost meant to teach us, let us take it in the ^argest sense, it
will afford. And first for repetition, we ^aue here 2. of the former points,
namely the first, and ^econd, that The Word was in the beginning, and that He
was with God. Leontius ad hunc loc. (...) de Trinit. lib. 2.
Some think the last also is implied. And so it is, in some sort: But surely
it is not repeated. For that only may be truly said to be repeated, which is
expressly, and plainly delivered, as the other 2 points are. But why should
there be any such repetition? Both that the Heretics might see and acknowledge
their error, and that the faithful might the better be confirmed in the truth,
which they saw doubled, and as it were twice confirmed by the holy Ghost.

But if this repetition bring also an exposition with it, who sees not the
necessity and profit of it? What is there then to be learned by the exposition?
Namely that those words In the beginning, which were only in the 1. clause, are
also to be referred to the second; that we may know, that as the Word was in
the beginning: so he was with God in the beginning: But this (to confesle the
truth) is necessarily implied, and so easily to be gathered out of the former
verse, that I can hardly persuade my self, it should be the meaning of the
holy Ghost to put us in mind of any such observation, by repetition. For when
he had said, that The Word was in the beginning, and added presently, that The
word was with God, did he not plainly tell us, That the VVord^ was in the
beginning with God? Surely the question was, where The Word remained, or had
his being, before, and in the creation of the world. To which, the Euangelis^
aunswers that He was with God. When was he with God? In the beginning, when all
things created, began, first to be. There is then no great likelihood, that the
reason of this repetition was to teach us that in the beginning must be added
to the second clause, or understood with it. How much easier might it have bin
set down in the place, to which it properly belonged, if there had been any
need thereof?

There Tertullian. con. Praxean. ca. 15
is another conjecture somewhat more likely, that it was the purpose of the
holy Ghost, to give us to understand, that the Word, before the creation, was
with God only, and so continued, though he were not seen of men, till his
incarnation. But this exposition also was needless. For where could he be
conceived to be, but with God, when as there was nothing, but God? As for the
time of his incarnation, the Evangelist signifies that afterward, where he
says, The Word became Verse 14.
flesh, and we saw his glory. Yea, the whole Gospel is well known to all men,
to be nothing else, but an history of his coming into the world, and
continuance there, till the time of his ascending up to heaven. I would not
trouble you with this diversity of interpretations, but that I am desirous, now
in the beginning, both to speak fully of such matters, as concern the
Godhead of our Savior, and the holy Trinity, and also to give you some
direction, by example, how to judge of the expositions of Scripture.

Let us see now what new matter we may gather out of this verse, if it be not
intended as a repetition. First, it serves to stop the mouths of those
Heretics, who fondly and lewdly teach, that there are two Words: one which
is indeed, as it were, in God; the other without him, or not united to him. The
former (say they) was not the Messiah, but the later: and of the former, S.
John speaks in the beginning of this Gospel. It is hard to say, whether this
conceit be more blasphemous, or more absurd. What is it, but blasphemy, to
deny, that our Savior is the same God with the Father? And what is more
absurd, then to dream of two Words, without any inkling of such a matter
given by the Evangelist? or to imagine, that the word, here spoken of, ^ not
the same, that afterward became flesh? First, this ^erse is apparently of the
same Word, that was descri^ed in the former: as if the Evangelist had said,
This lord, which I have avouched to Ioh. 1. 1. 2.
have been in the beginning, ^o have been with God, and to be God, this same
word was in the beginning with God. Is there any least signification here of
any Word, but one? what follows? By it were Verse 3.
all things made. By what? By the Word. What word, but that which was mentioned
before? For, to what else can it possibly be referred? Let us go forward. In
it was life, and so to the sixth verse. Who sees not, that the Evangelist
continues his speech of the same Word? Verse 4.
Then follows John the Baptists testimony: Of whom, Verse 6.
but the same Word, the light of men, as before ver. 4. who is afterward called
the true light. What need more Verse 9. Ver. 10. 11 Verse, 12.
words? his intertainement, he had by men, is showed, and the honor they
have, that receive him by faith, described. From which, the Evangelist passes
to the incarnation of (why should I doubt to say so?) the same Ver. 14
Word. And the Word (says he) became flesh. Be not so unreasonable, as to
imagine, that the holy Ghost would make a discourse in so many verses of one
Word, and upon a sudden fall into a new matter of an other Word, never heard
of, never thought of before. Tell me, I pray you, if you can, to what purpose
all the forme^ speech was, if our Evangelist now first begin to write of him
whom only his Gospel does concern. But what do I spend time in refuting
such absurdities? It is one and the same Word, that was in the beginning with
God, and that, in due time, took flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary his mother.

But these heretics make show of proof, for that they say; as if they were
blasphemous with reason. If Christ (say they) be that Word of the Father; since
the Father and the Word are of the same substance, the Father also must be the
word. First this makes no more against our Saviors being the Word, then
against the the other Word, which you fancy to your selves. For the Father, and
that Word also, by the like reason, must be one word, because they are one in
substance, that is one God, and yet not one Word; because to be the word, is a
property belonging to the person, not to the nature or substance of God; as it
shall appear God willing, when I handle the Doctrine of the Trinity. They
add, that the word being as it were made by speaking, must needs differ from
the word which is spoken, for the making or producing of it; wilfully refusing
to understand, that although the act of speaking, and the word that is spoken
be distinct, each from other; yet there are not two Words, but one; namely that
which is formed by speaking. The Father does not speak one word, by which the
second is framed; but by speaking frames, and begets the Word. Lastly whereas
they tell us, that the word, which our Savior says he kept, and which the
Jews heard of him, was not all one with Christ himself, they say true, but
nothing to purpose. For that word was not any thing united in nature to God,
but the Commandment of God, which is ordinarily in the Scripture called the
word of God. As for their gross and absurd conceit, that the Word meant by
our Savior in such speeches of his, should be I know not what speaking in
him, as it were a spirit in a body possessed, it is fitter to be laughed at,
then labored against. For how is our Savior Christ said, Ioh 8. 55.
to keep the word of God, which is the place which these fond Heretics
bring? By having it shut up within him, as it were in prison? and not rather by
remembering, and doing that, which God enioyneth? The other place they allege
is no less absurd. Ioh. 14. 24.
The word, that ye hear, is not mine, but the Fathers that sent me. Is it not
evident, that our Savior means the word spoken, the word that I speak? So
spoke verse 23.
he before. If any man will love me, he will keep my word. And immediately
before the words, they bring, He that loves me not, keeps not my word; then
follows, And that word, which you hear, is not mine. He should rather have
said in your sense. And it is I, that you hear speaking. But to conclude this
point, that which our Savior says here of the word, he speaks in another place
of his doctrine. Ioh. 17. 16.
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. Thus much and indeed too much
for this sottish heresy.

It is also gathered from hence by some, that the word is coeternall or equal
to the Father in eternity. A doctrine very true, and needful to be known; but
such as was signified before, when it was said that The Word was in the
beginning, and that it was with God. Neither does the beginning, in this or the
former clause note eternity, but the time, when all things began to be created.
Wherefore to shut up the interpretation of this verse with showing what I
concei^e to be intended in it, by the holy ghost; I am persuaded, that the
purpose of the Evangelist was to repeat that, which in the former verse he had
delivered. For if he had mea^t to add a fourth point of the like kind to the
other 3; in all liklyhood, he would have continued the same manner of writing,
by coupling this to that, which went before, and have said; And this was in the
beginning with God. If any man object, that he does not so in that which
follows: he is already answered, that in the next words the Evangelist comes
to a new kind of argument, whereby he proves that, which before he had
avoucht: namely that the word was in the beginning, and was God, At the least
he describes the Word by outward effects toward the creatures, not by his own
nature or properties. Neither is this a bare repetition, but a plainer
instruction for the simplest, that they may ^ssure themselves, that the Word
was in the beginning with God. I grant so much was implied before: but not
expressed to every man's capacity. Here the Evangelist speaks so, that all may
understand him, and gives direction for the interpreting of that clause, The
Word was with God. When was the Word with God? In the beginning. When as yet
there was neither time, nor place, even then had the Word his being with God.

I would gladly add to all this, that, which is observed by Toletus in Io^n.
cap. 1. Annot. 11.
some, as I persuade my self, not without great likelihood: that the
Evangelist by his repetition, would, farther give us to understand, that The
Word, not only, was in the beginning, but was then with God a worker in the
creation of all things. The ground of this interpretation, is taken from that
place in Pro. 8. 22.
the Proverbs, where this same Word is described by the name of wisdom. There
first his eternal Being is described, Verse 30
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way. I was before his works of
old: I was set-vp from everlasting, etc. This description is continued to the
end of ver. 26. In the 27. the holy Ghost proceeds to show us, that the same
wisdom was with God, as a nourisher, when he prepared the heavens, when he
set the compass upon the deep etc. Yea, it may be somewhat more particularly
applied; Solomon says, when he prepared the heavens, I was there. To that
answers this of our Evangelist; This was in the beginning with God.

His nourishing as some expound it, his creating or ordering of all things, the
holy Ghost here expresses at large, in the words following, By him were al
things made. The conference of these two places seems to warrant this
exposition, as we have seen. I will not strive much about it; so we apply this
repetition to the strengthening of our faith. Concerning our Savior Christ's
eternal Godhead, doubtless we attain to the principal thing intended by
the holy Ghost. And of that point, what Christian can doubt, though he would
never so feign? Do thou not perceive, that the holy Evangelist delivers it
with advise and deliberation? It is not a matter, that he hits upon, but a
point chosen by him, to begin his Gospel withal. It slips not from him at
unawares: but is repeated, upon good aduisement. Certainly this doubling of the
point, makes it manifest, that the holy ghost would have us view and consider
it thoroughly on al sides. It is neither of small importance, that it need not
to be learned; nor easy to be believed, that it need not to be taught but
once. Wherefore is it propounded, and repeated, but that it might be
understood, and remembered? Understood, that no heretics deceive us; remembered,
that our hearts faint not: He, that is God Almighty has redeemed us: who
shall be able to hold us Captives? Let us not be afraid to defye sin, hell,
death and the devil himself? Romans 8. 31.
God is on our side: who can be against us?

Having thus expounded these two verses, and finding in them some points, which
concern the admirarable Doctrine of the most glorious, and holy Trinity; so
many things also, being spoken every where, in this gospel, of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Spirit: I have thought it necessary, both sor your
instruction, and the discharge of my duty, to bestow the rest of this hour in
opening that blessed mystery. Wherein (according to the example of our
Evangelist, and the whole course of the scripture) I will content my self with
the Evidence of the word, without the curiosity of school divinity. It shall
be sufficient for us understand, that the scripture affirms, that there is
one God, and three persons, though we can see no reason how it can be so: And
farther, in showing that the three persons are indeed distinct one from another,
and not diverse respects of one and the same. I will not stand upon their nature
in themselves, so much as upon those effects, which being ascribed to them in
the Scripture, cannot, as in shall appear, be performed by any one person.
Our Evangelist delivers the point of our Saviors divine nature in a few words
here in the beginning of the Gospel. He proves it at large by many wonderful
works of his, through the whole course of his writing. This shall be my example
and warrant. Yet I would not have any man think, that I either condemn their
pains and care, who have labored to explain these mysteries, by the light of
reason, or affirm, that the points themselves cannot stand with reason. They
are indeed above reason, but yet not against reason. As the light of nature,
cannot discern them: so it cannot disprove the^. And the chief end of them,
that endeavored to discuss these matters, in some sort by reason, was rather to
stop their mouths, that would not believe, the^ to enforce the^ to believe. Now
this course, in this place and auditorie (I trust) is needless; I am sure with
the greatest part it would be bootlesse. For how many, or rather how few are
there here present, that are able to examine; or conceive the subtle
arguments that have been devised, and used in these questions? Neither are we
to settle our faith by the weight of humane reason, but to ground it upon
divine authority. Now to the matter.

Wherein, that I may proceed the more orderly, and be the more easily
understood; First I will speak of the unity of the godhead, that there is but
one God; Secondly of the Trinity of the persons. Where, the first point must be
to prove, that there are three persons; the second, to show how they are
distinguished one from an other. And because there is in our Church service a
treatise to this purpose, known in part to all, that are present, commonly
called the Creed of Athanasius, who like a valiant champion maintein'd the
godhead of Christ, against the Assaults of Arius, I will refer you from point
to point to that discourse.

That there is but one God, the same one God witnesses himself in scripture.
Exodus 20. 2. 3.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods but me. Which is not
ambitiously spoken, as if some one God would have the honor from all the rest;
but enjoined with authority by him who only had right to claim such
pre-eminence. Else, neither had he done done justly, that gave this charge (and
how should he be conceived to be God, that is known to be unjust) and the
Jews to whom he gave it, should have hurt themselves as much, by displeasing
all the other Gods, whom they refused to acknowledge, as help themselves by
pleasing that one, whom they did acknowledge. Vnlesle perhaps we may
ridiculously think, that for quietness sake, the other Gods were content to put
up this injury, or that they were all agreed to part stakes, as the heathen
absurdly feyne of their three Gods. Whereof Jupiter the eldest took heaven for
his share, Neptune the second got the government of the Sea, and Pluto the
youngest, rather then he would sit out quite, was content to play small game (as
we say) and to take Hell for his part rather then nothing. These are liker
fancies of men in a dream, then discourses of learned writers. And yet neither
could these three brothers well agree at all times: and to say the truth,
Jupiter, whom the other two aknowledged for their Soueraign, was the only God,
in the Judgment of the heathen. But whatsoever they imagined, we are sure our
God does so speak of himself, Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
Behold now: for I am he, and there is no Gods with me. That appears by the
effects; I kill (says he) and give life, I wound and I make whole. Are not
these the works of god? In whose hands are death and life, but in Gods? But
has this God only that power? Are there not other, that have it, as well as he?
No sure: as himself adds; There is none that can deliver out of my hands.
Thus he speaks of himself: thus the prophet Moses Exodus 33. 11.
that talked with him face to face, speaks of him; Unto thee it was showed
Deuteronomy. 435.
(says Moses to I srael) that thou might know that the Lord he is God, and
that there is none other, but he alone. And afterward: Understand v. 39.
therefore this day, and consider in thy heart, that the Lord, he is God, in
heaven above, and upon the earth beneath, there is none other. I might reckon
up many like testimonies. But whom will not these content, if enough will
content him?

Will any foolish blasphemer now except against these proofs, as if they were
to be understood of the general nature of God, not of any one, who only is
God? how fond and absurd must such an exception needs be! seeing all men know
by reason, that generals have not any real being, diverse from the specials,
or species, nor can be said to perform any particular action. For example (to
make the matter as plain as I can) Man, as it signifies that nature, which is
common, or general to every several man, is not any thing subsisting by
itself, but has it whole being in the particulars of that kind. Therefore
also it cannot be said, that the general nature of man does reason or speak;
but that this, or that man does so. But God says, I kill and give life:
neither can the general nature, which is leudly and absurdly conceived, say
truly of itself; Behold I am he, and there are no gods with me; neither were
such a speech to any purpose or of any use: as if it were to be thought that
any man could imagine, that there are more, then one general nature of any one
kind. There is then but one God only. For if there were more, God could not
say, there are no more: even as Adam, after Caine and Abel were borne, could
not affirm, That he alone was man, and that there was none beside him.

The same truth is confirmed in the new Testament by the 1. Cor. 8 4.
Apostle Paul; We know (says he) that an Idol is nothing in the world, and
that there is none other God, but one. As if he should have said: Howsoever
there are diverse idols, of this, and that shape, men idols and women Idols; yet
we know there are no such divine powers in the world, as these (according to
the fancy of men) represent; yea we are are sure, there is but one God. The
heathen indeed have many, whom they call God and Lord: but to us, that
understand the truth, there is but one Ver. 6.
God. So does the Scripture every where speak of God, as of one; Romans 1. 21.
23.
When they knew God, they glorified him not as God. The glory of the
incorruptible God. What shall I need to heap up many testimonies, in a case,
that is not doubtful? All the wise and learned, both Christians, Jews, and
Heathen, agree with one consent, that there cannot be any more, then one God.

All this notwithstanding, we find that in the Scripture there are more then
one, that are said to be God First, there is one called the Father, whom al
men acknowledge to be God; Romans 1. 7.
Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father. 1 Cor. 8. 6.
To us there is but one God, which is the Father. Ephesians. 1. 3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly, as I
showed before, Jesus Christ, or the Word, is also vouched to be God. In the
former verse The word was God. Romans 9. 5.
Christ is God over all, belssed for ever Thirdly, it is manifest, in the same
Scripture, that the holy Ghost, in like sort, is God. For although there be no^
one place, wherein he is so termed by name: yet the comparing of one text
with another, puts the matter out of question. The Lord says to the people of
Israel, that if Number. 12 6.
there be a Prophet amongst them, he, the Lord, will appear to him in a vision,
he will talk with him in a dream. It was the Lord therefore that spoke in and
by the Prophets This Lord says 1. Pet. 1. 11.
Saint Peter, was the spirit. The spirit testified before of Christ. 2. Pet. 1.
21.
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God,
spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. So God is said to be he Act. 2.
24. 25. and 1. 16
that spoke by the mouth of David: and the same God it termed the holy Ghost
in an other place. It is welknown that every where in the old Testament the
Jews are accused resisting God. That, Act. 7. 51.
Stephen expounds of the holy Ghost: O ye of uncircumcised hearts, and ears,
ye have always resisted the holy ghost; as your fathers, so you If then there
be but one God and ^et three distinct one from another, be every one of them
God; how can it be denied, that there are three persons, Mat. 28. 19.
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. To this, the beginning as it were
of our Profession leads us, when we are baptized in or into the name of the
Father, and of the Son and of the holy Ghost.

Now for the better conceiving of this great mystery, touching the three
persons: it is necessary for us to understand, what a person is; And then we
shall the more easily perceive, that every one of the three is a person. And
here, if I should stand curiously to deliver an exact definition of the thing,
and tell you that a Person is an individual ^ubsistence in an intellectual
nature, or a several or singular thing, that subsisteth by it self, in a
nature endued with understanding; I should either leave you more uncertain,
then I found you, or bestow more time in expounding the words, then shall
need (I hope) to make you discern of the matter it self. Wherefore (to
speak plainly, rather then artificially) it may please you first to be
persuaded, that although the word person, be not in the Scripture applied to
the Father the Son, and the holy Ghost: yet every one of them is so
described therein, that we may, and must needs conceive him to be a person,
according as we understand the word. First, who knows not, that there is no
person. but where there is a nature, that has reason and understanding. For no
man ever calls any creature, that is not endued with reason; by the name of a
person. Who will, or may say of ten or twenty Lions, Horses, Oxen, Apes, or
any creatures of the like kind, that there are ten or twenty persons? For
example, if we have a den, or a stall, that will receive ten Lions, or
ten Oxen: no man will say, such a den or stall will hold ten persons.
But if there be a Table, whereat ten men may sit, it is an usual speech, to
say, it will hold ten persons. So that first to the being of a Person, it is
necessary, that the thing, which we call a Person, be by nature endued with
reason: otherwise, it cannot by any means be a person. Secondly, we are
farther to understand, that the word person notes unto us some one of that
kind, and not many considered together. For, it were absurd to say of those
ten men before mentioned, though necessarily they have every one of them,
the use of reason, that they are a Person. Therefor by Person we mean any
one of such a kind. Every man, every woman, every child is a person; because
every one of them has understanding by nature, and is several or distinct by
himself, from al other: so that no other man, woman, or child in the world in
heaven or in earth, is or can be the same person. Some man perhaps will imagine,
that those qualities, or virtues, which are no where to be found, but where
first there is reason, as justice, wisdom, temperance, fortitude, and such
like, may be termed Persons; especially since every one of these, is
several from other. But that cannot be: because whatsoever is a Person must
depend on nothing as a part or property thereof, but must be entire of it self.
None of these qualities are such: but all of them have their being in some one
person or other. Salomons wisdom, and Samsons strengt^ have no being, but in
Solomon, and Samson: with them: they are; if they cease to be, they are not.
The case is far otherwise with Solomon, and Samson themselves. Let the
wisdom of the one, and the fortitude of the other be turned into folly and
Cowardice, yet shall each of them be still a person, as before he was: yea, if
there were no more Men, Women, nor Children in the world, but they two or
either of them: yet should they both, if both continued, or the one of them, if
the one continued, be two persons or one person. So then to the being of a
Person it is required, for the general, that the thing be of such a kind, as
has natu^ally reason or understanding; more parrticularly, that it be one
singular thing of that kind, and that it be such a thing, as has a subsistence
by it self, and depend not upon any other, as a part, or property thereof;
whersoeuer we find such a thing, we have a Person, yea so many Persons as we
have such things. Now let us apply this to the blessed Trinity.

And first concerning the nature of God, it neither is nor can be doubted, but
that he is the very fountain and spring of all understanding. From which, the
small streams continually do flow, which we see in the shallowe channelles of
the creatures. Psalm. 94. 9.
He, that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye,
shall he not see? Romans 16. 27.
To God only wise, be praise through Jesus Christ forever, Amen. Secondly, it
is apparent in the Scripture, that the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost
are distinct each from the two other; so that there is Athanal. Creed. ver. 24.
But one Father, one Son, one holy Ghost, and neither the Father is the
Son, or the holy Ghost: nor the Son the Father, or the holy Ghost: nor the
holy Ghost, the Father, or the Son. Which proves manifestly that every one
of these three, has his subsistence by himself, and so is a person. Look not
that I should repeat that, which before I delivered: take that one place for
all: Baptize them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. These three names, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, do not signify three
virtues, or qualities of one person, but three distinct persons.

Therefore, are they also alleag'd by the Apostle as three witnesses. I. John.
5. 7.
There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
holy Ghost. But this matter belongs rather to the second part of this discourse:
wherein I am to show, how they are distinguished one from an other. But ere I
come to that point (and yet I will hasten to it, all I can) I must needs
forewarne you, that none of us, for ought that has been, or shall be said,
conceive of God, as of the creatures. There is one general nature common to
all men, whereby they are men; and so men, as that every several person, is a
several man. Paul, Peter, James, and John, are four men, as well as four
persons. But the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are only three
persons, and not three Gods, For the establishing of your faith in this point,
I pray you remember, that I have made it evident to you, out of the scripture,
both that every one of these is a several person, and also that they are all
three but one God. That every one of them is God, it has been manifestly
proved; and no less, that there is but one God. Whereupon it must necessarily
follow, that they are all three, not three Gods, but one God. And this is that
which you have, set down in the Creed named before, Ath^nas. Creed. ver. 3.
That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, that is, one
God and yet three persons; Three persons, and yet one God.

If any man, for the satisfying of his mind, desire farther to understand the
reason of this difference, betwixt the Creator, and the Creatures; why every
several person amongst men, should be also a several man, and not all one
man: and yet the three persons, but one God; he must know, that this proceeds
from the diversity of nature in God and man. The nature of man being finit,
may be multiplied into many several men of the same kinds: But the nature of
God being infinite, cannot possibly admit any multiplication; because there
cannot be many infinits, or infinite substances, as there may be and are very
many finit substances, several and differing each from other. He, that can
with judgment and learning examine those points, that concern the nature of
God, may conceive the truth of that I say: they that cannot, have sufficient
ground for their belief in the word of that God, who neither can be deceived
in discerning his own nature, because he is infinitely wise; nor will deceive
any man, in speaking of it, because he is infinite in truth and goodness. ^et
us go forward therefore to learn of him the doctrine of the Trinity.

The word Trinity (as I said ere while of Person) is in no place of Scripture:
but the thing being there, we are not to refuse, or mislike the word;
especially, since it is of good use, and has been of so long continuance in
the Chruch. It is enough, if we understand; that whenever the Trinity is
named, all three persons are signified: as for example; when we say, the
Trinity is holy, blessed and glorious; we mean, that the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, are holy, blessed, and glorious. When we say the Trinity
of persons, it is our purpose to show the number of the persons, that they are
three. These two points, touching the unity of the god head, and Trinity of
the persons, are set out at large in ^^th. mas. Creed. ver. 3. 4. 5 etc. Ver. 4.
the forenamed Creed, from the beginning of the third verse, to the end of the
twenty one verse. The sum of all is this, that we must neither confound the
persons, nor divide the substance. To confound, in that place, signifies to
mingle together, and so to make one of many: and that is the very natural
meaning of the Latin word. So that, when we are forbidden to confound the
persons, we are taught that we may not so hold the unity of the Godhead,
that we deny the Trinity of the persons, and in stead of three, make but one;
whereas, Ver. 5.
according to the next verse, There is one person of the Father, another of the
Son, and another of the holy Ghost; and not one of all three.

Neither yet may we divide the substance, as if the divine nature were
multiplied, according to the number Ver. 6. 7.
of the persons. For (as it follows immediately) the Godhead of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one, the glory equal, the majesty
coaeternall. Therefore all the attributes, properties, and titles, which
appertain to God, belong equally, and in the same respects, to all, only they
are distinguished by that which is proper to each person. The particulars,
whereby Ve. 8 9. 10, etc.
this matter is declared in the same Creed, are these; To be uncreated,
Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty, to be God, and Lord. All these, and all
the rest of this kind, which are many, are common to all three persons, because
the nature of all three is one, and the same: wherefore although we must
acknowledge every person by himself Ver 19.
to be God and Lord: yet we may not say, there are three Gods or three Lords.
Ver. 20.


I have showed you, that there is but one God, which is three persons; every
one of them being alike, and equal in all things, that belong to the nature of
the godhead. It remains, that I should speak of the distinction of the three
persons; only so far, as to make us understand, wherein that distinction
consists. For the better conceiving whereof, we may say, in one word, that the
manner of being, which each person has proper to himself, is that, by which
they are distinguished; in all other things, there is no real distinction of
any one of them, from another. The very names themselves, which are given to
them severally in Scripture, point to the distinction, that is amongst them.
The Father, as every man knows, in that he is a Father, or, as he is a
Father, is conceived to be of himself, and to give being to his Son.
Consider Adam the first man, without looking back to his creation, by which he
had his being from God: but, look only forward as he was his Son Abels
Father: Do you not plainly perceive, that Adam thus considered, is author o^
Abels being? Apply this to God the Father. Being God, he can, in that
regard, have no author, nor beginning of being. Consider him as the Father:
He Ver. 21
is of himself, not made, not created, not begotten, not proceeding. It is not
possible truly to imagine any thing of his Being; but that He is.

May we reasonably affirm the like of the Son? Surely, as he is God, there
can nothing be said or conceived of the Father, but may truly and must
necessarily be spoken, and thought of the Son, and of the holy Ghost
severally, as well as of the Father: wherein then lies the distinction? Every man
can readily answer, In his manner of being, or in his being the Son. Take the
former example. Adam and Abel are both men, and in respect of their humane
nature, there is no difference betwixt them. What then? Is there none at all
therefore? yes sure: Adam has not his being of any other, as he is a Father;
Abell has his, as he is a Son, of his Father Adam. Let it not trouble you,
that I mention a difference betwixt Adam and Abell, and acknowledge no
difference, but only a distinction betwixt God the Father and the Son: the
reason is, because Adam and Abell are, as two persons, so two men: God Ver. 22.
the Father, and God the Son are indeed two persons, but not two Gods. We
see then, that the Father, is truly and really a distinct person from the
Son: who though he be neither made, nor created by the Father, yet is
begotten of him; and so has not his being of himself, but of his father, and
therefore, in the manner of his being, is distinguished from the Father.

So is the holy Ghost, or spirit from both of them. You will ask me, by what he
is distinguished from them. I answer Ver. 23.
by his proceeding from them. First, it is manifest he is distinct from the
father; because he is not of himself, in regard of his person, as the father
is. Secondly, although he agree with the Son, in that each of them has his
being from a Third, namely the Father; yet in the particular manner of his
being, he is distinguished from him. For the Son is begotten by the Father,
and so has his being: but the holy Ghost is not begotten, but proceeds. From
whom does the holy Ghost proceed? From the other two persons, the Father and
the Son. Of his proceeding from the Father, our Savior Ioh. 15. 26.
speaks distinctly and plainly, The comforter shall come, whom I will send you
from from the Father, the spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father.
Therefore also he is called the spirit of the Father. It is not you that
speak Mat. 10. 2^
(says our Savior) but the spirit of your Father, which speaks in you. Now
that he also proceeds from the Son, it may thus appear: All things ( Ioh.
16. 15.
says our Savior) that the Father has, are mine. And speaking to the Father
he Ioh. 17. 10.
sait^ All thine are mine. The later of these two Texts may be understood (I
grant) of those things that are (as we speak) without God: but because it
has usually been applied to prove this point, I thought fit to allege it.
You will reply, that all the Fathers, is not the Sons; That personal property,
whereby he is the Son, is not the Fathers, but the Sons: and that, by which
the Father is the Father, is not the Sons, but the Fathers. Whatsoever else
the Father has, the Son has also. But that the holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father, is not the personal property of the Father; and therefore the Son
has that, and so with the Father, as it were by breathing, produces the holy
Ghost: who therefore is called the spirit of the Son, and of Christ, Gal 46.
God has sent the spirit of his Son into your hearts. If any man Rom 89.
have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not Christ's. It is not said
indeed, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, as it is, that he
proceeds from the Father: but since he is called the spirit of the Son, as
well as of the Father, we truly gather, that he proceeds no less from the
Son, then from the Father, though the one be expressed, and the other be not.

To conclude then, we see what the properties are, by which the persons are
distinguished among themselves; The Father begets, and neither is begotten,
nor proceeds: the Son is begotten, but proceeds not: the holy Ghost
neither begets, nor is begotten, but proceeds. All these 3. He that
begets, He that is begotten, and He that proceeds, are all one and the
same God, to be blessed and praised for ever and ever, Amen. Therefore are all
3 absolutely equal in all matters, appertaining to the nature of God: only
there are 2 things, wherein the Father has as it were some praeeminence among
the persons. The one I noted by the way before; that He is of himself: so is
neither of the other, but both are of him. The other is, that the father is the
first in order; and, in these respects, he is sometime called by Divines the
fountain v^rse. 25.
of the Trinity. And whereas it is said in that Creed often named, that None
of the 3 persons is before or after other; the meaning is, that none of them is
in time before or after Verse. 26.
other, all being eternal, as the next verse shows: saying, that All 3 are
coeternall, that is alike eternal. The Son also has the like preaeminence
above the holy Ghost. For both he is in order before him, being the second:
and the holy Ghost is of him, as well as of the Father. But these praeeminences
concern the persons, which are distinct, not the divine nature, which is
wholly and absolutely one; as by which, these 3 persons are one God. To whom
be all glory etc.

THE THIRD SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 3. By it were all things made, and without it was nothing made, that was
made. Verse 4. In it was life, etc.
ALL true knowledge of things arises, either from an understanding of their
inward nature, or from a consideration of their works, and actions. The
former, teaching us the hidden causes, is the pefecter, but the harder; the
later showing us the secret nature, by the manifest effects, is the less
perfect, but the more easy. That nothing might be wanting, whereby any man
might be drawn or persuaded to the acknowledging of our Savior Christ's
Godhead, our Evangelist has both laid open the mystery of his nature, and set
out to all men's view the wonderful glory of his works. Have thou a desire to
fill the depth of thy understanding, with the profou^d knowledge of his
eternal being? Behold sufficient matter of continual meditation and study. In
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God. etc. Will not thy
capacity or leisure serve thee, to sound the depth of these bottomless
mysteries? Behold a shorter and easier means of knowledge, by which thou may
see the glorious Son shining in his works, whom in his natural brightness
thy dazzled eyes cannot look upon. If thou can not perfectly comprehend the
infiniteness of his light, yet thou shall certainly discern that it is
infinite. And with this desire and hope, let us come to the expounding of
this verse.

Wherein we are first to understand, what it is, that our Evangelist here
teaches; Secondly to see, how it proves our Savior Christ's divinity. In the
former part, I will speak of the clauses of this verse severally; then I will
consider the matter of them, jointly both together. By him were al things made;
that is, to speak plainly, He made all things: I am not ignorant, that Erasmus
ad hunc locum.
some me^ cast more doubts then need, because the word Him, in the greek, may
be referred either to God, or to the Word; and therefore they think it meet
and needful so to translate it, that it may be certainly, and necessarily, by
the very translation, restrained to the Word; so that in their opinion, we must
say, Istud, not Ipsu^.
It and not Him. For mine own part, I will not strive about a matter of so
small importance: only I see no necessity of any such curiosity in translating.
For seeing it is very apparent, that the Evangelist intends to describe our
Savior Christ, of whom the whole Gospel does entreat, and that all the other
verses, and clauses of verses, are applied thereunto; he must needs be less
then a reasonable man, that would pluck this verse out of the midst of the
rest, and conceive that by it, which never came into the thought of him, that
pend it. But for the translation, read it as you please, so you understand the
meaning of the Evangelist aright, that the Word or Son of God, our Savior
Christ made all things. This being understood, we are first to enquire what
this speech imports, By him; then what is said of him: namely, what this
making was, and what was made.

By him, or By it, By the Word or by the Son: why does the Evangelist make
choice of this kind of speech, and not rather, say plainly, as he might, He
made all things? It is, and has bin always commonly held, that this manner of
speaking does better set out the work of the Creation, and confirm that
former point of doctrine, whereby our Savior was affirmed to be the son of
God. If it had bin said, that The Word created all things, it might have bin
imagined, that the Father had had no hand therein: whereas now it is employed,
that the Father made all things by the Son. But surely (saving their better
judgment, that thus reason) there is no more fear least the father should
be thought not to have created the world, because the son did, then least
the holy Ghost, should by the same speech be imagined to have had nothing to do
therein: and it is as much against the truth of religion to deny or doubt of
the Godhead of the holy Ghost, as of the fathers being God. Yea, the danger
was greater, concerning the holy Ghost; because not only the Scripture does
more often ascribe that work of creation to the Father, then to the holy
Ghost: but also the general opinion of al men makes the father a Creator,
whereas the divine nature of the holy Ghost is not so commonly known or
believed. Neither will this kind of speech, which our Evangelist here uses,
though you take it never so largely, prevent or remedy that doubt, touching the
work of the holy Ghost in the Creation; but that for ought, that can possibly
be implied in this phrase By him, the spirit may be thought to be no creator.
But (that I may omit nothing which may be gathered for our instruction, out of
any reasonable observation) let us a little consider, how this manner of
speaking, may confirm our faith, concerning our Savior Christ's being of his
father. When we say By him, we often times imply, that there was some other,
beside him, of whom we so speak. For example, if I say By Ioab the Ammonits
were subdued; I may signify thereby, that David did sub due them by Ioab. So,
By the Word all things were made; I may hereby give notice, that the father
made al things, by the Word. Yet (to say the truth) neither does this manner o^
speech usually imply any such matter; nor the other exclude any that are, or
may be held to have bin doers therein. And therefore we are feign to add only
or alone, when we would have it conceived, that some one was the dooer of this,
or that. But let us grant, that By him signifies also the working of the
Father, that we may come to the chief thing intended by that observation.
What if all things be made by the Son? We must learn thereby that the Son
has all that he has, from the Father, and not of himself. The father is said
to have made all things; because he is of himself: All things are said to be
made by the son, for that he is of another. I propound these things to your
consideration, not so much with any opinion, that the Evangelist had any such
meaning, as for the satisfaction of some, who think it not lawful to leave any
thing untaught, which has been formerly observed, and delivered for truth.
And I do it the oftener now in this beginning, that I may rather be excused
hereafter, for leaving that out of my exposition, which has no certain
evidence of truth, nor great likelihood of reason. Wherefore I will (for the
most part) content my self, with the alleging, and refuting of such
interpretations only, as the heretics, Papists, and other, have made for the
avowing of some of their errors. For the present, to clear that, which I have
begun to speak of, the doctrine of our Saviors receiving his being from his
Father, yea the very power of creating, if you consider him as a Son, is
true, and sound. For being so co^sidred, he is wholly of the Father, and has
nothing of himself; that we may not continue a needless, and fruitless
controversy, begune slanderously by some Papists and ignorantly, as I showed
in my last exerci^e, concerning the Godhead of the Son. But this Doctrine
cannot necessarily be gathered from this kind of phrase. But if our Evangelist
had intended any such thing, he would have said, that the Father made all
things by the Son: as Heb. 1. 2.
the Apostle speaks, By whom also he made the world: and not thus
uncertainly, and to such a purpose obscurely, By him all things were made;
Especially, since the same speech may truly be uttered even of God the Father,
or of the Divine nature, in which all three Persons are comprehended. I do
therefore rather persuade my self, that the Evangelist used his liberty: and
whereas he might say either He made all things, or By him all things were
made, he did make choice of the later, both for variety, and for elegancy of
speech. He had spoken of the Word altogether as yet after one manner of phrase;
The Word was: that he now varies, saying not He made, but By him were made: and
this suiteth with the next verse very fitly, By him were all things made, In
him was life.

There is no question, but that this making, which the Evangelist here notes,
was the creating of the world, whereof Moses speaks. And how soever it is a
common opinion, that creating signifies making without any matter, whereof the
things to be created should be made, whereas making presupposes matter ready
to be framed, and formed; yet indeed there ca^ hardly be any such distinction
wrung out of the words themselves. For neither has the Hebrew, that Moses
uses, to set out the creation, any such nature, nor the Greek, by which it is
translated. For the former, it appears manifestly by the ordinary use of it
in the Scripture, and namely by Moses himself; who applies the word making to
that, which in in the next verse he calls creating; let us make man: Thus God
created the man in his image. The words are diverse, and yet spoken of the same
thing, or action, But what needs any farther proof, x Genesis 1. 26. 27.
then Moses himself affords us in this verse. Thus God created the man in his
image, in the image of God created he him; he created them male and female. Do
you mark the same word thrice used, concerning the making of man? And yet who
knows not, that Genesis 2. 7.
The Lord God made the man of the dust of the ground? Would Moses have called
that making of man by the name of Creating, if to Create were to make of
nothing? Surely man was not created, being made of the dust, if there be no
creating, where there is matter of which he is to be made. So it is also
affirmed by Moses, Genesis 21.
that God created the great whales: what of nothing? Nothing less. It is well
known, and recorded even there by Moses, that the water brought them forth. I
will say more. There is no one place in the history of the creation. where the
word Creating may be taken, (I do not say must be, but may be taken) for
making of nothing, except perhaps the first verse, In the beginuing God created
heaven, and earth: only here may the word be so understood, because by heaven
and earth, the first matter of all things may be conceived; which only was
created of nothing, all things else of it. As for the greek, both the use of
it in all kind of writers speaks for me: and who can imagine, that they who did
not believe, that ever there was any creation, should devise a needless word
to signify such a thing, as they never dreamt of and if at any time they
speak of such a question, they express themselves, by adding some word to
make; as to make of nothing, or without any preexistent matter, or such like.

What then? Do we deny the thing, because we say there is no word, that
necessarily signifies To make of nothing? God forbid. We have taught, and can
easily prove, if need be, that all things, besides God, have had a beginning
of their being. Then were they either made of nothing, which indeed is most
true, or of God himhimselfe, as the matter of them. But the later is merely
impossible. For neither is God of any bodily matter, as we see those things to
be; Job. 4. 24.
God is a spirit: and whatsoever is of his substance, is the same God with him,
infinite in power, and being: whereas all creatures are finit, in both.
Therefore when we meditate on the glorious work of creation, we must draw
our thoughts from the cogitation of these things, which we see, feel, hear,
smell, and taste, and conceive as well, as we can, that there is nothing, but
God. How then came all these to be, the world, and the creatures therein? God
made them. Of what? Of that first matter, which was without form, covered all
over with darkness. But whereof was that first matter made? Of nothing. That
is, when as yet there was nothing at all, but the in comprehensible majesty of
God, in his eternal being, it pleased him to will that all these things should
be: and by this will of his, and according to this will, all, and every one of
these Creaturs took their being. First, as God had from all eternity purposed,
and willed, that first matter, or lump, had its being, simply of nothing, as
all reason shows us. For how is it possible to conceive, or imagine, that that,
which is the first matter, should have any other matter before it, of which it
might be made? Therefore Arist. Phys^^. lib. 1.
the Philoso phers being ignorant of the creation, were enforced to make this
first matter eternal: and this was the conceit I. ucret. de natura rerum. lib.
1.
of them all, that did not acknowledge God to be the maker of that matter. So
then if you ask me, what that was, which was made of nothing; I say, the first
matter of all things, and in which all creatures were contained. If any man be
afraid, least this opinion should deminish the glory of God, in creating the
particulars; he must be put in mind, that both the matter it self was made by
God of nothing, and that all the creatures were made of it, by no less infinite
power, then the lump it self was made. If Adam in his first estate, if all
the Angels of God had been created before this lump; and that being made, by
the Almighty power of God, had been brought unto them, Genesis 2. 19.
as the creatures were to Adam: it had not bin possible for them, I will not
say to have made these other inferior creatures, but so much as to have devised
the form, and workmanship, which no^ they see, and wonder at, in the meanest
creatures. But of this point in the second part, when I come to show that the
Creation of all things is a certain proof of our Saviors Godhead.

It remains, that we expound the last words, All things. What need they any
exposition, may some man say. For who is so dull, that he understands not, what
is meant by them? what can be meant, but absolutely All things, without
exception? Surely it is certain, that the Evangelists meaning is so; and a man
may well marvel that there should be any question made of it: yet such has
bin the malice of Satan, and the miserable shifting of Heretics, that (I
think) no one text in this whole Gospel, has bin more strangely, or diversely
interpreted. I will touch some of the errors, point at other, and stand long
upon none. We press the generality of the words All things, which comprizeth
whatsoever has any being. Would you think it possible, that these words ^eing
so large, should be stretched too far? Yet have they bin, most absurdly. For
by them Macedonius, who denied the Godhead of the holy Ghost, labored to
establish his blasphemous heresy. If all things (says he) then the holy Ghost
too, unless he be nothing. Why do thou not multiply thy absurdities, and say
as much of the Father, and the Son himself too? For if it seem absurd to
thee, as it is, to contain the Son under these general terms, because he
is the creator or maker; how can thou imagine such a blasphemy, of the holy
Ghost, who is also a Creator with him, being one and the same God? At the least
thou can not exempt the Father; of whom there is no more mention in this
clause, then of the holy spirit. But Ambro^ ^^ sp^. S. cap 2. ^y ril. lib. 1. m
I ^^ cap. 5. Chry^^^^. in Ioa. ^om. 4 Gro^or^ (...) ora^. Thco^. 5.
the Evangelist (that I may not spend too much time in these fancies) has
answered for himself, where he restrains this to the things, that were made.
Without him was made nothing that was made. Whatsoever was made, was made by
him: but the holy Ghost being God (as has bin showed) has an eternal being,
and was never made; though he proceed from the father, and the Son.

As Macedonius stretched those words, farther then they would reach: so on the
contrary side, other Heretics drew them into a narrower room, then they could
endure. For whereas by by all things we must understand whatsoever had any
beginning of being, whether it be visible, as the heavens, the Earth and the
Sea, men, beasts, fowls, fishes: or invisible, as the Angels, and spirits;
some Heretics denied, that the one of these kinds was created by the Word,
some that the other. The Valentinians were content to grant, that he made all
things, that are bodily, and subject to sense, yea perhaps the souls of men
too, and the Angels: but yet for sooth they dreamt of I know not what (...)
apud Iren. lib. 1. cap. 1. 2. 3.
other conceits, which were not created by him. The Manichees allowed God the
creation of all invisible spirits: but they thought the world, and the
creatures in it, too base a piece of work for so glorious a worke-master; not
perceiving (ignorant wretches as they were) that the making of the least
creature requires infinite wisdom, and power. But what should I enter into any
refutation of these Heretics? All I mean to do in such cases, is to clear
the Text from such errors, as they load it withal. Therefore it shall be
sufficient against the one, and the other, that the Evangelist not only speaks
so generally All things, but also adds, to take away all manner of cauills,
that nothing, or not one thing was made without him. Neither will it serve the
Valentinians turn, to say, that their fancies were not made because whatsoever
is not God, had certainly a beginning of being, from and by the Son; and
therefore those multitudes of their Aeones as they call them, must needs be
made. For being so many, and so diverse in nature, it is not possible, they
hold be God; as themselves also grant. And for the first clause By him were
all things made, this may suffice: I come to the second.

And without him was nothing made, that was made. Here, because there is some
variety in joining, or s^uering the words, which makes a difference in the
meaning of the Evangelist; it behoues us, first to seek out the true pointing
of the sentence, and then we may readily proceed, to enquire after the sense
thereof. Some mingle part of this verse, and part of the next together, reading
it thus; Without him, was made nothing, that was made in him; taking the two
last words In him, from the verse that follows. But this has so little show
of reason in it, that to rehearse it, is to refute it. For how idle a speech is
it, to say, that nothing was made without him, that was made in him; that is by
him? As if any reasonable man could imagine, that something was made by him,
which was made without him. If any man will interpret In him, as the words
properly signify, it is yet more absurd. For neither are al things Tertull.
contra Her^^g. cap. 2c.
in the Word, taking In Properly; and it is a manifest contradiction to say,
that a thing is made in this, or that, and yet made without it, that is, not
within it. August. an Ioa. tract. 1.
Other thrust the later part of this verse, to the fourth, and make it part
thereof, in this sort; That which was made, in him was life. And so our
Rhemists translate the place, following the vulgar Latin. But there is more
curiosity in this reading, then truth. For who can believe, that the Evangelist
would trouble them, that should read, or hear this Gospel, with such a
subtility, as few men are able to understand; that all things which which were
made before their making, were life in God; because they were God himself, as
they the^ were (...)
and therefore life; because his knowledge, by which they were, is his essence,
and so life. These conceits may perhaps be admitted in the shooles, to
exercise scholars wits withal: but they can have no place in the Scripture;
which is appointed for the instruction of the weakest capacities. Besides, in all likely hood, if the Evangelist had purposed to give us notice of that
matter, he would not have said (as he does) That, which was made etc. but
rather Those, or All things, that were made, were life in him. I deny not, that
this translation has some authority from antiquity. But surely not so much as
is commonly thought: and the very evidence of truth, has made some later
Papists also reject it.

The truest, and plainest course is, to read it, as we commonly do, following
the general consent of almost all the ancient greek writers: sure the
learned, and soundest. Without him was made nothing that was made. Let no
man trouble himself with devising, what the reason should be, why the holy
Ghost adds this clause, seeing he had spoken sufficient in the former: I will,
if it please God, satisfy this doubt, when I have expounded the words, and come
to deliver the meaning of the Evangelist in them. Now the words are plain
enough in themselves; but that the curiosity of some men, and the crafty malice
of Satan, has made them doubtful: yet the doubts are neither many nor hard.
First, by without, Origin. in Ioa. lib. 3.
some men will needs understand that, which before I noted; as if the
Evangelists meaning were that the word contained al things in him, as the
preserver o^ them, by his infinite power, and being. The doctrine is true, but
nothing to the purpose. It is easy for every man to discern, that without him
signifies no more bu^ that, which was said in the former part of the sentence
By him; the one affirming, the other denying. If the Evangelist had said,
within him were al things, the^ there had bin god reason to expound without, as
these men do. But since he puts By him in the first part, surely in the later,
without must have such a sense, as best agrees with that. Tell me how you would
understand my words, if I should speak thus? David's battles were all fought
by Ioab, and without him there was none fought. So speaks S. John, and so he
is to be understood.

But in the word without, only the curiosity of men was to be blamed: in the
exposition of the other word, Nothing, wilful ignorance, and malicious
perverting of the holy Ghosts meaning bewary themselves. If I should ask any
reasonable man, how he thinks those words without him was nothing made, are
to be understood; would he not answer me readily, and plainly; that the
Evangelist meant to tell us, that There was not any thing made, but by him?
Surely, thus would a reasonable man answer, if he would answer like a
reasonable man. But Manich. apud August. de nature boni. cap. 25.
the men, of whom I speak, will have Nothing to be something; And whereas S.
John would teach us, that whatsoever was made, was made by him, they would make
him say, that there was a thing, yea many hundred, or thousand things, that
were not made by him. Nothing was made without him. That is, say the Manichees,
he was not the maker of Nothing; but that was made without him. Could a man
devise to speak more contrary to the holy Ghost, if the would set himself to
it never so earnestly? But what is this nothing? No less then the heaven, the
earth, the sea, and whatsoever is contained in all these (except spirits) They
might better call these All things, then Nothing. Sure, it is a far easier
matter to persuade men to be Sadduces, and think there are no spirits at al,
then to make them believe, that all these bodily things are nothing. They are
nothing (say they) because they are naught, and made by the devil. Away with
these horrible blasphemies, and absurdities. Is the world evil by creation,
and not rather wholly by corruption? Or is there any thing in the world so
evil, that it has not some good, and profitable use? Is it possible any thing
should have a being, but from Jehovah, the author of all being? But, I know
not how, I am almost slipped into a refutation of that, which deserves rather to
be rejected with detestation, then refuted by reason; especially seeing the
ground of this their building, is so slight and sandy. What color is there
for this interpretation of theyrs? If we take the words, in the plain sense
they afford us, they contain neither impiety, nor absurdity. What then? Does
the circumstance of the place require any such exposition? Nay rather ot
confutes it, as I have showed. Neither do they brag of any special
revelation, for the understanding of it. What should then be their reason for
it? Imagine what you will, or can, their conceit passes all absurdity.
Forsooth, the Evangelist has set nothing, in the last place, after was made. O
incredible, shall I say ignorance, or wilful blindness? As if for the sense,
it were not all one to say, without him was made nothing, and, without him
nothing was made. In English the later kind of speech is more agreeable to the
nature of the tongue; in greek it is not so: but the sense, even in the
English, is all one, though the words be not so well placed. But let us leave
these absurdities, upon which we have dwelt too long, a great deal longer
then I purposed, and betake our selves to the matter.

Yet perhaps it will not be amiss to add a word or two, first; for the
removing of a doubt, that may arise in some man's mind, who cannot satisfy
himself concerning it. And surely I am the bolder to spend the more time, and
labor, in expounding the text, and making al things as plain, as I can,
because I know, that one of Satan's means, to discredit the doctrine, and make
the exhortation out of any palce of Scripture, less effectual, is to cast
some doubts into men's hearts; about the true sense of the text expounded. If
he can show any likely hood of some other interpretation, then was given, he
makes account he has advantage enough, to persuade us not to regard what was
taught us, and what we were exhorted to. For if the foundation be weak, how
should the building be but ruinous? So likewise, if he cannot reasonably object
against the expounding of the place, yet if he can raise some doubts, which
were not satisfied, he will employ men therein, and so draw them away, from
the meditation, and practice of that, which was delivered. The doubt upon this
place, is in the later part of this clause, why the Evangelist should add these
words, without him was made: was it not sufficient to have said, All things
were made by him? yes surely, it was very sufficient, both for the truth of the
thing, and also for the understanding of it. What use is there then of this
repetition? It helps the memory, and as it were stirs us up to greater
atttention. But the true reason of it, (as I conceive) is, that the Evangelist
follows the Hebrew phrase very commonly; in which it is ordinary, to double
that, by a negation, or denial of the contrary, which before was affirmed. So
I say. 39. 4. 2. King. 20. 15.
speaks Hezekiah to the Prophet I sai, All that is in my house, they have
seen; there is nothing among my treasures, that I have not showed them So Ier.
42. 4.
Jeremy to ^ohanan, and the people, What soever thing the Lord shall answer
you, I will declare it to you: I will keep nothing back from you. Of this
kind, there are many speeches of our Savior recorded in the Gospel, that it
may appear it was ordinary with him, so to set out that he spoke, by
affirming, or denying the contrary. Ioh. 8. 29.
He that sent me, is with me, the Father, has not left me alone; Ioh. 3. 17.
God sent not his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved. This later Clause indeed has
somewhat more in it, then the former, but it was employed in it: So in the verse
going before, ver. 16.
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Ioh. 10. 18. Ver. 28.
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I give them eternal
life, and they shall never perish. This custom of speech used also by his Lord
and Master, did our Evangelist follow, that we might the rather believe, and
remember that, he writ.

Thus by the examining of the words, we are come, at the last, to understand
the Evangelists meaning: which is this; that all things whatsoever, which had
any beginning of being (as all things had, except God only) had that
beginning, and being of theirs from the word, or Son of God. There is nothing
so glorious in heaven above, nothing so mean on earth below, nothing so
hidden, and unknown in the depth of the Sea, but had his whole being from our
Savior Christ. From him they all received their substance, and nature; from
him they had their qualities, and properties; by him all things live, that have
life; by him all things move, that have motion; by him all things are, that
have any being. But let us consider these matters more attentively: First, in
general; then particularly. And because I have, once or twice already, made
mention of a place in the Proverbs, where this Son of God is brought in by
Solomon, calling himself, by the name of wisdom, and showing his admirable
wisdom by the works of the Creation, I will begin with his own report, as it
is there described. When he (that is God the Father) prepared the heavens, I
was there Pro. 8. 27.
(says this divine wisdom) when he set the compass upon the deep; when he
established the Clouds above, when he confirmed the Fountains of the deep.
Ver 28.
When he gave his decree to the Sea, that the waters should not Ver. 29.
pass his commandment, when he appointed the foundations of the earth, Then
was I with him a nourisher, and I was Ver. 30.
daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. But least any man should be so
obstinate, that this testimony cannot resolve, and satisfy him: I will add
hereunto, the witness of Psalm. 102. 25.
another Prophet, who calling upon the Son of God, speaks thus of him; Thou
have before time, laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
work of thy hands. If you doubt, whether this be spoken of the Son or no,
the holy Ghost shall assure you that it is, by the pen of Saint H^b. 1. 10.
Paul; who alleges this place, and applies it to our Savior Christ; Of
whom also he had affirmed a little before, that God made the world by him.

It may be, some man would know the reason, why our Evangelist, being to
describe our Savior, as the Creator of the world, does not use the same kind
of speech, which Moses does, and which also is common in the Scripture, to that
purpose. Why does he not more particularly recite the things, that were
created by him, and set out his glory therein at large as Moses does? I will
tell you, in as few words, as I can. And first I say of both questions
together, that therefore Saint John did not speak either so, or so largely, as
Moses had done before, because Moses had so done, and his purpose was not the
same, that Moses had in his writing. More particularly, and more plainly, I
say farther of the former doubt; first that it is true, and manifest, that
whereas Genesis 1. 1.
Moses named expressly the heaven, and the earth, our Evangelist says in
general, All things. It is also clear, and certain, that ordinarily in the
Scripture, where God is spoken of, as a Creator, there the same things are
mentioned. We heard erewhile several places to that purpose; you may find
more at your leisure. We preach unto you (says Act 14. 25.
the Apostle Paul to the men of Listra) That ye should turn from these vain
things, to the living God, which made heaven and earth. So Isay. 37. 16.
says Hezekiah, Thou art God alone over all the kingdoms of the earth, thou
have made the heaven, and the earth. So Ier. 32. 17.
Jeremiah; Thou have made the heaven and the earth, by thy great power: yet
says our Evangelist; By him were all things made. Why so; As well because by
these words, all that Moses said might and would easily be conceived, as also
for that he would have even those things to be understood whereof Moses had
made no express mention. Therefore also does Col. 1. 16.
the Apostle Paul speak otherwise of the creation, then Moses, where he says
of our Savior Christ, By him were all things created which are in heaven, and
which are in earth, things visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; then follow the very words of our
Evangelist, All things were created by him. Thus has Saint Paul taught us how
to expound Saint John, All things visible, and invisible. Of the later, Moses
says nothing expressly; but rather by his particular description of the visible
parts of the world, seems to tell us, that he spoke of them only. So might
our Evangelist also have been understood, if he had so spoken; whereas now we
are to expound him of both, according as the Apostle directs us. But why does
not Saint John (as the least) follow Moses course, and describe the particulars
at large? Because Moses was the first, that ever writ that history of
creation, and writ it of purpose, to give knowledge of it to all posterity:
But our Evangelist neither needed do that, which which was performed so
excellently, so long before, by another; and intended, not to set out the
history, but rather to apply it to the present occasion. He had also a more
worthy matter to handle, whereunto he hasted, the redemption of the children
of God, by the promised Messiah, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Give me leave I pray you a little to consider the glory of our heavenly
redeemer, and to insult over all such miscreants, Jews, and Turks, as despise
his gracious offer of salvation, and refuse him, as not worth the trusting in.
Whom do thou contemn? whose help do thou think scorn of? Can thou
not believe in him, when thou considerest him in the Virgins womb? yet believe
in him, when thou beholdest him in the bosom of God? what could he be, but
mortal, that was made of mortal flesh? Nay, rather, what could he be, but
immortal, that made both flesh, and spirit? Thou say, He is accursed, that
makes flesh his arm; and can he be blessed think thou, that refuses to
make God his strength? Shall the clay say to the potter, Thou art of no power?
Shall not so presump^uous a Clod of baked earth, be broken all to pieces, and
beaten to dust? That thou live, mov'st, breathe, that thou art, that thou
can be thus unthankful, it is his and only his goodness. What do thou
plotting, and devising to overthrow his religion? Behold, he will take a way
thy breath from thee, and then all thy thoughts shall perish. Do thou not
quake and tremble at the fearful sound of the thunder, that he made? Do
thou not flee away, and hide thy face from the flashes of lighting, that come
from him? Osc. 2. 8.
Do thou not know, that it is he, that gives thee Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, and multiplies thy silver and thy gold, which thou wastest in making
war against him? How long will thou proceed to harden thy wicked heart, to
thine own destruction? The weakest, and meanest of his creatures, Exodus 8. 19.
25.
Flies, and Lice, are stronger then all thy bands of Ianizaries.

If the meditation of our Savior Christ's Almighty power, in creating all
things, will prevail nothing at all with them, but to (...) urage them the
more; let us leave them to his just indignation; and apply the knowledge of
this doctrine, to the increase of our own faith, and comfort. And first, let
us hearten our selves against the reproaches, and scorns of the weak and
ignorant world. They believe not in Jesus Christ. Noe marvel. For they see
him not, but in the womb, in the manger, on the Cross, in the grave. They see
but a piece a it were, or rather the bark only of the tree of life. But we to
whom the same Lord, that created the eyes of our bodies, and the natural light
of our understanding, has given also the supernatural light of faith. behold
him a far off, even beyond the beginning of the world, and looking through
the rind of his humane nature, see the pith, and substance of his everlasting
Godhead; not what it is, but that it is. Why should it be thought strange for
men to rely wholly upon him, that made them? Let me reason with you a little.
If a Clock or Watch, a curious piece of work, had understanding to consider
its own nature, and to know the workman, that forged and framed it, to whose
keeping, think you, would it commit it self, rather then to his, that knew
^est how to preserve it, because he devised and made it? Is not every man
desirous to have that gardener, if it may be, to look to his herbs, flowers,
knots, arbors, and his whole ground, the excellency of whose skill he sees
continually before his eyes, in the beauty and growth of the things, he has
fashioned, and planted? And shall not we rest, and rely upon him, that
created us? If the skill, and strength of some workman be inferior to other
of the same trade; yet his love and affection to his own work, and the care
of his reputation, will make him ^ble above his power. If that Clock or Watch
I spoke of, could find it self decayed in any part, the teeth of the wheels
or pinions to be ouerworne, the axel to be grown too thin, or any thing to
be displaced, would it not seek, and call for help of the maker? I might say
^he like of the garden. Who is fitter to amend whatsoever is out of order, then
be that first set it in that order? To whom then should we seek for aid?
but to him, that having created us, is therefore able, and willing to restore us
to our former, and, if it please him, to a better estate.

We see how agreeable it is to reason, that he, which made man, after his own
image and likeness, should refresh it being decayed, and restore it being lost.
We see also, that the same reason teaches us, that as many, as desire to be
made partakers of that, for which they were made, must depend upon him, by whom
they were made. Therefore may we truly say unto the Lord; Psalm. 72. 25.
Whom have we in heaven, but thee? we have desired none in the earth with
thee. But if the hope of so necessary, and assured succor be not sufficient
to draw us to him, that offers himself to repair his own workemanshippe:
yet let the consideration of our duty weigh so much with us, as to make us
yield obedience to our Lord and Maker. There is nothing more common in the
Mouths of men and children, then that God made all other things for the
service of man, and man for his own service. Yea, to whom does it not seem
unreasonable, that the creature should deny obedience to the Creator? Do you
not hear the Lord complaining of this by the Isay. 1. 2. 3.
Prophet Isay; as of a monstrous, and unnatural impiety? Hear O heavens, and
hearken O earth; for the Lord has said, I have nourished, and brought up
Children: but they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his owner, and
the Ass his masters Crib; but Israel has not known, my people has not
understood. Are we more brutish then the Ox, more dull then the Ass? They
rely on them, by whom they have their meat; Do we refuse to rest on him, by
whom we have our whole being? If they should be given over by one master,
they would soon be found by another. If the Lord our Creator leave us to our
selves, there is no second, that can sustain us, but we shall immediately
fall to nothing. Be not afraid then, least thou should be shamed, when
the foolish world shall condemn thee, for believing in Jesus Christ. Ask them
boldly, if the creature may not, or ought not to put his trust in the Creator.
Let them tell thee, whether they do not think it just and reasonable, for the
workmaister, to have all command over the work. Thou find'st they self to be
wholly out of frame and order: to whom should thou go to be amended, but
to him, that formed thee? Thou art not able to attain to the end, for which
thou went created; who can better, or who will gladlier direct thee, then he,
that appointed that end for thee? He looks thou should seek unto him; he
calls thee, to come unto him. He commaunde^ thee to trust unto him. As he
has made thee a man on earth by creation: so he will make thee a Saint in
heaven by regeneration.

What do thou vexing, and troubling thy self (poor soul) with the
continual sight of thy present deformity? I was indeed (say thou)
beautiful, and glorious: but I am deformed, and loathsome. I had once the
lively image of him, that created me, true holiness and righteousness: but I
have now the ougly pourtrature of him. that deceived me, even sin, and
wickedness. If only the color were decayed, it might happily be refresht.
But when the very form is perished, there is nothing left to be repaired. O
miserable and wretched that I am; Not only to ose that happiness which can
never be recovered, out also to fall into that misery, which can never be
renedied. Which way shall I turn my self? or to whom hall I flee for succor?
It is high time to minister some comfort, when the party is so well prepared to
receive it; especially since it may so easily be had. Do thou ask, ^o whom
thou shall flee for succor? To whom else, but to him that offers it? As for
the fear of, I know not what impossibility to recover so great a loss,
remember by whom all things were made, and thou shall see how much thou art
deceived. Thou have lost the perfect beauty thou had bestowed on thee, in thy
creation: But he that gave it, has not lost his power, to bestow new on
thee. Is the color faded? He can lay on a fresher, and set an amiable gloss
thereon. I^ the woole form be perished, that there remains no one li^e, or
place of a line to be discer^ed: yet has not he, that created it, forgotten
what it was. Is it harder for him to make thee righteous, then it was to make
thee? Can not he, that created the soul it self, enrich it with qualities
beseeming such a substance? He that made the light to shine out of darkness,
can make the sowrest crabstocke, bear most sweet fruit. He that created
thee, when thou were not, can create true righteousness in thee when thou art
most unholy. But, let us consider this work of the creation more particularly:
and first, that our Savior Jesus Christ was the Creator of those invisible
Creatures, which we call Angels. Look you for proof of this point? By him
were all things made Or if that content you not, read that which follows. And
without him, was nothing made, that was made. Then if the Angels were not made
by him, either they have no being at all, or, at the least, had no beginning of
their being. The last is impossible. For they are servants to the Lord, who
only is eternal, and Psalm. 103. 20.
Do his comma^deme^t, in obeying the voice of his word. And indeed thence have
they their name. For what is an Angel, but a messenger employed in the
dispatch of some business? Genesis 24. 7.
He shall send his Angels with thee, says Abraham to his servant: and again,
The Lord, before whom I walk, will send his Angels with thee, and prosper
thy Journey. The books of the old Testament are full of examples, to this
purpose Yea, the new also affords not a few. Mat. 1. 20. and 2. 13. 19.
The Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, once, twice, thrice.
Luk 1. 11.
There appeared unto Zachary an Angel of the Lord. Therefore it is our of all
question, that the Angels had a beginning of their being by creation: and
whatsoever had so, took that beginning from him, without whom nothing was
made, that was made. In the acknowledgment of this; Heb. 1. 6.
when the Lord brings his first begotten Son into the world, he says, Psalm.
97. 7.
And let the Angels of God worship him. Will you see this homage as it were, and
service performed? Before his conception, Luke 1. 26.
the Angel Gabriell was sent to give notice of it. After his co^ception,
before his birth, Mat. 1. 20.
an Angel appeared to Iosoph, to testify, that his conception was by the holy
Ghost. Presently after his birth, Luke 2. 9.
the Angel of the Lord brought news thereof, to the Shepherds about
Bothlehem; Yea, straight way, there was with the Angel, a multitude of
heavenly soldiers, praising God, for his coming into the world. Which was the
mystery, that the Angels (as 1. Pet. 1. 12.
Saint Peter tells us) desired to behold. After his temptation in the
wilderness, Mat. 4. 11.
The Angels came and ministered unto him. I might go forward in this kind: but
what needs it? His they are, and at this command to be employed.

The Son of man shall send forth his Angels; Mat. 24. 31.
Hec ^ Mat. 13. 41.
shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet.

Will thou take a view now of some little part of thy happiness, by believing in
Jesus Christ, the maker of all things, and namely of these holy Angels? Look
about thee then, and behold them guarding thee, and attending upon thee, on
every side. Psalm. 91. 11. 12
He has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in thy ways. They
shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot a against a stone.
It is thought to be a goodly matter in the world, for a man to be waited on,
with a great train of nis followers: people gaze upon such an one, and he
himself oftentimes, dotes upon his own greatness. So many proper men, in so
brave liueries, decked with rich cognizances of silk, silver, or gold; clad
in velvet, or Satin; set out with chains of gold, scarfes, and brooches;
armed with gilt rapiers, and daggers; in a word, what can be supposed to be
wanting, either for glory, or for safety? Shall I compare one of these wonders
of the world, with a poor Christian, that believes truly, and soundly in
Jesus Christ? Think not scorn of the comparison, whosoever thou art. All the
brave rye of thy gallantest followers, is but beggerie, being compared to the
glory of the meanest of his attenda^ts. The gold, and silver of thy Retinue
glisters in the eyes of them, that gaze upon it. Thou had need have a fair
day, and a bright shunshine, or else half thy show will be utterly lost. It is
not so with him, whom thou despisest; one of his Angels is able to inlighten
any place in the darkest night. Luke 2. 9.
As the Shepheardes were watching their flocks by night, the Angel of the
Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone about the^. What is
become of thy glistring in the night time? Torches and candles are the light of
thy glory: take them away, and all is nothing. There is not so much ods betwixt
a black flint, and a well watered diamond, as betwixt the least glimpse of the
Angels brightness, and the greatest light of thy servants bravery.

Do thou boast of thy multitude? How can thou for shame, if thou remember,
how the Prophet Elisha was attended? 2. King. 6. 17.
Behold the mountain was full of horses, and Charets of fire round about
Elisha. Do thou hear? The mountain was full. Alas, a little hill will hold
all thy followers. Thou art feign to stretch them out to the uttermost, by two
and two, that they may make some show. The Prophet had the mountain full. He
has given his Angels charge over every one of his children. He names no
certain number, that we may know the charge is common to all. And though all
cannot be in all places, at once; yet is no place without great multitudes of
them. Dan. 7. 10.
He has thousand thousands mini string unto him, and ten thousand thousands
standing about him. But admit (as some men teach, I think without sufficient
warrant) that every man had his proper Angel, and no more; many thousands of
men might not be compared with such a guard, for safety. 2. King. 19. 35.
The Angel of the Lord went out, and slew, in one night, an hundred fourscore
and sieve thousand in the Camp of the Assyrians. Yea, the very appearance of an
Angel, is not without dread, and terror. Luke 1. 12.
When Zachary saw the Angel, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him. So was
Ver. 29. and 2. 9.
the Virgin Mary; so were the Shepheardes. And yet the messages they brought to
these, were full of comfort and joy. To Luke 1. 13.
Zachary word was brought by the Angel, That his prayer was heard. The Angel
assured the noly Virgin That she had found favor with God. And Ver. 30. and
2. 10.
he that came to the Shepherds, Brought them tidings of great joy, that
should be to all the people. If his presence were fearful to them, for whose
comfort he was sent, what will it be to them, against whom he comes as an
Enemy, for their destruction? Who then would not cast himself, for his
protection, and salvation, upon him, that was the Creator of these glorious and
mighty Angels? Would thou be honorably attended? Behold, the Angels ready to
wait upon thee. Heb. 1. 14
For they are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister, for their sakes,
which shall be heirs of salvation. Would thou be safely guarded? Psalm.
103. 20.
The Angels excel in strength. Mat. 28. 2.
Behold, there was a great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended
from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone from the door of the
Sepulcher, wherein our Savior was buried and sat upon it: and his countenance
was like lightning, Ver. 3.
and his raiment white as snow: and for fear of him, the kee^ers were
astonished, and became as dead men. What if they Ver. 4.
be not ordinarily to be seen? Is it not enough, that we are assured by the
holy Ghost, in the Scripture, that the Lord has given them charge over us?
Many and many times are we defended, and guided by them, though we see them
not. As the Devil labors all he can, to draw or thrust us into danger:
So do they strive against him, to keep us from it, or to pull us us out of
it. How many times have we been stirred up by them, to the service of God,
and the works of our calling? How often have they made us remember, and see,
that we were entering into the way of destruction? It is indeed, the blessed
spirit of the Almighty, that inclines our hearts, and affections, to like of,
and yield to holy motions; but the Angels are they, that ordinarily make these
motions. Believe then in Jesus Christ, and thou art presently furnished of a
most sufficient guard, both for state and strength. Psalm. 34. 7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them, that fear him, and
delivers them. King Solomon in all his royalty, in the midst of them, 2.
Chr. 9. 15. 16
that carried 200, targets, and 300. shieldes of beaten gold, was not so
richly, nor so safely guarded: such honor, such security does belief in
Christ procure all true Christians, how meanly soever the world account of
them. It will here perhaps be demanded by some, whether those wicked spirits,
which we commonly call Devils, be of the number of those Angels, or within
the compass of those All things, which, the Evangelist says, were made by
Christ. But the question is answered already: because these spirits are not
God, and yet have a true being, it must needs be, that they took their
beginning, by Creation, from him, Without whom nothing was made, that was
made. Besides, it is not unknown (I think) to any man, that these evil
Angels, are all one, for the substance of their nature, and being, with those
other holy, and glorious spirits: yea, the Lord does use them oftentimes, as
executioners of his just wrath, upon the wicked. I will not stand to inquire,
whether ever he do employ those his Angels of Light in any such kind of
service or no, or whether this office be put off to those evil spirits
only: once, it is a matter out of doubt, that these later are sometimes so
employed. 1. Sam. 16. 14.
The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit sent from the
Lord vexed him. And of the Israelites it is said, in Psalm. 78. 49.
the Psalm, That the Lord cast upon them the fiercenes of his anger,
indignation, and wrath, and vexation by the sending out of evil Angels. Such
was 1. King. 22. 21.
that lying spirit, which offered himself to deceive Ahab, by the mouth of his
false Prophets. As for that wickedness of theirs, which now, by long custom,
is as it were turned into nature, and has taken so full possession of them,
that they are utterly reprobat to all goodness; it was not made with them, but
bred and brought in by them; they received not that corruption with their
nature, but by their choice of evil corrupted their nature. Their estate by
creation was happy, their nature holy. Iud. v. 6.
But they kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, as Saint
Jude tells us: and as 2. Pet. 2. 4.
the Apostle Peter plainly says, They sinned. The Lord found no steadfastness
in them, as Job. 4. 18.
Eliphas affirms in the book of Job, They are now evil, and nothing but
evil: but from the beginning they were not so.

Yes says one, even from the beginning: witness our Savior himself, who
doubts not to affirm, that The devil has been a murderer, from the
beginning. What? From the beginning of his creation? That were indeed to make
God the author of sin, properly and immediately. But how should the Devil
be a murderer, when as yet there was none, whom he could murder? yea after
that Adam was created, which certainly was after the creation of Angels, who
were in all likelihood the beginning of Gods workmanship, the Devil was not
y^^ ^ murderer? For Euah, by whom he prevailed to the destruction of Adam, and
her self, with their whole posterity, was not yet framed. But as soon as the
Devil had seen the man, and the woman, his malice against God, and his envy
at their present happiness, and future glory, made him attempt that murder,
which he so soon committed. So that from the beginning, is nothing else, but
from the first time, that he had opportunity to do a murder. I deny not,
that he was ready enough before, to have done the like; but our Savior
speaks of that actual mutther. Neither yet do I grant, that he was
naturally so inclyned, by reason of any evil, created in him. But this I say,
that being holy by nature, he wilfully rebelled against God, before the
creation of Adam, and by that rebellion of his defaced in himself the Image of
God, in which he was created; and was given up by God, to his own wicked
heart, without hope or possibility of recovery. This (in part) our Savior
himself, in that place, signifies; when he adds, immediately upon the former
words, that H^e abode not in the truth. For by this speech he does imply, that
he was first in the truth. Let us not be afray de then to confess, that the
Son of God made the Devil: but let us know, and remember, that he made him
not a devil. He is a Spirit by creation; an evil spirit by declining from
that purity, wherein he was created. His being is from the will of God; his
being evil from his own will. But that, which concerns ve especially, in
this matter, is this, that how great soever his power seem to be, in the
world, how extreme soener his malice be against God, how desirous soever he
be of our destruction; yet he, in whom we believe, that did create him, both
has him at command, as a creature, and would never have created him, if he
had not been able to bring his own purpose to pass, for the salvation of
those, that trust in him, in despite of Sa^^n, and all his instruments.
Therefore take courage to thy self, whosoever thou art, that have committed
thy self to Jesus Christ to be saved by him. Does Satan rage against thee?
Does he beleger thee, on every side? Does heee come with open mouth, like a
Lion, to devour thee? He that made him, and thee, knows his strength, and
thy weakness. Sooner shall he burst himself with swelling envy, or fret
himself away to nothing, with bootelesse anger, then separate thee, from thy
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He love thee, for the first creation; a
thousand times more for the second generation. Though thy first righteousness
was lost by sin, thy second grace shall overcome sin. But let us proceed
to the creation of visible things.

Whereof I shall need to say the less, because they are (generally) so well
known to all men, and described somewhat largely in the history of the
creation. Yet thus much I may, and must say; that if we did more advisedly
consider, either the whole frame of the world, how each part serves and
beautifieth other, or the particular creatures, every one by themselves, we
should discern the power, and wisdom of the Creator, in a far more
excellent sort, then ever yet we saw it. But I will not enter into so large a
field, least the variety of most admirable workemanshippe make me forget my
self, and stay me too long, in the course of my present journey, to the end
of this whole verse. Only I will commend to your private meditation, for this
purpose, the later end of the book of Job, from the beginning of Chapter 38.
to the end of 41. Where the Lord himself, from heaven, thunders out a
wonderful description of his divine power, and wisdom, in the variety of
his works, and the incredible strength of some special creatures; to the
utter confusion of August. de ^aeros. cap. 46.
the wicked Maniches, who blasphemously gave the glory of these wonders to an
Idol of their own senseless devising, and setting up. But they, that have
either the light of true reason, or the direction of the holy spirit, clearly
see, and willingly acknowledge, that the least, and meanest creature in the
world, could never have been, but by the infinite power of God; and being is a
sufficient proof of that power, by which it is. This I speak the rather,
because A^crroes and aly.
some learned fools, being enforced by the light of nature, to discern the
Creator in the creatures, and yet being not willing to assent to the truth of
Religion, in the Scripture, have presumed to deny both the creation, and
providence of God in the smaller, and inferior creatures, and in ordinary
matters of no great moment. Why so? Because (forsooth) they were too base for
God to make, or meddle with. O the niceness of vain men! As if the Sun that
shines out of the heavens, were defiled, or abased, by casting of his beams
upon any place, though never so homely, or uncleanly? But of the providence of
God, upon some fitter occasion hereafter. For the creation of such small and
mean creatures, we have authority of Scripture to assure us, they are GODS
workemanshippe; and strength of reason to prove, that they are worthy to be
acknowledged for his.

And for Scripture, what better warrant can we desire, then the testimony of
the holy Ghost by Genesis 1. 20.
Moses, in the report, he makes of the first creation. God said, Ver. 24.
Let the waters bring forth in abundance, every creeping thing that has
life. And of the earth afterward; God said Let the earth bring forth the
living thing, according to his kind; cattle, and that which creeps. There is
not any creature in the Sea, or on the Land, of less worth, then that, which
creeps. Is it not a part of the Serpents punishment, to go on his belly? Genesis
3. 14.
Because thou have done this, thou art accursed above all cattle, and above
every beast of the field: upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou
eat all the days of thy life. Is there any baserfood, then the dust of the
earth? And yet that is the ordinary meat of such things, as craul upon the
land. As for those, that creep in the water, mudde and slyme is their ordinary
sustenance. Yet are both the one, and the other, created by the Lord.
Therefore also have they their part, in praising, and magnifying their heavenly
creator. Psalm: 148. 10.
Beasts and all Cattle, creeping things and feathered fowls. Yea they are not
only the creatures of God, but (howsoever for a time they were ceremonially
unclean) by nature clean, and good. So did the Lord himself teach and
inform Act. 10. 10.
Peter, by a voice from heaven. The holy Apostle was hungry, and while meat
was dressing for him, fell into a trance, wherein he saw a vessel come down
from heanen, in which were amongst verse. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
other creatures, creeping things. Then there came a voice to him, willing him
to kill and eat. Is not this a sufficient proof of their creation and
cleanness? They came now down from heaven, and Peter was willed to eat of
them. But Peter remembering that they were forbidden to be eaten, as unclean,
began to excuse himself. The Lord to cut of all objections, answers him
again. The thing that God has purified, pollute thou not. This was so done
thrice says the Text. Why so often? but that all doubt of their uncleanness
might be clean taken away.

Well, say you: let them be clean forvse, especially in acase of necessity;
yet they are not worthy to be held for the creatures of God. Not worthy, and
yet have being, moving, and life? Any one of these were sufficient to make them
show some part of his greatness, from whom they are. Take the least of the 3.
Is there not an infinite difference betwixt not being and being? Or can any
power, less then infinite, give being, where there is none? Do not all things
as it were, speak, and sound out the excellency of being, when they fear, and
strive against nothing more, then least they should not be? What has made
some profane wretches, that had no hope of life, after their death in this
world, to wish, that they might live, though it were but in the form and
nature of Todes or Spiders? It is an old, and true observation, even of the
heathen, that every thing is naturally desirous to continue its being, by all
means possible. But these fond wise men shall be condemned, by some like
themselves. Let us hear Pharaohs in chaunters give in their verdict. When they
all crauled with lice, and saw that God, who had suffered the Devil, for a
time, to deceive them with vain shows, would no longer endure his and their
damnable presumption, they cried out to Pharaoh; (...). 3. 19.
This is the singer of God. Surely, if making lice of dust, be not
dishonorable to God, but the wretched sorcerers are enforced to acknowledge
his power in them, what madness is it, to deny him the creation of the smallest,
and meanest things? Yet I would not be so understood, as if I thought, that
every kind of such creatures, was made at the first creation, within the
compass of those six days. It is enough for us to believe, and acknowledge,
that all things had their being from God; both for their nature, and their
properties, and that no kind of creature has bin, is, or shall be, at any time,
bred, but according to the appointment of the Lord, and by the means, which he
from the beginning ordained, and fitted to that purpose. Thence it is, that
diverse living creatures are daily bred of dust, mudd, slyme, and such like:
Not as if these things fell out thus, by chance, or arose from the nature of
these matters, without the foresight, and foreappointment of God the creator
of them. Nay rather, therefore did he so temper, and order these things,
because he had decreed to have such creatures bred of them from time to time.

Let us come yet nearer to these dainty ones, and (if it be possible) give them
a full and perfect view of their error. Me thinks their dealing with God in
this matter, is much like to that of Ahaz in another case. Whom when the
Prophet willed to ask a sign for his assurrance from the Lord, his tender
heart would not be so bold with God; Isay. 7. 11. 12.
I will not ask (says Ahaz) neither will I tempt the Lord. He durst not
(forsooth) ask the Lord: but he durst refuse to obey the word of the Lord by
the Prophet, when he was commanded to ask a sign. In like sort these men,
that are so jealous of Gods glory, will not grant that he should be the
maker of such mean things: But in the mean while, they are not afraid,
either to deny him to be the fountain of al being and so to make him no God,
or else to ascribe these creatures to some chance or necessity, not before
determined by him; and so put him then as it were to his shifts, to make the
best of that, which he cannot otherwise help. But if these curious men would
employ that time and study, in searching the nature, and parts of these little
despised creatures, which they bestow in devising idle, and foolish arguments,
to bewray their bold ignorance, they should find more cause to wonder at the
wisdom of God, in their smalnesse, then to deny him to be the maker of them,
because of any imagined baseness. Is there not beauty in a clear diamond,
though it be but a spark? May there not be singular workmanship showed, in
the caruing of a ladle or potlid, or some other thing of meaner service? How
much would be given for Myrons Fly sitting on a Chariot, and covering it and
the horses with her wings and body? But what are all these, and as many such
like devises, and pecces of workmanship as can be imagined, if you compare
them, with these little creatures? Did thou never see a worm, or fly so
little, that thou could hardly discern it with thy neeye, though thou
lookedst earnestly upon it, which yet moved, and crept, turned and returned
this way and that way, with no slow pase? If thou could possibly take a
view of the parts of these creatures, with what admiration of them would thou
be ravished? The Anatomy of such a worm would be no less wonderful, then the
opening of a Whale, or Elephant. What should I speak of the Be, or Silkworme?
Where is the Architect or spinster to be found, that ca^ match the curious
frame of the one, or the small and even third of the other? Butp whither does
the wondering at these creaturs draw me? The farther I go in this course; the
more, and more way I see still before me, and am never a whit the nearer my
iournies end. I will turn aside therefore into that path, which leads us to a
place of strength and comfort.

Have thou advisedly considred, that Jesus Christ thy Savior, is the mighty
and wise creator of all things? I cannot doubt then, but thou manifestly
discernest, that thou art sufficiently provided of all necessaries, that belong
to this present life. They are his by creation, whose thou art by regeneration.
The interest, thou have in him, conueies unto thee a just, and strong title to
all the comforts, and pleasures of this life. He himself has no need of
them; for he is Genesis 17. 1.
God all-sufficient. Else, he neither could, or would have endured to be
without the use of them, from all eternity, till within these 5600. years.
What then? Were they provided for his enemies, that his friends might want?
Mat. 5. 45.
He makes his Sun to arise on the evil indeed, and sends his reign on
the unjust. And not on the good, and just? He provides for both, but with a
diverse affection. Is it not daily seen, that Princes feed, and cloth them
(if need require) that are condemned to death for their misdeedes? Why so?
Because they mean to make their love of Justice known to al men, and to power
on such malefactors the shame, they have deserved. The Roman Generals had an
especial care, in all their conquests, to have the principal of their enemies
alive, that they might afterward lead them in triumph to show their glory. So
does the Lord deal with the great, and mighty wicked ones of the world: He
feeds them with the best and daintiest meat, he clothes them with the
costliest, and gayest apparel, he sets them out as it were to show, that all
men may take notice of them; to the end, that at the last, he may triumph
over them the more gloriously. Thou, that beleeuest in Jesus Christ, perhaps
farest hardly, and art meanly attired. Well; rest upon thy Savior, that was
the maker of all things. He can make supply to thee of all things, when he
will, and he will when he fees it best for thee. But it is his power, of
which we now speak. The Devil knew, and confessed, that the Son of God was
able to make bread of stones. But the Son of God told him, that Mat. 4. 3. 4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word, that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Lackest thou bread? The Creator of all things can provide it, in
a moment for thee, or feed thee without it. Who maintained life, and strength
in Ex^d. 34. 28.
Moses, and 1. King. 19. 8. and 17. 16.
Elias when they continued, without any manner of sustenance, by by the space
of 40. days, and 40. nights? Who kept the oil in the cruse, and the meal in
the barrel, that they wasted not? Did not this mighty Creator, thy Savior
Jesus Christ, Job. 69. 1^. 11
feed, and fill 5000. persons with 5. barley loves, and a. fishes, and yet
leave 12. baskets full of broken meat remaining? What should I say more? He
that made all things, can furnish thee with all things; and so will do, if
thou put all thy trust in him, to save thee.

There remains yet one doubt: which I reserved, of purpose, for this place,
though I had occasion to have spoken of it before, in the interpretation of the
later part of the Text. Some by Nothing, understand Sin; as if the Evangelist
had meant to signify that Sin was made, without him that was the Creator of
all things: but how then could this speech be true? If something were made
without him, how were all things made by him? Surely if we take that division
of the verses for good, and that sense for true, which they, that by Nothing
will have Sin to be meant, approve and follow; we may well be suspected, to
make God the author of sin. That which was made (say those men) In him was
life: who would not conceive this to be spoken of that, which went next
before? Let us make this a little plainer: Thus they read the text; without
him was made nothing. That, which was made, in him was life. Is it not more
reasonable to refer these last words, That which was made, to that nothing,
which they say was made, then to All things, in the former part of the verse,
as I noted before? If it had been the holy Ghostes purpose to sever these
middle words, in sense, where he speaks of Nothing, from the former, and in
the fourth verse to speak again of those All things, he would not have said,
That, which was made; but those things that were made. If then we take this
Nothing, for something, which was made, without the creator, and by Nothing
understand sin, we affirm in the next words, that sin was life in him. By
Nothing therefore, Sin is not meant: but the word must be taken as it
properly signifies, and this later part be understood as a denial of the
contrary to that, which was delivered in the former clause.

Yet because the question, concerning the being of sin, arises from the
doctrine, which the Evangelist here propounds: It is requisite to say somewhat
of it. All things were made by him; If all things then sin too, unless that
be simply nothing, or be, of it self, eternal and infinite, as nothing is, but
God only. Neither will it serve the turn to say, that All things, that were
made, were made by him. For by these words, that were made, nothing is exempted
from being made, but he only, that made al all things, God almighty, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. It seems then, that sin was made; and
maker it could have none, but him that made all things, that were made, that is
all things, besides himself. There fore sin also was made by him. O
blasphemy! God the author of sin? How shall he then condemn the world for
sin? For what is there, or can there be from him, that is nothing, but
goodness, which is not good? And shall men be judged for that, which is good?
Here, what the John 5. 29.
Judge himself says; They shall come forth that have done good, to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation. Be it far from the Lord (says Genesis 18 25.
faithful Abraham) to stay the righteous with the wicked: and that the
righteous should be even as the wicked; be it far from him. And shall not the
Judge of all the world do right? Therefore this must be laid, as a maine
foundation in divinity, that sin, whatsoever it be, is no creature of Gods
making. What if I through ignorance, be not able to make the point clear?
Shall it therefore be doubted of? I have said enough already to prove the truth
of the matter, that Sin is no creature of God; I am now only to describe the
nature of it to you, that you may be the better satisfied. If I sail in this
last part, blame my ignorance, but doubt not of the truth.

What is sin then? Our 1. John. 3. 4. (...)
Apostle answers, that Sin is the transgression of the law. For where there is
no law Romans 4. 15.
says another Apostle) there is no transgression. The word in S. John is
larger, then that in S. Paul. Because the later ex presses only those sins,
which are committed, by doing that, which is forbidden: but the former
condemns all, whatsoever is not according to the law. Transgression is as much
in english, and so is (...) transgressio.
the greek word in S. Paul, as going over. The Apostle compares the law of
God, to the pales of a park, or to the bounds of a forest, or chase, wherein
the Dear are to remain, and not to leap over them, or break out into
anyother ground. Let them feed where they will withing, al is well enough: But if
they once pass the pale, or bounds, they have faulted; and if they come short
home, it is no more then they have deserved. This going beyond their limittes,
within which they should keep, is a transgression, and offense. So is sin,
according to the Apostles word, he there uses. Yet doubtless, though he meant
especially to note that, which was best known, namely the doing of evil; we
may not think, but it was his purpose also, to signify the leaving undone of
that good, which is commanded. I will make the matter plain by the former
similitude. Let us imagine instead of those pales, the lists, or bars, that
are at the end of some race, or gole; to which, all, that make trial of
themselves, in that game, or exercise, must needs come, and beyond which they
may not go. He that faints, ere he have attained to the mark, is faulty, for
leaving undone which he ought to do: He that runns out beyond it, makes a
contrary fault, by doing that he should not do. Both transgress; that is,
break the law of the game, though the later more properly, in respect of the
word transgression. Our Apostle (...)
S. John took a word of larger signification, that comprehends whatsoever is
otherwise, then the law requires: whether we fall short of the mark, that is
set before us, or fly beyond it, we are still within the compass of S. John's
reproof; and our fact is a straying, or aberration from the law.

But whether we offend by too much, or too little, still the sin is some act,
or action, and is comprised in that usual distribution, thought, word, and
deed. Thought is an action of the inward parts only, the brain, and the heart,
or the understanding, and the will. Word adds to the former a second part,
performed by the tongue. Deed imployeth the whole body, or some members, or
member of it, to the doing of some outward evil. Al are actions, or deeds, to
speak truly: but these later have appropriated that name to themselves,
because they have an effect, that is most sensible, and known by feeling. I
will keep my self to the point in question: and though many things offer
themselves to be spoken of; yet I will rest content with that, which belongs
to my present purpose, reserving all other matters to their several places, and
just occasions. Sin then (as we have hitherto spoken of it) is nothing else,
but an aberration, or straying from the law of God, by doing that, we should
not do, or not doing that, we should do, Can there now be any reasonable cause
of doubting, whether sin were created by God, or no? Who can imagine, that it
was made by God? What being has it, but as other actions of men, and Angels,
which are their actions, and performed by them, and have their being in the
doing, and cease with the end of doing? Shall I endeavor to make it plain in
the several kinds of these Sins? First, for the omitting of that we are
enioyn'd to do; who sees not, that this is nothing, that has any being in
nature, but only a failing in our duty? Neither are we, in this case, guilty
of having done evil, but of haueing left good undone. In one word, here is no
action at al, nor any substance, the author of the being whereof we shall need
to enquire after. Let us come to the sins that are committed. Whether we
consider the inward thoughts of the heart, or the outward actions of the body,
what find we, that we may call a creature? The action, whatsoever it be, is
his, that does it. Genesis 4.
Cain murders Abell: Luke. 22. 48.
Indas betraies his Lord, and Master. Is there any substance, or creature made
by either of these actions? If you seek for the auctors of the facts: they are
well know. Cain commits the murder, Judas the treason. What does God but
continue the natural strength, which he gave them, whereby they are able to
do all such actions, as belong to such creatures. Cain has power to give a
stroke, one or more, that may cause death. Judas has power to bargain, and
covenant with whom he will, to walk into what place he will, to kiss whom he
will, to what end himself list. It is no sin to have this power, but to use
it otherwise then we ought. That we have it, is from God; that we abuse it, it
is from our selves. But this only by the way, least some scruple should arise
in some man: mind, touching Gods actions in the sins of men. The conclusion
is, that we have as yet found no sin, whereof God should be the maker. The
hardest point is yet behind, concerning the inward wickedness, and corruption
of nature. For although I am persuaded, that the law of the 10 Commandments,
is only the rule of our actions, teaching what we should, or should not do,
and not the pattern of our nature, showing what we ought to be: yet I am out
of doubt, that this proneness to sin, and untowardness to al good, which every
man finds in himself, is justly displeasing to God, because his image thereby
is defaced; and justly charged upon us as sin, because by our fault, it has
seized on us. Therefore taking this (for the present) as granted; let us
examine the matter, and see whether there be any thing, in this naughtiness of
our nature, which may be truly said to be the creature of God. First, it is out
of all question, that the soul it self, in which this corruption rests, is
the workmanship of God; I breathed as it were by him into the body perfitly
Genesis 27.
formed, in the creation of man. Whether it be immediately created by him
still, as I do verily persuade my self, or come from the parents, as the
matter of the body does, it is not much to our purpose, for the point we have
in hand. It is enough for the thing, we handle, that we acknowledge God to be
the maker of it. Secondly, it is not to be doubted, but that, as the substance
of the soul, so the qualities thereof also, proceed from the same God, as from
their maker. For he that Genesis 1. 27.
made man after his own image, and likeness, made those faculties of
understanding, and will, and those qualities of holiness and righteousness,
Ephesians. 4. 24.
wherein that image only, or especially consists. Is it not the^ to be feared,
least we should make God the author of this naughtiness, by which we are prone
to evil, since it is a quality abiding in the soul? Some have thought to
shift off the matter, by denying, that the corruption of our nature is any
thing else, but an absence of goodness, for want of which, we can neither
do, nor desire ought, that is good. But this does too much excuse the badnesse
of our hearts, which are proclaimed every where in Scripture, not only not to
incline to that, which is good, but to affect, and like of that which is evil;
yea to be wholly bent to evil, and to nothing else. Genesis 6. 5.
The Lord saw, that all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart were
only evil continually. Therefore Romans 6. 17.
the Apostle pronounces of all men, that while they are in their natural
estate, not freed by grace, they are the servants of sin. And all such I.
Ioh. 3. 10.
S. John calls the children of the Devil: and doubts not to affirm, that
the whole worldlyeth in wickedness. But what needs any more, or and 5. 19.
better proof, then that discourse, which the Apostle makes, where he sets
out the grievous misery of our corrupt nature, upon experience, that he
himself had, and that all men have of their untowardness to do good, eue^
after they have received the spirit of regeneration, Romans 7. 14. 15. etc.
I see a law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading
me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. I leave it to every
man's consideration, to judge what we are before grace, if we be such after it.

If then this our natural corruption, be more then a privation, or absence of
that righteousness, which was, and ought to be in us, what is it, but an evil
quality? If a quality, it must needs have had a beginning, either with the
soul, or after it. If so, from whom can it be imagined to have had that being,
but from him, that is the author of all being? Whereupon it seems necessary to
follow, that sin is to be reckned in the number of those All things, that
were made by Jesus Christ. But this was disclaimed before, as blasphemous. What
shall we say then? Shall we deny that every quality is made by God? How can we
possibly do so, with any reason? For every quality has a being: and every
being is good. Neither is there any good, but from God, as the author thereof:
Else were not he the only true good; if there were any thing good beside him,
which is not good by him. What remains, but to affirm, that this Corruption,
or naughtiness, is no quality? How may that appear? I will endeavor to make
it plain by a likeness, or similitude. What think you of the distempers,
that happen often times in the body? When it shakes, and quiuers, with the cold
of an ague? when it burns like fire, with the extreme heat of a fever? When
it flows with moisture in a dropsy? Are these alterations, new qualities
created by God? Consider the rottenness in an apple; or a consumption in the
body, I speak of or in any member of it. Can you conceive how these things may
be, without the creation of any new quality? Imagine the like of that
corruption, which possesses the soul of man. Certainly, putrefaction, and
rottenness, are not qualities made by the Creator; but rather corruptions of
the natural qualities, where with he enriched, and beautified his creature.

What then? Are they nothing, but the privation, or absence of that, which was
given by nature? Yes sure. Take example of the apple before named. The color,
and taste of it may be gone, and all virtue to nourish; and yet the fruit not be
rotten: The body of a man, or any other creature, may have lost power to move,
yea life it self too, and yet not forth with be putrified, or savor. He
stinkes before this time (quoth Martha of her brother Lazarus) for he has
been dead four days. The qualities of the soul, being things, that belong
to the nature of it, according to the creation, always continue with the
soul; but they may be distempred, and disord^ed, without any new work of god
by creating other, instead of them. Mark I pray you a little, when a man by
study attaines to the knowledge of any art, does the Creator make such a new
quality? Does he not rather bless him to the perfiting of that, which was as
the first created in him? If this knowledge decay by any disease of the body,
or by any carelessness of the mind, is the former quality perhaps lately made,
as it were unmade again? Or may we happily have the like made, and mard from
day to day? I might say the like of moral virtues. The reason is all one. You
will say perchance; that you see not, how there can be any such corruption, in
the qualities of the soul, as you discern plainly to happen in the body.
Surely, I confess mine ignorance in the same point with you. Neither do I any
way go about to show how it is, but me thinks I see by good reason, that it is
so. If we had as much knowledge of the nature of the soul and the qualities
thereof, as we have of the body, and the humors therein, I doubt not, but we
should as plainly discern the one, as we see the other.

Let all this be granted, may some man say; that this naughtiness of nature
insues, upon the committing of the first sin, as a corruption of the created
qualities, which the soul was endued withal, at her making: I would feign
know, why this may not challenge God for the author of it, as well as those
creatures, which you confess before, to take their beginning from the slyme,
and mudde of the earth, and water mingled together. They come of the corruption
of those principles of all bodyly things, at the least all under the moon; as
these are said to be from the decay of those qualities: For the better
satisfying of al me^, touching this doubt, I would entreat them to consider
these manifest differences: First, that the Lord directly, and principally,
intending the bringing forth of those creatures, as tending to the perfection
of the world, accordingly fitted the nature of the earth, and water, that, by
the power of the Sunn, such thing: might be formed of them.

But the wickedness of our nature, being not in such sort appointed by God,
but only upon a supposition of the fall of man, by sin; this corruption
proceeds not from necessity of nature, but from the just curse of God upon all
us. that sinned. Secondly, it is farther to be observed, that those creatures so
bred, become several and distinct things from that, where of they are bred;
having a being in themselves, and no way depending on the slyme, or mudde. So
is not this corruption, we speak of; which has no being, in it self, distinct
from the quality; but so cleaues to it, that without it, it cannot con^inue
one minute, no not so much, as in any reasonable ^magination. A scion or grift,
taken from a tree, and set in some other stock, or pricked into the ground, may
oroue a diverse plant, and tree, from that, whence it was cut. But a wen, or
bunch growing out of the tree, though it receive nourishment from it, and grow
with it, is no new creature, nor substance by it self. So is it with those
things that breed of slime, as with the grists; so with the naughtiness of
our nature, as with unnatural swellings in trees, or living creatures. Thirdly
(which I desire to have marked) the Lord has an especial hand, in giving life
to those forenamed creatures, and in framing their members, that they may be
apt for motion. The Sun, and slime, as it were afford, and temper the matter,
whereof they are to be made: but the Former of it is God himself. May we avouch
the like of that corruption, where with our nature is defiled? I trow not. God
in Justice will have it to be, he does not by creation give it being. And thus
much of the creation of all things, mentioned by our Evangelist; Now let us
consider, why he does here mention it, and what he intends to prove by it.

There are 3 several opinions, concerning the Evangelists purpose in this
verse, al agreeing with the words, and course of the Text; and such, as may
well stand, each with other. For if we say, as Leonti^s in Io ^ap. 1.
some have done, that Saint John by telling us, that Al things were made by
him, would exempt him from amongst the creatures, and set him on the Throne
of the Creator. what say we, that is either unworthy of our Saviors honor,
or not agreeable to the maine end of this description? which is to show, that
the promised Messiah had not his first being from the holy Virgin his mother.
Neither does this contrary the judgment of those writers Alcuinus in Ioa cap.
1.
who think, that our Evangelist, following as it were the order of time, first
shows our Saviors divinity, then his humanity; and in setting out the former,
after he has told us, what he was, before the beginning of the world,
proceeds now to inform us, what he did, at the creation of the world. Does
the third, Ignat^us ad Tarsens. ep^st. 7
and most common opinion please us; that this is brought in to prove his
Godhead? This indeed I take to have bin principally intended; but so, as that
both the other are likely. Did he mean to show that our Savior is God?
Certainly he would have us know then, that he is not a Creature only. These
two points imply each other; The third suits with them well enough. For S. John
might intend to prove his divine na ture by the creation of all things, and
withal purpose to declare, what he did, in the creation. Which opinion also is
somewhat the more likely, because the Evangelist bringes it in, upon repetition
of his being with God; as if he meant to show, what he did then with God, as
well, as that he was with God. But because the proof of the Messiahs Godhead,
is the main scope of this Gospel I will keep my self to to that point, in the
rest of my present exercise.

The question is, whether the creation of al things, be a sufficient proof of
his divine nature, that created them, or no. First, the Evangelists authority
is enough, to put the matter out of question. For he, that being directed, by
the spirit of God, could not err, would never have brought this, for a proof
thereof, if it could justly be excepted against. Yet because (as I have
showed) there might be other reasons of this speech, and some doubt therefore,
whether it were the Evangelists purpose to prove that, or no, let us take some
other course. for our full satisfaction. To which end, let us always remember,
that Moses Genesis 1. 1.
in the beginning of the Scripture, lays this as a maine foundation of
religion, that God created heaven and earth. Who can doubt then, ^ut it is a
sound reason to prove our Savior to be God, that All things were made by him?
For if it be tru^, that God was the maker of all things, whomsoever we find
to have made all things, him we know thereby to be God. Therefore the Apostle
Paul preaching to the heathen, and persuading them to forsake their Idolles,
and to turn to the living God, shows who he is, by this effect of creation.
We preach unto you (says the Act. 14. 15.
Apostle) that vee should turn from these vain Idols, unto the living God,
which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things, that in them are.
Worship him Revel. 14. 7.
(says an Angel from heaven) that made heaven and earth and the sea, and the
fountains of waters. By this does 1. Chro. 16. 26
David distinguish the true God, from Idols. All the Gods of the people are
Idols, but the Lord made the heavens. Is not this the proof of the power of
God, whereby he magnifieth himself, and amazeth Io. 38. 4. 5. etc.
Job with the brightness of the glory thereof? By this does Ezechiah conclude,
that he is the true God. Thou art very God alone, over all the kingdoms of the
earth; thou have made the heavens and the earth. Will you hear the Isay 3. 16.
and 48. 12. 13.
Lord himself? I am, I am the first, and I am the last. Surely my hand has
la^d the foundation of the earth, and my right hand has spanned the heavens;
when I call them, they stand up together. Let Heb. 1. 10.
the Apostle Paul end this controversy, who to prove our Saviors Godhead,
brings the place of the P^a. 102. 25.
Psalm. Thou Lord in the beginning have established the earth, and the heavens
are the works of thy hands. From hence then we may certainly, and necessarily
conclude, that the Word, the promised Messiah, our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, is true God. For by him were all things made; and nothing can be made
but by God only. This August. in Io^. tract. 1.
the Arians denied, because they saw themselves driven to confess, that all
things were made by Christ, whom they will not ack^owledge to be God equal to
the Father. Therefore, they devised this shift, that our Savior did indeed
creat all things, yet not as a principal worker, but as an instrument. And to
this, they say the Evangelist directed us, when he said, that All things were
made (...)
by him. For that, by which a thing is done, is an instrument in the doing of
that thing, and not the doer of it. If these men had not blinded their own
eyes with a prei^dicat conceit, against Godhead of our Savior, they might
easily have seen the fondness, and falsenesse of this blasphemous exception.
The folly of it I showed before, when I made it manifest, that it is all one,
to say, All things were made by him, and He made all things. The falsenesse of
it may appear thus; The scripture says the same of God, which is here
affirmed of Christ, that this or that was by him; and yet (I hope) they will
not dare therefore to conclude; that God in those matters, was not a principal
efficient cause, but an isntrumental. For example: Romans 11. 36. (...).
The Apostle says, That all things are by God. What? As an instrument? who is
then the principal essicient, that imployes God, as his instrument? 1. Cor. 1.
1. 2. Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. Col. 1. 1.
The same Apostle affirms of himself, that he was called to be an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, by the will of God. If the will of God be but an instrument,
we are content to require no more honor for our Savior, so you allow him to
be one with God in nature, as the Will of God is, which indeed is God
himself. What say you Gal. 1. 1.
to that place, where the Apostle pleades, for the authority of his
Apostleshippe, because it is by Jesus Christ, and God the Father? I doubt me,
we shall hardly find any principal efficient at all, where both the Father,
and the Son are instruments. How absurdly then, not only impiously, do the
Arians conclude from this word by, that our Savior Christ is not God? But you
(brethren) have been better instructed then to give ear to such blasphemies;
that I hold it altogether needless, to bring any father proof of the matter
then I delivered in my last exercise, or to use any word of exhortation to
belief in him, whom we clearly discern to be God all-sufficient. To whom with
the Father and the holy Ghost the same God, the most mighty and gracious
Creator of all things, let us always remember to ascribe all glory, power,
and dominion, and to perform all obedience for ever, Amen.

THE FOVRTH SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 4. In him was life, and that life was the light of men. 5 And the light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.
IT is a clear truth in natural reason, and a ruled case in divinity, that as
all things proceed from God, as the first cause of their being; so they are
all referred to God, as the last end, why they are. In him Acts. 17. 28.
(says the Apostle) we live, and move, and have our being. And to convince
the Heathen by the light of nature, he adds, As also certain of your own
Poets have said, Aratus in Phaenomen.
For we are all his generation. To whom then do we owe our selves, and
whatsoever we are, or have, but to him only? Witness for nature the wisest
of all the Philosophers, the Stoikes: for divinity, he, 1 King 4. 29. ^0,
that was wiser, then the wisest of the Heathen, Pro. 1. 12 and 16. 4.
Solomon, the preacher, King over Isreal in Jerusalem. The Lord has made all
things for his own sake: yet so for his own sake, that Psa^. 8. 34.
the Prophet is forced to cry out, When I behold the heavens, the works of thy
fingers, the Moon and the Stars, which thou have crealed: what is man (say
I) that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou visitest
him? That his gracious reguard of man, whom the Lord sets in the next place to
himself, may the better appear; as the first work of Creation was for his
service, so the second of Regeneration was for his salvation. This we learn
of our Evangelist: Ioh. 20. 31.
who tells us, that the end of writing the Gospel was, That we might believe,
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing we might
have life through his name. See I pray you, how Saint John has loyned these
two ends together: the former is the glorifying of Jesus Christ, as the Son
of God; the later, the procuring life to men, by faith in him. According to
these two ends the Evangelist has framed this beginning of his Gospel.
First, Ioh. 1. 1. 2.
he describes Jesus Christ unto us, as he is in himself, God everlasting.
Then he shows, what he is to us. A creator of us, when we were nothing; a
Savior to us, when Ver. 3.
we were worse then nothing. Of the former points we have heard out of the
three former verses: now of the Ver 4. 5.
later, out of these two that follow. Whereof we may sitly make these two
parts; a description of the Messiah, as the a^tor of Life, in the fourth verse,
and the former part of the fifth; His intertainment by men, in the later part of
the same verse. In the description, o^r Evangelist declares; first, what he
was in the nature of his mediation; verse 4. then what, in regard of the
effect; verse 5. Concerning the nature of that his office, two points are to
be considered: First, that In him was life. 2. that That life was the light of
men. The effect is, that The light shines in darkness. But how was this
light intertaind? Or rather this light found no entertainment; The darkness
comprehended it not. Now for the better understanding of these points; First,
according to my custom, I will examine the words, then expound the meaning of
the Text. For the words, in the first clause (for I will take every one
severally, by it self) we must consider, both what life, the Evangelist speaks
of; and why he speaks in that manner saying, In him was life. Why he says,
In him was life, rather then He was life; why was, rather then Is; seeing it is
as true and plain, that He is life, as that life was in him.

But what is this life, he speaks of? Look not that I should trouble you, or
my self, with refuting, or so much as reciting the diverse, and strange
interpretatio^s of Heretics, foolishly grounded upon that manner of reading,
which couples the former part of this verse, with the later end of the third;
That, which was made was life in him. I showed in my last exercise, that if
this had been intended, by the Evangelist, he would rather have said, All
things that were made, were life in him. Surely, the manifold, and different
expositions, that so many heretics have made of these words so read, and the
absurd errors, and blasphemies, they have gathered from them, may well seem a
sufficient reason, to discredit such a kind of reading, as has no better
warrant, then the conjectures of men; Howsoever the vulgar Latin retain it,
with the mislike of many learned Papists. August. in Ioa. tract. 1. Ambrosde
fide lib. 3. cap. 3. and in Psalm. 36. Theophyl. ad Ioa. 1.
The Manichees devised two senerall, and almost contrary interpretations of
them. The Arians a third; The Macedonians a fourth; Heracleon a fist: and
every one of these an erroneous doctrine, suitable to his exposition. Yea,
Origin. lib. 3 in Joan.
the best sense, that is given of the words so read, is so curious, and sub
till, that it rather shows the wit, and learning of the Interpreters, then
the meaning of the Writer. And perhaps it were but lost labor, for the greatest
part of this auditorie, to take pains, and spend time in striving to make them
understand it.

Wherefore leaving those nice points to another kind of exercise, and
auditorie, let us take the words plainly, and simply, as they offer
themselves to be conceived of all men; Who if they have any knowledge at all
of the Scripture, or of religion, by reading, or hearing, by this word life
understand one of these two things: Either the natural life, whereby all
living creatures are said to live; or the spiritual life, by which they, that
are regenerate by the spirit of God, live spiritually in this world by grace,
and in the world to come by glory. Let us see some examples of the word in
these senses, out of the Scripture. For the natural life, we have the very
beginning of it in Moses. Genesis 1. 20.
God said, Let the waters, bring forth in abundance, every creeping thing,
that has life. And afterward; Let the earth bring forth every living thing,
according Ver. 24.
to his kind. Of man it is particularly written, that Genesis 2. 7.
The Lord God breathed in his face breath of life, and the man was a living
soul. So says 1. Cor. 15. 45.
the Apostle, alluding to that place; The first man Adam, was made a living
soul. This is that life, which the Lord threatened he would take away by the
flood. Behold Genesis 6. 17.
(says he) I will bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life, under the heaven. In this sense the word
is not so common in the new Testament; I think not once in this whole
Gospel: in other places some times. Luke 8. 15.
Though a man have abundance, his life stands not in his riches. Act. 17. 25.
God gives to all, life, and breath in all things. 1. Cor. 15. 19.
If, in this life only, we have hope in Christ. And as this signification of
life is rare in the new Testament; so is the other for spiritual life in the
old: yet now and then, under the title of this present life, the life to come
is also employed. Behold Deu. 30. 15. 19. 20.
(says Moses) I have set before thee this day, life, and good, death, and
evil. Afterward; life and death, blessing and cursing. And in the next verse;
The Lord thy God is thy life, and the length of thy days. In the Psalm oftener
and playner. Psalm. 16. 11.
Thou will show me the path of life. Psalm. 36. 9.
With thee is the well of life. So in Pro. 2. 19.
the Proverbs. All they, that go unto her, return not again, neither take
they hold of the ways of life. Pro. 6. 23.
Corrections for instruction are the way of life. That one book affordes us
more examples of this kind, then all the old Testament beside. But the new is
full of them every where. Mat. 7. 14. and 18. 8.
The way is narrow, that leads unto life. It is better for thee to enter into
life, halt or maimed then having two hands or two feet, to be cast into
everlasting fire. This is that life of glory, which is very often called
everlasting life; and whereof our Evangelist speaks continually, almost in
every Chapter of this Gospel, diverse times; especially, in the third, the
fifth, and the sixth. The life of grace is more often in the Epistles; Romans 6. 4.
and 8. 2.
That we might walk in newness of life. The spirit of life, which is in
Christ Jesus. 2. Cor. 4. 10.
That the life of Jesus might also be made manifest in our bodies. Ephesians. 4 18.
Strangers from the life of God. I have been somewhat the larger in this
matter, because it helps much to the understanding of many texts of
Scripture, to know the different sense of the word in question.

For the place in hand, it is commonly thought to be meant of that natural
life, which all living creatures, receive from their creator; as if the
Evangelist should have said, that not only all things were made by him, as the
author of their being, but also that they had their life too from him. But this
(saving their better judgment, that so expound the text) seems to me somewhat
unlikely. For why should the Evangelist repeat that in this verse, which he
had delivered so fully immediately before? All things were made by him. Was
there any fear, that some exception would be taken to these words? could any
man imagine, that this making of all things, employed no more, but the outward
fashioning, and framing of them, and not also the inward form, and
wholenature? If we will give the words leave to reach as far, as by their
nature, they do, All things must needs import the same things in their best
estate, with all their natural qualities, and properties, and whatsoever else
belongs to their being that, which they are. For example, let us speak a word
or two of some particulars. By him were all trees made. What would a reasonable
man understand by this speech? That the body of the trees only, or the roots,
boughs, and branches, and leaves, and not the life of the Trees was made by
him? Surely, to speak according to truth, all these, without the life, and
form, do no more make a Tree, then a body without a soul does a Man. I might
say the like of men. By him were all men made. If the Lord God had only framed
Adam of the dust of the ground, and not breathed into his face, the breath of
life; might he have been said, to have created a man? No surely: unless a
carcass be a man, after the soul is departed out of it. But, let us think
the Evangelist might have such a meaning, would he (trow ye) have spoken, as
he does, if he had meant as you say? In him was life, that is, (say you) He
also gave life to all things that he had made. Who can so much deceive
himself, as to conceive, that Saint John would deliver his mind so darkely,
and doubtfully? Beside, was not this, you speak of, a creature? If so, it was
before comprised under those general terms, All things, and needed no
repetition. Neither will this interpretation of the word agree fitly with that,
which follows. Is it not evident, that the life, and the light, are of the
same kind, both natural, or both supernatural? But, the light, as it shall
appear anon, is that of grace to faith, not of nature to knowledge. For the
light of nature did comprehend the Creator so far, as to acknowledge it self
to proceed from him, and to depend upon him. Therefore Romans 1. 20.
the Apostle Saint Paul, does not accuse the heathen of ignorance, for not
knowing God, to be their maker; but for not honoring him, according to the
knowledge, they had of him. The invisible things of God (says he) that is,
his eternal power, and Godhead, are seen^ by the creation of the world, being
considered in his works, that they might be without excuse. Because when they
knew Ver. 21.
God, they glorified him not as God. So then, the Heathen for all the
darkness of nature, did comprehend the life, that was the natural light of
their souls. If you answer, that they did not perfitly understand all things
that concern him as the Creator: you say true, but not much to purpose. For,
who is there, that ever did o^ can, especially while he lives in this world,
compassed about with this house of clay, so fully conceive those points, as
they are to be, and shall be, after this life, understood?

But some man will say, perhaps, that although the giving of life to all
things, was signified in the making of them: yet the preserving, and
maintaining of it, was not. Nor of their being; which can no more be
continued, without the power of God support them in it, then their life can.
Therefore the Apostle, describing our Savior Christ's Godhead, sets it out by
this very work thereof; when he says of him, that Heb. 1. 3.
He bears up all things, by his mighty word: and Act. 17. 28.
in another place, where he tells the heathen, that they lived and moved in
God, he adde^ also, that in him they had their being. If then there were no
necessity to express the sustaining of all things in their being, no more was
there to note particularly the continuing of them in life. Yea, perhaps it
might be dangerous to mention the later, and conceal the former; least some
men should gather, that all things stand in need of God to preserve their
life, but not to continue their being. Give me leave to apply one of my former
exceptions, to the clearing of this matter also. How strangely does the
Evangelist speak, if his meaning be, as you make it? In him was life. That is,
He preserues all things in life. Could this point be more obscurely
delivered? What reason can you give me, why the holy Ghost should say was,
when he intended to signify the continual preserving of life? why did he not
rather say, In him is life; Or in him the life of all things is continually
preserved? But if by life, you will have the preserving of things in their
being signified, I desire to see some warrant of Scripture, or ground of
reason, for the using of that word, in that sense. Surely there can be no such
found in any place of all the Scripture, either or the word life, or for the
phrase, In him was life.

What remains then, but Clem. Alex andr. pae lagog lib. 1. cap. 6. A thana^.
lib. 3. ^^ hom^. Amb^o. lib. 3 de fide cap 3.
to expound the word, of that supernatural life, by which we live, through
faith in Christ? This is the life, of which our Evangelist so often speaks in
this Gospel, coming to us by, and in Christ Let us hear our Savior himself
speak. Ioh. 5. 24.
He that believes in him, that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. And in the same
Chapter, afterward, he Ver. 40.
reproues the Jews, because they would not come unto him, that they might have
life: Whereas the end of his coming was, Ioh. 10. 10.
That they might have life; and have it in abundance. Therefore does Act. 3 15.
the Apostle Peter call him, the Lord of life. But whom should we rather
hear, in this case, then (...)
the Evangelist himself, expounding his own meaning? The life appeared, and
we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life,
which was with the father and appeared unto us. Can any man doubt, but the
Evangelist speaks of the same life, in the beginning of his Epistle, whereof
he entreats, in his Gospel? Compare them together, and see if you can
persuade your selves otherwise. Will you hear him speak yet more plain? and
5. 11.
This is the record, that God has given unto us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son. This later is called Eternal life in the words before. Then
surely the Evangelist speaks in the Gospel also, of eternal life, which the
Son of God brings as mediatator; not of this transitory life, which he
gives as Creator. Now because this supernatural life is double, either of
grace in this world, or of glory in the world to come; I should farther
inquire whether of these two is here meant, or whether both be not meant. But
of that, as also of the reason, why our regeneration, and salvation is termed
life, I will speak, when I come to give the meaning of the place.

In the mean while, let us go forward in examining the words: and first let
us see, why he uses this kind of speech, In him. Why does he not rather say,
as before, by him? doubtless he might well have said so. For, it is by him
indeed, that we have life. Romans 5. 1. 2.
By him we have peace toward God; By him we have access, through Ver. 11.
faith unto this grace, wherein we stand. By him we have received the
atonement. But this manner of speech, though it be as true as the other: yet
it is not so fit in this place, nor so significant. Not so fit; because the
Evangelist would put a difference betwixt the Creator, and the Mediator. All
things were made by him; not in him, though Origin. hon. 2. ^n ^^uers.
some would have without to imply as much: whom I answered the last day. But
our spiritual life is, as by him, so in him. The things that are made by him,
howsoever they always depend on him, for the continuance of their being, yet
they are not one with him. Is it so with them that receive the life of grace
from him? No, no; They are joined close unto him: and the life, that they have,
is from that spirit, by which he lives. Therefore is Ephesians. 5. 3^
the Church flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; yea, all the faithful
are members of his body, himself being the head. This near coniun^ction with
him, could not be expressed so significantly, if the Evangelist should say, By
him was life; as it is, when he says, In him was life: yet does not say, He
was life, which also is true; because he^ speaks of it, not as it rests in
him, but as it is communicated by him to us.

But why says he was, and not rather, Is in him? Is there no life now to be
had? Or is there any to be had now, but in hi^? No surely. There is no
salvation in any other. ^^. 4. 12
For among men, there is given no other name, under heaven, whereby ^ee must
be saved. How then says the Evangelist, that l^^e was in him? Tolet. in ^^^
innot. 13.
We may not imagine, that ^ee means to show us any other way of attayning
to life; as if was, excluded is: No more, then we may conceive, that the Word
is not GOD now, because he says of him, The Word was God. What may then
be the reason of this manner of speech? It is thought to be double: either in
re^uard of Gods eternal purpose, or in respect of the ^mes, before the coming
of the Messiah. The former, we must thus understand; that the Lord God,
foreseeing the fall of his creature man, decreed in himself, to recover him,
by sending his Son to make satis^action for sin, by sacrificing of himself
upon the altar of the cross. Of this says 2. Tim. 1. 9.
the Apostle, He has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and grace, which was
given us through Jesus Christ, before the world was. Therefore also says our
Evangelist 1. Ioh. 1. 2.
other where, that this life was with the Father, and appeared unto us. When
the fullness of time was come (says Saint Paul) God sent his Son. What
fullness of time was this, but the very hour appointed by God? So that Saint
John may well say, In him was life. Because, even before the foundations of the
world, were laid, life was settled, and shut up in the person of the Son, who
was in due time to become the mediator of mankind, by taking the nature of man
upon him.

If there be any man, whom this answer does not content, it may be the
other conjecture will satisfy him. Let us not weary our selves with looking
so far as to the eternal decree of GOD, but keep our sight within the
compass of the world: within that time also we shall find some reason of
this speech. When was life in him? ever since there was any, to whom that life
might appertain, it was ready for him, in the Son of GOD, the promised
Messiah. Genesis 3. 15.
Where had our first parents, Adam and Eve, their spiritual life, after the
Curse, but in him? In whom was the covenant established with Genesis 12. 3. Gal.
3. 8.
Abraham, but in his seed Jesus Christ? What name I some special men? Did not
this life offer it self generally unto all, that came of Abraham? Brethren, I
would not that you should be ignorant (says 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4.
the Apostle) that all our fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed
through the Sea: And were all baptized unto. Moses in the Cloud, and in the
Sea: And did all eat the same spiritual meat; And did all drink the same
spiritual drink. For they drank of the same spiritual Rock, that followed
them, and the Rock was Christ. What though many thousands dyed, before the
Son of God became men? were they therefore without means of life and
salvation? Nothing less. Heb. 13. 8.
Jesus Christ yester-day, and to day, and the same for ever. They believed in
Christ to come: we believe in him being come. They saw him not; but were
persuaded, he should be seen, at the time appointed. Neither have we seen
him; but are out of doubt, that he was seen, while he lived here upon the
earth. They trusted in him, as the only and all-sufficient means of life. Is
not our faith the same? Therefore least any man should imagine that the
Fathers, which died before our Savior Christ was born, were destitute of
spiritual life, our Evangelist assures us, that there was, even then, life in
him.

These reasons may give some good satisfaction to them, who desire rather to
inform themselves, to edification, then to aim themselves, for contention.
Give me leave also, I pray you, to propound to your consideration, and
meditation, at your better leisure, what it has pleased God I should conceive
of this matter: would any man know of me, why the Evangelist says In him was,
rather then In him is life? I think, he may be fully satisfied, if he do
advisedly consider, that he continues the course, which he begun, in the
first verse, and followed in the second, and third. In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. The same was. By him
were: without him was. Do not marvel the^, that the Evangelist says here, In
him was life. Tell me how he could have spoken more fitly? He proceeds in
the description of the Messiah, touching his mediatorship; whose Godhead he had
before declared. Could he do better, the^ to hold on the same manner of
speech? But, will you see yet a farther reason? that nothing may be wanting,
which may help vou forward in the understanding of this scripture. Who knows
not, that the Evangelist, (according to the ordinary course which they take
that write the hystories of famous men) settes down in the beginning a brief
description of him, of whom afterward he is to entreat at large: by showing
that in particular, which was, at the first, delivered in a general sort? This
being so, let us remember, that the history is of him, that is not now living
amongst us, but departed out of this life from us. Therefore it was necessary
for our Evangelist to speak of him, as of one that had been, and now was not.
Not as if he were not now at all: but because he is not now alive, in the
world, as he was, when those things were done, the history whereof is written
in this Gospel. So then, we must conceive, that Saint John, in saying was,
has respect to the time of our Saviors being herein our nature; and therefore
not only might, but ought also to say, In him was, rather then In him is life:
because he is totel us, what he did, here in the world and not what he does,
now he is out of the world. This the holy Ghost teaches us, when he says Ioh.
20. 30.
toward and Ioh 21. 25.
in the end of this Gospel; Many other signs also did Jesus, and there are
also many other things which Jesus did. Yet the end of all is, Ioh. 20. 31.
that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ; and so, that life is in him,
now for us, as well as it was for them, that lived in his time.

The excellent comfort of this doctrine draws me to it with both the hands,
but that my promise holds me back very strongly. Let me first discharge
this, and then I will bestow my self wholly upon the handling of that more at
large. I undertook to show these two things; what spiritual life is here
signified: of grace, or of glory, or of both; why the term life is applied
to note that holiness, and happiness. I doubt not, but every man perceiues
already, that by life, I understand as well our living righteously in this
world, as our living gloriously in the world to come. How else could it note
such holiness, and happiness? The reason (perhaps) is not so apparent. I will
do my best endeavor, to give you satisfaction, touching that also. It is very
fit, if not necessary, to give as large an extent to all texts of Scripture,
as the circumstances of the present place, and the ordinary use of the words
will bear; least we seem to restrain the meaning of the holy Ghost, more
then we are warranted by him to do. And therefore I could have been
contented to have stretched the word, even to note the preserving of natural
life; but that I can find no such use of it in the Scripture: neither will
that sense well agree, with that exposition, which the light in the second
clause seems necessarily to require; as I hope to make it appear anon, if
God will.

But neither any circumstance of the place tieth life to the one, or to the
other: and the word is diverse times taken in both senses. Of eternal life,
what shall I need to bring many examples? This Gospel is full of them. I will
give you a taste, by one, or two. Ye search the Scriptures Ioh. 5. 39. 40.
(says our Savior to the Jews) for in them ye think to have eternal life,
and they are they, which testify of me. Yet ye will not come to me, that
ye might have life. That, which in the former verse, he names eternal life,
in the later he calls simply life. The Ver. 24.
like we have in the same Chapter, not very many verses before; He, that
believes in him, that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life. To what life? Even to
everlasting life, which he was said before to have. The other life, grace in
this world, both is employed oftentimes in the life of glory, whereof also it
is a part, the Image of God in us being renewed by it, and is many times
spoken of by it self, as I showed at large before, out of Ephesians. 4. 24.
diverse places of Scripture. It is needless to repeat them, or to add more
to them. What should hinder us then from expounding this life so largely, as
we have done? Nave, might we not be thought injurious, to the holy Ghost, if
we should leave out either of them? By life then, we understand that
spiritual estate of righteousness, and glory, of which all, that believe in
Christ, are made partakers, by being ingraffed into his mystical body. Would
any man know, why this estate, into which we are restored by our Savior,
should be termed life? I answer him, in a word, because the miserable
estate, into which we fell by sin, was called by the name of death. It will
not be unworthy our labor, to consider this point a little. When the Lord God
had made our first parents, and placed them in that palace of pleasure, the
garden of Paradise, Genesis 2. 8.
He charged them to forbear to eat of the Tree of the knowledge of good and
evil; threatening them, that if they brake his commandment, that day, that
they ate thereof, Ver. 17.
they should dye the death. Do you perceive, that the Lord himlelfe has given
that condition of ours the name of death? The old Testament furnish ^th us
with many examples, to precue the first sin com^itted by us in Adam, cast us
all into the state of death ^ut this death, so often there spoken of, is partly
the mortality of the body, and partly the eternal punishment of the soul in
hell fire; the other death of sinnei ^eldome, or I think, never mentioned, in
any of those books. The new Testament supplies us with very great plenty of
example, of both kinds. Of the one I will say nothing at all, because every
man continually obserue^ them: Of the other I must needs speak; because
perhaps they are not so ordinarily marked of all men. Mat. 8. 22.
Let the dead bury their dead, says our Savior. The dead, to be buried, are
they, whose carcases are left without life, by the departure of the souls from
the^, as the history that place manifestly shows. But, who be the dead,
that must be the buriers of those corpses? Who else, bu^ they, that are dead
in sin, dead to righteousness^ and so look after nothing that concerns
everlasting life, any more, then men naturally dead do after the things of
this present life? So says Luke 15. 32.
the kind Father of the prodigal Son: This thy brother was dead. Dead? The
parable had said no such thing of him. What the^ was that death, the Father
speaks of? Questionles the death of sin; whereby he had lived lewdly, and
wasted his goods with verse. 13.
riotousnesse, and (as his brother angerly objected) had devoured them with
harlots. This the Apostle expresses, Verse. 30.
when speaking of us all in our natural estate before grace, he Epb. 2. 5. 7.
says, that we were dead in sins, and trespasses. This may yet farther be
manifested, by the title, that is given to that condition, into which we enter
by regeneration. First Ioh. 3. 5.
our Savior says we must be borne again: what needs that if we were never
dead? And Romans 6. 2.
the Apostle S. Paul affirms, that they, which are so borne again, are dead
to sin. Then, till they were so borne again, they lived in sin. The life
of the one is always the dea'h of the other. If thou live to sin, thou art
dead to righteousness. If thou live to righteousness, thou art dead to sin.
Therefore 1. Pet. 2. 24.
S. Peter ioynes them both together, That we being dead to sin, might live to
righteousness. S. Paul has the like speech, in unlike terms. When ( Romans 6.
20.
says he) ye were the servants of sin, ye were freed from righteousness.
But now being freed from sin, and Verse. 22.
made servants unto God. Mark I pray you, how one of these, as it were,
destroies the other. A natural man without grace is free from righteousness,
yea as free, as a dead man is, from all matters of this world. A spiritual
man endued with grace is free from sin; yea as free as Lazarus was from all
the cares of this world, while he lay in his grave, without life or breath.
But I may not forget my self too much. The sum of all is this, that our
Savior Christ himself, and by his example, our Evangelist, describes the
estate, into which we are brought, by becoming members of his body, by the
term of life, because ourformer estate, out of which he delivered us, was in
name, and nature, an estate o^ death.

Now having examined the words, let us come to the doctrine it self. In him
was life: which is all one, as if the holy Evangelist should have said, This
word, or promised Messiah, of whom I have begun to entreat, and intend to write
this story, not only was eternal, having his being, before any thing created
ever began to be; and that with God, even then, when there was nothing beside
God: but was also himself very God. From him al things, that are, or ever
were, had their whole being: in him, the spiritual life, both of grace, and
glory was so planted, that who soever desires to be partaker of it, must have
it only, as in him, being come into the world. This is that which we are to
learn out of this place. In the handling whereof, I will first deliver the
doctrine, that our spiritual life is by Christ; then I will speak of the
manner, how it is by him. Concerning the former point, first I will propou^d it
in general: then I will show it in those particulars of holiness, and happynes,
The manner also has 2. things to be considered. That this life was in Christ,
and that it was in him, eue^ while he lived here upon the earth.

Touching the first point, that our estate is to be recovered by our Savior,
Christ, let me put you in mind of those places which I once before alleag'd,
and which are indeed the very foundation of the Gospel. By sin the devil
got dominion over us, God in justice leaving us, when we had forsaken him, and
Satan iniustly seizing on us, as it were intruding himself into a house void
of any owner, to keep possession. But the Lord God, though he would not
presently thrust out by the head, and shoulders, or pluck out by the ears that
presumptuous intruder: yet tells him, that he should not imagine, he had gotten,
or should hold quiet possession for ever. I will put enmity Genesis 3. 15.
(says the Lord) betwixt thee, and the woman, and between thy seed, and her
seed, What shall be the event of this long, and doubtful contention? He shall
break thy head. and thou shall bruise his beele. Though Satan be strong, and
armed, and by that means may seem to keep his palace without disturbance;
yet there comes Luke 11. 11. 22
a stronger then he, that ouercomes him, and takes from him al his armo^,
wherein he trusted, and diuides his spoils. This shows manifestly, that the
devil shall lose his possession; but perhaps he may reenter: or if he do not,
yet are we by this means rather freed from misery, then restored to felicity.
Let us go forward therefore, and hear the promise that God makes to Abraham the
Father of the faithful: Genesis 12. 3.
In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Gal 3. 16.
S. Paul thus expounds. To Abraham and his seedwere the promises made; He says
not, and to the seeds, as of many, but and to thy seed, as of one, which is
Christ. And this promise thus made, the same Apostle calls the preaching of the
Verse 8.
Gospel. The Scripture (says he) foreseeing that God would justify the
Gentiles by faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying In thee
shall all the Gentiles be blessed. This belssing our Evangelist describes, where
setting down the end of the Gospel, he tells us, that Ioh. 20. 31.
by believing we shall have life through his name. What shall I need to heap up
any more testimonies in a matter nothing doubted of? we have found that we
sought, that life is to be had in Jesus Christ.

See, I pray you, and consider a little with me, how many and great reasons we
have, to be inflamed with the love of Jesus Christ. If we regard excellency of
nature, in which respect Velleius Epi cur. apud Cicer. de not. deor. l. 1.
the graund Atheists of the world thought the heathen imagined Gods worthy of
honor and service, behold he is God. If length of years, he is eternal,
without beginning, or ending. But these things rather cause admiration, then
move affection; which is then most effectually stirred up, when the sense of
some benefit received, has taken full possession of our hearts. If there be any
man, with whom these respects cannot prevail, what is he but merely senseless,
neither knowing what he has, nor feeling what he wantes? What said I? Not
knowing what he has? There needs not so much. If no man can be ignorant,
that he is, all men must need understand, that they are beholding to him, by
whom they are. Look not upon the goodly feature of thy body, think not on the
excellency of thy soul, understand not that thou have understanding, forget,
that thou can remember: only deny not, that thou art, because thou prou'st
it, by denying it, and thou has^ cause enough to love the author of thy being.
Does this benefit of thy natural being somewhat affect thee? Oh, how would
thou be ravished, if thou could see the blessedness of thy supernatural
estate? I will not go about to show thee the misery, in which thou art now, by
the corruption of thy nature; I will not so much as say, thou art miserable. I
reserve those points for some other opportunity, the next verse will give me
occasion to speak somewhat of them. Only give meeleaue to proclayme life in
Jesus Christ. Do thou hear what I say? I will repeat it again, and that as
loud as I can, that all may hear it. The Word, the promised Messiah, Jesus
Christ the Son of God, has life in him, for all, that will be partakers of
it. Do thou sit still at the hearing of this proclamation? No marvel. How
should a dead man stit? Would thou have a better proof, that thou art dead
indeed? Well; if there be no remedy, but that thou will continue still in death,
I will leave thee in it, and turn to them, whom I see running up, and down, to
seek out this life.

Why do you vex, and weary your selves with seeking that, which is under your
noses? Rom 10. 6.
The righteousness of Verse. 7
this faith speaks on this wise; Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into
heaven? That is to bring Christ from above. Or Verse 8.
who shaldescend into deep? That is to bring Christ again from the dead. But
what says it? The word is near thee; even in thy mouth, and in thy heart.
Genesis 21. 15. 16.
When Agar, being turned out of Abraham's house with her Son Ismaell, had
spent the bottle of water, that she brought from home, heleft her Son under a
tree, and went a bow shoot off, that she might not see him die. And yet as it
appeared afterward she might hard by a well of water, though she knew it not,
God opened her eyes (says the text) and she Verse 19.
saw a well of water. This is the case of those men, to who^ I now speak. Are
ye turned out of doors from God your heavenly Father? Do you find your
selves out of all hope, to recover his favor? Are you dead, and would you
live, but that you can see no means of life? Be of good comfort, and cheer up
your selves. The water of life is nearer, then you are aware of. You are in it,
and know it not, It comes up to your very lips. Do but open your mouths, and
it will run in. Agar sat her down, and did not so much as look about her, to
see if Verse. 16.
she could light upon any spring, or pit of water to maintain life in her
Son; and the Lord himself called unto her, and fhew'd her, where she might
fill many bottels. And will he suffer thee (think thou) to wander from place
to place to seek life? Behold it is in his Son. Thou shall not need to climb
up to heaven. lib. 3. 13
Jesus Christ of his own accord, without thy desire, or thought of any such
matter, came down from thence, and brought life with him. Sound not the
depths, to fetch it out from below. Luke 24. 6.
Even from thence also the same Jesus Christ came up with life, Art thou dead?
There is life in him. If thou were not dead, neither could thou receive, nor
he bestow life upon thee. Mat 9. 12.
Can a whole man be cured, or Ioh. 8. 33. 34.
a free man set at liberty? Was Ioh. 11. 6. 39.
not Lazarus dead, before he could be raised again to life? Therefore did our
Savior stay in the place, where he was, 2. days, after he had word of his
sickness, that he might be dead, and buried, ere he should come to restore him
to life again. Tell me not, how long thou have bin dead. The strength of death
grows not by continuance, as sickness does. He, that has bin dead, but one
hour, is as void of life, as he that died a year ago. When our Savior came
to raise Lazarus, he had bin dead 4 days: Lord said Martha, he stinks by this
time. There wanted life: and when that came, neither continuance of time, nor
noysmnes of ^a^or, nor the bands at his hands and feet, were able to make any
resistance, for the detayning of the prisoner.

If the force of life be so great, that no contrary power is of strength to
make head against it, may it not well seem exceeding strange, that so few
recover life, or once look after it. Ioh. 5. 39. 40.
Our Savior complains of the Jews, that although they search the Scripturs,
with an opinion that everlasting life was to be had out of them, and those
Scriptures testified of him, that he was the author of that ^ife: yet they would
not come to him, that they might have life. There is no reason that we should
expect better intertainement, then he found He, that will not believe, that
the light shines, when it is plain to be seen, will hardly give credit to him,
that tells him afterward, it did shine. Yet me thinks, I cannot choose but wonder
that this life, which is in our Savior, should so generally be neglected; I am
loath to say despised, or refused: b^^ I must of necessity co^^ess, it is not
embraced, as it sh^u^d be. Would you know what the reason of it is? what? ^^e
we unwilling to have life? That is not possible, seeing our chiefest care is to
maintain life. Do we despair of means to come by it? The least show of hope
will make a man try any course, that shall be directed him. It is a rare thing,
to find any man so void of hope to live, that he will not take whatsoever is
offered him, to continue life. Is the remedy more grievous, then the disease?
what is easier in the opinion of ordinary men, then to believe? Shall I tell
you, what I conceive of the matter? There are 2 lets, that stay us commonly
from the seeking, and embracing of this life. Either we are too well co^ceited
of our selves, or not well enough persuaded of him, in whom this life is. Would
you have me seek for life? Let them look after it that lack it. I have life
already in my self, and need not depend upon any other for it. I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing, Reu. 3. 17.
says the Church of Laodicea: and yet indeed as our Savior there tells her,
She was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. This
conceit naturally possesses all men; and where this is rooted, and
flourishes, there is neither room for spiritual life to grow, nor will to
plant it. But this, because it is so agreeable to the pride of our corrupt
nature, is the less to be wondered at. The other hinderance, whereby we are
held back from this life, is more strange, and less excuseable. There are
many, that make open profession to all the world, that they know themselves to
be naturally dead, and to stand in need of life to quicken them; yea they go
farther; and, in words, acknowledge, that the life, they want, is in Christ:
and yet (like those Jews, I spoke of ere-while) they care not to join
themselves to Christ, that they may be made partakers thereof.

This I take to be generally the estate of most of us, that are called
Christians. Do we not all profess belief in Jesus Christ? Do we not thereby
acknowledge, that we are dead in our selves, and look to receive life from
him? And yet, how few of us are there, that indeed are so persuaded? Think not
much, that I make this grievous complaint. If we did truly believe that in
heart which we confess from the teeth outward, were it posssible we should be
so careless? where can you find me one amongst a great many, that either
knows or cares to know how this life is to be come by? Does thy heart leap
within thee for joy, as often as thou hear'st, that there is life to be had in
Jesus Christ? Genesis 42. 2.
When Jacob, in a time of famine, heard that there was food in Egypt, he sent
his S^nns thither with all speed, to buy some. How far would they have gone for
life, that travailed into Egypt, for meat? Thou have heard there is life in
Christ; and for ^ll that, sitst still thy house; I should say lie still in thy
grave, and think it enough for thee, to have heard of it. Thou do but
deceive thy own wretched poor soul: What could it have auailed Jacob, that
he heard where there was corn to be bought, if he had not sent his Sons to
fetch it? But perhaps thou make account, that thou have it sure. If I should
ask thee, when or how thou camst by it, I doubt me thy answer would be to
seek. Go to: I will not press thee so far, though well I might. For this life
we speak of, does not ste^le into a man, while he lies a-sleeping, but is
followed, and sought for, before it be obtained. But I will only dema^d this
one question of thee. Have thou indeed found life in Jesus Christ? Oh that it
were as ^ruly, as it is commonly spoken. I will not examine thee upon any
Interrogatories. Let thine own soul tell thee in secret, betwixt it, and
thee, whether thy affection to this author of life be such, as the feeling of
so great a blessing can not possibly choose but make it. He, that says, he
believes there is life in Christ, and uses no means to become partaker of it,
either thinks he has no need thereof, or accou^ts it not worth the having,
or says, he knows not what; deceiving himself with an empty shadow, the
substance whereof he neither has nor cares for. What shall I say of him who
brags he is possessed of life in Christ; yet neither honors Christ, nor rejoices
in his own happiness? What else? But that his heart believes not, what his tongue
avouches.

But I dwell too long in the general. Let us come now to the particulars; and
first to the life of holiness; which is so absolutely from Christ, that the
Apostle says it is not himself, that lives, but Christ, that lives in him.
Will you hear him speak. I through the law ( Gal. 2. 19. 20.
says S. Paul) am dead to the law; and that I might live unto God, I am
crucified with Christ. Thus I live; yet not I now, but Christ lives in me. For
the spirit, by which we live, is Ephesians. 4. 15. 16.
the spirit of Christ resting in him, as in the head, and spreading himself
abroad into every one of the members, to give them their proportion of life,
and growth. This is that, which ( Romans 8. 2.
in another place) is called the spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus; and
which is there said to have freed us from the law of sin. The Jews bragd
they were free by nature, because they were Abraham's children. Ioh. 8. 33. 34.
But our Savior aunsweres them, that they were the servants of sin, because
they committed sin, and could not be made free indeed but by the son Ver. 36.
only. This, our Baptism teaches us, as Rom 6. 2. 3. 4.
the Apostle shows at large: The sum is, that we are buried by Baptism
into the death of Christ, that sin may be slain Ver. 11.
in us; and raised again by the power of his resurrection, that righteousness
may live, and grow in us. The conclusion is this, Make account (says the holy
Apostle) that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ our
Lord. Ephesians. 2. 5.
In whom we were quickened, when we were dead in sins. For 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ Jesus is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. Where are they now, who find themselves so perplexed, with the
sight, and sense of that their natural corruption? Me thinks I hear the
sighs, and groans of a poor soul, lamentably complaining, that she can
find no end of her wretchedness, no bottom of her running sore. If she
heal up one, two break out for it. If she make head against pride,
covetousness setts upon her behind her back. While she is busy with all the
force she can make, to withstand the lusts of the flesh, that outwardly assault
her, her own thoughts inwardly commit fornication. Though she keep her hands
from murder: yet her tongue wounds deeply, and deadly, with evil speeches. To
conclude, when she has over night emptied the sink, in the morning she
finds it full again. What may we say, to comfort one so distressed? Our
Evangelist shall speak for us: In him was life. Art thou dead to
righteousness? There is life in him. Dwelles there no good in thee? In him
there is nothing but good. Never amplify the strength of thy corruption, as if
the life that is in him could not overcome it. Think not thy death can be
stronger, then his life. Consider with thy self, that it is no easy matter to
dispossess him, that has so long a time binne willingly enterteyned. Thy
corruption is of long continuance, and growth; the grace, that must cure it,
newly planted in thee, and tender. If thy not being could not withstand thy
natural life, neither shall thy being naught, be able to keep away from thee,
the supernatural life.

But many occasions will be offered us, in the whole course of this Gospel, to
comfort, and strengthen all them, that feel themselves to be spiritually
dead, and desire to have life in Jesus Christ. Give me leave therefore, now in
the beginning, to discover the heretics and idolaters, their erroneous
opinions, and conceiptes of our Savior, and of themselves. The heretics, that
denied his divinity, never suffi^iently waighed the poize of our Evangelists
speech; In him was life. For if they had advisedly considered, that all
spiritual life was shut up in him, so that none at all was to be had, either
without him, or out of him, they would easily have discerned, that he must
needs be very God. Can not natural life be settled in any creature, as in the
fountain thereof; and can spiritual life (trow ye) spring in him, that has
not so much as his natural being from himself? Let us imagine the greatest
power of this kind, that possibly can be in any creature. The most, he can
do, is, to offer the consideration of spiritual matters to our meditation, to
make clear, in some measure, the truth of that, he says; to persuade, and
urge us to believe and like of that, which he delivers. Alas; all this comes
very short of the help we need. Can he withdraw our minds from the cares,
and pleasures of this world, that we may give our selves to the meditation, he
exhorts to? Can he give us spiritual eyes, to see the truth, of that, he
teaches? Can he incline our unwilling hearts, and make them willing, to
embrace the life, he so commends unto us? Dares he say, there is life in
himself, otherwise then by his depending upon him, of whom our Evangelist
says, In him was life? The most excellent creatures, for their natures, are
the Angels; yet had not they life in them, as the fountain thereof. For many
of them are spiritually dead, having no true holiness, or righteousness in
them: and as for them, that continue in life, what have they, that they have
not received? If it were possible to dig a new channel for the sea, and to
empty that, wherein now the water runs, into that new one so prepared,
stopping up the passage betwixt them; might we account of this, as of the
spring of waters? Let the breadth, length, and depth of it be never so great,
as long as the springes are not there, it may be a lake, or poole, and that a
great one; but the sea, or beginning of waters it cannot be. So it is with all
creatures whatsoever. If the life of righteousness, like the water of the sea,
could be conceived to be in them, and they not in Christ; yet were not this the
life, we speak of; which is the wellspring of life, and feeds all rivers
with a continual supply of living water. Of his fullness (says S. John) have
we received; and so received, that as the sun beam has all his light, by
continuing joined to the body of the sun, from which if it should be
separted, it would be wrapped up in darkness: so have we life in Christ;
who could not so largely impart it to all his members, if it were not his own
by nature, and in him, as in the first breeder of it. How can he then be any
less, then perfect God? Shall I now compare him with the Idols of the
Heathen? the auncientest, and principallest of whom were (at the most) but
men, as I showed in my former exercicises. The comparison would be too base,
and labor lost, to prove them to be without life, whose murders, adultries,
and thefts, are recorded by the chie^est of their own followers. I cannot
choose but wonder that the heathen, who worshipped such unclean, unjust,
intempera^e, and every way wicked wretches, for Gods, could have any conceit
of their own virtues. Doubtless if the report they make of their God, be
true, and the commendation they give to many of their philosophers, Sta^es men,
and Captains, true also there was more reason to honor the^^a, Gods that
lived virtuously, then to account of them, as the fountains of virtue, that
poured out such floods, and seas of all manner of viciousnes. Is not this
sufficient to root out that vain conceipte of the Heathen Philosophers, and
other, who are lrangely proud of I know not what virtue they dream of, that
should be in them? Let us confer a little, if not as learned, yet as
reasonable men. Art thou so conce^pted of thine own virtues? I marvel whence
thou should have that, thou so much bragst of. Thou will not for shame say,
that the fountain of all virtue is in thy self. For then how should other men
have any, that never fetched drop at thy spring, or streams? How should the
world have done for a new supply, when thou dyedst? Me think it is against
sense, for any of the Heathen to boast of virtue, seeing it is more then
apparent, that their Gods the fountains of it were so dry, and empty. But I
will deal with them more kindly: and not call them to account, where they had
it; but only make a little trial, whether they had it, or no. The trial is
soon made. Take the opinions of the best, and most virtuous, that euerliued,
without the life of righteousness in Christ, and you shall find them full of
error; I will not say in matter of religion, without which there can be no
holiness, but in judging of ordinary duties, betwixt man and man. If I should
rehearse some maine grounds, that the wisest, and iustest of them delivered,
upon ripe, and See Plato de Republ. and Aristo tell. politia.
advised deliberation, in the greatest points of the government of states, you
would hardly endure the hearing of them. But I will not enter into particulars,
whereof there would be no end. What life of righteousness could there be
amongst them, which always allowed revenge to be most lawful? I will only
say thus much in one word, that they labored to cleanse the outside of the
vessel, but within were full of all uncleanness.

It shall suffize then for the conclusion of this point, that the life of
holiness and righteousness, was in Christ indeed; because no man ever had
it, that was not in him; and many have had, and have it in abundance, by
depending wholly upon him. The principal point is yet behind, concerning the
life of glory. Which though it properly belong to the world to come: yet there
is one chief thing, apperteining thereunto, which is to be had in this world,
as an entrance to the other. The death, that insued upon the breach of that
charge; Genesis 2. 17.
Thou shall not eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, was the estate of mortality to the body, and of condemnation both to
body, and soul. Therefore the life, that was in Christ, must needs afford us
remedy against both these. Let us take them in their order. And first, that by
death, the separation of the soul, and body was signified; it may evidently
appear, as by the words themselves, in their proper sense: so also by the
sentence of the Lord, pronounced after the sin, according to the penalty
before threatened; In Gen 3. 19.
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the earth:
for out of it wast thou taken: because thou art dust, and to dust thou shall
return. Adam indeed lived many hundred years after this sentence, but at
last the execution of it came. Genesis 5. 5.
All the days that Adam lived, were 930. years, and he died. But this is so
well known, and generally confessed, that it needs no further proof. Let us
show, that there is life in Christ, to destroy this death. Ne there need we
go far, to seek for that matter. Remember G^n 3. 15.
what was threatened the devil, that the seed of the woman should bruise his
head. Heb. 2. 14.
If the devil be subdued, who has the power of death, as the Apostle tells
us; what shall become of death, that is under his power? The Lord himself
tells thee, by Heb. 2. 14.
his Prophet, e Ose 13. 14.
where he triumphs over death, trampling him under his feet, O death, I will
be thy death: Oh grave, I will be thy destruction. But this was rather a
discouragement of death, then a destruction. Hear 1 Cor. 15. 54.
the Apostle proclaiming the victory, after the fight was ended. Death is
swalowed Verse 55.
up in victory. He proceeds to insult over him. O death, where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory? The Verse 56. 27.
sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be
unto God, who has give us victory, through I. Chr. Verse 21. 22.
our Lord. Given us victory? How does that appear? For since by man, came death
by man also came the resurrection of the dead. For as in Ada^al me^dy, so in
Christ shall albe made alive: 2. Tim 1. 10.
through Christ (I say) gwho has abolished death and has brought life, and
immortality to light, through the Gospel.

I wish it were so (may some men say) that death were indeed destoried, and
that we need no longer stand in fear of him. But what credit may be given to
that, which is refuted by sense, in daily and hoverly experience? Did not A^a^
die? Are not Abraham, Isaak Jacob, and all the prophets, and Patriarchs dead? Is
not there proof enough in the scripture, that every man must die? Psalm. 89. 48.
What man lives and shall not see death? The Apostle seconds the Prophet; Heb.
9. 27.
It is appointed to men that they shall once die. What say you to that great
conqueror of death himself? The two tneeues, that were executed with him,
withstood death longer the^ he did. The Soldiers came Ioh. 19. 32. Ver 33.
says the Evangelist) and brake the legs of the first, and of the other,
which was crucified with Jesus. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he
was dead already, they brake not his legs. See I pray you; the champion, that
should overcome death, is sooner subdued by death, then either of these two
ordinary fellows. It was no wonder though the Jews vpbraided him, when he
hung upon the Cross. He saved others (quoth they) but he cannot save himself.
Is it possible Mat. 27. 42.
to believe, that there was life in him, whose death his best friends confess?
Does this seem impossible to thee? What will thou say then, if I tell thee of
a greater matter? He overcame death by dying. The same stroke, that took life
from him, through him Heb. 2. 14.
slew death himself, and him that had power over death even the devil. Would
you know more particularly, how that could be? I may not enter into any large
discourse of the point: In one word it was thus, The sting of death (as the
Apostle taught us) is sin: By which the devil prevailed, to the destruction
of them, that had sinned. This sting was not only blunted, and rebated, but
plucked out and cast away by our Savior. For his death, being a sacrifice for
sin, took sin quite away Job. 1. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. So that now
the name of death is more terrible, then the thing: there is more fear, then
hurt in it. Tell me what it could endanger, or indamage thee, to have a snake
creep upon thee, yea if it were into thy bosom; so the sting, teeth, and
whatsoever else it has power to hurt withal, were first pulled out? It might
perhaps scarre thee, or make thee start, as a little cold water will do, if it
be cast (upon a sudden) in thy face: but that is all the harm thou could
have by it.

Death then is thus disarmd by our Savior Christ: but the destruction of him,
is by his resurrection. If thou would see death dead indeed, look into the
grave, where Jesus thy savior was laid. There showed death the uttermost of his
power. He thought himself sure enough of the victory, when he had shut him up
without life in the sepulcher, rolled a great stone to the mouth of it, and saw
a guard of soldiers set to watch him well: there he keeps him in that estate,
the same day he was crucified, all the next, and the beginning of the third.
What ensued? Surely if he had bin put in alive, he would have bin dead, by
that time. There is no question then, but that we shall find him dead in the
grave. So though his disciples. Who the next day, after the Jews Sabboath,
Luke 24. 1.
Early in the morning, came unto the Sepulcher, and brought the odors, which
they had prepared, to embalme his body withal; They made no doubt, but they
should find him, Mark. 16. 1. Mark 15. 47.
where they had seen him laid. For dead men are no starters. Only their fear
was, that they should not be able to roll away the stone, from the door of
the Sepulcher. But that fear lasted not long. Luke 24. 2. 3
When they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away: And they went in,
but found not the body of the Lord JESUS. What should they now think? Or how
should they come to learn, what was become of him? Sure they were, that there
he was laid; and being dead, had no power to convey himself away from thence.
The likeliest was, that some body had taken him up, and carried him away to some
other place. Sir ( Ioh. 20. 15.
says Mary Magdalen to one, who she thought had bin the Gardener) If thou
have borne him hence, tell me, where thou have laid him, and I will take him
away: Thou shall not need to be in fear, of having thy garden annoyed, or
troubled with him any further. Ioh. 20. 2.
His Apostles were informed of this doubtful matter. To Ver. 6.
assure themselves the better, they run to the sepulcher, they find the
linen clothes, in which he was wrapped, and the Ver. 7.
kerchiefe, that was upon his head; not lying with the linen clothes, but
wrapped together, in aplace by it self. Having Ver. 17.
seen this, they return back, whence they came. Mary stays: and to her Jesus
discouers himself. What should I make many words? The proof of this point,
belo^gs to an other place. Death had done his worst: and in despite of him, the
Lord Jesus is risen again, leaving him ashamed, and co^quequered. To Luk 24. 5.
6.
this the Angels bear witness; Why seek ye him, that lives, among the dead?
He is not here n but is risen. I speak of known things, it is enough to name
them. We see for all this goodly discourse, that death still seizes upon all
men: let them be never so well settled in Jesus Christ, he plucks them up, and
carries them away with him into the grave. What is become of the holy Apostles?
where is his blessed mother the virgin? Is there life in the head, when the
members of the body die so fast, every day? And not one or two, a joint or a
finger, or a limme, but the very principal parts, yea all, one, and other?
Do thou doubt, whether there be life in him or no, who has wrastled with
death, and overthrown him? Can death prevail against him, now he lives, whom
he could not keep in subjection, when he had him dead and buried? Romans 5. 9.
10.
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion
over him. For, in that he died, he died once to sin, but in that be lives,
he lives to God. Sin had his due; a sacrifice of infinite worth, to pay the
price of man's redemption: now must God also have his due, that he, that lives
to him, may live for ever. But I would not have any man so much deceive
himself, as to imagine, that the dying of them, which are in Christ, is an
argument of the continuance of the authority, or power of death. No, no,
beloved, there is an other reason of this dissolution. Alas, alas, death does
not advance his own estate, and kingdom by this means, but serves the Lords
turn, to bring his purpose to effect. It fares with him, in this case, as it
did in the death of our Savior. That which he thought to establish his power
by, by that he destroyed it. So is it in the death of those, that are Christ's.
The body, as now it is, is neither capable of immortality, and fit for the
service of sin. How shall it be prepared to receive the one; how purged and
cleansed from the other, but by death? Flesh and blood ( 1. Cor. 15. 50.
says the Apostle) can not inherit the kingdom of God, neither does
corruption inherit incorruption. Would thou have part in our Savior Christ's
immortality, that thou might be free from death? Die then, that thou
may be rid of mortality. Art thou afraid? Of what? Least death should be
too strong for thee, if he once ger thee into his clouches? Have thou not an
example in Christ? I am alive ( Revel. 1. 18.
says he) but I was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore. But thou
fear, because thy body shall be turned into dust. O fool 1 Cor. 15. 36
says the Apostle) that, which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it die.
Keep thy corn above ground; because if thou put it into the earth, it will
consume, that thou shall never find it again. Where then shall the fresh
green blade appear? When shall the stalk grow up? When shall it ear? When
shall it flower? Shall not all this glory be lost, if the grain be not
sowed in the furrows of the earth? And art thou so, I will not say fearful,
but foolish, and childish, that thou dare not die once, that thou may live
for ever? Pluck up thy spirits, and be no longer a child, but a man: were it
not better for thee to die a thousand deaths, then to be continually
disquieted with the motions of thy corruption? Thou have now some life of
Christ in thee, by the power of his spirit, which inables thee to fight against
sin, and to prevail. But there is no final subduing of it, till the body be
destroyed, which does so incline, and draw thee to the service thereof: Neither
has the spirit of God quiet, or full possession of thy soul, as long as that
corruption abides therein. And that, as it was bred with thee, must die with
thee: there is no other course appointed by God, to rid thee of it. I doubt
not, but thou art now resolved to desire death, when it shall please God:
seeing there is no way to life, but by it: and with this resolution, I leave
thee, that I may speak a word, or two to the^, that are yet out of Christ

And how shall I address my speech unto them? It is needless to inflame them
with a desire of life. For they are wholly possessed with that already, It is in
vain to persuade them they shall never die, if they be in Christ. For all
experience teaches the contrary. Shall I exhort them not to fear that, which
they cannot avoid? They may learn that in the school of reason: what
remains then? At the least give me leave to advise you, how you may make the
best of that, which can by no means be escaped. You are resolved, there is no
way with you, but one. Die you must, and it is uncertain how soon. Yet if you
may die so, that you may be sure to live again, and that for ever, what hurt
can there be in death, what fear should there be of it? A crab stock, that
having his head, boughts, and arms cut off, is graffed with a pippin, or some
other dainty fruit, can not reasonably complain of hurt, but rather has great
cause to rejoice, and glory. Has he any wrong done him, that having his
cottage of clay pulled down, has a goodly palace of stone built for his
dwelling? But these me^ will not believe, that there is any such life in
Christ. I would to God I were able to persuade the^, but to make some little
trial. O! if they would be contented, but to rest upon him for life, how
quickly should they find his promise true, and certain? Be persuaded, be
entreated I beseech you by the love of life, which you so desire: what shall
you lose by it? If that we preach be false, yet shall the rest of your years be
spent in more hope, and comfort. If you know any better way to provide for
your selves; in kindness, and humanity, impart that at knowledge to us. If you
do not; in quilitie, and good manners condemn us not, till upon trial, you
can disprove us. Life you earnestly desire, even bodily life: refuse it not,
when it is oftred you without any danger of loss if you should be deceived.

I am come now at the last, to the chief point of all, which is life
everlasting; begun (as I said ere-while) in this world, by the forgiving of
sin, and perfited in the next by the giving of glory. Of which notwithstanding
I inte^d not to say much; because, being the maine matter of the Gospel, every
chapter almost will afford me necessary occasion to entreat thereof. Shortly for
the proof of the point, that eternal death, and condemnation are comprised in
that threating, Genesis 2. 17.
Thou shall die the death; I appeal to the whole course of the scripture, and
the joint consent of all, that ever professed true religion, Jews and
Christians. But it is manifest enough, by the deliverance, we have through
Christ; that I may make one labor of two. Job. 3. 17.
God sent not his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved. He Ver. 18.
that believes in him, shall not be condemned: but he that believes not, is
condemned already. Yea such is the redemption, which we have by Jesus Christ,
Job. 5. 24.
that he, which believes, has passed from death to life. What is this passing
from death to life, but obteining forgiveness of sins, being reconciled to
God? whose wrath otherwise abides in us, to condemnation. God has set forth
Jesus Christ ( Romans 3. 25.
says the Apostle) to be apropitiation, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins, that are past, Romans 5.
10.
If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
son, much more, being reeonciled we shall be saved by his life. But I forget
my self, in staying too long in this discourse; wherein the new Testament is
so plentiful and easy to be understood.

Neither is the point of everlasting life, either harder, or rarer. This one
Gospel of S. John, has not so few as twenty several places to that purpose.
10. 3. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that who
soever believes in him should not perish but have life everlasting. This is
the will of him, that sent me, that every man which sees the son and believes
in him, should have everlasting life, and Ioh. 6. 40.
I will raise him up at the last day. Look not that I should go forward in this
course, or spend time in amplifying the unspeakable glory of that life. For the
one I refer al men to the reading of this gospel; especially the chapters I
named before: and concerning the other, all I can possibly say of it, is less
then nothing in comparison of the thing it self. Therefore also I hold it in a
manner needless, to enter into any course of exhortation. For who can hear of
these kinds of life in our Savior; and not be carried to him, for the
enjoying of them, with all speed, and means, he can possibly make? Let it be a
small thing, for a man to be dead in sin, because perhaps he feels it not.
Let the life of righteousness be little accounted of; ov reason of the
pleasure we take in sinning. Let us despie bodily death, as a common matter.
Let us not reguard the resurrection of the flesh, as long as the soul is
immortal. Shall not fear of damnation for ever in hell fire affright us? Shall
not hope of eternal joy in heaven delight us? Is it nothing to endure most
horrible torments, without ease or end? Is it nothing to be partaker of such
pleasure, as cannot be conceived, without danger, or fear of change? What is
the immortality of the soul, of which thou bragst, but an immortal misery?
The more thou art persuaded of the everlasting continuance thereof, the greater
knowledge thou have of thine own endless calamity: Whereas if once thou come
to be joined to Christ; the farderthou see into the continuance of thy life,
the more thou art inflamed with a delight to live. But now I have brought thee
where this life is to be had, I will show thee how it is to be attained

In him was life: Where though it may seem that the Evangelist says no more,
but he is life, or life is by him, yet indeed the speech is more significant.
First in respect of life, the manner of speaking makes difference in the thing.
For when the scripture says that Christ is life, the word is to be taken for
the cause of life. John. 11. 25.
I am the resurrection, and the life, says our Savior: and again, I Ioh. 14.
6.
am the way, the truth and the life. So speaks Col. 3. 4.
the Apostle of him. When Christ your life shall appear. Who see not, that by
life in these places, the author of life, or life, as it is in the cause
thereof, is understood? But in the other phrase, the same thing is noted, as it
is imparted by him to us. 1 Ioh. 5, 11.
God has given us everlasting life, and that life is in his son. We have
example of both these in one place; ye are dead (says Col. 3. 3. 4.
the Apostle) and your life is hidwith God in Christ: What life? That same
life, which Christ has communicated to you, and by which you live. What
follows? When Christ your life shall appear. How is Christ their life? By
giving them life. And as in this kind of speech we may easily discern some
reason of the difference, that the scripture observes; so may we also in the
other. Sometimes Cor. 1. 30.
the holy Ghost says, that Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
etc. What is this else, but that we receive these things from Christ, as the
author, and cause thereof. Sometimes, life is said to be in him: so we are said to
be in Christ Jesus; 1 Ioh, 5. 11.
ye are of him in Christ; as in the place I named before: Romans 8, 1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. Now in these speeches,
and the like, not only the effect, but also the manner of our coming by it is
signified. Will you have a plain example of it? 1 Cor. 15. x1.
Since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. We
have here the effect of Adams transgression, and of Christ's resurrection. The
next verse shows the manner of both more Ver. 22.
evidently. For as in Adam (says the Apostle) all men die, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive. How die all men in Adam; but Rom 5. 12.
as being one with Adam, in whose loins they were, when he sinned, Heb. 7, 9.
10.
as Leui was in his father Abraham's, when he paid tithes to Melchisedech? So
are all raised again in Christ. Not simply all: but all his. 1 Cor. 15. 23.
The first fruits is Christ's: then they, that are Christ's, at his coming.

Would thou then be made partaker of this life, of which thou have heard so
many admirable, and glorious things? This life is in Christ. How will thou do
to fetch it out of him? Deceive not thy self: it is not so to he had. He,
that will enjoy the life, which is in Christ, must not think to come to him,
and take a snatch, and carry it away with him. He keeps it close shut up
within himself: Not refusing to impart it to other, but desiring to join
other to him, that they may be sure to hold fast for ever, that he gives
them. If he should commit it to thy custody, and let thee depart from him
with it, what would thou do, or what means could thou use, to keep it
safe? Satan is crafty, and mighty. It is a great venture, but either he would
cousin thee of it by deceit, or rob thee of it by force. What say I a
venture? It is out of question, thou would never be able to keep it from
him. If thou have any experience of his undermining, and assaulting thee, thou
know how hardly, and with what ado, it is now held, when yet thou art knit
by faith to him, in whom the very fountain of it is. Do thou not feel how
strongly he pulls, to rent thee from him, that sometimes thou can scarce
tell, whether he have severed thee from him, or no? If thy experience be
small in thy self; did thou never see a poor soul stand quaking, and
trembling, looking ruefully about on every side, shrieking, and crying out for
fear, least he should be separated from Jesus Christ? At the least persuade
thy self, it is not for nothing, that our Savior himself, when he labors
to assure his sheep, that they shall never be wrung out of his hands, puts
them in mind of his fathers Almigh. ^ie power. Ioh. 10. 27. ver. 28
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, ind they follow me: And I give
them eternal life, and they shall never perish: neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand: Is not here assurance enough? They know his voice, that they
may not be deceived by harkning to a stranger. They follow him, having him
still in sight, least they should mistake some other for him. He gives them
eternal life. How shall they die, that have life everlasting? He secures them,
in saying, they shall never perish. They have life, and shall hold it fast to
the end. Is there yet more? None shall take them out of his hand. This
confirms all the rest. What though the devil be haling, and drawing of them
continually? He shall not prevail. How shall we be assured of that? For
then we are safe indeed. Hear what follows. My father which gave them me,
is greater then all, and none is able to take ver. 29.
them out of my fathers hand. What needed all this, if it be so easy a matter
to keep life, when once thou have it? Thou make account to take life of our
Savior, and when thou have it, to be gone with all speed. Alas poor man, thou will keep it but a little while lwis, if thou have no better help then thine
own. But if thou cleave fast to Jesus Christ, and stir not an inch, or an
hayres breadth from his side, thou may perhaps hear the devil roaring at thy
back, or see him running up and down prying, and seeking some advantage to
seize upon thee: it may be he will offer to snatch at thee, and lay hold
upon thee; cling to rhy Savior, as the child does to the mother, when he is
in fear: and then doubt not, but he, that is greater then all, will keep thee
out of Satan's jaws, maugre all his power, and malice.

Bear with me, I pray you, if I seem to be ouerlarge in this point. I feel
such an increase of comfort, and assurance in the meditation of this matter,
that I can not leave it, till I have looked a little nearer into the particulars
thereof, especially those, that concern the temporal death of the body, and
the eternal both of it, and the soul.

Now the life, whereby we are delivered from the one and the other death, as
it has often bin said, is in Christ. For the better, and fuller conceiving
whereof, we must remember, that faith, whereby we are joined unto Christ, that
we may partake of that life, which is in him, makes us al one with him. There
are a similirudes, by which the Scripture expresses this spiritual
conjunction: the one is that bond, which is betwixt man, and wife; by which
they, that were two, become one flesh. This is most excellently set out by Ephesians.
5. 23.
the Apostle S. Paul; where he shows, that Christ is the head of the Church,
as the husband thereof; that the Lord nourishes, and cherishes it, as his
own flesh. And no marvel though he do so: For (as it follows) we are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Yea so members of them,
that we are one flesh with him, by reason of this bond of marriage, that so
chains, and links us together. No man can be so fond, as to understand this of
our humane nature; as if therefore we were said to be one flesh, because he
and we are of the same nature. For neither are all men one flesh, though they
be all of the same nature: and if the Apostle had intended to speak of that
point, he would not have said, that we are bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh; but rather that he was bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. For it
is well known to al men, that, in regard of the nature of man, they, that are
the Church, I mean a great part of them, eue^ all that died before our Savior,
and were partakers of the life we speak of, had it, before he was made man:
and but for their sake, and some others, he had not taken that nature upon
him. But the mystical conjunction, whereof Ephesians. 5. 23. 29
the Apostle professes to speak in that place, has the beginning and ground
in Christ, and not in us. He is the husband, we are the wife; Eve was bone of
Adams bone, not Verse. 30.
he of hers. Yet, when they were joined together in marriage, they were both
but one flesh. It is then apparent verse. 31.
by this similitude, that we being thus spiritually become one with Chr. have
the same life, which is in him; as the Verse. 32.
wife has the same flesh, or rather is the same flesh with her husband. The
other similitude is of the head and body; which live by the same spirit of
life. resting originally in the head, and from thence dispersing it self into
all the members of the body. This also, the same Apostle sets forth in the
same Epistle. It will be sufficient to rehearse his words. Let us ( Fph 4. 35.
16
says he) follow the truth, in love, and in all things grow up into him, which
is the head, even Christ. By whom at the body being coupled, and kint together
by every joint, for the furniture thereof, according to the effectual power,
in the measure of every part, receives increase of the body, unto the edifying
of it self in love. Therefore does he often call the Church the body of
Christ. Fph. 1. 22. 23.
God has appointed him over all, the head to the Church, which is his body.
Fph^^. 5 23.
Christ is the head of the Church; and the same is the Savior of his body.
Col. 1. 18.
He is the head of the body of the Church.

Give ear now with attention, and take knowledge of the assurance of your
life. Why do you shrink, and quake, at the mention of death? Even when your
are dead, you are still alive. Are you not one with Jesus Christ? Are you not
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh? Are not you and he one flesh? Does
not every man nourish, and cherish his own flesh: And will Christ (think you)
suffer his flesh to be destroyed by death? What do thou tell me, of the decay
of thy strength? that thy sight waxes dim, thy legs feeble, thine arms
weak, and all thy senses begin to fail thee? Is not Christ alive? Or can
thou die, as long as he lives? Thou art but the least part of thy self; thy
husband is thy head, and thy life. And whereas thou art now a-dying, it is not
for thy destruction, but for the abolishing of that which makes thee subject to
die. Christ thy husband does not mean to forgo thee, but to join thee nearer
to him. Would thou bring a mortal carcass into heaven? Would thou be
continually in danger of dying? Is it not better once to endure it, then
always to fear it? A quarter of an hours work, will rid thee of all pain
for ever. How will thou wonder at thy self when thou shall behold the glory of
that body, which thou left'st naked, and miserable? Shall I need to put thee in
mind of thy happiness? Do thou remember, that thou art a part of Jesus
Christ's body? Has he any dead part trow'st thou? Thou can not imagine, that
any man of reason would suffer his enemies to dismember his body, or to deprive
the least finger he has of life or sense? How then should Christ endure such a
mayme? But what talk I of bereauing his members of life? As if it were any way
possible, that deathshould be in that part in which life is continued? Wait the
time, that God has appointed for thy quicking. Thou art but dressing, and
attiring, that thou mai'st be a fit Bride, for an immortal Bridegroom.

As for condemnation to hell fire, the second death, be not so injurious to the
Majesty of Christ, as once to think, that any member of his body can be
liable to damnation. Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to them, that are in Christ. Who shall lay anything
to the charge of Jesus Christ? Can thou be condemned, and he acquitted? Can
the head be in heaven, and the members in hell? Father ( John. 17. 24.
says our Savior) I will that they, which thou have given me, be with me,
even where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me. Can
the first fruits be holy, and the lump unclean? Can the head reign in
glory, and the members be plunged in the pit of damnation? Assure thy self,
if there be life in Christ, and thou one of his members, thy part is in it. He
bought thee too dear, now to lose thee, or let thee be taken from him.
Besides, he has openly confessed; that he received a charge from God his
Father, to see that none should perish, that belieu'd in him: and Ioh. 6 40.
he has professed, that he will discharge the trust reposed in him. I will
raise him up at the last day. He that eats my flesh, and Verse. 54. Ver. 56.
drinks my blood. has eternal life, and I n will raise him up at the last
day: In him, as it follows, Christ dwells, and he in Christ. Then must he
needs be sure of everlasting li'e, that lodges such a guest.

A guest, that has life in him, as in the fountain thereof, from whence it
flows to al those, that are io^ned to him. For although our Evangelist say,
In him was life and not Is life; yet he may no more be thought once to have had
it, and now to be without it, the^ once to have bin God, and now not to be so.
But that all doubt of this matter may be taken a way, we must call to mind
that which we heard before of the reasons, why this manner of speech is used.
First then (for I will now set it in the first place, because it is the
plainest, and has least need of any explication) we may well, and reasonably
imagine, that the Evangelist continues his former kind of speech; The word was
in the beginning, was with God, was God. All things were made by him, nothing
was made without him. was it not fitter then, to say, In him was, then, in him
is life, that the whole description of him may be delivered in the like
terms? This might serve, in my poor opinion, to satisfy any man, concerning
the word. Yet because there are some other reasons of it alleged, and those
both true, for the doctrine they teach, and not unfit for the text it self, I
will make bold to stand a little upon them; the rather because I perceive I
shall not end these 2 verses in this one exercise, as I purposed, and desired
to do.

The former reason of the word was depends upon the like course the Evangelist
takes in the rest of his description: those that now I am to handle, concern
the time, either before our Saviors being in the world, or while he was in the
world. The time before, either reaches to eternity, before all beginning, or at
the least makes it self equal to the continuance of the world, after the fall
of Adam, til the coming of Christ in the flesh. If we apply it to eternity,
who can doubt, but life was always in him who only lives of himself, and gives
life both temporal and spiritual to al, eue^ to every one that has it. But
because this manner of giving life is an effect of Godhead; and so, common to
him with the Father, and the holy Ghost and not a matter belonging properly to
his person, nor any work of his mediatorship: I will leave it, as not intended
in this place; and come to a second consideration of life being in him from all
eternity, as in the mediator betwixt God and man. In what respect then may it
be truly, and fitly said, that life was in him from all eternity? In respect of
the eternal decree of God, whereby he determined to restore to life those,
whom he chose thereunto by the mediation of his Son, the word, of whom we
speak. Of this Romans 8. 29. 30
the Apostle speaks: Those, whom he knew before, he did also predestinate, to
be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne
among many children. Upon this predestination (as the Apostle adds) follows
calling, justifying, and at the last glorifying, which is the highest degree of
the life, that is in Christ. But in Ephesians. 1. 3. 4.
an other place he speaks more plainly. Blessed be God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ; which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ: As he has chosen us in him bebefore the foundation
of the world. Therefore does the Apostle Peter ascribe the appointing of the
means, and the execution of it, according to the appointment, to the
foreknowledge of God. Act. 2. 23.
Him have ye taken by the hands of the wicked, being delivered by the
determinate counsel, and fore knowledge of God. The same is acknowledged by
the joint confession of the Apostles, where they say, that Herod, Pontius
Pilat, the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, gathered them selves together
against the holy Son of and 4. 27. 28.
God Jesus (whom God had anointed) to do what soever the hand, and counsel
of the Lord had determined before to be done. VVorthily then does Saint John
avouch, that life was in him; yea before any time was, life was in him. Gal. 4.
4.
When the fullness of time was come God sent his Son. Life did not then
begin to be in him, but to show it self to be in him, Rom 3 25.
God set him forth (by his incarnation) to be apropitiation. Life was in him
before, in regard of Gods eternal counsel; but not discovered, nor
manifested to the world, no nor those works of his, which were to bring life,
performed: Yet even the^ was life in him.

If it seem to any man somewhat overmuch, to go so far for the Evangelists
meaning, let him shorten his journey, and contain him self, within the
compass of the world created. Shall we not find sufficient reason of this
speech In him was life, though we go not out of the world? yes out of doubt,
very sufficient. For seeing many worthy Patriarchs, and holy Prophets, many
true Israelits, and Sonns of Abraham by faith, as well as by nature, departed
out of this world, before our Savior came into it, to perform the
foreappointed work of redemption, either these must have died without life,
and so always continue dead, or there was life in him, before he was incarnat.
Luke 10. 24.
Many Prophets, and Kings desired to see and hear him, at the Apostles while
he lived here, saw and heard. Surely then they were not ignorant of him, and
that life was in him. But did they not see him? By one, judge of the rest, Your
Father Abraham Ioh. 8. 56.
(says Christ) rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad. And yet,
what name I one? seeing we have a cloud of witnesses, that compasses us round
about, Heb. 11. 1. 2. 3. etc.
sounding out the same assurance of faith, that we now have, and looking for
the same promises to be fulfilled, which we believe, and know to have been
performed to the uttermost. Was not our God, Mat 22. 32.
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Was not our Savior, their Savior? Romans
4. 11. Gal. 3. 16.
Does not our interest, we have in Christ, depend upon our being the children
of Abraham? Heb. 13. 8.
Was not Jesus Christ yester-day, is he not to day, shall he not be the
same for ever? Then may we safely, and truly conclude, that there was life in
him, before he was in the nature of man.

But howsoever it be true, and certain, that life was in him, both from all
eternity, in regard of the counsel of God, which is as ancient as himself;
and in effect, in respect of them, that from time to time were partakers of it,
even from Adam to John Baptist: yet it was then most properly in him, when
having taken our nature upon him, he overcame death, and him, that had power
over it, the Devil. This was that, which those Kings, and Prophets desired,
and longed to see. This was that, which good old Simeon so rejoiced at, that
he was ready to depart out of this life with full satisfaction, and
contentedness, when he had seen the promised Messiah in the nature of man:
Lord Luke 2. 29. 39
(says he) now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation. The holy man had a long time
believed by faith, that salvation was to come, and in hope with patience waited
for the coming of it, but he never saw it til that time. Indeed how should he?
For it was never to be seen, till then. How could it be? For it never was
fully, and perfitly till then. It was not enough for the Son of God, that he
had infinite power, as God, to give life to whom he would, to repair the ruins
of his image in man, by clensing him from sin, and clothing him with
righteousness, by raising him from death, as he first breath ed the soul of
life into him, by vouchsafing him a place in heaven, which was at his command,
that had made it. All this I say would not serve the turn, that the Evangelist
might say as he does, In him was life. For the Lord God, Father, Son, and Holy
ghost, had appointed another course of giving life, another means of
salvation, not to be performed by the Son of God, sitting in heaven; but to be
wrought here upon earth, in the same nature, that had sind, and was dead. He,
that made man holy, and righteous at his creation, could, by the same power,
have restord to him his original righteousness in a moment. But it pleased him
to do it after an other manner; whereof more hereafter in due place. To say al
at once; seeing by man came death, God would have life to come by man, and no
otherwise.

Let it be granted (may some man say) that there was no possibility of life,
but by the death of the Son of God, and that the Son of God could not dye,
unless he became man; yet might the Evangelist have well said, In him is life.
For since it is confessed, that he took the nature of man, and continues still
in heaven in that nature, surely life was no more in him, while he was here,
then it is in him, now he is gone from hence. Why then says S. John, In him
was life? I answer in one word, though life be still in him; yet it is in
respect of that, which he performed, when he was here on the earth. Here he
took, and sanctified our nature; here he bare the chastisement of our peace?
here he offered up that invaluable sacrifice, for the purging of our sins:
Here he triumphed on the Cross over all principalities, and powers: Here he
rose out of the grave from death to life: Only one thing, which here possibly
could not be don, he has done being gone from hence; that is he has taken
possession of our inheritance in heaven, and waits there to receive us into
his own glory. The Evangelist therefore writing the history of his life and
death, while he was here in the world, speaks of him, as of one that was, and
is not. But of this enough before.

I should now proceed to the later part of this fourth verse; And that life was
the light of men: But I find my self so much overtaken by the time, that it is
in vain to meddle with it. I will I therefore content my self with some word
of exhortation, whereby we may be stirred up to the embracing of that life,
which was in Christ. To which purpose what shall I need to say much? The mat ter
does so highly commend it self, that it refuses to be entreated for. Look
not therefore, that I should desire you to be willing to live. Nay, be
unwilling if you can. Do but propound the matter to your own hearts, and you
will not choose, but like of it. And yet, me thinks I see no man make any
great haste. Shall I wonder or complain? It is strange, that life, life
everlasting should be so little set by. It is lamentable that death, eternal
death should so little be feared. If it were any long Journey, or dangerous
way, if hard to come by, or soon lost again, there might be perhaps some
color of excuse for this backewardnesse. But when the thing it self is near
at hand, the way to it safe, the means of attaining to it easy, and the
possession of it sure, who can excuse himself to himself (I say not to God)
if he fail of so glorious a treasure? Do we not believe the Evangelist, that
there is life in him? Do we flatter our selves with a conceit, that there is
life in us? Why come we to hear that, which when we have heard, we will not
credit? why make we a show, as if we stood in need of life from Christ, when
we think our selves, sped of it already? Perhaps it seems the less worth,
because it is offered. Who ever thought, that the kindness of the giver should
abate the value of the gift? Condemn thy self, for not seeking to him; not
him, for seeking to thee. That he reueales to thee, he conceales from many.
That which thou unthankfully refusest, many thousands would most thankefully
receive. O the frowardness of the hearts of men! O the blindness of their
minds! If this life were in God, they would tremble to come near him for it,
because of his dreadful majesty. Now it is in a man (least happily they
should be too much afraid) they disdain to take it of him, by reason of his
meandness. Mat. 11. 19.
But wisdom is justified of her children. He is both God, and man, that thou
may neither fear nor despise him. If thou will not live to show his mercy,
thou shall die to set forth his Justice; For to him belongs all glory, both
of mercy and Justice for ever and ever, Amen.

THE FIFTH SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 4. -- And that life was the light of men. And the light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.
THey that take upon them to write the lives of famous men, such as the world
admires, either for their goodness, or greatness, ordinarily deliver some
general description of them, in the beginning of their histories. These
descriptions usually contain either a rehearsal of their pedigree, and descent,
together with the place, time, and other matters concerning their birth, and
such like; or a commendation of them, for some especial virtues. We have
examples of both these kinds in the Scripture. 1. ^^^. 1. 1. 2
He, that was the holy Ghosts Secretary, in penning the history of Samuel,
begins his book with a recital of his genealogy, a description of his
parents, and diverse other points touching his conception, birth, and education.
Job. 1. 1. 2.
Another, whom it pleased the same spirit of God to employ in writing the life
of Job, makes the entrance into his history, by commending him for an upright
and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Our Evangelist intending
to set forth the life and death of our Savior Jesus Christ; as the party, he
writes of, was extraordinary: so does he extraordinarily join both together.
And because two other Evangelists, M^^. 1. 1. 2. 3. etc.
Saint Matthew, and Luke 3. 50. 31 etc.
Saint Luke, had already set out his humane pedigree, both for succession in
the kingdom, and fornaturall descent, Saint John leaving them untouched, betakes
himself to the declaring of his divine estate: First, what he was in himself;
eternal, with God the Father, and himself very God: Secondly, what he was to
us; a Creator, in making all things for us; a Savior, in giving life, even
spiritual life; life of grace, and pardon, life of immortality, and glory. So
that whether we respect his greatness. or his goodness, never was any man so
worthy the writing of, never any man so worthy the knowing, and following.

His greatness was magnified in the power of creation: his goodness shows it
self especially in the work of regeneration. Wherein first, the Evangelist
declares what he is, and does: then how he is intertaind. In him was life, and
that life was the light of men. What does he? According to the nature of
light, He shines in darkness. But the darkness will not be enlightened. Of
the first of these points concerning life in him, I spoke in my last Sermon:
now let us proceed to that, which follows touching light. And therein
(keeping our former course of handling the Clauses severally, as they lie) we
must first labor to understand the words, then seek out the Evangelists
meaning. The words direct us to inquire what life it is, that is here spoken
of; to consider what is said of it: that it is light, and the light of men.
For the first word, a little labor will serve: because there would have been
no doubt of the meaning, but for the needless curiosity of some, that make
themselves work, where they find none. What reasonable man would make any
question, but that the Evangelist in both clauses speaks of the same life? In
him was life. What follows? And that life was the light of men. What life
think you? Any other, then that he named presently, yea immediately before? I,
say these me^; else, why has he added the article in this later part, which
he had omitted in the former? what needs all this ado about the Article? How
vain and false the observation is, that has no better ground, then the
presence or absence of the article, I showed in expounding the first verse,
against the Arians. Here is less color for the proof of any difference.
First, the course of writing, which the Evangelist has hitherto kept, in the
beginning of this Gospel, makes it evident, and certain, that the same life
is meant in both places. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God. It is ridiculous to imagine, that the word, which was in the beginning,
should be any other word, then that, which was with God. By him were all things
made, and without him was nothing made, that was made. Without whom was nothing
made? without him, by whom all things were made. So in this verse the repeating
of the same word teaches us, that the same life, and no other, is signified.
Secondly, there may sufficient reason be given, why it was requisite, if not
necessary, to add the article, in the later part. Let us make the Evangelist
speak without it. In him was life. What then? And life was the light of men.
Who can reasonably conceive, what life he means? In the first verse I showed
that there was good reason to place the Article before word, that it might the
easilier appear, whether the Evangelist intended to say, The word was God, or
God was the Word. The case is much a like. Take away the Article, and we may
well think, that Saint John tells v^, that the light was life, rather then that
the life was the light of men. He could not then speak otherwise, if he
would speak plain: In him was life, and that life was the light of men. As
for his omitting it in the first place, it is usual with all our authors both
divine and humane, to put it in, or leave it out, at their pleasure.

The same life then, which was in the Word, was also the light of men. But,
what light was that? For the word may be taken in diverse senses. The most
proper, and ordinary use of light, is to signify that visible creature, made
by God, Genesis 1. 3.
the first day of the creation, by which all things afterward to be created,
might be seen, and they that had eyes might see. But of this light there is no
occasion to speak in this place; neither was it in the Messiah, and it is
common to all creatures, that can see, as well as to men. From this proper
signification, the word is applied, by a certain resemblance, to note out the
instructing, and teaching of the mind, which is as i^ were enlightened with
knowledge, whereby the understanding is fitted to judge of truth, as the bodily
eye, discerns colors. This our Savior himself decleares. both for the
proper and figurative use of the word. I think it is not amiss to recite the
place at large. The light of the body Luke 11. 34.
(says he) is the eye. Not as the fountain, or spring of light, but as the
pipe, which receives, and conueyes it to the use of the body. Therefore, when
thine eye is single, then is they whole body light. As the water, that is
taken out of the Well, where it arises pure, and clean, is so brought to the
Cisterne, if the pipe be sweet, and without filth: so if the eye be not
dimd, nor tainted with any evil humor, the whole body receives the light, as
it is bright, and clear. But if thine eye be evil (says the text) then the
body is dark. A Ver. 34.
bad sight changes light into darkness, or at the least discernes not the
brightness of it. Take heed therefore (says Christ) that the light which is
in thee, be not darkened. What is the light, that is in a man, but the
understanding? Therefore also it is often called by the name of eyes. Pal. 19.
8.
The Commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes. The
Sun inlightens the eyes of the body: but the knowledge of the will of God is
that which makes the understanding see. Open mineeies (says the Psalm. 1 19.
18.
Prophet) that I may see the wonders of thy law. That the eyes of your
understanding may be lightened ( ^^ ph. 1. 18.
says the Apostle) that ye may know, what is the hope of his calling. This
is that, the Jews commonly bragd of, though falsely, Romans 2. 19.
That they were guides of the blind, alight to them which are in darkness:
namely, in the darkness of igno^ance, not understanding the true way of
righteousness.

Now this light, by which the understanding is enabled to know, and judge, is
of two kinds; natural or supernatural, which we also call spiritual. The
natural light, is that, which we have from God, by nature; either bred in us
with reason, or gotten by reading, hearing, observation, studying, and such
other means. Of this speaks Eceles. 1. 13.
the wise King; I gave heart (says he) to search, and find out wisdom by
all things, that are done under the heaven. This is that wisdom of the
Egyptians, Act. 7. 22.
wherein Moses was learned. The supernatural light, is that knowledge of
matters concerning everlasting life, which we receive from God in the
scriptures, or by the ministry of men, according to the truth therein
revealed. We speak e the wisdom of God in a mystery (says 1. Cor. 2. 7.
the Apostle) even the hidden wisdom, which God had determined, before the
world, to our glory. These are the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, al
which Col. 2. 3.
the Apostle says, are hidin Christ, who has sent his Apostles and Ministers,
To make clear unto all men, (as Ephesians. 39.
Saint Paul says) what the fellowship of the mystery is, which from the
beginning of the world, has been hid in God, who has created all things by
Jesus Christ; to the intent, that now unto principalities and powers in
heavenly places might be known, by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God.
These are the two kinds of light whereby the understanding of man is
enlightened, and instructed. The question is, whether of these two, the holy
Ghost means in this place.

A question easy to be answered, will some man say. For seeing it was
proved, that by life in the former part of the verse, not the natural, but the
supernatural life was signified; who can doubt but the light in this later
part, is of the same nature? It is so, doubtless; and therefore we shall
need to stand the less while, upon the proof thereof. Yet because it is (for
the most part) otherwise understood, and that one especial ground of
interpreting that life, to be the supernatural, or spiritual life, was
fetched out of this place; I think it will not be amiss to say somewhat, for
the better clearing of the matter. First then, the light, here spoken of, must
be conceived to be such, as the Scripture otherwhere ordinarily signifies by
the same word. For it were strange, and against reason, to give the word such
a sense, in this place, as it has not any where else in the whole volume of
the Bible. I deny not, but it is possible, that some one place may have a word
in such a meaning, as is not elsewhere to be found. But this I say, that he,
which will adventure upon any such unusual, and rare exposition, had need be
sure, that the place will not admitany ordinary interpretation of the word.
Here is no such necessity. All things are agreeable to the Evangelists
purpose, and circumstances of the text, if we take the word light in that
sense, which it commonly bears every where in the Scripture. Let us inquire
then, how it is ordinarily taken. Surely, for that supernatural light, which
the Lord reuealeth, for the making known of the means, whereby he has
appointed to bring us to salvation.

It were too much to recite all. I will name some principal places, by which
you may judge of the rest. With thee is the well of life (says P^^l. 36. 9.
the Prophet) and in thy light shall we see light: Life, and light both in one
verse, both of one nature, both supernatural. Psalm. 42. 3.
Send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me. The light of nature, is
never called the light of God: the truth of God is that, which himself has
revealed by his word. But what do I expounding it? The next words put the
matter out of doubt. Let them bring me unto thy holy Mountain, and to thy
Tabernacle. Can natural wisdom guide us thither? Can the light of humane
learning show us that way? 1. Cor. 1. 21.
The world in the wisdom of God knew not God by wisdom. It is the word of
God, Psalm. 119. 105
that is a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths. Pro. 6. 23.
Salomen bears witness to the same truth. The commandment is a lantern,
and instruction a light. Therefore does Isay. 2. 5.
the Prophet Esaias exhort the Israelites, to walk in the light of the Lord. And
in Chap. 60. 1.
another place he comes nearer to the light, that Saint John in this place
holds out unto us. Arise O Jerusalem, (says he) be bright: for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold, darkness
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Ver 2.
Lord shall arise upon thee. And his glory shall be seen upon thee And the
gentiles shall walk in thy light, and Kings at Ver. 3.
the brightness of thy rising up. What is this darkness, but the ignorance
of the way to salvation? What the light, but the manifesting, and showing of
that way, by the ministry of the Gospel? Chap. 9. 2.
The people, that walked in darkness, have seen great light; they, that
dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined.
Which prophecy as the Evangelist says, was then fulfild, Mat. 4. 14.
when our Savior preached the Gospel in Galilee.

Therefore also is he himself called A light. Luke. 2. 32.
A light to be revealed to the Gentiles. And himself called his Apostles Mat.
5. 14
The light of the world. Yea, all Christians, truly enlightened by Jesus Christ,
are called the children of of light. The children of this world ( ^ ^uk 16. 8.
says Christ) are wiser in their generation, then the children of light. To
conclude God himself is said to be Iam. 1. 17.
the father of lights, from whom every good, and perfect gift comes. To be
light, and that without all kind of darkness. 1 I Io^. 1. 5.
God is light; and in him is no darkness, Them, that believe, I. Pet. 2. 9.
He has called out of darkness, into his marvelous light. But what stand I
reciting so many particular places? The new Testament is full of the like. As
for the other signification of the word, that by light, natural reason or
knowledge should be meant, I am certainly persuaded, that it is not once to be
found in the whole course of the scripture. What other proof of this point
shall I need, then that they, which expound this place of such natural light,
can allege no text, but one, that may seem to make any thing for that
purpose? And the most that can be gathered out of that too, is but a seeming,
or show; Psalm. 4. 6.
Lordlift up the light of thy countenance upon us, Who is so desirous to have
light, taken for reason, that he can think, the Prophet speaks of it in that
place? He compares the wishes of worldly men, with the desires of the
faithful. Many say, who will show us any good? Who will teach v^ how we may
gather goods? But what do the godly pray for? That the Lord would give them an
increase of humane wisdom? Indeed this prayer had not bin unfit for a
Philosopher, who knew nothing better, nor esteemed any thing more, then such
manner of knowledge. But the thoughts of Gods children are raised higher, and
their happiness is of an other kind. The knowledge, and favor of GOD, are
the matters, they labor for. That is the light, which they would have to shine
upon them, and in them; without which they account themselves to be in
palpable darkness, though they had more knowledge of all other matters, then
al men in the world beside. This was fit to be opposed to the vain wishes of
carnal worldlings.

If then the word be ordinarily taken for supernatural, or spiritual light,
seldom or never for the natural light of reason, and humane knowledge; how
should we understand it, in this place, but according to the general use of
it in the scripture, for that light which we receive from God by revelation?
Whereof that we may be the better persuaded; let us consider the signification
of the word, as it is commonly used by Ioh. 3. 19. 20. 21.
this writer. This is condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather then light. So in the two next verses. What is this
light? not natural reason, nor any knowledge obtained by it; but the mystery
of redemption; which carnal men cannot fancy, because it overthrows all
opinion of any goodness in man. Let us go forward. John (says Chap. 5. 35.
Christ) was a burning, and a shining candle. Not for any extraordinary
knowledge in humane learning, whereof he was utterly void, as his bringing up
shows; but for his innocent life and preaching of the Messiah, of whom (as
Chap. 1. 7.
our Evangelist says) he came to bear witness: and that was the light,
wherein, as it follows, Chap. 5. 35.
the Jews for a season would have reioic^d; namely in taking him for the
promised seed sent from heaven, for their deliverance, Chap. 1. 19.
as it appears in this first chapter. I am the light of the world says our
Savior. As long as I i Chap 8. 12.
am in the world, I am the light of the world. What? To show Chap. 9. 5.
them the way to the wisdom of this world? No such matter. The things, that
our Savior declared, Luke 10. 21.
were hid from the wise, and men of understanding, and revealed to the simple,
that had no learning. I will not weary you too much with turning your books, or
stuffing your memories: look over the whole Gospel, and the Epistles of this
Evangelist, and Apostle, at your leisure; you shall never find the word
otherwise used, unless perhaps once or twice, for the outward light of the
sun, or a torch, or candle.

Whom may not these observations suffice? If need be, there is yet more proof
left, and somewhat more direct, if any thing can be more direct, to the place in
question. For Saint John proceeds to expound that, he had said, of the light,
John the Baptist came to bear witness of the light m Ioh. 1. 7.
Of what light, but that which was mentioned presently before? And what light
was that? The supernatural light, which is not to be seen with the eyes of the
body, not understood by the discourse of reason, but believed by the virtue of
faith. He came for a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men
through him might believe. Believe what? Chap. 12. 1^
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of
the light. Is it not as clear as the sunne-shi^e, that the light Saint John
speaks of, is neither the sun nor natural reason; but more excellent, and
glorious then either of these in their greatest height and perfection? Shall I
go yet one step further? Follow me, I pray you a little way, and I shall bring
you, where you may rest your selves after this long travel. Where may that be?
but in the same signification of light, which before, I gave in particular of
the life, that was affirmed to be in Christ. The life of grace or
sanctification, which is the fountain of holiness in us, appears evidently in
the light of our conversation. God is light, and in him is no darkness. If we
say that we have fellowship with him, and 1. Ioh. 1. 5.
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not truly. But if we walk ^er 6.
in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with an other,
and the blood of JESUS CHRIST his ver. 7.
Son cleanses us from all our sins. Would you see thy more particularly?
For the enlightening of the understanding, call to mind that the Apostle Saint
Paul, laboring to draw the Heathen out of their ignorance, to the knowledge of
GOD to their salvation, tells them that he was sent to open their eyes, that
they may Act. 26. 18.
turn from darkness to light. The reforming of the flection is signified by
the same kind of speech. Ye were once darkness, but are now light in the
Lord: Walk ^^ 5. 8.
as the children of light. So is the out ward conversation also. The night is
past, and the days is at band: Let us Romans 13.
therefore cast away the works of darkness, and put upon us the armor of
life: So that we walk honestly as in the Verse. 13.
day: not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in Chambering and wantonness,
nor in strife and envying. But eut you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no
thought for ^^14.
the slesh, to fulfill the Iusts thereof. I confess, the life of glory in
heaven is not so plainly expressed by the name of light; yet both God is said to
dwell in light, which no man 1 Timothy 6. 16.
may come unto: and the place of torment is called darkness; whereby we are
given to understand, that the contrary to is light, and brightness. The
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness. They are
wandering vat. 8. 12.
stars (says the Apostle Jude, of certain wicked men) to whom is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever. Jude ver. 13.
And this may suffice to show, that by light in this place supernatural light,
and not natural light is signified.

Which being granted, we may by it discern, why it is called the light of men;
which was the second thing to be considered in this point. They, that by light
understand August in Joan. tract. 1. Beda m loan 1.
natural reason, can give no sufficient satisfaction, why the Evangelist
should make mention of men, rather then of Angels; who are furnished with that
virtue, no less, if not more, then men. Expound it of supernatural light, and
the reason is evident. For the redemption, which is by Christ, is proper to
men, and belongs not to the Angels; who (as S. Peter teaches us) are east 2.
pet. 2. 4.
down into hell, and delivered into chains of darkness, to be kept unto
damnation, namely unto the judgment of the Jude ver 6.
great day. To Abraham, and his seed were the promises made. Not to the Angels.
For he in no sort took the Angels, but Gal. 3 16. Heb. 2. 16.
he took the seed of Abraham. Therefore is he called the light of men, not of
Angels, nor any other creatures, who have no need, or no part of the spiritual
life, and light, which is by, and in him. Look not, that I should magnify the
mercy of God toward mankind, in this respect; or so much as put you in mind,
how infinitely we are all beholding to his Majesty, for so unspeakable, and
undeserved a favor. Of that in due place: as yet we have but searched out the
true sense of the words.

From which, I pass now to deliver the Evangelists meaning, contained in them.
And that life was the light of men. What is it, that the holy Ghost would teach
us, by this kind of speech? Doubtless, either he sets out the benefits, we
reap by our Savior, in an other particular; or else he intends to show us, how
we come to the obteyning of them. I will speak shortly of both. Life is the
chiefest of all outward blessings; as upon which all the rest so far depend,
that without it, they cease to be, What does any man enjoy in this world
apperteining to his being, or well being here, which receives not end with
this present life? Health, wealth, friends, beauty, wisdom, learning, valor,
and whatsoever else belongs to the comfort, or ornament of man, in this world,
is bounded on every side with the limits of this natural life. Therefore is
the commandment of not killing set in the first place, of all matters that
concern ordinary men; because he, that takes away life, spoils a man at
one stroke, of all things appeartaining to this present world. Yet many a man
enjoys life, who has little joy of any thing in life; and to speak
according to the point in hand, who lackes a chief comfort of life, the sight
either of body, or of mind, or of both. Therefore although the Evangelist had
told us before, that life was in CHRIST, then which nothing is more excellent:
yet he truly conceived, that a farther benefit might be added, namely light.
So does our Savior sometimes speak of himself, heaping up as it were one
bounty upon an other, and setting forth in diverse similitudes, the blessings
we receive by belief in him. I am the way, the truth, and the life. And in
one place, to amplify Ie^. 14 6.
the greatness of the blessing, he ioineth light and life together. I am the
light of the world: he, that follows and 8. 12.
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. It is
much to have light, whereby a man may be guided in his ordinary course of
trauarle; and he that wants it, wandering in the night, is in the danger of
stumbling, and 11. 9. 10.
and falling. But it is a blessing above the conceit of man, to have such a
light held out unto him, as shall direct him to everlasting life: that shall
not only make him able to see the way, that lies before him, but shall go
before him as a guide in the way, to the end of so happy a journey. This is
that then, which Saint John instructs us in, that our Savior Christ is not
only the fountain of life, which streameth, and ^ssueth forth to all them,
that by faith cleave unto him; but that he is also the light, that leads, and
vsners us as it were, into the palace of heaven. Thou live in him, and by
him: Thou have thy understanding enlightened with the true knowledge of God, and
clear sight of the certain way to salvation. I can hardly stay my self from
falling into some earnest exhortation, when I consider these wondrous
blessings, that are to be had in Christ. But I must of necessity forbear it,
till I have ended the exposition.

Which may reasonably be thus delivered; that the Evangelist, in these words,
gives us to understand, that the life, which he said was in CHRIST, is
conveyed to men, by a certain inlightning of them, with the saving knowledge
of GOD in CHRIST. As if he should have said, Whereas all men naturally are
dead in sin, and by reason of sin, liable to eternal damnation; and also
are farther overwhelmed with the mist of ignorance in darkness, that they
cannot discern of the way, that leads to true happiness; He that first created
the world, and all therein of nothing, has taken a second pains to revive
them, that are void of life, and to inlighten them, which are covered with
darkness; that as he has provided means of life for them: so they may see,
what those means are, and seeing attain unto them. So that whatsoever may be
needful to the obtaining of everlasting life; all that, our Savior has
graciously, and bountifully provided. Art thou dead? In him is life. Art thou
ignorant that thou can not descerne of the way to life? That life, which is
in him, is the light of men. If he had not brought the former, it would never
have come. If he had brought it, and not seconded that faucur with a farther
kindness, to make us see our own death, and life in him, all had bin to no
purpose. For who will seek for that, whereof (in his own conceit) he has no
need, not use? who will spend his time about the seeking of that, which he
has no po^sibility to find, or guess at? Therefore although the maine
blessing, and end of all, be life in Chr. yet the discovering of this life is
so necessary that without it we should be never a whit the better for the
other, the^ we are for those riches, and tresurs, which are hid in the fardest
parts of the world, unseen, and unknown to us.

Hence it is, that our Evangelist adds light to life; following the example of
his Lord, and master, who makes so often, and so honorable mention of the
light. This is Ioh 3 19.
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness better
then light. Mark, I beseech you: the refusal of the light is the great cause
of damnation to the world. Therefore does he exhort the^, To belecue in the
light, and 12. 36.
while they have the light. And least this same light should seem unto them a
matter of small account, he tells them, both that he himself is the light,
and that they shall not always have it shining to them, as they had then, when
persuaded them to make a right use of it. I am (says he) the light of the
world; he that follows and 8 12.
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life: As long as
I am in the world, I am the light of the world: walk ^ 9. 5.
while ye have light; least the darkness come upon you. For he that walks in
the dark, knows not whither he goes. ^ 11. 35.
This is the commendation of the light, not much inferior to that of the life
it self. For it little auailes a man to have an earnest desire to go to any
place, if he know not, nor can learn the way, that should bring him thither.
The Athenians had an altar built, and dedicated to the unknown God. Were they
ought the better for it? They A^^. 17. 23.
worshipped they knew not what: as our Savior says of the ^ 4. 22.
Samaritans. The Apostle brings them light. Whom you ignorantly worship, him I
show unto you. But they loved darkness better then light, and so came not to
life. Now, that we may not be guilty of the same sin, and fall into the
same damnation; Let us stir up our dead hearts, by the consideration of the
doctrine herein delivered.

That life was the light of men: that is, according to the former exposition;
The same word or Messiah, that is the author of life, is also the fountain of
light unto us. Without life, what are we but dead carcasses? without light,
what are we but blind beetles? Light without life can no more quicken us, then
the fish in the sea, or the beasts in the forest nourish us. Life without
light can no more guide us to happiness, then a good appetite without meat
feed us. If either fail, neither auailes. But if that life be the light of
men; both the end and the way are ready for us, and open to us. Refine thy
thoughts, to meditate on so high a favor. Enlarge thy heart, to conceive so
great a kindness. Was it not enough for JESUS CHRIST to bring life into the
world, but that he must also light us the way to find it? Had it not bin more
then extraordinary love, to lay it before us, though he had not as it were
thrust, and forced it upon us? Must he give thee both meat to feed thee, and
stomach to eat it? O incredible favor! O more then admirable kindness! He
offers thee life. Thou neither regardest it, nor see it. I would we did not
turn away our faces from it. He opens thine eyes, and makes thee see it. Will thou shut them again, and be wilfully blind? S^y not in thy wretched
unthankful heart; Who will show me the way to life? Behold, the author of life
spreads the beams of light round about thee. The darkness is great, and thick;
but the light does pearce, and scatter it. There is nothing wanting but a
willingness to see. What if it were far off, that it could hardly be
discerned? Could thou reasonably excuse thy self, by a fear of
ouer-strayning thy sight? It is life thou look at. If thou should break
thine eye-strings with thy earnestness in looking, would any man say, it was
not worth the venturing? It is better to go blind into heaven, then having
full sight of both eyes to be cast into hell fire. I was purposed to have spent
this exhortation in kindling, or inflaming our affection if I could, with the
love of him, that has so carefully, graciously, and bountifully provided for
us: and must I be feign to bestow my time, and pains in persuading you to
accept of so rare a courtesy? But what say I courtesy? Kindness, favor, love,
the most affectionate, and forcible words, that can be devised, are too cold,
and weak, to signify, I will not say to express such unspeakable bounty.

But let us make as light reckoning as possibly we can, of being enlightened.
Let us account it a small favor to see, that we are guided in the way to
happiness. Let us despise the pleasure we may take, by knowing what we have
escaped, and what we shall come too. At the least, though we care not to know
our happiness, ver let us not be so senseless, as not to care whether we be
hap^ie, or no. The life, which we can not choose but desire, is not found, but
by the light, which we look not after. He that walks in the dark knows not
whither he Ioh. 12. 36.
goes. Yet perhaps he may light upon the place, he seeks ^or. O miserable
hazard! will any man so adventure his eternal salvation? How shall he know
it, when he comes to it? He may ouer-shoote his Port. He may fall short of
it. He may be carried captive into samaria, ^ King. 6. 13. 19.
while he puzzles in the dark to beleger Dothan. Beside, if he were sure to
arrive at the place, he goes for, he may have exceeding much foul wether,
that he shall never know where is; nor believe that, which, at his first
putting to Sea, he seemed to be assured of. If a man walk in the night
(says our Savior) he stumbleth. Well, let all this be nothing; though he
can be no wise man, that will bear such an adventure, when he need not: But
let it (as I said) be nothing. It is something to lose or miss of felicity,
and life; howsoever the danger of losing, or missing it may be thought a matter
of small importance. So a man have it at the last, it skills not perhaps how
hardly, or slowly he come by it.

Be it so. But what if it will not be had at all, without light? While ye have
light, believe in the light, that ye may be Ioh. 12. 35.
the children of the light. Mark ye what he says, that has life in him? Ye
must be children of the light, by believing in the light; how shall that be,
if ye despise the light? Would you attain to life? Take the light with you,
that may show you where it is, The first step to life, is turning from darkness
to light. The Lord sends the Apostle Paul to the Ge^^ils, that by his ministry
they may be brought ^o life. How is the course of this work described? He must
Act. 26. 18.
open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God. While we are in darkness, we are also in the power of Satan;
when we approach to God, we come out of darkness. After that, follows
forgiveness of sins; that is, life in this world, and in heritance among them,
which are sanctisied by faith in Christ; that is, glory in the world to come.
Knowledge enters us into the way of life; faith settles our steps in it, that
we neither turn aside out of it, nor run backward, whence we came. He, that
never sets foot in the way, can not go forward in it. He, that knows not,
what is to be believed, can not believe. Let a man run never so hard, if he
be out of the race, he shall never come to the gole, Look upon the Apostle
Phil. 3. 5 6.
Paul; see what pains he takes, how temperately he lives, how religiously he
worships, how zealously he pursues, Act. 26 9. 10. 11.
and persecutes the^, who^ (in his ignorance) he took to be enemies to God. At
your leisure consider his behavior, as himself has set it out; What was he
the nearer to true happiness, for all this ado? He found at the last, that his
best righteousness was no better the^ dung, and all the reward his zealous
persecuting could procure him, was feign to be given over, for the purchase of
the pardon thereof. So little can it avail a man, to make all the speed, that
may be, when he is out of the way. Therefore if any man be desirous to become
partaker of the life, which is in Christ, he must of necessity be directed, and
guided by the light, that from him shines unto us. If thou will live, thou must
be enlightened. Will life, think thou, be found in darkness? no more the^
light is in death. Is it not strange then, yea admirable, and incredible, that
they which profess, they seek for life, should wilfully continue in darkness?
And yet me thinks it is more strange, if more may be, that those me^ should
persuade themselves, they are in possession of life, who feel the^ seluesshut
up fast in darkness. Who is there in this congregation, I had almost said in this
whole nation, that does not flatter his own heart with an opinion of life by
Christ? That life is the light of men. Give me leave now, after long time of
error, to advise with thee of that, which thou should have bin fully resolvd
of, a great while since. Thou say, the life that is in Christ has quickened
thee. Thou art questionless enlightened. Shall I make bold to ask thee a ^ew
questions, concerning the mystery of thy redemption; the root, whereon the
life, thou talkest of, grows? Will thou not abide to be questioned with of
these points? Hear me a little; I do it not to appose thee, but to instruct
thee. At the least, if thou will not answer me, yet give me the hearing,
while I open this great secret unto thee. Not that neither? Shall thy pleasure
lull thee a sleep, that thou can not hear? Shall thy profit carry thee
away, that thou will not see? I were as good hold my peace, as speak, and not
be heard. All men are willing, and ready to conser of that, whereof they have
skill, and experience. Thou can not do a soldier a greater pleasure, then
to put him into some discourse of war. How gladly does a Mariner take
occasion to entreat of navigations? So all professions, and trades, easily fall
into speech of that, wherein they have best knowledge. Only in the profession
of christianity, the case is otherwise. You shall find many a one, (I would I
might not truly say very many, I am sure I may say over many) that can not
endure to speak themselves, or hear other men enter into any discourse of
life in CHRIST. Tell me I pray you, what is the reason, why other sorts of
professions are so forward in talking of their arts, and trades? Is it not
because they make account they have some good skill in them? Could Christians
be so backward to reason of matters touching their salvation, but that they are
privy to their own ignorance in such cases? Shall a smith, or a shoemaker,
delight to speak of his craft, because he is skillful in it? and shall we hold
off, and shun speech of our glorious redemption, because; but I will say no
more for very shame of the world. It were not possible we should avoid such
communication, if we knew how to carry our selves in it, without bewraying our
ignorance. How then stands the case with us? Are we not enlightened? Then are
we not quickened. If we be in darkness, we are in death too. This, this (it
is be feared) is the case of many of us. There is no life in us, because there
is no light in us: With this light we may search our hearts, and discern,
whether we be indeed alive, or dead, What know I, concerning mine own
natural estate? What have I learned of my first transgression in Adam? What
feeling am I come to of the horrible corruption, where with my soul, and body
are defiled? What understand I of Jesus Christ's natures, and offices? Have I
considered the infiniteness of the love of God, in sending his own, and only
son to be my savior? Am I well instructed in the doctrine of his sufferings?
Is the value of his inualuable sacrifice magnified by me, though not
comprehended? Let me yet come a little nearer. How many are there that do not
so much, as know what Jesus Christ was? what it is to be justified; what it is
to believe? We are buried in the darkness of death; having nothing in us, but
the bare conceit of life. I appeal to thine own soul, whosoever thou art,
that would be saved: I desire thee not to let me see the light, that is in
thee, but to look into thine own heart, whether therebe any there, or no. The
trial is betwixt God, and thee. It is in vain to say, thou art enlightened.
For he knows, what is in thee, better then thou do thy self. And there is
no greater argument of thy blindness, then that thou do not see it. He,
that begins to see, perceiues he wants a great deal of seeing perfectly. But
he, that was borne blind, and continues so, knows not that there is any such
thing as sight to be had, but only as he hears other men talk of it: Such
is the estate of many professed Christians. They have heard I know not what
rumors of Adam, and his fall; of CHRIST, and his death, and such other
matters: But they know no one point, or other, soundly; and thoroughly, either
to their humiliation, or consolation.

And yet (for I must repeat it again, and often) without light, there is no
life, to be had in Jesus Christ. How long, then will you wander in darkness?
When will you approach to life? Let it suffice us, that we have hitherto
continued in ignorance: yet the light shines unto us. Who can tell how soon
the Lord will be weary of waiting on us, and holding out the light of
salvation to them, that will not see? Deceive not your own selves with a vain
hope of life, as if it could be seized on, by groping in the dark. Be not
wanting to your selves, and assuredly ye shall be saved. Christ Jesus has
provided life sor you. The same Christ Jesus is ready to show you the way to
it; nay, has showed it to you already, if you would have vouchsaf't to look
toward it. And because you are not blind only, but dead also, he has sent us
his servants, and ministers, to call upon you, to cry out unto you, to entreat
you, that you would open your eyes, and see the light. It lies shining upon
your eie-liddes; do but lift them up, and it will enter. What shall you lose by
receiving sight? What will it hurt you to be saved? Is any man so hardly
entreated to his own good? You shall not travail alone, in the way to life.
Behold here is company on every side. I, and my brethren the Ministers will
carry the light before you; do but follow it, and the light will bring you to
life. If any man, for all this, will roust in darkness; though he refuse to
see the light, yet shall that discover him both to God and men. Art thou not
ashamed to know, that so many see thy blindness? Art thou not afraid, that
the Lord himself will cast thee into eternal darkness, since thou take no
pleasure in light? Rowse up thy self, and shake off this drowsinesse, that
CHRIST JESUS may give thee light. If thou will not, never press into this, and
the like places. God is not deceived. Thou make a show of love to the light,
when thou come hither, where it shines. Is thy sight dim? The light will
clear it. Have thou no sight at all? The light will give thee eyes to see
withal. The light of the sun appears not, but where there are eyes
already, and those open too. But the light of life which is in CHRIST, makes
eyes where it is desired, and causes life in all, that are willing to have it.

Whereof if any man doubt, let our Evangelist resolve him: who, proceeding to
show us the effect of the light, tells us, that it shines in darkness; as it
were offering it self to disperse, and scatter whatsoever hinders or staieth
our full inlightning. For though it follow in the later part of the verse, that
the darkness comprehends it not: Yet the force of the light appears in some,
who by it attain to knowledge, and salvation. But this belongs to an other
place and discourse: let us go forward in our exposition. Wherein we are first
to consider the words, then to deliver the sense. The words are not so
doubtful in themselves as the variety of interpretations has made them:
which indeed is so great, that if I should handle them at large, both you and
I should be sooner wearied, then edified. I will therefore content my self
with some little speech concerning the diversity of the expositions. And
therein first we must see what light it is, the Evangelist speaks of: then
what he says of it; that it shines in darkness. By light, generally CHRIST,
or his doctrine, or both, are thought to be signified. The variety of opinions
principally consists in the diverse respects in which he may be conceived to
be spoken of. All which may be referred to these two heads; his divine
Nature, or his Person. And so much of these respects in general: the
particulars I must needs reserve, till I have showed what is meant by darkness,
and not comprehending; for without the knowledge of them, this cannot be
understood. In the mean while. we may easily guess at the Evangelists
meaning if we assure our selves, as there is good cause we should, that the
light here is all one, with that in the former verse. Whereof who can
reasonably make any doubt? Has not the Evangelist held the same course before?
One and the same word was in the beginning, was God, was with God. By the same
word, were all things made: nothing was made without him. In him was life: and
that life, which was in him, was the light of men. And the light shines. What
light, but that which he named, in the clause before?

Now, that both the person and the doctrine may well be understood, by this
light; it is clear by that, which our Savior often says of himself in this
Gospell^ I am Ioh. 8. 12. and 1. 46.
the light of the world. I am come a light into the world. And that this
belongs to his person, it is manifest, because he restraines this light to his
continuance in the world. While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
walk while ye have the light; while ye have the light, believe in the and 9.
5. and 12. and 35. 36.
light. But what need I go any further then this chapter? What was John's
witness, but that Jesus was the Lamb of Ioh. 1. 6. 7. Ver. 29. Ver. 33.
God that takes away the sins of the world? That he was the Messiah, whom
the father had sent? Therefore does he as it were point him out: John sees
Jesus coming unto him; and says: Behold the Lamb of God. And Ver. 29. Ver.
36.
he beheld JESUS walking by and said; Behold the Lamb of God. What should I use
many words? It not his person signified, when Saint John says, In him was Ver.
4.
life? It is then truly said of our Saviors person, that he is light, and
shines. But how is our Savior light? Not only as by his divine power he
gives us light, through the work of his Spirit in our hearts, whereof in this
place our Evangelist does not speak; but also in regard of the doctrine of
everlasting life, which he preached in his own person, while he lived here
amongst men, and now teaches daily by those whom he has made his
Ambassadors, to entreat men on his behalf, and in his name, that they 2. Cor.
5. 19.
would be reconciled unto God. Let us see how this may be proved. Light is
come into the world (says Ioh. 3. 19.
our Savior) and men loved darkness, more then light. What light? Namely, the
true knowledge of salvation; whereof our Savior had discoursed before to
Nicodemus, not without his wonder, and astonishment. How Ver. 4.
can a man be borne which is old? said Nicodemus, when Christ preached to him
of regeneration by water, and the spirit, without which, no man can enter into
heaven. Afterward, when he labord to instruct him, in the knowledge of his
corrupt natural estate, and showed him, that the spirit inlightens whom he
pleases, as the wind blows where it list; How can these things be? said
Nicodemus. Ver. 9.
The world can not abide this light, which discouers the shame, and misery of
her darkness. Men had rather continue a good opinion of their own virtue, and
holiness, though with error, then forgo that proud conceit, they have naturally
of themselves; by seeing their sins laid open by the light of truth. Thus
was Christ the light of the world, while he was in the world; because Ioh. 9. 5.
he preached the Gospel to as many, as would hear it. And this was the light,
which should not, as he threatens them, always be with them. So then by light
the doctrine of the Gospel, and knowledge of everlasting, life is understood,
and the person of our Savior there by signified, so far as concerns his
delivering and teaching of that mystery.

This being thus conceived, it is no hard matter to know, what is meant by
shining. What else, showing and manifesting it self, so that they which will
may see it, and by it see the way to everlasting life: No man lights Mat. 5.
15.
a candle to put it under a bushel, but to set it on a Candlestick, that it
may give light to all, that are in the house. Let your light so shine before
men (says our Savior, applying the former similitude) that they may see your
good works. (...) le si (...). Arian. ^^ 3. cap. 3.
They, that would have the place understood of that inlighting, by which Christ
makes us discern the truth of that which is taught us, do not put any
difference betwixt shining, and inlighting; whereas it is plain, that the holy
Ghost, in this place, intends not to entreat of the effect, in the hearts of
men, but of the natural property, and immediate act of the light. Neither does
this sense of word well agree with that, which follows; And the darkness
comprehended it not. Is not this contrary to the former? If the light shine, so
that it inlighten the darkness, how can it be said, that the darkness does
not comprehend it? For it will appear anon, that by not comprehending, not
acknowledging, or not receiving the light, is signified. But although the
darkness be not cleared and made bright by the light; yet the light it self
shines; that is, casts, and spreads abroad his beams. Does not the Sun
shine, but when it is seen? Shines it not upon the blind? Even so the light of
truth glistereth brightly, though it be not discernd by the^ on who^ it falls.

But this (as I noted before) is easily acknowledged; the greatest doubt is,
why the evangelist changes his manner of speech, and speaks of the persent
time; The light shines. We have had nothing hitherto, but of the time past.
The word was in the beginning, was with God, was God; were made, was made, was
life; was light; All of that, which is past, according to the ordinary course
of an History. So in the clause, that follows, Comprehended not. Only here,
The light shines, not shined. That our Saviors continual inlightning us from
heaven is not signified, it appeared before, because of the difference betwixt
that, and shining. Add thereto, that if Christ inlighten, the darkness is
enlightened, and so comprehends the light. But the Darkness says our
Evangelist did not comprehend it. Shall we refer it to the whole time, since
our Saviors incarnation? Indeed the light has shined ever since, and does,
and shall shine. If that had been the meaning, it had been fitter to have said;
The darkness co^ prehendeth it not, then comprehended it not; unless we think
that the darkness is less dark now then it was, when the Apostle writ this
Gospel. And in that place, which is brought to prove this exposition, there is
no such diversity of time, but al runs alike. That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, have seen, have looked upon, have 1. Ioh. ^. ^.
handled; The life appeared, and we have seen it. We shall come nearer to the
point, if we understand it of that continua^ Ver. 2.
light, which shines to us, by the ministry of the word. Yet will not the
former doubt be removed why the Evangelist says not comprehends, and so
includes the present also, which is as unable and unwilling to comprehend the
light, as the former times have been.

What may then be thereaso^, why the holy ghost speaks after this sort? The
light shines. It seems to me, saving other men's better judgment, that this
speech co^cerns the general nature of the light, to which the sh^ning of our
Savior, and his doctrine is resembled. Al me^ know that light properly
signifies that by which we are enabled to see with our bodily eyes: and by a
resem blance thereunto, that which informs the judgment. and instructs the
understanding, is called by the same name, whether it be done by natural, or
supernatural, means. The Evangelist the^ having given this name to our
spiritual inlightning by Christ, and to the shining of that supernatural light
upon us, speaks in these words of light in general, as if the should have said:
It is the nature of al light to shine, as of water to moysten, and of fire to
burn Therefore does the Sun continually ^end forth his beams, and as soon
shall he cease to be, as to shine. For, seeing light is as natural to him, as
reason, and life are to men, and beasts; as they leave to be that they are,
when these actions have an end. so does the sun perish. whenever he gives
over shining. What is this to the iupernaturall light, which comes from our
Savior, by his word and doctrine? may some men say, I will tell thee. The holy
Ghost will have us by this former part of the similitude, to gather, and
understand the later, in this ^ort. The life that is in Christ (says Saint
John) is that, which inlightens men; giving them, or at the least affording,
and offering them the knowledge of their blindness, and deadnes, and of light,
and life to be had by, and in Christ. Now it is well known, that the light,
according to the nature thereof, shines in darkness; so did, does, and will,
this supernatural light, always show it self to them, that look after it.

This (I take it) is that, which our Evangelist intendes, and implies, though
he express it not. Since we perceive, that the light must needs shine, and
understand that the life in Christ is the light of men; how can we choose
but conclude, that certainly the light did shine, while our Savior was in the
world?

So then, the light shines always by nature; But where shines it? Surely in
darkness. For there is no use of light, but in respect of darkness: and
wheresoever any light shines, there is darkness, without that light,
naturally, and ordinarily. What darkness is it, wherein this supernatural
light shines? Questionless, a darkness suitable to that light. For the Sun
in his greatest brightness, at high noone in summer, shines not to the soul,
but to the body of man; and the excelle^test knowledge, and cleerest light of
reason, helps nothing to the inlightning of our bodily darkness: but the
simplest idiot, if his sight be good, will see as well, as the wisest man in the
world, if he have the sun light. This then must be laid, as the foundation of
the building; that by darkness, not the absence of natural light, but the want
of spiritual knowledge is signified. And as by light we understand the person
of the Messiah, together with the doctrine he taught, concerning our
spiritual salvation; so by darkness we must in like sort conceive the
ignorance of him, and of that knowledge, which he imparted to the world,
whereby only everlasting life can be attained to. What then is this
darkness, wherein the light shines? what else, but the blindness of men, by
which they are unable to see, and know, what belongs to their eternal
salvation; the infidelity of men, whereby they are hindered, and withheld from
acknowledging the means of it, when they are offered?

Of the doctrine anon; as yet I am in search for the meaning of the word.
Which, as all men know, and confess, signifie^ properly the abse^ce of this
out ward light, to which it is contrary. It is needless to prove this point by
example. Take one for all, in the beginning of the scripture. Darkness was upon
the deep. And God said, Let Genesis 1. 2. 3. 4.
there be light. And God separated the light from the darkness. We see
clearly, what darkness Moses speaks of; that it needs not my exposition.
From hence the word is taken, and applied, to note out the punishment of sin,
and sin it self: The punishment in this life, adversity and affliction. He
has set darkness in my paths, says Job; Job. 19. 3.
meaning that the Lord had laid grievous afflictions vphim. If they look unto
the earth (says I say) behold darkness, Isay. 5. 30. and 8. 22.
and sorrow, and the light shall be darkened in their sky. Darkness is without
comfort, and affords a man no sight of any means for his deliverance.
Therefore the use of the word reaches farther; even to death, and damnation.
Before I go, and shall not return (says Job) to the land of Job. 10. 21.
ver. 22.
darkness, and shadow of death, Into a land, dark as darkness it self, into
the shadow of death, where there is no order, but the light is as darkness;
Of damnation our Savior often speaks, when he names, casting into utter
darkness. The children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter Mat. 8. 12.
and 22. 13. and 25. 30.
darkness. Take him away, and cast him into utter darkness. This, Jude calls
the blackenes of darkness. For whom, is Iad. ver. 13.
reserved the blacknes of darkness for ever.

When the word is used for sin, it signifies either the ignorance of the
mind, and understanding, or the Romans 2. 19.
wickedness of the heart, and conversation. Thou perswadest thy self (says the
Apostle to the Jews) that thou art a guide of the blind, a light of them,
which are in darkness: namely in ignorance. To this purpose the same Apostle
says of the Ephesians, before they had been taught by Ephesians. 4. 18.
the Gospel, that Their cogitation was darkened. This is Mat. 4. 16.
that Darkness, in which the people sat, til by our Saviors preaching (as
Saint Matthew tells us) They came to see light. That the wickedness of our heart,
and the leudnes of our actions are signified by the same word, it may Romans 13.
12.
appear by these places. Let us cast away the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armor of light. What these works of darkness are, the Apostle shows in
the next verse: Ver. 13.
Gluttony, drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, strife, and envying: and
generally in the verse following, To fulfill the Ver. 14. Ephe. 5. 8.
lusts of the flesh. In this respect he tells the Ephesians, that they were once
darkness. And a little after, he forbids them Ver. 11.
to have any fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. But no man
speaks more plainly, or more fully to this purpose then S. John himself. God
is light, and in him is no 1. Ioh. 1. 5.
darkness; that is no kind of evil. If we say, that we have fellowship with him
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do and ver. 6. 2. 11.
not truly. He that hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in
darkness: is in the corruption of nature, and behaues himself according
thereunto. And of the word this may suffice, concerning the ordinary use of it
in the Scripture.

For this place, we must needs take it generally, as we did light, and so
apply it to the particular in hand. The light naturally shines in darkness; and
bodily light in bodily darkness, the spiritual in spiritual. So did the
Messiah shine in the ignorance, and wickedness of men. So did the doctrine of
salvation show it self, in the blindness, and naughtiness of the world. The
former point of the natural, and bodily light shining in darkness, is not any
matter of divinity; and besides so well known to children, that it were lost
labor to say any thing of it. Let us keep our selves to the Evangelists
meaning; and after we have a little proved the doctrine, consider the matter
for our farther instruction, and edification. And that the truth may the rather
be acknowledged, let us call to mind, that the Prophet Isay, many hundred
ye^res before, gave notice of this light, and the shining thereof: and not of
the shining only, but also of a farther effect, the inlightning of them, that
were in darkness. Let us hear himself speak. The people, that walked in
darkness, have seen a Isay. 9. 2.
great light; they that dwelt in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them
has the light shined. My warrant to expound this prophecy, of the light, in
the ministry of our Savior Christ, is from the authority of the holy Ghost,
in Saint Mathewes Gospel. Jesus leaving Nazareth Mat. 4. 13. 14. 15
went, and dwelt in Capernaum, which is near the Sea, in the borders of
Zabulon, and the Land of Nepthalyn by the way of the Sea, Galilee of the
Gentiles; The people which sat in darkness etc. I spoke of this before in
expounding the words: the naming of it, this second time, is sufficient. Let me
second it with an other prophecy out of the new Testament. Old Zachary, the
Father of Saint Luke 1. 67.
John Baptist, being filled with the holy Ghost, foretold this shining. Through
the tender mercy of our God, the dayspring Ver 78. Ver. 79.
(says he) from an high, has visited us; to give light to them, that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of
peace. This day. spring, Simeon in few words terms alight to be revealed to
the and 2. 32.
Gentiles; He mentions not the darkness. True: but we have learned, that the
Gentiles were in darkness; as well by that of Esaias, as by the testimony of Saint
Paul: Walk not (says he to the Ephesians, turned from Gentilisme) as other
Gentiles walked, having their cogitation darkened, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18.
and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance, that is in
them, because of the hardness of their heart: But the brightness of this light,
and the glorious shining thereof, is no where more clearly to be discernd,
then in the course of this Gospel: wherein so many secrets of God, of the
Messiah, of the holy spirit, and comforter, of freedom from sin, of
deliverance from damuation, and of everlasting life are set forth, and
commended to us.

The doctrine then is easy, and certain; that our Sa^iour, being the
supernatural light, shined to the world, and shines still, and ever, in the
knowledge of eternal salvation. Let not the manner of speech trouble any man;
because the Evangelist says, that The light shines in darkness. You will
ask me, how this can be. If the light shine, there is no darkness. It there
be darkness, the light shines not. How then can the light shine in
darkness? Is it all one, as if he should have said, The Ma'd ^nat. ad hunc
lo cum.
light inlightneth the darkness, scattering, and dispersing it? But shining,
and inlightning (as I showed before) are diverse; the former respe^ting the
nature of the light, the other a second arie effect of the light in things
enlightened. Neither may we forget, that the darkness was not enlightened. The
darkness (says Saint John) omprehended it not. How, then, does the light
shine in ^^rkenesse? Surely, as the Sun in the firmament, shines ^^ongst a
company of blind men. The Sun indeed ^^^nes; but the darkness to blind
men is never a whit ^he loss. So our Lord, and his doctrine shined most
brightly in the midst of the blind Scribes, and Pharisees; yet were they still
in darkness. The natural light does his office, and shows his nature, by
spreading his beams all about, that all men may see: so does the supernatu^al
light, delivering the knowledge of God, and Christ; to salvation; yet to the
blind the darkness co^tinues: and thogh^ the darkness continue, yet the light
shines; so the light shines in darkness.

The ligh in darkness? what light? What darkness? Is not the light, you
speak of, a dim glimmering? or rather is it not as a candle wasted, and spent
to nothing? Is not Christ, the light you brag of? Is not this light put out?
You preach Christ crucified. What light is there in death? What shining, when
the Sun is set? Where is the darkness, you upbraid the world withal? Is not
this Chr. crucified, which in your conceit shines so brightly, a stumbling
block to the Jews, and foolishnes to the Gentiles? 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Are all these in darkness? Nay rather, is not your light a false fire, that
flashes, and vanishes? These, these are the proud conceits of the ignorant
world. Not without some show I confess; (for the devil must deceive with some
color) but yet without substance. The show is great; both in respect of the
adversaries themselves, and for the continuance of the error. Multitude bears
a great sway; and like a mighty land-water caries a way all it meets with.
But if it come once to be the greater part, it seems to challenge allowance
and consent; not so much by force, as by equity and reason. What if it prove
generally; yea so general that it comprise all within it? One or two may be
deceived; but that, which all men agree of, must of necessity be true. And that
these men may not be thought to preuail by number of voices, but by weight of
reason, they are content to argue the matter with us; Jews, and Gentiles each
a part for themselves. For though they be at deadly fewd one with another; yet
they all join in one against God, that we may be sure they are in darkness:
but let us hear their several pleas, for the clearing of themselves. Suppose
then that Zedekiah Ahabs Prophet, or if you will Caiphas, 1. King. 22. 24. Ioh.
11. 49. 50.
who lived in the office of the high Priest, when this light was to be seen,
and felt almost with men's fingers, should start up in defense of his nation, of
which he was so careful, and speak in this sort; What is he, that accuses the
Jews of blindesse? Is not Abraham Ioh. 8. 33. and 5. 45.
their Father? Is not Moses their teacher? Did not God deliver the knowledge of
his will unto them? He has Psalm. 147. 20.
not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his ludgements. Were
not all the Prophets sent, from time Icr. 7. 25.
to time, for their instruction? Are not they a guide of the blind, a light of
them, which are in darkness? Do not the Romans 2 19. Mal. 2. 7. Mic. 4 2. Ioh.
4. 22.
Priest lips preserve knowledge? Must not all men seek the law at his mouth?
Does not the law go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem?
for salvation is of the Jews. How then are they in darkness? All the land of
Egypt may be covered with darkness, but the children of I sraell Exodus 10. 23.
have light, where they dwell. Thus has Caiphas cleerd the Jews (as he
thinks) of the imputation of ignorance, which was laid upon them. But what
says Saint Paul, Jew, and a Pharise? There is none that understands, there
Romans 3. 11. 12. Psalm 13. 3.
is none that seeks after God; They are all gone out of the way. Neither
speaks he this, of himself; but alleges it out of the Jews own records.
Indeed he brings it against the Jews; and he gives a sufficient reason of his
so doing. We know(says he) that whatsoever the Law says, Romans 3. 19.
it says it to them, which are under the law. How many witnesses might I bring
in to be deposed of this truth? which of the Prophets has not accused them as
grievously? Their writings abound with such complaints. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters crib; Esaias. 1. 3.
But Israellhath not known, my people has not understood. The Lord has a
controversy with the Land (says another Ose. 4. 1.
Prophet) because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
Land. But let us grant as much as they desire, that the Oracles of God were
committed to them. Does not this prove, that, of themselves, they were as
blind, as other nations? Is not this the word of the Prophets 2. Pet. 1. 19.
which (as S. Peter says) is a light shining in a dark place? was this any
other thing, then the dawning of the dav. before the rising of the Sun of
righteousness? But I should show my self to be too blind, if I should spend
time to discover their darkness. Their greatest Rabbis the Scribes, and
Pharisees, were blind leaders of the blind: Mat. 15. 14.
who professing themselves to be master builders, had not so much skill, as to
know the head stone of the corner; without which, all, that they set up,
could Mark. 12. 10.
not choose but fall to ruin, as we see it is come to pass,

Let us then leave the Jews in their ignorance, that we may encounter the
Gentiles, even the Grecians, the 1. Cor. 1. 22. 23
wisest of them; whose profession it is, to seek after wisdom, and who
therefore despise the Gospel, because it is foolishnes. These men think foul
scorn to be counted ignorant. If knowledge were lost, and the books of
learning burnt up, it might be found among them, and would flame up, at their
blast, out of thevery ashes. Have not they clim'd up into heaven, and brought
down from thence the admirable knowledge of the motions, and influences of the
stars? Have not they taken a full survey of every Region of the Air, and
observed the causes; and breeding of Coluds, rain, hail, snow, Comets,
blazing slarrs, frost, dew and all such wonders? Who has sounded the depth of
the Sea, and discovered the hidden secrets of the saltness, and ebbing and
flowing there of, but the Grecians? who has raked, into the bowels of the
earth, and fetched out the treasures of it for the use of men but the Grecians?
Their Philosophy has taught Princes, how to manage, affairs of State. Of them,
masters of families have learned, how to order their households. Among them
military discipline was bred, and nourisht. They have instructed men, how to
make themselves virtuous. They have showed men how to attain to happiness. To
conclude, all learning, all virtue, all wisdom, has flowed out of their
fountains, and watered all the world with streams of knowledge, and
Judgment. As for Religion, where had God more Temples, more Priests, more
altars? Where was more cost bestowed on his worship? Where was more wit showed
in the devising of it? The like plea make the Romans: who although they cannot
deny, that they received these things, at the second hand, of the Grecians: yet
(in their conceyts) all knowledge, and virtue, especially religion, had her
full growth, and perfection amongst, and from them.

What shall we say to these men; and how shall we answer them? if we deny
them to be learned, all the world will condemn us of ignorance, or envy? Shall
we grant, that they shine with learning, and yet accuse them, as hidden in
darkness? What is light, but knowledge? What is darkness, but ignorance?
Either they are in darkness, because they want knowledge; or if they have
knowledge, they are not in darkness. How stands the case then? Have we accusd
them unjustly? That were to condemn the holy Ghost of falsehood; as if he had
made them worse then they are, that he might magnify our Savior Christ the
more. What if we prove their knowledge in the things, they most brag of, to be
imperfect? Cicer. in Acad. and Socrat. apud Plato.
We shall say no more, then many of themselves do, who yet are learned; nor
bring any proof of the light, that shines in darkness. For, the doctrine of the
Gospel, does not perfect the learning, whereof the Grecians boast, but teach an
other kind of knowledge, then ever they dreamt of. But that we may, if not
give them full satisfaction, yet at the least stop their mouths; let us honor
them with the reputation of learning, and if they will needs have it so, with
the commendation thereof to: yet with this prouiso that even in that knowledge,
wherein they hold themselves so skillful, they may easily be proved to have
erred often, and grossly. But let us take no advantage of those errors: let
them al be wise Statesmen, expert warriers, great Clerks, deep
naturalists, temperate moralists, cunning artificers, good common-wealths-men
for the public benefit, good husbands for their private estates: for all this,
they are in darkness, and ignorance. For what are they but ignorant, that
know not the true God; nor how he is to be worshipped? What light is there in
them, that see not the way to their own happiness, nor understand where it is
to be had? I should never done, if I should, let me not say refute, but recite
their manifold errors, touching God himself, the foundation of all religion.
Give me leave therefore I pray you to omit them all, save a very few of the
most principal. First, whereas there is but one God, as the very light of
Nature shows, they set up, in their blind fancies, infinite multitudes of
Gods, and Goddesses, to the number of I wot not how many (I am sure a great
many) thousands; that, as the Prophet says of the Jews, according to the
number of their Cytties (yea Ier. 2. 28.
and far above it too) so were their Gods. Yet had this bin the more tolerable
(though indeed it were most intolerable) if they had not added a second error,
worse, if worse may be, then the first. Be it, that they could not content
themselves with one God, but must needs have heaps of them for failing; was it
possible, they could be so absurd, and senseless, as not to devise them all of
one kind, and nature? Say there was some color, for to imagine there should
be a difference of sex, and so he Gods, and she Gods: yet was there not any
the least show of reason to conceive, they might be of diverse natures. There
is wonderful variety of nations, and people in the world: yet all are of one
kind; of the same proportion of body, of the same nature of the soul. But the
Gods of the heathen, many of them (can they hear it without blushing?) are
utterly of a diverse kind one from another. Some of them were Gods both by the
Father, amd Mother, some only by the Fathers side, some by the mothers, side
only, some by neither. What say you to the Sun the Moon, and diverse stars?
Could these be of the same kind with the former? Certainly beasts, fowls,
fishes, creeping things, onions, garlic, I am ashamed to say all I could,
were Gods of an other nature then those before mentioned. Do you think these
me^, that made themselves such Gods, had any spark of light in them? Is it not
pity, but these companions should be held to be wise, and learned? What
dreams of a sick man's distempered brain, what old wives fable, what idle
fancy of a child, that builds Castles in the air, is either so absurd, or so
impious? And such as their opinions were of their Gods, such was their worship;
By murders, adulteries, incests, filthy speeches, abominable gestures,
sorceries, coniurations. The least sin of this kind, was their doting
Idolatry; that he, which only made an idol of God, and did him no farther
dishonor, might well be counted a holy man, amongst a route of such profane
miscreants.

Could these men (let them boast of their knowledge as much as they list) could
these men, I say, know wherein their own happiness consisted, or how they
might attain unto it? How should he, that is ignorant of God from whom all
things receive as their being, so their well being, ever understand what
felicity is, or how it may be come by? There needs no other, nor can be any
better proof of their ignorance, in this point, then the multitude of diverse
and many contrary opinions. One of the heathen a learned Roman has left us
record Varro, apud Aug. de cruitder.
of almost 300. several conceits touching the soueraingne good, or felicity of
man. It were a hard matter for a man to choose among so many, especially where
he has no certain marks, whereby to direct him in his choice. But what a
misery is it, for one to vex, and tire himself in seeking, when the thing, he
seeks for, is not near the place of his search? To examine the opinions
severally were more labor then profit, I will only point at ^ome maine errors,
as in the other part of their ignorance, concerning God. First then, what true
knoweledge can be looked for at their hands, touching persite happiness, whose
bse thoughts have imprisoned the^ selves within the narrow compass of this
short, and uncertain life? wherein, there is so little quietness to be
found, and so much misery to be endured, that their own Cicer. Tuscul quaest.
lib. 1.
Gods, as they say, have counted it a man's greatest felicity, either never to
have bin borne, or to dye quickly: yea, have bestowed death on their fauorits,
as the richest reward they could give them. And if any of them took a conceit
of the immortality of the soul: yet they spoiled man of one part of his
happiness, by leaving the body void of al possibility to live again. Yea what
was the felicity they allowed the soul, but such a kind of vain pleasure, as
the mind of a natural wise man, would rather despise, then delight in? But
these also were very few; the greatest part, not of the common sort only but of
the Philosophers too, either denying, or doubting of the immortality of the
soul. How should such blind men, knowthe way to true felicity? Or if they
might have lighted on it by chance, how could they have perceived it? Well: let
us take pity of their ignorance, and show the^, that true happiness is only
in the inioying of God. What are they the nearer? Al their learning will not
teach the^ how to find him. The best they can imagine, is to procure his favor
by sacrifices, or to deserve his love by their shadow of virtue. Alas poor
wretches! How highly soever they value this their painted vain glory; he, that
searches the hearts, condemns it of hypocrisy. To who^ do thou offer thy
sacrifices? Which of thy Gods is it, thou would fainest please? Art thou not
afraid, least while thou do thy whole in deauour to serve one, all the rest
think themselves neglected; Or can thou have so base an estimation of their
excellency, or so proud a conceit of thine own worth, as to imagine that thou
can do them all service, to their likeing? Art thou so far in love with
thy own self, that thou never perceiu'st, wherein thou offend'st any of them?
Let me come nearer to thee; Does not thy heart tell thee, that the greatest
motive, thou have to virtue, is the praise, and applause of men? Thou have it:
and in it, thou have thy full reward.

It is pity, I confess, to leave a man in this desperate estate, if he will be
content to receive better instruction. But it fares with the wise men of this
world, in this matter, as it does with some melancholy person; who^ if a
Physician offer to cure, he will not be persuaded, that he stands in need of
help: but if you be earnest with him in the business, he will take on
against you, as against a fool, or one that meant to murder him. We preach
Christ crucified (says the Apostle) to the Jews a 1 Cor. 1. 23.
stumbling block, and to the Grecians foolishness. To the ignorant, you will
say, and unlearned; not of judgment, and knowledge. What say you to the
Epicures, and Stoiks? were they void of learning, and understanding? I doubt me
you will find but a very few men worthy to be counted learned, if you
condemn them of ignorance? How did they entertain the doctrine of the
Gospel, brought unto them by the learned, and eloquent Apostle Saint Paul?
They disputed against him, they called him Act. 17. 28.
babbler, they took him for a setter out of strange Gods. Yea the greatest
favor, he could find amongst the Athenians, in a learned University was this,
that some mocked, others said, We will hear thee again of this thing. Some
in. Verse. 32.
deed claue unto him, whereof one was a Judge in the City; but neither was
his learning the reason of his Verse. 34.
yielding, and what is one amongst so many thousands? The natural man (says
S. Paul) perceives not the things of the spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him; neither 1. Cor. 2. 14.
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, And is he not then
blind, and ignorant, if he neither do, nor can perceive the secrets of God,
touching his own salvation? Me thinks I discern a certain cheerefulnes in
your countenances, arising (as I verily persuade my self) from the sense of
the knowledge you have, in this great mystery of your redemption. It will save
me some labor, that the rest of this short time remaining, may be bestowed
upon the later part of this verse. Only give me leave in two words, both to
abate the pride of our nature, by showing our ignorance, and to increase the
joy of the spirit, by looking on the light, that shines about us, and in us.
There is no one sin, to which we are naturally more subject, then pride; no
pride that does sooner, or more puff us up, then the opinion of knowledge. For
since the understanding is the most principal part of the soul; how can it
be, but a man must principally delight in that, which is the cheifest
perfection thereof? What should then, in reason, be of greater force, to make
us strike the sail of pride, then the consideration of our ignorance. Every
one of us is ready to say to himself; Have not I sharpness of wit;
soundness of judgment; a quick conceit, to apprehend what I hear; a deep
reach to compass what I disire? I say nothing of extraordinary learning,
because it concerns not every man. And is this that, which makes thee proud?
Let me question with thee a little. Art thou indeed so sharp, so sound, so
quick, so deep? Make proof of these excellent parts in a matter, that
concerns thee nearly, and imports thee much. Can thou, by the sharpness of
thy wit, clear thy self, against the accusation of thy conscience? Can
thou, by the soundness of thy judgment, determine wherein true selicity
consists? Can thou, by the quicknes of thy conceit, venderstand readily the
whole doctrine of salvation? Can thou, by the depth of thy reach, procure a
place for thy self in heaven? What? none of al these? Call thy wits together;
beat thy brains about the matter; Let thy conceit work upon whatsoever,
nature, or humane learning can teach thee: de^ise plot contriue. Comes all to
nothing? O the ignorance, and blindness of men! Let us be as wise, and
skillful in worldly matters, as we conceive ourselves to be: in true wisdom,
and knowledge, we are fools, and blind. Darkness, palpable darkness, nothing
but darkness. I make challenge here to all the learned of the world, that ever
were, are, or shall be, to show their skill, and learning, either in devising a
means to bring a distressed soul to quietness, and comfort, or in disprouing
the means discovered by the Gospel, or in proving the truth of it, as it is
revealed. If they can do none of all these, let them confess, as they must
needs, that they are indeed blind, and ignorant.

This being confessed, as it cannot be denied; let us see now, what means they
are are able to procure of inlightning, and instruction. Nature affords them
none; for if it did, some man, or other, in all this time, would have hit upon
it. Will learning help them? It is not possible it should. For what is
learning, but the perfection of nature? If the foundation be weak, the
building must needs be ruinous. The light of nature may show thee many
defects, and faults, many vices, and unruly affections: the knowledge of
Philosophy may confirm this Judgment of nature, and add much to the heap,
that thou may be overwhelmed with the consideration of thy wickedness, and
wretchedness. But neither can both these, by any study, and meditation, fully
inform thee of thy miserable, and damnable estate: and when they have done
all, they possibly can, they will either leave thee desperate, to consume thy
self with sorrow, or bring thee into a fools paradise, and lead thee gaily to
destruction, as an Ox with gilded horns, and sweet Garlands, to be
slaughtered in sacrifice. How then shall we get out of this darkness? Who will
show us the way to knowledge? O that there were this heart in us indeed! O that
we were as truly desirous to find the right way, as we are ashamed to be
thought ignorant of it! How easy were it for us to be saved! The light shines
in darkness. That thou seek for, if thou seek it in truth, as thou do in
show, is near thee, is about thee, is upon thee, I had almost said, is in
thee. If thou will read^ the Scriptures, it will thrust in by thine eyes. If
thou will hear the Scriptures, it will wind it self in, through thine ears.
The light that shines in darkness, will make thy darkness light. Only be contented
to be enlightened.

But alas we are not so affected. We despise the light: we delight in
darkness, we hate him that should draw us out of it. Neither can our own
misery drive us, nor his kindness allure us to him. O that we would but a
little consider, how extraodinarily we are beholding to this light, that shines
in darkness! Let us take some view of it, in a like matter. Imagine that thou
were wandering, thou know not whither, all alone, naked, and comfortless, the
darkness being so great, that thou could not see thy hand, the wind blowing
through thee, the rain pouring down upon thee, the cold striking to thy very
heart, the way so slippery, that thou could not stand upright, so full of
deep holes, that every step, thou should be in danger of breaking thy
legs, or arms: at the end of thy travail, when thou should come to rest,
suppose there were al kind of torments, and tortures prepared for thee, which
thou could by no means escape: tell me now, can thou possibly conceive,
how infinitely thou should be bound to him that should bring thee a light,
show thee the perils of thy journey, the certain destruction in the end
thereof; that should set thee in a plain and easy path, should cloth thee,
comfort thee, keep thee company, and bring thee to a place, or palace rather of
al pleasure, and happiness? What is that darkness to the blindness of thy soul?
What comparison is there betwixt the danger of breaking an arm or a leg, and
the hazard of falling into the pit of hell? The glorious brightness of the Sun
does not so ^xceed the dim light of a watching rush candle; as the knowledge
of salvation by Christ, excels all the ^arning, and wisdom of the world.
And yet do we ^^rne away our faces from this brightness? Do we ^hut our
eyes against this light? I would this were the worst, though it be too too
bad. Nay we thrust it a way from us: we run away from it; we disdain it, we
hate it, we do all that lies in us, to put it quite out. But do what we can,
the light shines in darkness; As I said once before in a former Sermon, if we
will not be enlightened, yet shall our blyndnes and darkness be discoue^ed,
whether we will or no; God, his holy Angels, and blessed Saints shall see
our shame, and rei^^ce at our just confusion for continuing in wilful
blindness.

I (...) slipped, I know not how, into the later part of this verse before I was
aware, concerning the intertainment, that the light found in the world: The
darkness comprehended it not. The light shines, and the darkness will not be
enlightened. It will be worth the doing, to consider the point more fully.
Which that we may lee the better, somewhat must be said of the words, or
rather of that one word Comprehended. For where-as some men seek a new
meaning of the word Darkness, and will not have it taken in the sense, it had
in the former clause, there is more curiosity, then truth in their speculation.
Who can imagine, that the Evangelist would use a word in two diverse senses,
without giving any notice or inkling of such a change? Is it not contrary to
the rest of his course, wherein the same word has the same signification?
The Word was in the beginning, The Word was with GOD, The Word was
GOD; Still the same Word. But I showed this sufficiently before; and there is
no reason to be alleged, why S. John should differ in this verse from the
former; al things agreeing so well, if we retain the sense, as it was formerly
delivered, and understood. Wherefore, understanding, by Darkness, man in his
natural estate, without any supernatural grace; let us enquire what the
Evangelist means, when he says, that the darkness did not comprehend the
light. First, what is it, to Comprehend? Variety of opinions, breeds
doubtfulnes in resolving. I will draw all to two principal heads, and in the
handling of them discharge my promise, concerning the diverse interpretations
of the light. The word, that is here used by the Evangelist, signifies in the
Scripture, either an understanding and attaineing to some thing, for our own
knowledge or benefit; or an apprehending, and taking of somewhat. to the hurt,
or disgrace thereof: Of the former signification is the word in this, and such
like places; Of a truth I Act. 10. 34.
understand or perceive, that God is no accepter of persons. That ye may be
able with all Saints to conceive or apprehend, Ephesians. 3, 18.
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height etc: The Gentiles which
followed not righteousness, have attained Romans 9. 30.
unto righteousness. Of the later these may be examples; Ioh 8. 3. and 12. 35.
1. Thesl 5. 4.
The Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery. Walk
while ye have the light, least the darkness come or seize upon you. Ye
(brethren) are not in darkness, that that day should come upon you as it were a
thief. According to these 2 significations, so are the interpretations of the
word in this Text. Some, acknowledging the light to Greg. Naziac. orat. 4.
Theol. O^igen. in Ioa. l. ^. Chrysostom in Ioa. hom. 4.
be in Christ, will have the darkness to be the Devil, and persecution; which
could not, say they, overcome Christ. But though they could not utterly subdue
him, yet they did seize on him to his disgrace, and death, in the world: which
is as much, as the signification of the word w^l^ Apud. Theo^hilact. ad. huno
ocum.
bear. Other, that will have the light to signifi^ Christ, in respect of his
divine nature, by Darkness understand his manhood, which could not so obscure
the other, but that it still shined, and showed it self. Where shall we
find warrant for this interpretation of Darkness? And what is this else, but
that, which the Evangelist says in the fourteenth verse at large? The words
became flesh, and we saw the glory thereof etc. It is usual with the spirit
of GOD in the Scripture, to call mankind, flesh, because the body is one
part, whereof they consist: but Darkness it is never called; unless it be
with respect to the corruption thereof, which our Savior took not with our
nature. Fulge^t. ad T^^asi. lib. 2.
The same answer may satisfy them, who taking light in the same sense, for
the divine nature, make all things else darkness; which (say they) could not
taint or defile the light. But where is the word Comprehended ever used so?
Therefore they also are deceived, Ma. bom. 2. de pase and hom. ^. de pentecost.
that think our Evangelist by not being Comprehended, notes our Saviors
being free from sin. The word has no such signification any where.

Let us come to the other meaning of it. by which it signifies to understand or
attain to somewhat, for our knoweledge, or benefit. The light is Christ; the
darkness, in the opinion of most men, the nature Tatian. orat. ontra gentes.
of man corrupted: which (say some) does not so comprehend CHRIST, but that
still in comparison of him, it continues darkness. But the Evangelist speaks
not of comparison: neither was it, or could it be looked for, that men should
become equal in knoweledge to the light, that shone upon them. If they had
acknowledged it, and followed the direction of it to salvation, they had don as
much, as reasonably could be required at their hands. That is more likely,
and yet not the Leontius ad hunc locum.
true meaning of the Text, that the Godhead of our Savior Christ shines in
the creatures, though men in their blindness discern it not. But neither can
the knowledge of the creatures teach us the distinction of the persons, but
only the being, power, and wisdom of the divine nature; and if it could, yet
might we be in darkness, concerning salvation, for all that knowledge. It
remains then, that we take the word in the ordinary signification thereof;
and accordingly understand the Evangelist, as if he had said in plain
terms, that our Savior Christ, by the doctrine of the Gospel, which he
preached, and by the miracles, which he daiely wrought, showed himself to be
the light of the world, and the true means of salvation; but men being blind
in their judgment, and perverse in their affections, would not acknowledge him
for their Savior, that they might come to life by him. And for the meaning of
the word, let that, which has bin said, suffice.

If any man be desirous to know the reason, why the holy Ghost changes his
manner of speech, and whereas in the next words he had said Shines, and not
Shined, he now says Comprehended, and not Comprehends: he must remember,
that in the former clause, as we heard, the general nature of the light is
expressed, and the particular shineing of this supernatural light implied
therein. After this manner; the Evangelist having told us, that our Savior was
the light of men, proceeds to show what he did for the inlighting of them,
and what they refused to do, that they might be enlightened: as if he should
have said; The light naturally shines in darkness, and so did that light I
speak of, but the darkness would not receive it, to be enlightened. We
must farther conceive, that it shines continually, and is ordinarily refused of
blind, and ignorant men: but it seems most likely, that the Evangelist had
special respect to them, that lived in our Sauiors days, while he was
conversant upon the earth amongst men; who notably bewrayed their blindness by
not descerning, and acknowledging so clear a light; whereof if it please GOD
^eereafter in this Chapter more particularly, and largely. Now to the doctrine.

There are 2 things, that discover the blindness and folly of mankind unto us.
The former, that having so great a conceit of our natural parts, and such
especial helps of education, and instruction, we should notwithstanding be
unable to devise, and determine, how we might attain to the chief point of
happiness, that we are capable of: the later, and more shameful of the 2 is
this, that we are so full of darkness, and perverseness, that we neither
will, nor can learn, what belongs to our felicity, when it is kindly, and
plainly taught us. The lesiod. and A^st. Ethic.
heathen were wont to make 2 degrees of wisdom: the one was, for a man to be
able to advise himself, what was best, and fittest for him; the other, if he
could not attain to that height, yet to follow good counsel, when it was
given him. If there were any man, that came short of this later, him they
wholly condemned of extreme folly. And can we think our selves wife, yea
brag of our learning, and knowledge, when we are not able to set one foot
upon this first, and lowest step to wisdom? Do we think much to be charged
so deeply with ignorance? He, that knows us better, then we do our selves,
has long since given this testimony of us; The natural man perceives, or
rather receives not the things 1. Cor. 2. 14.
of the spirit of God. Do thou mark, what he says? He finds not fault
with the slowenesse of thy imagination, that thou can not of thy self, by
natural wit, or learning find out, what is true happiness, and how to
attain unto it. but he shows thy dullness, and blindness, that thou know
it not, when it is laid before thee. I would it were not worse then so. Yes
yes: it is a degree lower. Thou can neither direct thy self in the way of
life, nor if thou be set in it, perceive when thou art right, nor by any rea on
be persuaded to acknowledge it, though a man should show thee, which it is.

Nay (says some man) you shall never make me have so all an opinion of my
self. Perhaps indeed, I should hardly hit on that way, without a guide;
because I have not gone it at any time heretofore: and therefore I grant also,
that it is possible I should not know it, when I were in it; but I would not
have you think me so unreasonable, that I should refuse to learn that, whereof
I am ignorant. Well said: I perceive thou have a good conceit of thy self: and
I will not press thee too far in thine own particular; but rather show thee
thy case in an other man's example. And that I may not seem to disparage thee
in thy wit, and judgment, by any base comparison, let me offer to thy
consideration the whole people of the Jews; not as they are now in the state
of bondage and misery, but as they were in that time, when the light we speak
of shone amongst them. I will not stand to magnify their excellent parts of
nature, and learning: I will say nothing of their Scribes and Pharisees; I will
not mention their Priests, and Levites: what they were for their imagination,
and understanding, the learned know, the unlearned may guess by the report of
them, that have trade and traffic with them daily, even now when their wits
are dulled, and their hearts as it were broken, with the continual sense of
their bondage, and misery Surely there is no great reason, why any man should
think so highly of himself, or so meanly of them, as to presume of his own
skill, where their judgment has failed them. Especially in a matter of this
nature, concerning God, and everlasting life; wherein they were extraodinarily
instructed by him, that only could teach them. Match thy self with them for
sufficiency of natural gifts, equal them in helps of learning: yet certainly
thou must needs come ^ehinde them in that supernatural knowledge, which is
gotten by revelation from God, bevond the reach of art, and nature. Let us then
make one labor of two; and in showing the truth of that, which our Evangelist
says particularly, touching the Jews, that they acknowledged not the light,
prove withal the general ignorance, and insufficiency of all men to
comprehend that secret mystery. First, that we may know what to look for
afterward, the Prophets foretell us, how the matter would fall out. Lord
(says Isay) who has believed our report? or to whom is the Arm of the
Lord revealed? Isay. 53. 1.


And in another place, he brings in our Savior himself, complaying of the ill
success of his ministry. I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength
in vain. and 494.
and for nothing. Yea the builders, the great learned men among the Jews,
refused the headstone of the corner, says Psalm. 118. 22.
another Prophet. As it was prohesied, so it came to pass. Let themselves give
evidence. When the Messiah was come, and had proved his calling by many
admirable, and glorious miracles, and had offered them salvation with all
kindness, and authority, what insued? Hear them speaking in a Council. Does
any of the Rulers or the Pharisees believe in him? Some of the Ioh. 7. 48.
common sort flockt after him, but the great men, and Rabbis regarded him not:
or if any of them had any better conceit of him, then the rest, he durst not
be known of it; but (as it appeared by Nicodemus) was and 3. 1. 2.
glad to steal into his company in the dark night. Nay it was not enoughe for
them to reject him, but they persecuted him, and all that favored him,
accounting and 7. 49. and 9. 34. and 12. 10. 11. and 19. 12.
of them as of men accrsed; casting them out of their Synagogues, seeking to
make them away, and accusing them as enemies to Caesar, as they began to
charge Pilat himself, for speaking in his behalf. Neither stayed their malice
here, but proceeded without end, or rest till they had murdered the Lord of
life, A^^ 3 14. 15.
with all the disgrace, that possibly they could do him. I do now but point at
these things: which, if it please God, shall hereafter be handled at large.
This may suffice; especially the time being past, and occasion of the like
discourse offering it self often times in this Gospel, to show with what
obstinate blindness our Savior was withstood, and rejected by the Jews, and
to teach us, what intertainement we are like to give him, if we be not other
wise taught and inclined by his holy spirit. To whom with the Father, and the
Son, one God be all glory, etc,

THE SIXTH SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 6. 7. 8. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John, etc.
IF there were as much understanding, and judgment in men, to conceive, and
discern matters of religion, and salvation, as every one of us would be
thought to have; it were enough for us to have the doctrine of everlasting
life, by any means whatsoever propounded unto us. For no sooner should any
point thereof be delivered, but we should be ready to acknowledge, and
embrace it. But alas, we are wonderfully deceived in this conceit of our
natural capacity. Which is so slow, and dull, in things of this nature, that
we can neither find them out of our selves, by any discourse of reason, nor
give aslent to the truth of them, when they are revealed, and manifested, by
especial order from God himself. For proof of that I say, whither should I
appeal rather, then to every man's experience, touching the former points, both
in himself, and in the whole nation of the Jews? Which of us would ever have
thought of any one of those mysteries, if he had not read, or heard of them
extraordinarily? Now they are discovered unto us, where is there any man to be
found, that, by any natural skill, or help of learning, can discern, and
yield to them, as ture, and certain? The reasons of this impossibility to
believe, shall be showed, if it please God, hereafter: for the present I do
but give a touch, that we may all consider of it, at better leisure. The
darkness did not Ioh. 1. 5.
comprehend the light, when it shone most brightly. Our Savior taught them
with authority, not like the Scribes and Mat. 7. 29.
Pharisees: Yet did they not regard his doctrine. He wrought many admirable
miracles among them: Yet would they not acknowledge, that he came from God. At
the least they should have respected the testimony of John, a man of such
account, and worth in their own judgment. But all was one with them; and
nothing of force sufficient, to bring them to an acknowledgement of the light.
What remedy then, but to leave them in their blindness, and in theirs to see our
own, that we may be so much the more careful to heed and learn, what the
Evangelist does teach us in this Gospel.

Where having, in the five former verses, described the Messiah, of whom he
writes, by his divine nature, and his office of mediation, he proceeds to
second that, he has delivered, with the testimony of John; and there upon
takes occasion to enlarge some of the points, that before he had propounded,
and to amplify the benifits we receive by our Savior, more fully, and
plainly. In the former part, concerning the witness of John, first we are to
consider the party as he is described to us in the three verses, I read.
Secondly, to weigh his testimony; which is employed, rather then expressed in the
two later: He came to bear witness of the light. The description is partly
of his person, verse 6, and partly of his office, ver. 7. 8. To the knowledge
of his person there belong these two things; his nature, and his name. By
nature he was a man; but yet not after the ordinary course of mankind, but
after an extraordinary sort, by a special work of God, who sent him as well in
reguard of his person, as of his office. Which office of his is first plainly
declared, verse 7, then some what amplified, verse 7. 8. The declaration is
general: He came for a witness. Particular: To bear witness of the light. In
the description of the person; touching his nature, I note two points; that He
was a man; that He was sent from God. In the former, we are to examine the
words, whether the former of the two was, imply any especial matter or no, why
the Evangelist mentions, that He was a man. Then must we say somewhat of the
sense intended by Saint John. For the later point, of his being sent, we will
in quire, who sent him; God; the divine nature, or some one of the persons. How
he was sent: by an extraordinary conception; by an especial appointment,
either by some vision, or by revelation. Touching his name, we are to learn,
what the signification of it is, why the Evangelist does mention it.

Other reasons, whereby we prove any matter in question, have their force, and
power to argue, such as it is, more or less, from their own nature; only a
Testimony fetches all the weight it has, from the credit, or authority of
him, that gives it. So that where as in ordinary proofs we regard what is
said, rather then who says it; in this witness bearing, the man is first
respected, and then the matter. Our Evangelist therefore, being to allege the
deposition of John the Baptist, begins with a description of his person;
There was a man Where, by the manner of the Evangelists Cyril in Ita. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
speech, There was, some think an especial difference betwixt our Savior, and
him, is noted; as if the very (...). Erat. Fuit.
word did note the eternity of the one, and the beginning of the other. We
heard of the like curious observation before, at the first verse, In the
beginning was the word: But it appeared to have more show then substance. The
diversity in that place was to be drawn from the tense, or time of the Verb,
whereas in the original Greek there is no such variety; and in the Latin,
upon which many ground, no certainty for the proof of such a difference,
either in the nature, or use of the two words, as I then showed more at large.
Here there seems to be more advantage; because Saint John uses another
word, and that such a word, as indeed is never applied but (...)
to those things, which have some beginning of their being. Yet may we not
thereupon conclude that wheresoever we find the word, there such a
difference is employed, or noted. For it is very clear, that it may and must
bereferred to that which follows, touching his Chrysostom. in Io^. hom. 5.
being sent; There was a man sent, not There was a man; but, was sent. So have
we the word used in other places; John was baptizing in the Wilderness.
Where Mar. 1 4
we may not sever was, from baptizing: The sense being no more, but (as it is
well translated in English) John did baptize or baptized. And there was a and
9. 7.
Cloud that shaddowed them. There may seem to be more reason in this text,
to part the words; but the Greek will not bear, it, which is word for
word, There was a Cloud shaddowinge them; (...)
that is a Cloud shaddowed them. But let us grant (which is not ture) that
the word signifies a beginning; yet not simply a beginning, but only of that,
which is so spoken of. So that the beginning must belong not to his being
absolutely, but his being sent. So says our Evangelist afterward, The Word
became flesh: not began (...)
to be, as if before it had not been at all, but only became flesh.

I am not afraid therefore of being accused, to have omitted something, which
the holy Ghost intended to teach us, though I say nothing of that difference
betwixt Christ, and John concerning the eternal being of the one, and the
others beginning to be in time. Neither do I see any necessity the of
expounding the word, as some other men take it, to note the extraordinary
conception, and eduction of the Baptist; which either are not touched by our
Evangelist: or if they be, are to be delivered in that point, of his sending.
As for the word was, I hope I have made it plain, that it belongs to his being
sent, and has no especial signification by it self.

The like (in my poor opinion) may truly be said of the other word Man, that
it is indefinitly taken for One, as we commonly speak in English: There was
one sent. Of the likelihood of this interpretation, by and by, it first you
will give me leave, to speak a word or two of that, which is generally
conceived by it. Which is, that by Man, the nature of John is signified. To
what end? partly that the former difference, betwixt Christ, and him, might
be more expressed: partly that no man might take him for an Angel, though he be
so called by Malachy. But neither of these (saving their better judgment, that
are of a contrary opinion) seems to be any sufficient reason of such an
exposition. First the difference they aim at, is as plain, and as great, as
may be. The one was in the beginning, was with God, was Ioh. 1. 1. 2. Ver. 6.
Ver. 4. 5. Ver. 8.
God. The other was sent by God, and no farther matter auoucht of him. The one
had life in him, and was the light of men. The other was not the light, but
came to bear witness of the light Secondly, the auouching of him to be a man,
does not express that difference. For our Savior was also a man, as truly,
and naturally as he. The word became flesh. As by a man came death, so by a
man Ver. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 20.
came the resurrection from the dead; yea he is called the man, whom God
appointed to judge the world by. If Act. 17. 31.
you say Christ is not only a man: neither does the Evangelist a affirm any
such thing of John, by that word; There was a man. Thirdly, who took John, to
be any other, then a man? The Jews indeed (many of them) held him for a
Prophet; but none of them ever denied Ioh. 1. 21.
him to be a man. Therefore also the second respect, in which he is called a
man, is not much to Mat. 21. 26.
be respected. The Prophet Malachy (you say) calls Mal. 3. 1.
him an Angel. Behold I send mine Angel before thy face. What of that? Was it
therefore to be feared, that some men would think him to be an Angel by
nature? Neither does Malachy so say; but rather shows, that he speaks of his
office, because he gives the same title to the Messiah, though with an
additon, The Angel of the Covenant: and who but those, that believed the
Gospel, acknowledged John to be he of whom that was written by the Prophet;
Besides, his parents and kindred were well known, and his birth was
extraordinarily famous; yea the whole course of his life, his preaching, and
his death, were matters commonly talked of among the Jews.

There was little reason then, why the Evangelist should give any especial
notice of his nature, in either of the respects above mentioned. It is more
likely (as I noted before) that he used the word in a general sense^ as we
do, when we say, There was a man, or there was one. That we may the rather be
persuaded hereof, let us con sider the like use of the word, in other places,
of the scripture. Man lives not by bread only. Which we would Mat. 4 4. and
12. 20. Luke 2. 25.
thus express in our tongue. A man, or one lives not. There was a man, which
had his hand dried up. There was a man in Jerusalem. And this manner of speech
is very usual, in the beginning of an history, or parable. There was a man 1.
Sa^. 1. 1. (...) 1 S ^n 9. 1.
of the two Ram ^thaim Zophim. Where, in the Greek, (...) be very word^ that
our Evangelist here uses. So of Saul's father. There was a man of Benjamin. The
new Testament is full of the like examples: some of them we heard before; a
few more will suffice. There Ioh. 5. 5. and 2. 1.
was a m^^ there, says our Evangelist, speaking of the poole at ^ethesda.
There was a man, one of the Pha^ises; A^^ 5. 1. and 10. 1.
A certain man named Ananias: There was a certain man in Caesarea I might
rehearse many more of the same kind; but these are more then enough: and by this
(I think) we have sufficient warrant to conclude, that the holy Ghost, in
this History of John, speaks, as he does ordinarily, in other places of the
like kind; without any intent to signify his nature, of whom he speaks; and
this is the simplest, and Plainest interpretation of these former words.

The later, Sent from God, offer these two things to our consideration; who
sent: what this sending was. What needs any question of the former? may some
man say. Does not the Evangelist speak plain enough, and tell us, that God,
was the sender? He was sent from God. But we learned in the beginning of this
Gospel, that the word God, sometimes signified the divine nature, which is but
one and the same in all three, persons, sometimes some one of them. And we have
here the more reason to make this inquiry, because one of the persons, namely
the second, is he, of whom John was to witness. Not to use more words then
need, we are directed by John himself to understand this of GOD the Father.
This I prove by this our Evangelist, in this present chapter; where he reports
part of the Baprists tesimonie, touching our Savior, in this sort; He that
sent me to baptize with water, he said unto me, upon whom thou Ioh. 1. 33.
shall see the spirit come down, and tarry still on him, that is he, which
baptizeth with the holy Ghost. Who is this, that sent John to baptize? Not the
divine nature. For he is distinguished from the Son, and the holy Ghost; who
can it be then, but the Father? God the father gave John a token whereby he
should know the Son, that was the Messiah; the coming down of the holy
Ghost, and his abiding on him. S. Matthew sets out the point, as distinctly. The
second Person is in the water, newly baptized, the third sits upon him in the
likeness of a Dove, the first proclaims him from heaven. This is that my Son,
Mat. 3. 17.
that beloved one, in whom I am well pleased. As if he should in plain
terms have said to John. This is he, of whom I sent thee to bear witness.
The like distinction, for the Father, and the Son, we have in Saint Luke;
where Zachary the father of John, prophesying Luke 1. 76.
of his son, says, that he shall be called the Prophet of the most high,
namely of God the Father; as it appears by the speech of the Angel Gabriell
to the virgin Mary: He shall be called the Son of the most verse. 32.
high. Then follows John's office, Thou shall go before the face of the Lord;
namely the Lord Jesus, for whom John prepared the way.

But how did God the Father send him? Surely he may well be said to have bin
sent, in regard both of his person, and of his office. His person (as it is well
known, I will but point at the particulars) was after an extraordinary manner
from GOD; as I saac was given to Genesis 18. 10.
Abraham, and Sarah, by him. His father, and mother were both stricken image,
and she also barren; insomuch, Luke 1. 7.
that when she was conceived with child, contrary to her expectation, and
beyond all likelihood; and natural possibility, she, hid her self five
months, till she might be more sure of that, which to Ver. 24. 36.
many would seem impossible, and to take away too much occasion of speech,
from the common sort. For his office, it was assigned him by GOD; and notice
also of that Assig^ment given to his father, before the child was conceived.
He shall go before him (says the Angel) in the spirit and power of Elias.
Neither was he only thus foreappointed for this excel^ent office; but when the
time came, that he should enter upon it, he received a special commission,
and warrant from God, for the execution thereof, The word Luke. 3. 1. 2.
of God came to John the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. It is to no
purpose, to spend time, in seeking how this word came; whether by any inward
motion of the spirit only, or by some outward vision also; we may safely be
ignorant of such matters, has not pleased the holy Ghost to reveal in the
scriptures: yet if we may lawfully guess, it seems most likely, that it was
without any such outward show; because the Evangelist makes no mention of it,
in setting down the History. This last sending only, is thought by some to
be signified in this place. If they had said no more but chiefly, I should
ensily have assented to them: Now they say only, I doubt whether they have any
sufficient warrant, so to restrain the holy Ghosts words, or no; and therefore
think it most convenient, to allow them as large an extent, as they will
reasonably bear.

You look perhaps, that I should now proceed to deliver the Enangelists
meaning, and accordingly to add such proof. and exhortation, as may help us
forward in the embracing of the Gospel. But I think it fittest to forbear
that, for a time, till I have expounded the other part of the verse. that I may
take all together. It follows then to speak of the name, and why the
Euangelst records it. The name as it sounds in our language, has little
resemblance of the original, whence it comes. Which if any man think a
fault, let him take heed that he do not rashly condemn the holy Ghost, who
in the Greek has had small care to express the Hebrew sounds; following
continually the custom, howsoever not answering the original tongue. Shall I
need to bring any particulars for proof of that I say? Look over the new
Testament, and wheresoever you find the name of any Prophet, where the Greek
differs from the Hebrew, you have an example of that, which I affirm. Begin
with Moses if you will, and so go forward to Malachy: You shall find, that
the holy Ghost keeps one, and the same course, in naming of them, without
respect of their significations, or sounds. The reason of this is, that the
parties were well known to the Jews by those names, according as the 72.
Interpreters had translated them, after the manner of the Greek tongue. Other
languages Except perhaps the Flem^sh.
by the same warrant, have justly taken the same liberty, and not doubted (as
they needed not) to fit the He. brew, and Greek names to the fashion of their
several tongues: So that if any man shall either curiously affect, or
superstitiously observe the nature, and sound of those names, which they have
in the original, he shall not follow therein the direction and practice of the
holy Ghost, but his own conceit, and persuasion. Do I then say, it is
unlawful to note the sounds of such names, that their interpretations may be
known? Nothing less. But as the Jews, in the old Testament, have some
thousands of 8000.
words, which they use for expounding the other in the text (whether by their
own direction, or by the direction of the spirit of God, as some think, I will
not dispute) which yet they place in the margin of their books; So perhaps it
were not unfit to set these Hebrew and Greek names in the side, following in
the scripture it self the ordinary course, which the Lord uses, to frame the
words, according to the nature of the tongue, in which he writes. How far then
ought we al to be from condemning one another, either of ignorance, or
carelessness, for not following the sounds of the original languages? But I
will not press this too much, till I have some farther occasion given me, in
the expounding of this Gospel.

Yet, howsoever I see no necessity, nor conuenience for any such strictness in
translating proper names; I deny not, that it is fit, and needful to
understand their significations; especially in such of them, as were purposely
given by direction from God himself, For they have always some instruction,
joined with them, concerning somewhat that is past; as Isack of sarah^ laughing,
Genesis 18. 12. and 17. 19.
or touching some action, or office to be performed, or some favor that he
particularly intends. Of the later kind is this name John, whereby the Lord
would have his people the Jews to know, and consider, that he would now
visit, and redeem them, as Zachary prophesied, at the circumcising of him.
The name signifies as it were grace, and favor, which God vouchsafed the
people, by sending first this second Eliah, to prepare the way of the Lord, and
then the Messiah himfelfe, to perform the work of redemption. This gracious
mercy of God. John was appointed to preach and publish; extraordinarily called
as to that office, so by that name, the end that men might look for some
extraordinary matter of favor by his ministry. This use both the Jews
then, and we now are to make of the name; not as if it had bin appointed upon
any humor, but as intending a help to that preparation, which was to follow.

This was one reason, why it seemed good to the holy Ghost, that our Evangelist
should set down his name; that with the report of his being sent from God, the
nature of his message might, in a general sort, be conceived. Especially, if
we remember withal, as we cannot almost choose but do, that the name was
enioined before his conception. by order from God himself. Does the Evangelist
tell me, that his name was John? Surely though he writ not the history at
large, yet he would have me consider, that his name was of Gods appointing and
therefore of some extraodinarie signification, and use; that we may enter into
such a consideration of him, as they did, that dwelling near to his father,
heard how matters had passed at his birth, concerning this name. They laid up
those things in their hearts (says Saint Luke) saying what Luke 1. 66.
manner of child shall this be? If the like should be done in this our time,
it would fill all men's mouths, and ears, though they found it did little, or
nothing concern them. And shall we pass over, without due regard, a thing,
that does so much import us? Will neither the signification of the word, so
sweet, and comfortable, delight us? nor the manner of imposing the name, so
extraordinary, and wonderful, stir us up to consider it? nor the authority
of him, that appointed it, cause us to advise better of it? Let us take heed,
that this carelesnes be not a shreud sign, that we little esteem the grace it
self, which the name shadoweth out unto us. The last reason why the name is
mentioned, is the nature of the writing: which being an History, requires
that the names. at the least of all principal men in it, should be recorded.
This course our Evangelist here follows, the rather, that all men may
certainly know, whom he means, this description.

What remains, the words being expounded, but to deliver the meaning of the
Evangelist? which can not well be done, till we understand, what his purpose
is, in that he says. Now of that, there are diverse opinions, all reasonable,
and of some likelihood. We may draw them to these heads; the course of the
history, and the amplifying of the matter, that concerns our Savior Christ.
They that refer it to the course of the History, say no more of it, but that
the Evangelist, having spoken of our Saviors divine nature in the former
Chrysostom. in Ioa. hom. 4. August. in Ioa. tract. 2. Theophil. in Ioa.
verses and being to speak of his humane afterward, interlaceth this
discourse of John, who was appointed to be as it were his usher, and did
preach of him, before the manifestation of him to the world. But this seems be
some what too slight an occasion of this discourse; especially seeing the
Evangelist speaks so much of John, after the report of our Saviors
incarnation, (...) 1. 15. 15. etc. and 3. 27. 28. etc.
both in this, and the third Chapter; and that the other three had delivered
those matters at large, that concern the birth and ministry of John. Neither
is that conjecture Masculas ad (...) locum.
more likely, which imagins, that therefore mention is here made of John,
because the Messiah began not to be known, till the time that John baptized.
What word has the Evangelist of John's baptizing? It is clear, that he
passed it over without any touch, till he came almost to the end of the third
Ioh. 3. 23.
Chapter. Yet if he spoke any thing in those verses of our Saviors being
famous, there might be some place perhaps for that couecture: But since he
does not, I see no great likelihood to approve thereof; cheefely, when there
are other opinions, of more probability.

The former whereof, will have this brought in, as a Aegid. Henni^^ ^ bunc
locum.
comparison of the less; where by the excellency of our Saviors person is
set out, in that he is preserred before John Baptist. For, such, and so great
was the opinion, which the Jews had of John that he must needs be a man of
extraordinary worth, to whom John should Luke 1. 66.
be thought inferior. We heard erewhile, that some great matters were looked
for of him, when he was newly borne: What manner of child shall this be? When
Mat. 3. 5. 6.
he began to exercise his ministry, There went out to him Jerusalem, and all
Indea, and all the region round about Jordan. Neither went they out only, but
submitted themselves to be taught, and baptized by him; Ver. 7.
and that not without consossing their sins. What speak I of the common sort?
Many of their great Doctors, Pharisees, Ioh. 1. 19. 20.
and Sadduces, were glad to receive baptism at his hands. Yea the rules of the
jews. sem an embassage to him of no mean men, Priests and Levites, being
Pharisees, as it were being ready and in a manner offering to acknowledge him for
the Messiah. Judge then what reconing he must be of among the Jews, that was
of greater dignity, and excellency, then a man of such estimation, as John
the Baptist. Surely I can not easily discern, what could be written more to
the commendation and honor of CHRIST, after the former points of his divine
nature, and mediatorship, then this comparison, by which he is magnified above
John And there fore we may well allow this exposition a place amongst them,
that are best to be liked. Which Iam the willinger to do, because it agrees
also, with an other, that is of good likelihood. I showed even Rollochus ad
hunc locum.
now, that the Jews generally, rulers and people, had no small opinion of John
Baptist. This perhaps might prejudice our Savior CHRIST, as we see it did,
with the disciples of John; who came to their master, and complained of
CHRIST, that he had took Ioh. 3. 26.
upon him to baptize, and was followed by all men. To take away this doubt, it
is thought by some, that our Evangelist brings in this discourse, wherein he
makes John inferior to Christ; and (as it may seem) not without need, because
(ordinarily) he that comes to Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 4.
bear witness of any man's credit, or authority, is of greater, or as grear
reputation, as himself.

These might be some reasons, why our Evangelist makes mention of John but (me
thinks) it may farther be added, that he does apply this testimony to the
confirmation of that he had formerly delivered, concerning our Saviors being
the light. Therefore says he in particular, that John came to bear witness of
the light, not only to testify that our Savior was the Messaih. Not,
withstanding; I would not have any man think, it is my meaning to restrain the
testimony of John to this particular of the light, where of he makes no
especial mention by any record of this, or the other Evangelists: but this I
say, that therefore this witness of John is alleged, because the Jews having
so high a conceit of John, could not reasonably choose, but be extraordinarily
well persuaded of him, for his power to inlighten the world, whom John their
famous Prophet preferred, in all his Sermons, so far before himself. John
was as the day. sfarre, whose appearance gives notice of the suns approach.
He is a light, that brings the dawning of the day: but he is not that light,
which shines to the inlightning of the world, as the sun does; who is truly,
and properly called the light of the world. I had rather therefore take this
place, as a testimony of Christ by John, then as a comparison betwixt him, and
John. As if our Evangelist, should have said; That which I have avouched of
him, whom we set before you, to be believed in, as the Messiah, is no more,
then was affirmed by no mean man, John the Baptist sent from God to bear
witness of him, that from him only, life, and light was to be received. He
came to bear witness of the light, that all men, through him might believe.
He was not the light, but the forerunner of the light, to show the coming of
it.

Thus then is the Evangelist to be understood, that in this verse, and the two
next, he confirms that, which he from the beginning had affirmed, that our
Savior, of whom he writes this Gospel, was the Messiah, His authority was
sufficient, as being the word of an Apostle: but that all excuse might be
taken away from perverse and unbelieving me^, he adds the testimony of one,
whose memory, when John penned this history, was fresh, and famous; yea of such
account amongst al, that knew him, by their own experience, or report of
others, that he must needs be held to be very uncivil, in the opinion of
ordinary men, and impious in the judgment of as many, as were religious, that
would call the credit of his testimony into question: as if he would have
spoken either rashly of that, he knew not, or deceitfully against his
knowledge; He was sent from GOD. Can you suspect him of falsehood, whom God
imploies in witnessing the truth? Can you require more Authority in any man,
then to have him sent from God? With what other commission did ever any of the
Prophets come? If he send them, we are bound to hear them. If he give them
instructions, they need no farther teaching.

How can this be, says one, that his sending from God should autorize him to
speak, what he list, and enjoyne us to believe whatsoever he speaks? Are not
our ministers now adays sent from God? Are we tied to like obedience? what is
this else, but to make men Lords of our faith; Why have we renounced Popery; if
we have changed not our estate, but our masters only? Were we not better to
rest upon the faith of the church in general, then to subject our selves to
every particular man's authority, by giving credit to every point, he delivers?
This complaint will easily be satisfied, if we rightly inform our selves,
concerning the difference of sending. All true Ministers are sent by, or from
GOD; but not all alike: Some imediately, without the ordinary ministry of
men; MOSES, and all the Prophets, and Apostles: Some by the judgment, and
discretion of men, according to warrant given by GOD, in the Scriptures, to
that purpose. The former have, as their calling, so their direction from GOD,
that sends them, in such sort, that they cannot err, or stray from their
commission. The later, as they get the knowledge of that, they are to teach,
not by revelation of God to them, but by their prayer to God, and study in the
scriptures: So they have no further assurance of being preserved from error,
then as they faithfully endeavor to perfect their knowledge by the same
means, whereby they attained to the beginnings thereof. So it comes often to
pass, by our want of zeal, and faith in prayer, by our negligence in study,
and by our natural dullness to conceive, that we mistake the matters, whereof
we labor to inform our selves, and other. I say nothing of our corrupt
affections, by which we are sometimes drawn away from seeing that, we see,
and driven to speak that, we would have true, not that we know to be true;
of which passions, in regard of the event, men so especially guided by the
spirit of God, as the Prophets, and Apostles were, are wholly freed.

As for our witness John Baptist, what could there be extraordinary, in any
man's sending, that was wanting in his? Do not put me to repeat that, I
delivered before of his birth, bringing up, and calling. Only take, for your
better satisfaction, the prophecies of him, and the performance of them,
witnessed in the scripture. A voice cries in the wilderness (says the Prophet
Esaias) Prepare ye the way of the Lord; make Isai 40. 3.
straight his paths. Malachy speaks somewhat more Mal. 3. 1.
plain. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me. What voice; what messenger was this? Let S. Matthew show us? This is he
(viz. John Mat. 3. 3.
Baptist) of whom it is spoken by the Prophet Isaias, saying, The voice of him,
that cries in the wilderness, etc. The like has S. Mark, who begins his
Gospel with the testimony Mark 1. 2.
of Malachy, the last of the Prophets, and applies it to John. Behold I send my
messenger, etc. S. Luke also Luke 3. 4.
bears witness to the same truth: and that the joint consent of all the 4. may
be seen; our Evangelist S. John reports the same thing, from the mouth of
John Baptist himself; who being asked, by the Priests and Levites sent from
the Jews, what he said of himself, answered I am Ioh. 1. 23.
the voice of him, that cries in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the
Lord. If there be any man, whom this colud of witnesses cannot persuade,
though he deserve not any farther instruction; yet let him hearken to our
Savior; affirming that this John was that Elias, of whom Malachy prophesied,
saying, Behold Mal. 4. 5.
I will send you Elias the Prophet, before the coming of the great, and
fearful day of the Lord. If ye will receive Mat. 11. 14.
it (says Christ) This is Elias which was to come. So had the Angel Gabriell
prophesied of him before, to his father Zachary. He shall go before him
(Christ) in the spirit, and power of Elias. There can possibly be no doubt
then, but that he, which was in such extraordinary sort, sent from GOD, both
could, and would testify, according to the truth, he had received by
revelation from him, who employed him in so worthy a service.

Is it not strange then, yea almost more then incredible, that the Jews, for
whose sake principally, if not only a messenger of such credit, and authority,
was sent, should so distaste the chief point, and the very substance of his
Message? I intend not to make any long discourse of the matter, because I shall
have more just occasion thereof at the 11. verse: Yet I can not paste it over
wholly in silence. At his circumcision, all that heard Luke 1. 60. Ver. 63.
Ver. 64.
what had happened; that his mother against the liking of her kindred, and
friends, would needs have him named John, that his father took writing tables,
and set down the same name, that thereupon he was restored to the use of his
speech, having bin dumb at the least 9. or 10. months; all I say that heard
these things were stricken with fear, and wonder, saving one to another; What
manner of Child shall this be? Now the time was come, that they might cast off
that fear, and satisfy themselves, concerning that their wondering. He was
grown to man's estate, he betook himself to the work of his calling; he
persuaded, and exhorted all men to repent; he showed them the Messiah; he spoke
plainly of him, as no prophet ever could, that no man could doubt, whom he
meant. Behold the Lamb of God. Ioh. 1. 29.
What could they desire more? If the authority of the speaker might prevail
with them; All men held John Mat. 21. 26.
for a Prophet. If the warrant of his Doctrine were looked for; the people were
generally of opinion, that he had it from heaven: So that the Pharisees and
Scribes, durst not say the contrary, for fear of the multitude. What then? Did
he speak obscurely, and darkely, after the manner of prophecies? He pointed
to the person with his finger. This is he, of whom I said, After me comes
a man which is preferred before Ioh 1, 30.
me. He declared his office in plain words. Behold the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of Ver. 29.
the world. I may well take up the complaint of the Prophet I say against this
people in the like case: What Isai. 5. 4.
could the Lord have done more for them, then he did? John Baptist came neither
eating nor drinking, but leading so austere a life, that the very Heathen were
moved with reverence toward him. Herod feared John, knowing Mark 6. 20.
that he was a just man, and an holy, and reverenced him; and when he heard
him, did many things, and heard him gladly: But it was a small matter for the
Jews to make little account of Herod's judgment, concerning the Baptist; it
was much they should not believe a man, whom they thought to be sent from God.

Especially considering the end of his sending, which Verse 7.
we have set down in these two next verses; The same came for a witness, to
bear witness of the light, etc. In the former whereof we are first to speak
of his office, both in the general, that he came for a witness, and in the
particular, that he was to bear witness of the light. Secondly, we must
consider the amplification of this his office, by the end; That all men through
him might believe: and in the next verse, by a denial of the contrary
thereto, he was not the light; and a repetition of the office, but was sent to
bear witness of the light. In the first part, there is no need of any long
exposition of the words, they are so plain: only somewhat must be said of the
last of them, a witness. The Greek word does not signify a party that is to
be witness, but rather the testimony it self, (...)
which he must give. Therefore our Rhemists take advantage to make the text as
hard, and unpleasant, as they can. He came for testimony, say they. For
testimony? What English should a man pick out of such a strange kind of
speech? Surely if any thing can reasonably be made of it, we must understand
Testimony for testimonial; as if the Evangelist had meant to tell us, that
John's coming was for testimonial. But he had no such thought. For he came
not to have any testimony of this, or that from other men, but to give
testimony himself to other. So that neither the word testimony may be put
for testimonial; nor if it might, could it serve to express Saint John's
meaning. Which is nothing else, but that the Baptist came to bear, or give
witness. The phrase is somewhat diverse in the two clauses: but the sense is
absolutely one, and the same. May we then so expound our Popish translation of
the Rhemists? This man (say they) came for testimony; that is, to give
testimony. Indeed, that is the thing that our Evangelist would have us know:
but the English will not bear it; For testimony, For to give testimony: But
such strange, and new language, may suite with their strange, and new Religion:
English ears mislike the manner of their speech, as Christian hearts do the
points of their doctrine. We commonly translate the words, for a witness; fitly
in regard of the sense, and easily for all men's (...) In testimonium.
understanding: This same came for a witness; that is, This man, who I said was
sent from God, came to be a witness. The Evangelists manner of speech is not
fully delivered: who according to the custom of the tongue he writ in, says,
word for word, he came to testimony, namely to give testimony; which the
Latin also follows, though that language do scarce bear it so well, as the
Greek does. To draw into English such kind of phrases is not to enrich the
tongue, but to corrupt it. We have no way to express the Evangelists speech
and meaning in English, but to say, To give or bear testimony, or witness.

This was then the office of John Baptist, To be a witness. Now the use of
witnesses is, for the confirmation of some truth, or for manifestation of it.
For where there is no doubt, nor question; howsoever perhaps in form of Law,
there may be witnesses required: yet indeed there needs none. Where there is
need of them, there the matter is not plain in it self, or at the least not
acknowledged to be true. So that the point, for which John's testimony is to
be had, has of its own nature, or by the ignorance, or peruerseness of men,
something not clear, or not confessed. What if it have? Could not God have made
it manifest, by some testimony, from himself, without such an extraordinary
course ossending a witness, as it were down from heaven? Yes out of doubt. He,
that made the understanding of man, can make man understand what pleases him.
He, that framed the heart, can persuade, and incline it, to what himself list.
But all such courses of revelation from God, were as extraordinary as such a
kind of birth and message; and both the one and the other little enough in this
case: as the event showed. For although the Lord testified of his son, by his
own voice from heaven, and by John upon earth, yet was he scarcely
acknowledged by any man. As for the work of Gods mighty power in the souls of
them, that come to belief in Christ, it was not wanting to any of these Jews,
who advisedly and religiously gave credit to the testimony of John the
Baptist, or set themselves to consider of it, as they ought to have done; which
if they had done, it was not possible, but they should have seen, both the
love of God in sending them such worthy means of instruction, and the truth of
that, which John delivered by commission from him. Do thou wonder at the
blindness, and frowardnes of the Jews, whom the testimony of a man (in their
own judgment) not to be excepted against, could not move to believe? View
thy self in this glass. and consider whether more witnesses, acknowledged by
thee to be sent from God, and to speak according to the truth of God, be not
of as small credit with thee, in many points, wherein thy obedience is required.

But of this, more anon, when we have a little better examined, of what
kind, this testimony of John was. That he might bear witness of the light.
The words have been all expounded already: in the matter there are these two
things to be considered; what manner of testimony it was, that John gave;
what it was that he testified. A testimony, as all men know, is ordinarily
given by word of mouth: wherein some matter in question is either affirmed, or
denied; and they, that give these testimonies, are called witnesses. Amongst
Christians there is another kind of witnesses, termed Martyrs by the Greek
name: which is common to all, that testify any thing, especially in matters of
Law, and judgment. The same word is here used, to signify the witness, that
John bare. Those, whom we call Martyrs, are such, as, by their death, bear
witness to some truth of God, revealed in his word; suffering themselves to
be tormented, and murdered, rather then they will deny, or not confess a
known truth of God, when they are lawfully demanded of it. Such was Stephen,
and so is he called by Paul; When the blood of thy Act 22. 20,
Martyr Stephen was shed. The same title is given Revel. 2. 13.
to Antipas, whom our Savior calls his Martyr, when Antipas my faithful
Martyr was stain among you. For this cause Christ himself is named a Martyr:
from Jesus Christ which is a faithful Martyr or witness; and the first
begotten of the dead. As for John, who knows not that he was put to death by
Herod, for doing his duty, in witnessing a truth of GOD? Yet he is not
thought to be any of the Martyrs, that give witness by their death; because
it is commonly held, that the dying for no truth makes a Martyr, unless the
truth concern somewhat belonging to the profession of the Gospel: so that
neither Isay, nor any of the Prophets, are properly to be termed Martyrs. I
will not strive about the point: especially, since I do but touch this by the
way; only for John, I think he is not properly to be reckoned in the number
of the Martyrs: not so much, because the matter, for which he reproved Herod,
did not appertain, in any particular sort, to the Gospel as for that he was
not executed professedly for that, he had said, and did constantly mainetaine;
but for satisfying of the Kings promise, and Horodias malice: but whether that
bearing witness could make him a Martyr, or no, questionless it was not that,
which our Evangelist here speaks of; for it was not any testimony of the
Light.

How then did John bear witness? By preaching of Christ; and auowing, that
he was the Messiah ordained; and sent for the salvation of them, that would
believe in him. This (may some man say) was common to him, with the Prophets
(at the least, with many of them) and with all the Apostles, that succeeded
him, who also therefore are called in the scripture by the name of witnesses.

Let us make that we say, apparent to all men. First, for them all in
general, Zachary the Father of John Baptist, speaking of our Savior, and
redemption by him, says that God spoke of him, and his coming to that
purpose: By the mouth of his holy Prophets, Luke 1. 70.
which were since the world began. And the Apostle tells us, that God had
promised the sending of his Son, before by his Prophets, in the holy
Scriptures. Romans 1. 2.
In particular. I will make choice of two only; Isay, and Daniell. Of which
the former is ordinarily called the Evangelical Prophet, as if he had written
the Gospel in his Prophecy. And that not without cause. For he has spoken
very plainly of the birth, life, and death of our Savior. Concerning his
birth, he notes that, which was most strange in it; and which, but by
revelation from God, could not possibly be known, or thought on, Behold
(says he) a Virgin shall Isay 7. 14.
bear a Son.

Neither does he only prophecy of his miraculous conception; but also he
signifies the great mystery of his person, consisting of two natures, divine,
and humane: She shall call his name Emanuell. Which is Mat 1. 23.
by interpretation (says Saint Mathewe) God with us. His life and death is
shortly, but very lively described, by the same Prophet. He shall grow up
before him, as I^ay. 53. 2.
a branch, and as a root out of a dry ground, etc. He was cut out of the
Land of the living. Yea, he adds Ver. 8.
to this the maine point of Redemption, forgiveness of sins by his
sufferings, and death. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken
for our iniquities, the chast^sement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. Daniell describes the very time, Dan. 9. 25.
and settes down an exact computation, by the direction of the Angel
Gabriell, till the death of the Messiah; and withal preaches forgiveness of
sins by him. Were not these, witnesses? were they not sent from GOD to bear
witness of the Messiah? What though they were also employed in other matters
of renroofe, and instruction? So was John too, as it is manifest by all the
other 3. Evangelists Mat. 14 3. 4. Mat. 6. 17. 18. Luke 3. 19.
who show that the occasion of his death, was the rebuking of Heroa, for taking
his brother Philips wife. But the Prophets only spoke of such an one, that was
to come: they did not witness, that he was come; they did not show which was
he; they did nor say Behold the lamb of God: This is he, as John did.
Therefore is his ministry, in this respect preferred far before theirs, by our
Savior Christ's own judgment. John was more then a Mat. 11. 9. 11.
Prophet: Among them that are begotten of women arose there not a greater then
John Baptist.

Well let him have the name of a witness, above all the Prophets, that went
before him; yet the Apostles, have that title given them by Christ himself,
as well as he; ye shall be witnesses to me (says our Savior) in Jerusalem,
Act. 1. 8.
and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and (wherein their commission went beyond
John's) unto the uttermost part of the earth. And John himself, though he were
magnified above the former Prophets, in regard of his ministry: Yet is he
(even therein) made inferior to the Apostles. Mat. 11. 11.
He that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater then he. It is not to
be denied, but that the Apostles were witnesses, in a very extraordinary sort;
being chosen before, to give notice of such things, as should befall our
Savior, to all the world. Therefore to them did he appear after his
resurrection. Him (says Peter) God caused to be Act. 10. 40. 41.
shown openly Not to all the people, but to witnesses, chosen before of God;
to us which did eat, and drink with him, after he was risen from the dead.
Notwithstanding, the witness of John was of an other kind, then either the
Prophets, or Apostles. For the one foretold, that he should come into the
world; the other affirmed, that he had bin in the world; Only John was he,
that showed him, while he was in the world, and who was long before prophesied
of for an immediate forerunner of him, at his coming, Luke 1. 17.
and to make ready a people for him. We see of what kind his testimony was;
John came, and preached in the Wilderness of Iudaea: let us now inquire what
it was, that he witnessed. Whereof I shall need to say very little, because
I spoke of it in handling the former point. In one word, the sum of his
testimony was this, first, that the kingdom of Mat. 3. 2,
heaven was at hand; that is, as Saint Luke expresses the matter, He
preachedthe baptism of repentance, for the remission Luke 3. 3
of sins. He testified to all the Jews, and to all that heard him, that
there was no means, nor hope of salvation, but by repentance of their sins,
and resting upon the Messiah, (who was now amongst them, though they knew him
not) for pardon thereof, by his death, and sacrifice. The second, and most
proper part of his testimony, was the pointing out, and showing of him, that
was the Messiah; that all men might know, and embrace him. Behold the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sin of the world. This was the testimony of John.
But that, which principally concerns the reason, why our Evangelist mentions
his bearing witness, is to be fetched out of the third Chapter of this
Gospel; where a Sermon of his is recorded: in which he commends our Savior to
all me^, as him, who being sent from God to be the Messiah, speaks Ioh. 3. 34.
the words of God; so that by him all other are enlightened; who are of the
earth, and speak of the earth; whe^eas Ver. 31. 32.
he testifies nothing but that, which he had seen, and heard. Truly,
therefore he is called the light, who being in the bosom of his father,
reueales to men the secrets of his rather, touching their redemption, which no
man ever knew, or can know, but from, and by him.

What use then was there of any witness? If neither John had any knowledge,
but from him, and he only was able to inlighten whom he would, why did God,
end the Bapti^ to bear witness of the light? Needs ^^e Sun the day star,
to show him to the world? This was a means likelier to make John be for Ioh.
1. 19. 20.
the Messiah, then to credit the Messiah by his report^ as we see also it
came to pass; whereof hereafter. But that no man may either conceive amiss,
or be euer-much troubled with this doubt, let us take a short view of the
purpose of GOD herein. The end of all teaching, and preaching concerning
Christ, is to bring men to belief in him. This was first to be done amongst
the Jews. For the better performing whereof, it pleased God to deal
graciously and bountifully with them, in affording many, and diverse means, by
which they might be moved, and persuaded to believe. Among the rest this was
one, whereof the Lord thought good to make choice even to send them a man,
after so extraordinary a manner, who being in especial credit, and favor
with them; by his authority, and gratiousnesse, might draw them to belief.
Could there any more likely means be devised to persuade them? He was look^
after, as one that would prove some rare man, from his very Cradle. His course
of lise was such, as might yet procure more admiration. When he came to the
execution of his ministry, how powerfully did he work upon the hearts of
them, that heard him? what a fame went there of him far and near? what
heaps of all sorts of people slocked to him? The covetous Luke 3. 12. 14.
Publicans, were content to hear him reprove their greediness, and extor
ion. The desperate soldiers trained up in violence, and insolency, submitted
themselves to his instruction, and baptism. What should I speak of the proud
Pharisees, who had bewitched all Mat. 3 7.
men with an opinion of their purity, and holiness, and none more then
themselves? yet were they glad to come to John to be washed, and purified by
his Baptism. The Sadduces, were little better the^ professed Atheists, Act.
23. 8.
saving, There is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor spirit. What need these
men care for sin, or damnation? And yet the ministry, life, and doctrine of
John the Baptist was such, that even these Miscreants were drawn to seek to
him. I say nothing of Herod, because I signified before, that he reverenced
John, and heard him gladly, and followed his doctrine in many things. Tell me
Mark. 6. 20.
now, what you could desire more, I had almost said, what you can imagine
more in any man, to make him of credit, and authority, that he may be
believed, in that, he constantly affirms, If the Lord should have made a man
in Heaven, as he did Adam here on earth, and have sent him into the world, in
the sight of all men, he could not have been of more estimation, then John
Baptist was. And was not this a marvelous likely means, to begette faith in
the Jews, that such a man, so extraordinarily sent, so admirable in his
bringing up, so unblameable in his life, so sound in his doctrine, and (which
is all in all to this purpose) of such reputation for his sincerity, and
preciseness, so plainly, and constantly protested, that Jesus was the Savior
of the world, and himself no better then his unworthy servant? ^oh. 1. 27.
I am not worthy (said John) to unloose his shoe latchet. Let us therefore
acknowledge the goodness of God, who voutchsafed to use such means for the
teaching, and persuading of so unkind, and unthankful a people.

But the necessity of sending John, and the kindness of the LORD in sending
him, will the more appear, if we advisedly consider both the ignorance of
the Jews, and the meandness of our Saviors estate, while he was in the
World. It is true, that the LORD had (from time to time) given notice, and
made many promises of the coming of the Messiah. It is as true, that the
set time of his coming was foretoulde, and cast up by Daniell, insomuch
that old Symeon, and Luke 2 25. 26.
(in all likelihood) some others understood, that the time of his appearance
was come; and with the good Widow Anna, looked for it, every moment But
alas, Ver. 36. 37
how few of these were to be found? The people generally (as it is now amongst
us) had little knowledge of the Scriptures. They heard them read, and many
times expounded, in their Synagogues, as we ^ow do in our Churehes: but they
were as far from the true understanding of them, as we commonly now ^^e
Daniels weeks were as great mysteries to them, ^^ the Revelation of Saint John
is to us; so that they ^ere^n table to compare his prophecy with the E^ents,
that had fallen out, and to subduct the time, that was past, that they might
see what the rest was. And this I speak of the better sort of the common
people. The worst, and greatest part had seldom a^y thought of these matters;
no more then we now ordinarily) have of the last day of Judgment. Be^ides,
the most part of them that desired his coming, ^ookt for another manner of
deliverance by him, then our Saviors estate in the World was likely to afford.

And this conceit had taken such root in their hearts, that our Savior
Christ's own Disciples held it fast in them, even till the very time of his
Ascension; Act. 1. 6.
Lord (say they) will thou at this time, restore the kingdom to Israel? It
was an outward freedom, and glorious estate, in this life, which the Jews
promised themselves, by the coming of the Messiah. What was there in our
Saviors parentage, bringing up, or course of life, that could feed this hope?
His supposed Father Mat. 13. 55.
a poor Carpenter, under whom he was employed ^^mselfe in the same trade,
and therefore is called a Carpenter. Is not this the Carpenter, Mary's son?
And Mat. 6. 3.
what was his life? he wandered from place to place no^ie^, ^ng arm^es, not
mustring soldiers, not persuading any man to take up arms, but disclaiming
all worldly authority. Who made me a Judge, or a diuider, over you? inioyning
obedience to Princes, and rulers; Give unto Luke 12. 14. Man. 22. 21. and 20.
28.
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. Yea professing, that he came to serve,
and not to be served. This being at the time of our Saviors coming, the
estate of the jews, they either careless of ^is assistance, or ignorant of
the nature thereof, his own condition also being so mean, and contemptible,
was it not graciously done of God, and in respect of the people, necessarily,
to send one of such credit, and authority, to assure them, that Christ was the
Messiah in whom they ought to trust; and to teach them, what deliverance they
were to look for by him? Christ needed no testimony of any man. But the Jews
stood in great need of John, to inform them concerning him. It were not lost
labor to bestow some time in the consideration of the goodness of God, in
yielding so much to the Jews weakness, or r^ther in striving with such
patience, and bounty, against their obstinat wilfulness. I might also take
occasion to stir up our selves to trust in God; of whose kindness, we have
so plain, and so great experience But I am willing to forbear both these
points, till I come to some other place, where they are more directly intended,
by the purpose of the Evangelist.

In the mean while, let us go forward with the expounding of this Scripture;
wherein (as we have heard) the office of John is amplified* in this verse, by
the end of it, That all men through, or by him, might believe. Whereof that I
may speak the more plainly, and certainly, I will first examine what this
end is; To believe by him: Secondly I will consider the quality of it, or who
they were that should believe. The former has these two doubts, what is here
meant by believing: to whom this Him must be reffer'd whether to John the
witness, or to the light, of which he bears witness, might believe through him.
Now, because Believing is a word of so common and great use in the Scriptures,
and that this is the first place, where it is mentioned in this Gospel; I hold
it not only requisite, but necessary for me, to speak of it somewhat more at
large. To believe, in matter of religion, is commonly taken to signify 3
things: The acknowledging of Gods being; Credere Deum, To believe that God is,
or that there is a God: Credere Deo, To give credit to that, which God says:
Credere in Deum, To believe in God. And of all these significations, we have
variety of examples in the Scripture. Give me leave, I pray you, for our better
understanding, and memory, to draw them to 2 principal heads, according to
the diverse seat, or place, they have in the soul of man. To believe then, is
to hold something for truth, or to trust to something. The former is an action
of the understanding; the later of the will. In the one truth only is
respected; the other has an eye to some good, or benefit.

Believing, as it has place in the understanding, signifies either an holding
of some point as a truth, by the original light of nature in us, or an
assenting to some such thing revealed by some outward means, and taken upon the
credit of the teacher. Of the 1. kind is the persuasion, that all men naturally
have, that there is one God; that he is the Creator of heaven, and earth; that
he is almighty, wise, just, good etc. These things, men are truly, and
properly, said to believe, because they are not taught them, but bred in them;
they receive them not of other, but have them of themselves; they come not to
the acknowledging of them, by any discourse of reason, but see them by a light,
that shines within the^. But this sense of the word, I confess, is hardly to
be found in the book of God: which refers us, for the natural knowledge of
God to the consideration of his workmanship in the creatures. ^om. 1. 20.
The invisible things of God (says the Apostle) that is, his eternal power,
and Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the world: Yea so manifestly seen,
that, as the same Apostle testifies other where, we may in a manner feel the
Lord by groping; seeing in him we live, and move, and have our being. Act. 17.
27 28. Iamblich. de mysteri^s cap. 1
Yea the Philosophers themselves acknowledge, that there is in man a certain
notion, or persuasion of God, which goes before all discourse of reason: and
we ordinarily say of the most barbarous, and ignorant heathen, who have small
use of reason, that they all believe there is a God; yea even those people,
which never thought on the making of the world, yet have an opinion, that there
is a God to be worshipped; and the grand Atheist Epicurus, that would by no means
confess, that the world Veleius apud Cicero. de ^at. deor. lib. 1. Lucret de
not. rerum. lib. 1.
had any Creator of it, doubted not to profess, that he believed, there was a
God; because Nature has ingraffed that persuasion in every man's heart. But it
is all one to the point, I have in hand, whether there be any such opinion in
us, or no; as long as it is granted that we may and do attain to this belief,
without any resting upon other men's report, and credit, it suffices to prove
the first kind of believing, seated in the understanding. The 2. is an
assenting to that, which is affirmed, merely upon the credit of him, that
speaks it. For if he be able to make proof of that he says, by any reason,
and do so; and thereby persuade us of the truth of that, he has avouched, he
does beget knowledge in us, rather then belief which is always grounded upon
the authority and reputation of him, for whose words-sake we believe. This use
of the word is very common in the old, and new Testament; where (for the most
part) the other signification of trusting to is employed. Will you see this in
some sewe examples? Abraham Genesis 15. 6
believed God: that is, Abraham was persuaded, that God would be as good as
his word, and (accordingly) he trusted to him, or believed in him for the
performance thereof. That thus much is to be conceived by that belief of
Abraham's, is is evident by the Apostles disputation of it. Who having alleag'd
that testimony of Moses, to prove justification by faith or believing in
Christ, in the applying of it expoundes believing God by believing in him. To
him, that works Romans 45.
not, but believes in him, that iustisieth the ungodly, his faith is counted
for righteousness: where he delivers, that in general, which before he had said
in particular. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness. Verse. 3.
There is the particular touching Abraham. To which, the general, concerning
all other men to beiustified, must needs agree, if the Apostles reason, be of
any force. Abraham believed God; To him that believes in him that iustifies
the ungodly; that is God; It (his believing) was counted to him for
righteousness. His faith (his believing) is counted for righteousness. Do you not
see, that to believe God, in this example, includs believing in God, that is
trusting to God, or resting upon God for that, which Isai. 28. 16.
God is to perform? Therefore the Prophet I say directly protests; that he,
which believes, shall not make haste. So that no man is accounted to believe
God, but he that relyeth upon him, for the fulfilling of that, which he has
spoken; or, at the least, that believing of God only is accepted of him: which
procures a trusting in him for that, which we believe he has truly affirmed.
The new Testament is plentiful in such examples; I will give you a taste of
them, and leave the rest to your farther meditation, and to some other occasion,
that shall offer it self Romans 10. 10.
^ereafter in this Gospel. With the heart (says S. Paul) man believes to
righteousness. What believing is this? the Apostle himself teaches us in
the next verse, where he proves that, he had said, by the testimony of the
Prophet; whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed. Verse. 11. Ioh. 8.
30. Verse 31.
The same is con^^m'd by our Evangelist. As he sp^ke these things many believed
in him. Then said Jesus to the Jews which believed him. Can any man doubt, but
the holy Verse. 31.
Ghost, in the later verse, means the same belief, he had mentioned in the
former? But what should I seek any farther then this Chapter? That which here
is called believing, afterward is expressed by believing in. Here he says That
al men through him might believe. What says Ioh. 1. 7. Verse, 12.
he in the 12 verse? To them, that believe in his name. It may seem perhaps,
that I have stood ouer-long upon this point: but the necessity of the matter, I
doubt not, will excuseme in any reasonable man's judgment; especially if he
consider, that I have almost dispatched the whole question, in that former
discourse, having showed (though but by the way) diverse examples of Believing
in, or trusting to; that I may be the shorter in that, which remains to be
handled, concerning belief, as it is an action of the will, resting, or
relying upon somewhat, for some benefit to be received. In this signification,
when the matter is of believing God to justification, and salvation, sometimes
the word is used by it self; sometimes it has an other word, which we call a
preposition joined with it. Of the former sort, these may be examples. Ioh. 5.
24.
He that hears my word, and believes him, that sent me, has everlasting
life. What is this believing, but that which we heard of even now, out of the
Apostle? He that believes in him that justifies the wicked: and that, Romans
45.
which we are to hear of, if it please God, in the course of this Gospel, ye
believe in God. The like is to be said Ioh. 14. 1.
of that in the Acts, of the Iaylor; He reioiced, that he, with all his
household, believed God. Would you know what Act. 15. 34.
belief this was? We may learn that, out of the Apostles former instruction,
and exhortation. Believe in the Verse 31.
Lord Jesus Christ. There is yet a plainer testimony then this, if any thing
can be plainer, in the same book; where S. Luke writing the history of Crispus,
and his conversion to the faith, speaks thus. And Crispus the chief ruer
Chap. 18. 8.
of the Synagogue, believed the Lord. The Lord, that is our Savior Christ had
not spoken to him; but the Apostle Paul had taught him the doctrine of the
Gospel, that he was to believe in Jesus Christ for salvation. To this he
obayed, and therefore is said to believe the Lord, that is, to believe in him.

When the prepositions are added, the signification of the word is more fully
expressed. The most common, and usual (whereof we have very many examples in
this Gospel) is In. His Disciples believed in him. Trusted (...) Ioh. 2. 11.
Chap. 3. 16.
to him, as to the Messiah. That whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have life everlasting. Whosoever rests upon him for salvation. Almost
every Chapter affords us the like examples; so do the other books, of the new
Testament, especially the Epistle to the Romans; that I may spare time and
labor, and hasten to the other preposition; which though it be used more
seldom, yet is most significant. It is as much in english as upon, or on; It
was known throughout all Ioppa, and many (...) Act. 9. 42.
believed upon, or on him. That is, many rested upon him for Salvation. What
must I do to be saved? says Chap. 16. 30. Verse. 31.
the Iaylour. Paul and Silas answered him; Believe on, or upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. But no one place does so plainly, and fully
express the nature of this phrase, as that to the Romans. Behold Rom 9. 33.
I lay in Syon a stumbling stone, and a rock of offense; and every one that
believes on it, shall not be ashamed. Here our Savior is compared to a
Rock, at which many do stumble, not acknowledging him to be the Messiah, but
seeking other means to save themselves by. This Simeon foretold of our
Savior, that he should be an occasion of falling, to many in Israel. But
Luke 2. 34.
they, that shall settle themselves upon that rock, and renounce all other
causes, and means, of attaining to everlasting life, shall never be ashamed of
that their trust in him, but shall come to the end of their hope, even the
eternal salvation of their souls by him. So that, if any man be desirous, or
willing to understand, what it is to believe in Christ, this one place may give
him full satisfaction; out of which (as it has been showed) he may learn,
that it is nothing else, but to cast himself upon Christ to be justified, and
saved by him.

Thevse of the word being (as has been said) so diverse; in what sense shall
we take it, in this text? That we shall know, by understanding, what it was,
that John labored to persuade men to, by his preaching. For we have learned,
that his witness beareing, was Teaching: and we see here, that the end of
his teaching was, Belief, that all men might believe. What was this believing?
Only an aslenting to the truth of that, which they heard John deliver? If that
had been all, surely he would never have taken so much pains, and spent so
much time, in exhorting all men, to consider their own estate, and in
convincing them of sin, that they might find, in what need they stood of
deliverance by the Messiah. But that I may make as short, as I can, we may
fetch the answer to this doubt from the Apostle Paul: who thus describes the
office, and doctrine of John the Baptist. John verily baptized Act. 19. 4.
with the baptism of repentance (says the Apostle) saying unto the people,
that they should believe in him which should come after him, that is, in Christ
Jesus. So then, whereas our Evangelist tells us, that the end of John's coming
was, that all men should believe, he gives us to understand, that he taught
men the mystery of redemption by Christ (though not so distinctly as it was
afterward delivered) with a purpose, and desire, that they should take our
Savior CHRIST for the Messiah, and rest upon him, that their sins might be
taken away. Behold (says he) the lamb of God that takes away the sin of
the world. It is true, that believing properly signifies no more, but giving
credit, or assenting to the truth; but seeing we find the end of John's
preaching to reach farther then so, we must needs hold that the other degrees
of believing are implied in this one and first step to faith, by which we are
justified. The like we are to conceive of the word, wheresoever in the new
Testament we find that ascribed to believing, which cannot be attained to,
but by faith in Christ. I will endeavor to make this plain by an example or
two. He Mark. 16. 16.
that believes, and is baptized, shallbe saved. What is meant here, by
believing? Nothing, but assenting to that, which the Apostles taught, in regard
of the truth thereof? But that cannot bring salvation to any man; which is not
to be obtained, without resting upon Christ for justification. Therefore to
believe, in that text of Mark, is as much as, to believe in Christ, or to rely
upon Christ for salvation. Do thou believe in the Son of God? says Ioh. 9.
35.
our Savior to the man, whom he had before restored to his sight. He
answered and said, Who is he Lord, that I may believe in him? And Jesus said,
Both thou have seen him and he it is that talks with thee. Then he said Lord
I believe. What did he believe? That Christ was the Son of God. Was that all?
Our Savior asked him, if he did believe in the Son of God. Had it been
sufficient for him to profess, that he believed him to be the Son of God? No
sure. But it behooved him for the answering of the question, to affirm that he
believed in him. It is needless to heap up any more examples; These few may
serve to teach us, that believing is sometimes put, for believing in Christ. If
it please you to take a view of other places of the same kind, I doubt not, but
you will be confirmed in the truth of this observation.

The end then of John's bearing witness was, that all men through him might
believe in Jesus Christ to salvation. There is yet an other doubt, who it is,
that the Evangelist means by Him, through him. Through whom? For the word in
the Greek may agree either to John the witness, or to the light, whereof he
bears witness: though in our English there is a plain difference; because if
we would have it understood of John, we must translate the word, as we do,
Him: but if we refer it to the light, we must say It, that all men by it
might believe. Let us see now to whether of the 2 the word must belong. By
light (as it is apparent) our Savior Christ is signified: so that if we
understand it of the light, the meaning is, that all men should believe by
Christ. But this is a strange kind of speech, without al warrant of example
from the Scripture, concerning him. To believe Christ, To believe in or on
Christ, are usual, and ordinary: but to believe by Christ, is a phrase with
which the Scripture is not acquainted. And whereas some men would defend the
applying of this to the light, by expounding it, that men through Christ, might
believe in God; they affirm that of Chr. which the Scripture never speaks of
him. Where is it said of him, that he taught men to believe in God? Once in
this Gospel, he mentions believing in God; but as a thing, to which they
needed no instruction of his; because they did already perform that duty. Ye
believe in God (says he) Believe also in me: I deny not, that Ioh. 14. 1.
the Jews needed to be taught by our Savior, how they ought to believe in
God; but I cannot see why we should imagine, that the Evangelist would, in this
place, speak of such a point, as he no where touches, in any other part of
his Gospel. It is best therefore to translate, as we read it; and to
understand it, not of Christ, but of John: who was sent to bear witness of
the light, to assure the Jews, that Jesus was he, by whom they were to receive
life, and light; that they being thus instructed, and persuaded by him, might
believe in Christ, to the obtaining of everlasting life: and this was the end
of John's ministry.

For the farther comme^dation whereof, some allege the generality of it, that it
belongd to all, Jews, and Gentiles, one, and other, without exception, as the
words (they say) manifestly prove; that all men through him might believe. It
is not my desire, nor purpose, to speak any thing, that may darken the glory of
so honorable a calling, as John's was: as it might, and (I hope) did appear,
when I handled the point of his witnes-bearing. But But I am now to seek out
the meaning of that, which our Evangelist here reports, not to apply my
self to set forth the largeness of John's commission, or the excellency of his
office. The question is, how far these words, All men, are to be stretched,
according to the true intent, and meaning of the Evangelist. What needs any
question of this matter? says one. The Evangelist has spoken plain enough.
Let the words have their full course, and restrain not that to some, which is
imparted to all. If the like speeches were always in Scripture of as large
extent, in the holy Ghosts meaning, as they are in their own nature; there
might be no question made, but that in this place they were so to be taken. But
who is ignorant, that often times in Scripture, the general sense of the word
must be limited to some particulars? For example, in this very case,
concerning the ministry of John; Saint Matthew says, That, All Judea and all
the Region about Jordan went out to him: Mat 3 5.
Who is so unreasonable, as to expound this All, of all men, women, and
children? Yea who dare avouch it of all men, or precisely of the greater part?
The holy Ghost follows the ordinary custom of men's daily speech, who, to
signify a great number, are wont to say All: Such is that common phrase, All
men, or all the world knows it. And of the same kind is that in the Gospel,
though not so large; All hold John as a Prophet, Mat. 21. 26.
and yet there might be many, that perhaps had scarsly heard of him: but
(generally) he was taken to be a Prophet.

Shall I allege a stranger kind of speech, for proof of that, I have
affirmed? As in Adam all men die; So in 1. Cor. 15. 22.
Christ shall all be made alive. Here is the very same word twice used, and
yet diversely. All, in the first part of the verse, signifies every man, woman,
and child, that came from Adam by natural propagation. But in the later part
it is restrained to certain men, as the next verse makes it plain: But every
man in his Verse. 23.
order: The first fruits is Christ's, afterward they that are Christ's. Those
All are no more, but such, as are Christ's. For none, but they, are made alive
in Christ; that is, as members of his body, whereof he is the head. If you
press me with the opposition betwixt Adam, and Christ, to conclude from
thence, that All must be as general in the later clause, as in the former;
first we have heard the Apostles limitation, They, that are Christ's: Secondly,
consider the similitude of the first fruits, which sanctify none, but their
own lump: and the wicked are not one lump with Christ; no more, then they
are part of his body. Lastly, conceive also the reason of this diversity, and
the opposition will stand, for all this restraint. In Adam all men die: simply
all men, not one excepted, of any age, sex, or condition. Why so? Because every
man, woman, and child was in Adam, when he sinned, and is naturally descended
from Adam. Shall all men in like sort be made alive in Christ? Not simply all;
because all are not Christ's, as all were Adams; yet is there a fit comparison
of contraries. For as all Adams die in Adam; So all Christ's live in Christ.

Seeing it is so clear, that the word All, neither must, nor may always be
extended to the uttermost of the proper signification thereof, I trust no man
will rashly condemn me, If I make inquity, whether it be so general, in this
place, or no, Would you know why I doubt? You have heard the general reason
thereof; I will come to some particulars. Frst there is no remedy, but it must
be some what restrained, because there were many thousands, in the world, that
could not possibly come to any knowledge of John, or his testimony. Yea I may
truly, and therefore boldly say, that the hundredth part of men living, when
John preached, could not by any ordinary means, so much as have the least
inkling of any such matter. The time of his ministry exceeded not the compass
of 3 years; he travailed not as the Apostles did afterward, from Country to
Country, Luke 3. 3.
but keept himself within the bounds of the land, that God bestowed upon the
Jews, and there only employed himself How then should al me^ in the world take
knowledge of his doctrine? And how straungely did he carry himself, in the
discharge of his duty, if being sent to al men, wheresoever, he kept
continually in the Country, where he was borne, and bred? Secondly, the
prophecies concerning John, are peculiar to the Jews, and no mention in them of
any other people. Comfort ye my people; Speak comfortably to Jerusalem. Isai.
40. 1. 2. 3
A voice cries in the wilderness. There was his ordinary aboade, till the
time came (says Saint Luke) that he Luke 1. 80.
should show himself to Israel. To whom does Malachy prophecy of his
coming, but only to the Jews, Mal. 3. 1.
without any mention of the Gentiles; which yet is not omitted, where that,
which is prophesied of, belongs Mal. 4. 5. 6.
unto them? Behold I will send you the Prophet Eliah etc. And he shall turn
the hearts of the Fathers to the children. Of what fathers, to what children?
Is it not manifest, that Luke 1. 16.
this is proper to the Jews? Many of the children of Israel (says the Angel
to Zachary)shall he turn to their Lord God. And he confirms his speech by
that testimony of Malachy. Can you show me the like warrant or any at all,
concerning his converting of the Gentiles? I do not say, that there was never
a one of the heathen, proselyte, or other, that had the use, and benefit of the
Baptists ministry; but this was extraordinary, and by an especial mercy of God
to those men, not by the general intendement of the Lord to all the Gentiles.
Thirdly we must remember, that the ministry of Christ himself, was confined
to the land of Jury, and not suffered to be common to all the world. Therefore
is he called the minister of the circumcision; and his office therein Rom 15. 8.
described; for the truth of God to confirm the promise to the fathers. And
accordingly he professed, that he was not Mat. 15. 24.
sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Not as if the benefit of
his mediation, and redemption, were not common to the Jews, and Gentiles; but
for that his ministry, in his own person, was appointed only for the
Israelits howsoever some one of the heathen, here and there, might lay hold on
him, to salvation, being converted by his preaching. John then, who was to
prepare the way for the Messiahs person, had his commission accordingly, not
for all the world, but for the Jews only.

I might add many other proofs to the same purpose, but these few are
sufficient; both to show their misunderstanding of this place, who would build
the doctrine of universal grace upon it, and to direct us, to the true meaning
of the holy Ghost therein. For the matter it self, whether God have made no
difference, touching election to everlasting life, betwixt one man, and an
other, but have equally ordained all men thereunto or no, I will not, nor may,
upon this occasion, dispute; only it was necessary for me, to put you in mind
that no such doctrine can be gathered out of this place. The reason thereof is
double; as well because the ministry of John, is not appointed by God for the
instruction of every particular man in the world: as also for that it is one
thing to say, God affoordes all men the means of salvation (supposing that to
be true, which I am out of doubt no man can prove) and another thing to
affirm, that God intends the salvation of every ^euerall man whatsoever. But
of this enough for the present. It remains, that I deliver the true meaning of
these words; All men: which (as I have proved) must be particularly understood
of the Jews. This being granted, there arises yet an other question; whether
under this All, every one of the Jews be comprised, or no. But me thinks this
point should be out of question; because many of the Jews, were at that time
scattered abroad in diverse Countries, so that they could neither come to John,
to receive the word, and baptism by his ministry, nor could have any such
knowledge of that, he taught, as that by it, they might be brought to believe
in Jesus Christ for salvation.

Some men therefore have thought it most fit to ty this ^enerall word to all
the elect, amongst the Jews; as if the Evangelist had intended to teach us,
that the end of John's sending was, that al those Jews, whom God had ordained to
everlasting life, might believe. And surely if it were the purpose of the holy
Ghost, to reueal unto us the secret counsa^l of God, concerning the salvation
of some certain men, there can be no doubt, but the elect only are signified.
But this (give me leave to speak plainl^ what I think, without prejudice to
any man's judgment seems to me, not so agreeable to the Eua^gelists purpose as
to make the end of John's witnes-bearing, as general as reasonably we may. For
it is somewhat liable to exception, in the opinion of al men, that shall read,
or hear this point, to affirm, that the Lord would have so public a
ministry restrained to some few; if he had bard a men, save some few, from
believing. Wherefore I had rather take it as in definitly spoken, without
respect of these or those men, that me^ might believe; yet still with restrain^
to the Jews. Which in the original may more easily be done, because the word
men being not expressed, we may reasonably understand in place of it the Jews.
That all might believe: namely that all the Jews, to whom only he was sent,
might believe. And so may we also very well, and fitly translate it, leaving
out men.

What then? How shall we understand the place? First we must expound it of
none, but the Jews; because to them only John was sent. Secondly, we must
know, that it concerns them all without exception, one and other. Thirdly, let
us remember, that here is no thought of Gods secret election, but the end of
the ministry of John propounded. The meaning then is this, that God sent John
to bear witness, that Jesus was the light, to the end that all, to whom he
was sent, might acknowledge the Messiah and rest upon him for salvation. What?
Every one of the Jews? I: Every one, none excepted. As concerning the
preaching of John; had he any commission from God, to deny any man his help,
in teaching, and baptising? Had any man charge from God, not to hear, or not
to be baptized? Did the Lord with hold any man from believing, or coming to
baptism? Did he put a mislike of John, and his ministry into any man's heart?
Did he nourish any such conceit, or incline any man to the retaining of it? It
is true indeed, that John was to execute his office only in Iewry, and not to
seek out the Jews in the several Countries, where they were dispersed. But
this does not prove, that his ministry therefore belongd not to them. There was
great reason why he should abide in those parts. There was our Savior to be
borne; there to be baptized by him; there to be shown to the people. That was
the land, in which the people, to who^ John was sent, had their ordinary, and
proper dwelling. And though many were d^sperst here, and there; yet this was
the general rendez-vous, to which all were to resort, for the worship of God,
and the expectation of the Messiah. If their worldly affairs, and occasions
held the^ir other places that they ^a^e no^ to hear John preach, ve^ was John's
ministry, in respect of the common end thereof, as free for them, as for any
other of the Jews whatsoever, that they might have believed.

And shall any of them, that have perished, through their own default, or shall
any Proctor for them open his mouth, to blame the justice, or deny the mercy of
God, in providing for their salvation? What do thou climing up to heaven, and
prying into the hidden counsel of God, to accuse him, or excuse them? John
was sent to bear witness, that all men might believe. Did he not accordingly,
show himself to all, that would see him? Did he forbid, or discourage any man
from hearing? If at any time he seemed to drive men, from him, it was to drive
them to Christ. I grant, he was mean in his apparel, homely in his diet,
solitary in his conversation, sharp in his reproves. But he was faithful,
and painful in his ministry. Though he rebuked many, that came to his
baptism; yet the refused none, that confessed their sins. It was not his
purpose to withold baptism from any man; but to prepare all men, that they
might be fit receivers of it. But what spend I time, in defending of John?
These men's quarrel is not to him, but to God. Alas poor wretches! Whom do
they provoke? How will they be able to maintain their quarrel? Nay rather: O
desperate miscreants! O profane blasphemers! Was God in fault, that they
believed not? Did he not promise them often, that the Messiah should come? Did
he not send his Angel, even Gabriell, to foretell the precise time of his
coming? Did he not provide, that John should preach unto them, That he might
Mal. 4. 6.
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the
children to the fathers, least he should come, and smite the earth with
cursing? And, as if all this had been a small matter, did he not take order,
that his promises should be left in writing, to the end that all men might
know them? Where was the fault now, that these things were not known, and
believed? Many of them could not read these prophecies. But God had made every
one of them capable of skill to read. If their parents neglected the means, or
if themselves reguarded not the knowledge, shall God bear the blame of their
sin, and folly? Will you except against the hardness of the points, as they
are delivered, in the prophecies of the old Testament? Nay, rather condemn
the hardness of their hearts, that would not understand that, which (as for
those times) was plainly, and manifestly taught.

There was none so simple, or ignorant amongst them, but he had heard of the
Messiah. None almost so careless, but looked for his coming. None so
desperate, but hoped for some good by his coming. Why then did they refuse
him? Refuse him said I? Nay; why did they deny him, disgrace him, hate him,
persecute him, murder him? Because they knew him not. Did they not know him?
But they might have done, if they had believed Moses, and the rest of the
Prophets, that testified of him. But let all them go. Admit they Ioh. 5. 46.
had given no tokens, by which the Messiah, when he should come, might be
known. I will urge none, but John Baptists testimony; or rather I will not
urge it, but name it. John is sent to them, as it is generally known amongst
them, after an extraordinary manner; his father, and mother being very old,
and she all her life time time very barren. An Angel brings his father a
message from God, that his wife should conceive, and appoints him to call the
child John. The father makes doubt of this promise, is threatened, and stricken
with dumbness thereupon; which (according to the Angels threatening) continues,
till the child be born. The eight day after, when he is to be circumcised,
the mother names him John: the kindred except against it, because none of their
Ancestors, or stock have been so called. His fathers opinion is required.
He makes signs for a pair of writing Tables, and confirms his wives
direction, by his consent thus written, His name is John. Presently hereupon,
his mouth is opened, and his tongue loosed; and by the spirit of prophecy, he
breaks out into a psalm of praise, and thanksgiving to God. These things are
noysed all about those parts, and there is great muttering among the people,
with wonder at the child, what manner of man he will prove. To increase this
admiration, the course of this childs life is yet more extraordinary; he
withdrawes himself from the company of men, and lives in the wilderness, many
years together: at the last, about the thirteth year of his age, as it were,
upon a sudden, He comes into all the Coasts about Jordan preaching the
baptism of repenta^c for the remission of sins. In a short time, his fame
grows s^ great, that the Rulers of the Jews, are half of opinion that he is
the Messiah; yea there wanted nothing, bu^ his own word, to make him beso
acknowledged. He^ cleares it, and says plainly, I am not the Christ. No many
days after this message, even the next day while these things were fresh in
memory, he tell them directly that Jesus, whom also he shows them being
now present with him, is the Messiah, after whom they inqure.

Consider now I beseech you, a little, the strange, and wilful blindness of
this people. John the Baptist was a man, in that credit, and favor with them,
that he might have been taken for the Messiah, if he would have taken the
office upon him. He tells them, he is not the man; he assures them upon his
reputation, that Jesus is he: to whom he does so much submit^e himself that
he holds not himself worthy to untie his shoe. Tell me now, and speak
boldly, so thou will speak reasonably, whosoever thou art, what can thou
say against the Lord in this case? Devise a more likely means, if thou
can, to perswad^ them by. Does John want authority, to move them? All men
held John for a Prophet. Lackes he credit with them, or favor? The Scribes,
and Pharisees durst not so much as deny, that his ministry was from God, for
fear of the people. Perhaps his austeritie in his private carriage, and
public preaching, made them grow into some mislike of him. Nothing less.
They flockt after him by heaps. But they might suspect, that it was a set
match, betwixt Christ, and him, for the advantage of them both. They were
persuaded of his sincerity, they heard his profession, that he knew not him,
to be the Messiah, but by the sign, that God himself had given him: They had
seen the education of them both, in diverse places, and courses of life. What
should I say? I am even amazed to think upon so rare, and incredible, shall I
call it, ignorance, or obstinacy? Let me repeat the matter in a word or two,
that you may be Judges, whether I have cause to be astonished, or no. A people
living upon the hope of the Messiah, seating their happiness in deliverance by
him, harkening, prying. gaping after his coming (having him showed to them, by
one, whom they justly admired for his parts and graces, as a man indeed sent
from God) like wey ward children, reject that, when it is offered them, which
before they cried for. Who can give me the reason of this refusal? But what
speak I of reason, in a matter so vnteasonable? who can tell me, what
pretense, or color they had for it?

Shall we confer with some of them, about the point? I would feign hear
what they can say for themselves. If John say true, why do you not believe
him? If he deliver that, which is false, why do ye not reprove him? Either
leave following him, if he teach untruths: or if ye will needs follow him,
give credit to that, he speaks.

Is his report of Jesus untrue? Then why do you wonder at him, as a Prophet
sent from heaven? Does he utter that he knows not? How is he worth the
hearing? Does he speak contrary to his knowledge? He is to be hated, not
hearkened to. How uncivil are you (to speak as sparingly as I can) who suspect
his faithfulness, whom you never found in any fault? How irreligious are you
that condemn him of error, whom God sent immediately, for your instruction?
Bethink yourselues in time, whom you refuse, and despise. Through John's sides
you strike at God himself Of him, John received his commission. From him he
had instruction, what to teach you. By him he was directed in teaching.

In other points you acknowledge it, to his singular commendation. Why not in
this too, which was the maine end of his Embassage? At the least be not so
unthankful, injurious, blasphemous, as not to acknowledge that John was sent
to bear witness, that ye might all believe.

I have been longer in this discourse, then I purposed: yet it repents me not;
because I doubt not, but you all perceive, that those things, which I have
handled, touching the Jews, may concern us also, as well as the^. For although
I persuade my self, that these All (as I have said) are the Jews only: yet I
make no question, but it was the good pleasure of God, that we also should be
helped forward to belief, by the Evangelists recording this office, and
testimony of John. His bearing witness did properly inform them, that heard
it: but the knowledge of his extraordinary sending, birth, education,
conversation, preaching, and baptizing, may, and must confirm the faith of all
us, that daily hear of it. Ignorance in the nature of the Messiah office,
proud conceit of their own goodness, and doting upon worldly pleasures, and
preferments, were great causes of their infidelity. If we be blinded with
such conceits, and drowned in such gulfes, we shall not see, nor come to Christ
for salvation. But we are better instructed in the redemption, which is
wrought by the Messiah, and look not for any temporal kingdom by him.
Therefore we cannot choose, but discern (that which the Jews would not see)
that Jesus is he, by whom the sin of the world is taken away. Only let
me give warning, that (seeing God affords us the Gospel, that we might
believe) no man be so wicked, or desperate, as to except against the mercy of
God, or his own salvation, upon pretense of I know not what conceit,
erroneously grounded on the eternal decree of predestination. It is enough
(for the present) to name it; I will say more of it hereafter (if it please
God) upon every just occasion.

In the mean while, let us proceed with that, which follows. He was not the
light, but was sent to bear witness Ver. 8.
of the light. Where the Evangelist describes the office of John, by denying
that, which is contrary unto it, and repeating the substance of it. He denies
him to be the light, he tells us again, that he was sent to bear witness of
the light. This later point has been expounded, and enlarged. If the time,
which is almost past, will give me leave, perhaps a word or two shall be
added. In the handling of the former, I will speak shortly to these two points;
that John is not the light: why our Evangelist adds this caution, in the
describing of his ministry. For I hold it altogether needless, to show that
John is he, of whom this being the light is denied. There is no man, but upon
the reading of the text, discerns as much. Neither is it greatly needful, to
inquire in what sense John is denied to be the light, seeing our Savior
professes of him, that He was a burning and shining Candle. Ioh. 5. 35.
A Candle may be without light; and a burning Candle may give very little
light, that it shall be very hardly perceived, but a shining candle is light
indeed. It may be whelmed under a bushel, and so hid, not from shining, but
from being seen to shine; but John spread his light round about, that as it
follows in the same place, the Jews (for a season) would have rejoiced in it.
But Cyrillus in Ioa. lib. 1. cap.
this doubt is easily satisfied. John was a light: But not the light. What is a
Candle to the Sun? But the difference was greater, and of another kind. The
light shines of it self by nature, as the Sun does. A light is like the
Moon, which shines indeed, but by a borrowed brightness received from the
Sun, which is the fountain, from whence all that light streams. So was the
Baptist a light; so were the Apostles the light of the world. Not shining of
themselves, Mat. 5. 14.
but delivering abroad, as a glass does from the Sun by reflection, the
light, which Christ the true light powered upon, and into them, for the
inlightning of others.

Now, that John was not the light, himself continually not confessed only,
but professed. The rulers of the Jews were ready to have accepted him for the
Messiah; and to that purpose, they sent Priests, and Ioh. 1. 20.
Levites, which by their sect also were Pharisees, to make offer to him of that
honor; but He (says our Evangelist) confessed and denied not, and said
Ver. 21.
plainly, I am not the Christ. And when they pressed him farther, as if they
would have persuaded him, that he did but deny it for modesty, he told
them, Ver. 23. Isay. 40. 3.
He was the voice, that Isay prophesied of, crying in the wilderness, that the
way of the Lord might be made straight. And as for his baptism, which as the
Pharisees truly taught, and urged, showed him to be some extraordinary man,
he wild them to consider, that he baptized but with water, whereas the
Messiah should baptize them with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Yea, so far
does Luke 3. 16.
he worthily, and truly abase himself, in comparison of Christ, that he
assures them, he is not worthy to vnty his Ioh. 1. 27. Mat. 3. 11.
shooelaetchet, or to carry his shoes after him. And this he spoke not once
only, but as often as any just occasion was offered, appealing to his Disciples
knowledge, that they Ioh. 3. 28.
could bear him witness of his protestation against the Jews offer, to take
him for Christ. Therefore did he not Luke 7, 19.
only patiently bear the departure of his followers, to Mat. 11. 2.
Christ, but also exhorted them to go, and sent them to him. Yet all this
would not move the Jews (O men of uncircumcised hearts, and ears!) to
acknowledge the Messiah, though they thought so reverently and highly of John.

Therefore, that I may come to the second point, it was necessary for our
Evangelist, after the description of John Baptist, and his office, to add this
prouiso, that as great as he was, yet no man should take him for the light. The
Jews (as we know) were strongly co^ceited of the matter: and that, which the
Evangelist says here of John, may seem to nourish and strengthen that
conceit. For it falls Chrysostom. in Ioa. hom. 4.
out often times, that he, whose witness must procure credit to another man, is
greater the^ the party, that sta^ds in need of his testimony. Therefore our
Savior tells the Jews that he regarded not the deposition of John, nor of any
Ioh. 5. 34.
man, as if it had been needful for him. But because they had so high an
opinion of John, therefore he was contented for their sakes, to use his
testimony, that they might believe. Besides, it serves to set out the worth,
and excellency of our Savior, to the Jews, that John, of whom they were so
well persuaded, for his greatness, and holiness, was but darkness, if he were
severed from Christ, or compared with him. He was not the light.

Yet, let no man conceive of John, but as of a worthy instrument, to bring the
Jews to faith in Christ; and as of a holy, and admirable person: whose whole
carriage was such, that he might have been taken for the Messiah himself; as
no ordinary man possibly could be, especially of the learned, and wise, among
the Jews. The people waited (says Saint Luke) and all men mused Luke 3. 15.
in their hearts, of John, if he were not the Christ: Insomuch, that Priests
and Levites were sent from the Rulers to Ioh. 1. 19.
know, if he were not so. Our Evangelist therefore having (as it was
necessary for him) denied him to be the light, repeats that which he had
formerly delivered, touching his office, which was to bear witness of the
light. An office of no mean dignity or use, to be employed by God in showing of
the Messiah, that al might believe. We are every one of us ready I doubt not,
to cry out with open mouth against the in fidelity, and obstinacy of the
Jews, who would not be brought to faith by so excellent a ministry. Let us
take heed, that we condemn not our selves in that, for which we reprove
them. John showed them Christ, but in his beginning only, before he had made
any proof of his divine power, in teachin, and working miracles. We have the
knowledge of all those wonders, and the distinct understanding of the nature,
and course of his mediatorship. We have been made acquainted with his
sufferings for our sin, his triumphant resurrection, and glorious ascension.
And shall we neglect so many, and so worthy points? Nay rather, let us stir up
our selves both to learn, and believe, that we may attain to the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
to whom with etc.

THE SEVENTH SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 9 10. 11. That was the true light, that enlightens every man, etc.
THe conception, and birth of John the Baptist were very extraordinary, and
strange; his father, and mother being grown old, she all her life time,
barren. And least these circumstances should not work with the people, an
Angel, was sent from GOD to Zacharias, to give him knowledge of these things
before hand. He believes not: and thereupon is stricken dumb, till the time of
circumcising the child came; when his speech is restored to him again: and
he, inspired by the holy Ghost, prophecyeth both of his own son, and the
Messiah. But what stand I reciting all the particulars? These matters together
with the Conversation, Doctrine, and Baptism of John drove the Jews into an
admiration of him; and not, into an admiration only, but into a strong
conceit, that he should be the Christ, the deliverer, for whom they looked.
Neither were the common sort only of this opinion, but the Rulers themselves
were drawn to the like persuasion; insomuch ^h^^ they sent Priests and Levites
to inquire whether he were the Messiah, or no. These things considered, it was
not without cause, that our Evangelist directly affirms He was not the light,
but had an under office; To bear witness of the light. Who then was the light?
Even he, of whom he spoke so much before; and to the description of whom, by
way of farther amplification, he returns saying; That was the true light.

This amplificatio^ is continued to the 14, ver: and may thus reasonably be
applied to the formerpoints delivered concerning the Word. In the 5. ver. the
creation of al things by him was affirmed: In the which it is said, that He
was in the world, and the world was made by him. The fourth teaches us that he
was the light of men. To that, the ninth answers, That was the true light,
which inlighteneth every man, that comes into the world. And whereas the
fist verse tells us, that the light shines in darkness; the tenth speaks of
his being in the world, and the eleventh of his coming to his own. The
success is alike in both places; The darkness comprehended it not, verse 5.
The world knew him not, verse 10. His own received him not, verse 11. Thus
has our Evangelist labored to set out to all men, the bounty of the Lord, in
sending so glorious a light, to shine in the midst of darkness; and the
unkindness, and blindness of men, that refuse to be iulightened. For the
distribution of these 5. verses by themselves, we must observe, first, that
the Evangelist proceeds to describe the light, Verse 9. Then he shows the
actions thereof, in the later part of the same verse. and the other 4. In the
description, the title True is added to the light. The actions of the light,
are set down in general, It lighteneth every man, that comes into the
world: And the manner of the inlightening follows. Where we consider, how the
light offers it self. He was in the world; He came to his own. How is he
entertained; The world knew him not. His own received him not. In particular,
the benefit that comes by the light is declared, verse 12. 13.

Let us come now to expound the verses severally: and in the 9. we are first
to inquire of the translation: then of the distribution thereof: Secondly, of
the Evangelists meaning, and the doctrine it self. The translation in the
former words, That was the light, has two doubts; How we must supply that,
which in the original is not expressed: How the articles therein used are to be
translated. The Greek has no more set down but was a light: The question is,
what is here to be understood, to make the sentence perfect. One of these two
things must needs be intended by the Evangelist; either he does affirm, that
there was a true light, though John was not the light, or else he shows us,
which was the true light. If the former please us, then we must supply that
which wants in this sort, There was a true light. But this may well seem
needeless; because both the Evangelist, had auoucht as much before, That life
was the light of men: and if there had bin no light, or the matter had bin in
question, whether there were any light or no, it had bin in vain for him to
have said, that John was not the light. For that speech presupposes, that
There was a light, though John were not he. It is therefore more likely, or
rather certain, that the holy Ghost intends to show us who was the light.

In this point, our Popish Rhemists agree with us, howsoever according to their
custom, they will needs differ from us, as far as they can, in translation.
Let us hear their conceit in translating. It was the true light. Why It? For
neither the original Greek, which is the authentical record, nor the vulgar
Latin, which they profess to follow, has any more It, then there. They had
our translation before their face, That was the true light; when they devised,
how they might disagree from us in words at the least, if not in matter. At
last out comes this new nothing. It was the light^ What is this same It? Who
knows not, that in plain English, this word It does not so fitly, or fully
express, which was the true light as that does? Let me show you that I say, by
particular applying it to the matter, we have in hand. It is agreed upon, that
in the former verse the Evangelist tells us, John was not the light, but was
sent to bear witness of the light. Which then, or who was the light? It was
the light, say our Rhemists: who can guess almost what they mean? If he had
bin describing of the light, and had affirmed it to be such, or such, then
might this fitly have bin brought in; It was the true light. But nothing being
in that sort spoken of it, in this part of the Evangelists discourse; surely it
was not fit, to give us knowledge of his true meaning, in this place.

This will better appear by comparing our translation with this affectation of
theirs. That (say we) was the true light. Would you know which that? That
light, of which John was sent to bear witness, was the true light. Who does not
easily conceive this? Shall we translate as our English Papists do; It was
the true light? Express that you say, like a Grammarian. Must you not be
driven to this, It light, of which John, etc. Make the best of it you possibly
can, and you must be forced to expound It, by That light. It was, that is,
That light was. See, see, whither a contentious desire of dissenting from us,
has drawn you as it were by the neck, against learning, and common sense. You
will say perhaps; It is a small matter, about which I make this a do against
them. Be it so. And yet I discern not, how it should be counted a thing of
small importance, to make the word of God without any good sense, by a false
translation. But let it be as small a matter as you will. What is it to
affect, and seek out such a manner of translating, where the truth is manifest
unto them, and wilfully rejected by them? It will not serve the turn to say,
as some Papists do without conscience, or civil equity; It is the
translation or exposition of Heretics; Maldon in Ioa. 1. 1
therefore I will not like it; as if the men, and not the matter were to be
regarded. I must needs confess, that when I first looked upon this Elephants
calfe, that was so long a breeding, I wondered in my self, what so strange a
shape should portend. But when I had taken a little better view of it, I
perceived the crafty purpose of the damme in so monstrous a birth. It is a
principle in Popery, that the Scriptures are not to be read of the common Lay
people, as they call them. This being overthrown by the force of the truth in
the Gospel, when they saw there was no remedy, but they must of necessity
afford their poor seduced followers some translation of the Bible, they
thought, they would so handle the matter, that they should be little the
better for it. Therefore have they so translated the new Testament, as
Aristotle is said to have set out some of his books, as if he had not set
them out at all: Arist in opist. ad Alex.
Because they were so hard to be understood of any, but his own Scholars.
Yet his dealing was far honester, then these men's, who have labored for
nothing more, then to make such a translation, as for the hardness, and
vnpleasantness thereof, might drive all men from the reading and studying of
it. If this censure seem uncharitable, or uncivil to any man, let me
entreat him to suspend his judgment, till he have seen what I can, and will,
if it please God, discover in the exposition of this Gospel, touching their
course in translating.

We understand what supply is to be made by the expressing of that, which in
the Original might be concealed better, then in our English. Now to the
Articles: Which are two, or rather, one twice repeated. For the Text lies thus;
The light, the true. It is indeed very certain; that the use of Articles in
the Greek is very uncertain; as I showed at the first verse. Yet have we two
reasons, why we should look for some especial signification of it, in this
place. First we see, that in the next verse before, it is of necessary use.
He was not the light. Take away the Article, and read it thus; He was not
light, or a light. This were to Ioh. 5. 35.
affirm a direct untruth, contrary to the Scriptures. For John (as our
Savior himself has testified of him) was a burning and a shining candle.
Therefore must we so conceive the Evangelist, that he denies him to have bin
The light, not a light, or light. Secondly, the doubling of the Article, and
applying it both to the Substantive light, and the Adjective true (whereas
usually it belongs only to the former, in the nature of the tongue, and
practice of the Scripture) notes unto us some thing more then ordinary of that
kind, Mat. 3. 17. (...)
whereof there is speech. This is that my Son, that belouedone. If the
Article had bin left out in the later word, any son might have bin signified
by that voice from heaven, for ought the words necessarily imported. But the
repeating of it, ties it as it were to the Person of our Savior Christ, who
was the only natural son of God his father. And this is so much the more to
be considered, because it is very rare in the Scripture to find examples of
it. Well then; How shall we translate it? That was the light, the true light.
These words express the Evangelists sense to the full, and yet leave the Greek
text unblemished, by putting the first, and last words in a different letter
from the rest, as it is well observed in our common translation, that every man
may know what is in the Original, and what is added to set forth the holy
Ghosts meaning, according to the property of the several tongues, into which
the Hebrew, and Greek are turned, for the peoples understanding.

But of the translation in this former part of the verse, enough: that, which I
have to say concerning the later part, I think best to reserve, till I have
spoken of the distribution of the whole, and come to the several handling of
that clause by it self. In seeking out the distribution, I do not inquire,
into how many parcels, or members, the matter of it is to be divided, which is
commonly signified by that term distribution; but I am to search first,
whether the whole verse be one proposition, or sentence: or else two. In the
first verse, to make that I say, plain, we had three several propositions. 1
The Word was in the beginning: 2. the Word was with GOD: 3. the Word was
GOD: The second verse contained but one, The same Word was in the beginning
with GOD. For although there be, at the least two diverse points in that
sentence: (The Word was in the beginning; and the Word was GOD) yet they are
comprised in one proposition. So are they also in this verse, which I now
expound, That was the true light; the light inlighteneth every man, that
comes into the world. Yet perhaps these two make but one proposition in the
Evangelists writing. If any man be desirous to know, why I cast this doubt
here, rather then in any of the former verses, all which in a manner have more
sentences then one; he is to understand, that none of them, afforded the like
cause of doubting; every one having the several propositions so distinct, that
they could not well be tied altogether in one. But here the case is
otherwise, as you shall presently see. For those words in the later part,
which have a full sense in themselves, may notwithstanding reasonably seem to
belong to the former part, and to make up the Antecedent or Subject of the
sentence: Bear with me I pray you a little in these terms; I avoid them,
all I can: and now I am forced to use them, I will do my best to make you
understand them. Every sentence, or proposition has something as the ground,
and matter, some other thing as an appurtenance to that; which is either
affirmed, or denied of it. As in the first verse: The Words is the chief
matter; that which is auoucht of the word is, that he was GOD. The word
therefore in that sentence is the Antecedent, or Subject; GOD is the
Consequent, Attribute or Predicate. Let me not trouble you too much with these
words of Art; but rather apply them as shortly as I can to the matter I have in
hand.

How this verse may well consist of two diverse sentences, and what they are, I
signified before. Let me show now in what sort they may be shut up, both in
one: which may thus be done. That light which inlighteneth every man that
comes into the world, was the light, the true light. The Antecedent or
Subject is The light, which inlighteneth every man, etc. Of this light it is
affirmed, that it was the true light. Both the words will bear this disposing
of the verse, and the sense will be good, and fit; yea I may say more: The
speech of the Evangelist may seem, more perfect in it self, and to have less
need of any supply, if we so understand it. For both the Greek, and the
English may conveniently, and easily be conceived, if we so read, and
expound the verse, without the express adding of any oher word, but That, in
the English: The Greek needs absolutely none at all. Yet I rather choose to
divide the verse into two distinct propositions; partly for the consent of all
interpreters of it, which I have read; but especially, because being so
divided, it seems to depend better upon that, which went before. That light of
which John came to bear witness was the true light: Which light also
inlighteneth every man, that comes into the world If any man list to take it
the other way, he may show the agreement of it, with the former, in this sort.
John was not the light: That light which inlighteneth every man, etc. was the
true light: Now this light is CHRIST, as the Evangelist had said, verse 4. That
was the light of men. But the other interpretation ioines somewhat more close
to the later part of the verse going immediately before; But was sent to bear
witness of the light. That light was the true light, etc. The verse then has
two several propositions, or sentences, to be handled severally, each by it
self. That was the light, the true light. First of the words what is meant by
True: What the Article being doubled imports. Then of the Evangelists meaning,
and the Doctrine of the place. Truth in the Scripture is commonly taken, as the
nature of the word requires for that which is contrary to falsehood. Cast off
lying (says the Apostle) and let every one Ephe. 4. 25.
speak truth to his neighbor. Sometimes it is put for that, which is opposite
to the shadows of the Law. The Ioh 1 17.
law was given by Moses, but grace, and truth came by JESUS CHRIST. And this
sense has also warrant from the use of the word, in common speech; where the
pattern, or a thing it self, that is inutated, or counterfetted is called the
Truth. The truth Vritas vincit iantationem.
excels the imitation. So the Lord is named the true God: This is
everlasting life to know thee, the only true God. Ioh 17. 3.
Some think that by this truth, or trueness, the light is signified to be
such by nature, and of it self, not by Ciril. in Ioa. lib. 1. cap. 9.
grace, or participation. And so may the Lord be called the true being:
because he is so naturally, and imparts to all things such being, as they have.
But of this signification I think there is no example to be found in
Scripture. The two former agree very well to our Savior, who is indeed the
true light, without any darkness of error, or falsehood in him. He whom God
has sent, speaks the words of God; for God gives him not the spirit by
measure. Ioh. 3. 34.
And of him were all the ceremonies of the law, shadows, and figures; as the
Apostle has showed at large in the Epistle to the Hebrews; especially in the
ninth and tenth Chapters.

But the best way to understand the true sense of the word; is to compare it
with other of the same kind, in the Scripture. For which purpose what shall
we need to go any farther, then this Gospel? Wherein we have two like
speeches, uttered by our Savior, of himself. My father (says he) gives you
the true Ioh. 6. 32.
bread from Heaven. What true bread was this? It is evident, that he speaks
it of himself, whom a little before he had called the meat that indureth to
everlasting Verse 27.
life. Here he compares himself with that Manna, whereof the Jews boasted,
and wherewith they say Moses fed them, even with bread from Heaven. To this our
Savior answers; that Moses gave them not bread from heaven: but my father
gives you (says he) the true bread from Heaven. They had bread from heaven,
by the ministry of Moses, as they proved by the place Psalm. 78. 24.
of the Psalm. He gave them bread from heaven. How then says our Savior,
that Moses gave them not bread from heaven, and that his father gives them the
true bread? Surely, that bread, which they had by the means of Moses, was true
bread, and did truly the office of bread, to feed their bodies. What then?
Does he mean, that it was but a figure of the heavenly bread which God was to
give, and now in, and by him, did give them? This was true indeed; but not so
much to purpose, as our Saviors speech was, being rightly understood. He
Ver. 27.
had persuaded them before, to labor for the meat, that endures to
everlasting life. They would needs have Ver. 30. Ver. 31.
him show them some sign, that is, work some miracle, whereby they might be
occasioned to believe him, that there was better bread, then such as their
fathers had eaten in the Wilderness. To this our Lord answers, that Moses gave
them not bread from heaven, namely no such Ver. 32.
bread, as could endure, to life eternal. That bread, that could so feed
them, was the true bread, and was given by his father; in comparison whereof,
the other was not worthy the name of bread. The use of the bread is to nourisn,
and continue life: and that bread which can not work such an effect in him,
that eats it, is not true bread. Your fathers (says he afterward) dideate
Manna in the Wilderness and are dead. How Ver. 49. Ver. 50.
then was that true bread? This is the bread that came down from heaven, that
he which eats of it, should not die. Lo: here we have the true bread,
which performs that in truth to the soul, that the other does but as it were
offer to the body. Therefore also he tells them a little after, that his flesh
is truly meat, and his blood truly Ver 55.
drink. A like place we have in the same Gospel, where he terms himself the
true Vine. I am the true Vine. Why is Ioh. 15. 1.
he the true Vine? Because he does indeed truly, and effectually nourish,
comfort, and sustain those, that cleave to him by faith; whereas the best Vine
in the world, has sometimes dead branches, and at the last dies it self.

Now then if any man demand in what sense Christ is the true light; in the
very same (say I) in which he does affirm, that he is the true bread, and the
true Vine. The Son, which is the fountain of this visible light, does not so
truly shine, and give light to the eyes of the body, as Jesus Christ, does
inlighten the understanding; which is the eye of the Soul. Jesus Christ? (may
Ambros. de fide contra Arian. cap. 3.
some man say.) Why not rather God the Father; or, at least, the whole
Trinity? whose joint action it is to inlighten, and not the Sons alone.
These objections are easily answered. For it is more then plame, that our
Evangelist speaks only of the Son, in this whole description. What reason is
there then, to understand this one verse of any other, but of him alone? How
should this point, applied either to the Father, or to the Trinity, have any
due place in this discourse? Is it not also apparent, that the light here
spoken of, is the same, whereof John bare witness; and which is said, in the
verses following, to have come unto his own, and to have given the privilege
to men, of becoming the sons of God? Consider yet farther, how unfit it had
bin for Saint John, having called the Word by the name of the light, in the
former verses, here, upon a sudden, to give the same title to any other of the
persons, or the Godhead. Will any man take the word in such diverse sort, if
he be not constrained to do so, by clear evidence of the Text? But so to
understand it, were to cover the place with darkness, not to make the sense of
it clear, and evident. But the action of inlightening is common to all three
Persons. So are all actions of any person of the three which concern any
other, beside the Persons themselves. To choose, to justify, to sanctify, to
redeem, to instruct, to inspire, to comfort, etc. are all common works of the
Divine nature: Yet are they appropriated, in the Scripture, severally to the
several persons, as all men know, and as I must show particularly, when I come
to the 33. verse

In the mean while, let us go forward with the exposition of this verse;
wherein we are next to consider, what the doubling of the article may teach us.
The light; the true light: was it not enough to have said The light? For surely
that implies an especial excellency of the light, we mean. There be
perhaps many candles, torches, stars, and moons: but the sun only is the
light. They are lights, but not the light. If that would not serve the turn,
he might have said, The true light; then which, what can be said more? All
this contented not the holy Ghost: but that he might ravish us with the love,
and admiration of this light, he calls it The light, the true light. Some
apply it more particularly, and p^ecisely to our Savior, in these two
considerations. The light (say they) with an Article. to note the excellency
of the Person; The true light, with the same Article repeated, to signify the
glory and brightness of that knowledge, which flows to men from that light. I
deny not, but the Evangelist comprizeth both under these words. I doubt
whether he intended to give us notice of them so distinctly, by the repetition
of the Article, or no.

It remains, that I deliver the plain meaning of the Evangelist, and declare
the Doctrine contained in it. Wherein I may, and will be the shorter, because
somewhat has bin said already of each, in examining the former points. What
then means Saint John by these words; That was the light; etc. He had told
us in the last verse, that John the Baptist was not the light, but was sent
before, as a servant, to give notice, and to bear witness of the light. Now
he proceeds to show us the excellency of that light; in respect of whom,
John, though he were of so rare gifts, and high account was no body. Look
upon the Moon in the night time, when she is at the full, and you would
think, you had light enough. Surely he, that had never seen the Sun, would
easily be persuaded, to take the Moon for the Well, or spring of light. But
if he should once come to see the beauty, and brightness of the sun, he
would be ashamed of his former childishness, and ignorance, that thought that
to be all, which in a manner, was nothing at all.

The Doctrine is as plain, and was handled more largely, at the 4. and 5.
verses. CHRIST is the true light. There are candles and torches here on earth;
men that have discovered some truth concerning God. There are Stars, and
Moons shining from heaven: Such as, by supernatural illumination, have
revealed many, and great mysteries, concerning our redemption, and salvation by
JESUS CHRIST. But all these are nothing to him. If it were possible to join
all the lights, I spoke of, together; would they match the brightness of the
sun? How much less can these torches, and stars, which have all their
light, from the Son of God, equal the author, and giver of that light? Let
the light, they give, be as great, as it can reasonably be imagined to be,
yet are they not the true light. what do we then gazing, and gaping upon Men,
as if there were no light, but in them? If any man have a little more
knowledge, then others, that he can teach us somewhat, which every one is not
acquainted withal, we wonder at him, as the only light: Yea, we are
oftentimes so carried away with a conceit of his brightness, that the light it
self is either despised or forgotten in comparison of him. It was somewhat more
excusable in the Jews (though it were intolerable) to prefer John before
CHRIST; because they had settled a reverend opinion of him in their hearts,
when they had no thought of any other Messiah: But how shall we be excused,
that know who is the light, and yet dote upon other so much, that we hardly
think on him? He, that fits our humor, either with some point of Divinity,
which we knew not, or with some word of exhortation, that we desired, is so
admired, and followed, that we are ready to receive any thing, he will
deliver unto us for truth, without viewing it by the true light. I speak not
this to disgrace John, but to magnify Christ. John was a light, but not the
light. To speak truly, and plainly, John was no light at all; as our
Evangelist affirmed in the former verse. He was a candlestick, or a
torch-bearer, to hold out, and show the light; but, the light he was not. He
glistered in the eyes of men, as a piece of glass, or any burnisht metal
does, upon which the sun, or some other light beats, which is not seen of
us, but by reflection, at the second hand. To conclude; that which the
Evangelist says here of our Savior, is the very same, that the Baptist would
teach his disciples, whom he sent to Jesus, saying; Art thou he, that should
come, or shall we look for an other? John knew well enough, that Jesus was the
Savior, as he testified at the time of his baptism, and Mat. 11. 2. 3.
afterward: but his Scholars were not so persuaded. Therefore he sends them
on such a message, that they might themselves discern him to be the light.
This is that, which the Apostles avouched, after his death, that There is no
other name under heaven, by which we Act. 4. 12.
can be saved.

Miserable then, and damnable is the case of those men, who for any benefit,
and commodity in this world, or for any pain, and torment, that can be here
endured, for a time, renounce the Savior of their souls, and light of
eternal life, Jesus Christ. Do you marvel brethren, what should make me
break out into such a speech, in this Auditorie? All of us profess belief in
Christ; we have all bin baptized; we have all bin taught. Put case we did all
believe indeed, for the persuasion of the truth, we now maintain, as we
have bin taught; were it therefore needeless to use any word of exhortation, to
confirm us in the truth? Is not our Faith nourisht, and strengthened in us, by
the same means, by which it is begotten? I say nothing of our natural
ignorance, which had need of much teaching. I let pass our shuttle memories,
which easily forget that, we have learned. Let me omit our unruly
affections, which draw us away from the meditation of those things, that
concern salvation.

Shall I tell you in one word, why I have entered into this course, upon a
point so well known, and generally resolved of? Did none of you ever hear of
any Christians, of any Euglishmen, that have denied the faith of CHRIST, and
become Renegados? I must needs confess, I speak upon report, not upon sight,
or experience; but yet upon such report as I have good cause to credit, both
for the honesty, and the number of the reporters. It has come to pass (my
heart bleeds within me to think, and utter it) yea it does fall out daily, a
great deal too often, that men trained up here amongst us in the religion of
JESUS CHRIST, for some worldly respects, without conscience of their
profession, without care of their souls, without regard of their credits,
without fear of damnation, have blasphemed the Lord JESUS CHRIST, that died
for them, and turned Turks. O the weakness of our faith! O the strength of our
corruption! O the hypocrisy of our hearts! That, which happens to one man,
may happen to any man. Do thou believe? So they said, and (like enough)
thought too. But thou art strong in faith. Who (almost) thinks himself weak?
The pride of our nature does so puff us up, with a good conceit of our own
knowledge, and belief, that the eyes of our minds are closed, and our sight
dimmed, if not blinded, that we are not able to give any true judgment
(naturally) of our greatest imperfections. Fear makes us wary, least we
should fall. Hope fills us with presumption, that we run headlong to our fall.

Be not high minded, but fear: Fear thine own corruption: suspect thine own
strength. Thy strength say d I? nay, thy weakness rather. If thou will presume
upon Gods powerful mercy to uphold thee; lay hold upon the means, he has
appointed for the staying of thee up. Believe, remember, resolve, that Christ
only is the light. I am not to enter into any discourse, whereby I may
instruct, or direct thee how to confirm thy faith in this point; but only to
exhort thee thereunto, according as this doctrine gives me just occasion.

It is not unlikely, that there are some in this Assembly, perhaps (as in
such a small company) not a few, whom these things may nearly concern:
Merchants; a good part of whose estate lies abroad in Turkey or Barbary.
Maryners, whose course of life, and help of maintenance, requires employment
in those parts. Trauaylers, whose desire to see fashions, and learn
experience, will draw them into all Countries, and companies. Young impes, who
becoming apprentices, shall be transported out of this nuiserie, where they
have been bred, to be planted in those places for many years, even for the
chief time of their growthe. Shall I crave leave of you, to speak a few words
to the point in hand, with your favor and attention? I will not ask you,
whether you believe that the Scripture, contained in the old, and new
Testament, be the word of God or no. I know you believe it. As needless is
it, yea perhaps more needless, to tell you, that this Scripture (being the
word of GOD) is of certain, and undoubted truth, both for the whole, and
every part of it. Let us come more particularly to the matter, we are now in
handling. The holy Evangelist Saint John, inspired by the holy Ghost, affirms,
upon the warrant of that inspiration, that our Lord Jesus Christ, is the
light. Of the truth hereof thou profeslest, thou art resolved. With this
resolution (as thou perswadest thy self) thou saylest, as thy occasions call
thee, into Heathen Countries, where Christ, and this truth, concerning him, is
not only doubted of, but denied, hated, impugned, persecuted. It falls out,
while thou art there, that either thine own misdemeanor, in the carriage of
thy person, or managing of thy business, casts thee into some danger: or the
opportunity of some pleasure, profit, or honor bewitcheth thee with an
earnest desire thereof. There is no means for thee to avoid that danger, or
to enjoy those benefittes, but to disclayme Jesus Christ, and to embrace
Mahomet. Now show thy faith; now make proof of thy constancy: now it must,
and will be seen, whether thy profession be sincere, or counterfaite. What
stand thou wavering, and tottering this way, and that way? If Mahomet be
the light, follow him; If Jesus be the inlightner of thy soul, go after
him. Doubting is not of faith. Thy feet tread one way, and thy face looks
another way. Thy tongue hardely forbeares to deny that, to be true, which thy
heart would feign think to be false. What means thy craving respite to give
in thine answer? A ^orte beleagered, that offers parle, is half yielded.

Thy heart is even gone, and thou carest not, that God sees it, as long as men
hear not thy tongue profess it. If, at the last, with much a do, thou
resolve to continue in thy Christian profession: yet remember, that he which
is long, ere he do that, he knows ought to be done, a great while would
not do it.

But thou have somewhat, perhaps, to say for thy self in this case. Let us
give thee the hearing: speak thy mind freely, and spare not. Well; I see what
thou would say: that if thou persevere in acknowledging Christ to be the
light, thou shall be sure to be clapped in prison, and to be deprived of the
light of this world: but if thou honor Mahomet, as the teacher of truth from
God, thou shall shine in the glory of this life. Is this all? Alas poor
wretch; what shall it avail thee, to escape a few years imprisonment in this
world, and to be shut up, for it, in the Dungeon of hell, world without
end? What art thou the better, for a little painted glory, and trash in this
life, when thereby thou shall lose the glory of God in the life to come? Art
thou afraid of a dark prison; and do not tremble at the horror of hellish
darkness? why do thou not consider, that Christ is the light? Can he be
in darkness, that has the light with him, and shining to him? Be not
deceived, nor discomforted. This light shall show the more, in that dark
Iayle, thou fear, then the Sun can do, at the noone day, in the open
fields. As for the shadow of glory, thou so doatest upon, what is it to the
light of truth? Say thou were Emperor of Turkey, or did command the whole
World; without this light thou were covered with more then Egyptian
darkness. What can thou hope for by Mahomet, when all he could devise to
promise, is nothing but a little sensual, and beastly voluptuousness; the
happiness of a Goat, a Swine, or a Dog, and not of a man? They do all they
can to turn themselves into Beasts, that feed their brutish humor, with the
conceit of such filthy pleasures.

How blind must they needs be, that embrace darkness for light? There was some
show for the error of the Jews. The Turks have not the least color for
belief in Mahomet: except a few knackes of cousinage, which some fools took
for miracles. The Alcoran, wherein the light of his knowledge should shine, is
such a disorderly bundle of senseless dreams, and idle tales without head or
foot, that a man of any reason cannot read, or hear it with patience. But the
true light powers forth streams of admirable knowledge, for the inlightning
of all men, that they may, see the truth of God to salvation. So it follows
in my text: which inlightneth every man that comes into the world. This is
the other proposition or sentence, in which (as in the former) First, of the
words, then of the Evangelists meaning. In the words I find some occasion of
doubt, concerning the translation: of which I wonder that our Rhemists took
not hold, having so fair an opportunity. The Greek word, which we
translate, That comes, properly signifies (...) venientem. coming.
coming. And the Latin, which the Rhemists profess to follow, with
superstitious preciseness, has expressed it by a word of the same kind, and
signification: How chance our new Translaters, having an English word so fit
for the purpose, yea fitter for the Greek then their Latin is, and fully
expressing the Latin, did not remember to make their advantage of it?
Doubtless, they never marked it; For if they had, it is apparent by their
ordinary practice, that they would have used it; especially, seeing it differs
from our Translation, and affords a double interpretation, as the Greek does.

There are two things mentioned in this proposition: that which inlightneth,
and that, which is enlightened; the light, and man. The word coming, in the
original is such, that it may well agree either with the light, or with man.
To the light it may thus be joined; which light coming into the world,
inlightneth every man. If we refer it to man, we may translate it thus,
which inlightneth every man coming into the world, or that comes into the
world. I will not strive much about so small a matter; yet (to speak my mind
plainly) I hold that word for the better, which comes nearer to the original,
and has also example from the Latin. Only there seems to be this
inconvenience, in following of the Greek, and translation of the word coming,
that we shall be thought to restrain this inlightning to the time of a man's
birth, or coming into the world. For, so much the words ordinarily import.
Which inlightneth every man coming into the world: that is, every man when
he comes into the world. And then cannot this be understood of supernatural
grace, and teaching by revelation: but of the light of nature; whereas the holy
Ghost, in this place, speaks only of the former: as I showed at the fourth
verse. Yet the Greek and Latin are both subject to the like inconvenience,
and the English may be otherwise understood; to signify no more, then the
common translation, that comes. It is somewhat to have warrant from the
Greek, and consent of the Latin, though it be not altogether so plain, as
perhaps otherwise it might be. The Rhemists have rejected both. But in the
next words they have followed the Latin, and left both us and the Greek.

The world, says our translation, according to the (...)
Greek. This world, says the Latin, and the Rhemists after it. It is no
great matter whether of the two we read. For this world, and the world, in
every man's understanding, signify the same thing. But who had not rather
drink of the Fountain, then of the Channel, though the water be pure, and
sweet in both?

But of the translation enough: now a word or two of the Evangelists manner
of speech: Every man, that comes into the world. Why did not Saint John
content himself to say Every man, but adds, that comes into the world.
Shall we imagine, as some have done very strangely, that the souls of men
were created at the first altogether by God, and are reserved by him, to be
coupled to bodies, according to their Origin. de princip. lib. 1. cap. 3 and
lib. 2. cap. 8.
behavior, good, or badde, in that world, where they were created? This idle
fancy, and fond error is vanished long since, that it were lost labor to spend
anic time in the refuting of it.

There is another opinion, in it self true, but not fit for this text; that
therefore men are thus described, because the souls, though they have not any
being with God, before the creation, or making of the bodies, to which they
are to be joined; yet they may be said to come into the world, because they
are not framed of any matter, as the bodies are; but have their original
immediately, in regard of their substance, from God himself: whereas the
bodies so come into the world, that they are fashioned, and formed here below
of an earthly matter. But this seems to be ouer-curious, and nothing agreeable
to the simplicity of the Gospel, which enters not into such opinions, as
little concern our knowledge, in any point of Religion.

What is then the meaning of this speech, That comes into the world? Surely,
nothing else, but that is borne; and so it is often used in the Scripture, as
the contrary, to go out of the world, is to die. Naked came I out of my
mothers womhe (says Job) and naked Job. 1. 21.
shall I return thither again. To come out of the womb, is to be borne:
toreturne, that is, to go out of the world, or to leave it, is to die. The
same kind of speech, the wise King uses: As He came forth of Eccles. 5. 14.
his mothers belly, he shall return naked to go as he came.

To these, add that of the Apostle; We brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain we shall carry 1. Tim. 6. 7.
nothing out. We brought nothing: namely, when by our birth we came into the
world; We shall carry nothing out, when we dye. This bringing, and
carrying away, argues a coming, and a departing. But why would the Evangelist
so describe men? I am wholly of their opinion in this point, who think that
he followed the Hebrewe Rabbis herein, who do oftentimes call a man by the
like name; under which they comprehend infants too, none excepted.

This manner of speech it is likely the common people had learned of their
teachers; and therefore by it Saint John would farther teach them, that CHRIST
is he, which inlightneth all men, one, and other, that no man may except
himself. Some expound this coming into the world, of regeneration by
baptism. By what warrant? where is it ever so called in Scripture? How can
it be so termed? Baptism rather carries out of the world, then brings us
into it. For in, and by Baptism we renounce the world, and dye unto it; so
far are we from coming into it thereby. It is therefore best, and safest,
to take the words in the playnest sense, and to understand by them, To be
borne, which is common to all men whatsoever: so much the rather, because our
Lord in the Gospel has a like speech, by which he notes all men. Among
them, (says he) which are borne of Women, arose Mat. 11. 11.
there not a greater then John Baptist. Is this any more, then if he had said,
Among men, there is not a greater then John?

Having thus cleared those doubts, which, by reason of the words, might make
the Evangelists meaning more dark, and hard; Let us come now to the matter,
that is here deliuerd. In the former part of the verse, our Lord was said
to be the true light; in this later proposition, he is showed to be so, by
an especial effect, which is inlightning every man. Is every man then
enlightened? How else, if our Savior inlighten every man? But there are many,
not men only, but nations, that never received any light of the Gospel, or
inlightning from Christ.

This doubt has made diverse writers expound this place of the light of nature,
which we have by creation. And this, it is apparent, we have of Christ, By
whom all things were made, who is the life of men. But what reason should
lead us, to apply this to natural light? seeing we have made it manifest,
that in the former verses, it is to be understood of that, which is
supernatural. Why should we give the word light, such a signification here,
as it has no where else, in all the Scripture? But it is no where used for the
light of reason, which we have by nature; nor for that general knowledge of
GOD, which we partly bring with us into the world, and partly attain to, by
the contemplation of the creatures.

Wherefore we must needs conceive, that the Evangelist speaks of that lights
which men receive by Revelation from GOD, concerning the means of everlasting
life, by faith in Christ; of which the greatest part of the world never had
any notice. It behooues us then to consider the point with good advise, that
we may understand the Evangelists meaning aright; and neither deny, that our
Savior inlightneth every man, nor confess that every man is enlightened with
the knowledge of him to salvation.

The ancient Divines of former ages, seeing these inconveniences, and desiring
to provide some rerredy for them; by their meditation, and learning, did find
out, and leave unto us 2 espseciall answers, for the satisfying of these
doubts. First they teach us, that Christ Aug. Enchirid ad Laurent. cap. 103
Depeccat. merit. 8 remiss ^. 1. c. 25
may truly be said to enlighten every man, because no man is enlightened, but
by him. If there were but one Physician, or one Schoolmaster in this City, of
that one it might truly be affirmed, that he taught all, that he cured all.
This is he (might we say) that cures every man: This is he, that teaches
every one. Not meaning thereby, that every particular man, woman, and child,
in the City, is taught or healed; but signifying in general, that there is no
other Physician, no other teacher, by which any one receives health, or
instruction. So our Savior Christ may be conceived to inlighten every man;
because every one that is enlightened, has that light from him; and not because
every one is enlightened. So that Saint John's meaning, according to this
interpretation, must be thus understood; Jesus, of whom John bare witness,
was the true light: and whosoever is enlightened, is enlightened by him. This
exposition, as every man may easily discern, agrees very fitly with the
former part, and proves it very strongly. For indeed what sounder proof can
we require, to assure us, that our Lord was the true light, then that every
man fetches all the light, he has, from him? Either we must grant, that no
man at all has any light of grace; or else yield, that he, from whom he has
that light, is the true light. The former is not doubted of; How then should
the later be in question? The second answer does not so much respect the
parties enlightened, as him, that does inlighten; who shines to every man, that
will open his eyes to behold him. For as the natural light, spreads the
beams thereof abroad, in all places, and gives light to every man, as much as
lies in it, though blind men see never a whit, the better: So this true light,
offers himself to al men, shines upon every man, that who so will may be
enlightened by him. It may seem perhaps to some man, that inlightning signifies
a farther matter, then shining upon a man; and so, I remember, it was observed
at verse the fifth, The light shines in darkness. Those blind men, I named ere
while, had the Sun shining on them, but yet they were not enlightened: unless
by inlightning we understand no more, but being made visible, that we may be
seen. And in that sense indeed, a tree, or a stone, is enlightened by the
Sun, as well as any living creature, that has eyes to see withal. This cannot
be the meaning of the Evangelist. For he speaks not of any man's being made
known, or apparent to other men; but of every man's knoweing, and seeing those
matters, which concern his everlasting salvation. That is to be enlightened;
to have the doctrine of salvation declared to him; so that he discern, and
acknowledge it for such, the truth thereof being made manifest to his
conscience; or at the least the sense of that, which is delivered, being
evident, and clear unto him. If this later point be not performed; surely
there is no inlightning, but at the most, shining.

The word, which our Evangelist uses in this place, signifies in the
Scripture, both the holding out of light, by which, things may be made visible
to men, and the giving of them sight, by which they may see. Candles are said,
to light us with their brightness; that is, to afford Luke 11. 36.
us light, by means whereof things may be seen. And in this sense, the
things that are seen, to speak truly, and properly are enlightened, and not
we, in whom there is no alteration, by the presence of the light; but only the
form, or shape of that, which is to be seen, is presented to our view by the
light shining upon it, and bringing the proportion, and colors of it to our
eyes. This signification of the word is the more common of the 2: Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things, that are hid
in darkness. 1. Cor. 4. 5.
In this place of Scripture, as every one sees, the lightning is referred to
the things, that shall be seen; which being hidden shall be discoured, and
made visible, or rather laid open to all men's view. But the Scripture has
examples of the other signification also. I cease not (says the Apostle) to
give thanks for you, making mention Ephesians. 1. 16.
of you in my prayers, etc. that the eyes of your understanding may be
enlightened, that you may know what the Verse. 18.
hope is of your calling etc. This inlightning of the eyes of the
understanding, is not only affording of light, by which the things themselves,
that are to be seen, may become visible (for that is done by the ministry of
the word, whereby the hidden mysteries of salvation are revealed to all, that
will hear) but an opening of the heart, and an inward teaching of those
secrets; so that a man shall thereby be persuaded of the truth thereof. For,
the Ephesians, to whom the Apostle writ this, had heard the Gospel preached by
Saint Paul himself; and by that peaching of his, had the light vouchsaf't
them, by which the knowledge of salvation might be had; and, in some measure
also, had attained, to the understanding, and acknowledging of the truth, which
the Apostles pray to have farther revealed to them, that they might believe,
and embrace it. This, the same Apostle in an other place, calls the receiving
of light. Many have light, and Heb. 10. 32.
knoweledge offered them, but they receive it not: either because it seems not
worth the receiving, or for that they are drawn away by their worldly cares,
or some other such respects, from the due consideration of that whereof there
is offer made them. But the Hebrews (as Saint Paul there writes) had received
the light, that is, had given assent to the truth of that, which was taught
them, and for the maintaining of it, had endured (as it is there witnesses)
great fight in afflictions.

If we take the word in the former sense, only for shining upon the things,
that are needful to be seen, that they may show themselves unto us; it is
out of doubt, that, in respect thereof, every man is enlightened, for so much as
concerns the office of the light; which is to make manifest those things that
were not, without it, to be seen. For so our Lord has revealed the will of
his Father, concerning the means of salvation; which, Ioh. 1. 18.
but by him, had never been published, and proclaimed to all the world. But this
is rather lightning, the^ inlightning; as he, that carries a candle, or torch
with him, inlightens not the party, before whom he goes, or to who^ he comes,
but only lights him: and in this sense our Savior does but show men, what is
to be believed. Whereon there grows more question, how it may be said, that
every man is thus lighted. For it is very manifest, that there were many
thousands in the world, even then, when our Savior himself shone so brightly,
by his glorious works, and powerful preaching, who never heard, or saw the
one or other, nor, in any likelihood of reason, possibly could do. What say I?
There were many thousands. I may truly say, the thousand man then living,
never had, nor could have any sight of the light, that then shined among the
Jews. Yet I confess, that the light stretched, and spread his beams, to the
uttermost of his nature, and strength. Take example of the Sun, which in the
height of summer rises early, mounts high, shines gloriously, sets late; and
yet there are diverse nations in the world, which have not the least glimse of
his light, all the while, he shows himself to us, in these parts of the
Hemisphere, most apparent and bright. Therefore when we read or hear, That our
Savior, the true light, lights every man, as much as in him lies, we must
not consider him as God, but as the mediator of mankind become man. As he was
God, he could have given every one, then living in the world, certain
knowledge, that himself was ordained for the Savior of the world. But he was
here to demean him self as a person, who, by the divine power of his
Godhead, could do al things; but, by the condition of his mediatorship, was to
do no more, then his humane nature might be known to be employed in, some way
or other. He taught the admirable secrets of God, by his voice; he wrought
wonderful miracles by his almighty power: but still it appeared to all men,
that by the word, and will of him, whom they saw to be a man, all those wonders
weredon. So then, if we take this lightning of every man, for affording them
the means of knowledge to salvation, we must thus conceive the matter; that
our Savior preached, and showed his miracles by himself, and his Apostles, and
does daily vouchsafe the knowledge of the truth to every man, without
exception, not forbidding his ministers to teach any man, nor barring any from
learning of them.

Let us now see, how we are to understand the Evangelist, that the true light
inlightneth every man. Inlightning causes him to discern the truth of that,
which is delivered: so that the doctrine of the Gospel is always effectual
to him, that is enlightened. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she
attended to the things, that Paul Act. 16. 14.
spoke. All, that heard him, were lighted; but they only enlightened, which
believed the things, he spoke. How then may Christ be said to inlighten every
man, since it is apparent, many, yea the greatest part, believe not? Surely the
former answer satisfies this doubt very sufficiently. Whosoever is enlightened,
has this inlightning from the true light. And this interpretation (as I showed
before) agrees very well with the Evangelists words, and meaning. But let us
apply the common distinction to this purpose. Christ inlightneth every man as
much as lies in him. If we understand this of his absolute power, whereby he is
able, as God, to do al things, it is manifestly false. Else should every man
undoubtedly believe. For he is able to beget faith in the heart of every man.
Therefore the most, that can be truly avoucht in this matter, is this, that he
is ready to inlighte^ every man. But this interpretation, as far as I can
conceive, does not fully express the sense of the place, if we expound it of
inlightning. For it is one thing to inlighten, an other thing to be ready to
inlighten.

What could the Evangelist say more of them, that are actually enlightened? I
acknowledge the truth of the doctrine, that our Lord is ready to refresh all,
that come unto him, to teach all, that use the means to learn; but Mat. 11.
28.
me thinks this is not all, that the holy Ghost in this place affirms.
Therefore I had rather interpret the text, either of lightning, that the true
light shines to all, without exception, no man being shut out from the hearing,
and reading of the Scriptures, by any commandment, or restraint of the light
it self; or of inlightning, that all, which are made partakers thereof attain
to it, only by this true light: and both these expositions, are true, and may
agree with the words, and meaning of the Evangelist, to commend our Savior
Christ, as the true light of all men.

Now whereas some men hereupon would conclude, that because the true light
inlightens every man, therefore God has not made choice of any man, more then
of all men, to be heirs of his glory in heaven, they gather that, which grows
not of the text. I will make it plain by a short examination of the matter,
according to the former interpretations.

No man is barred the ministry of the word. Therefore salvation is intended
alike to all. If you add, in regard of the ministry thereof, yet that you say
will hardly prove true. For though no man, be abbridg'd of liberty to hear, by
any charge to the contrary from God; yet many are not vouchsaf't the
possibility of hearing. How shall we affirm then, that in respect of the
ministry of the word, salvation was intended alike to all? I grant, that the
means is affoorded in general; but I deny that therefore there is no
difference in Gods purpose, touching lightning of one nation, more then of an
other. It is as free (for any restraint made by God) for the Turks to have the
Gospel, as for us; For they are Gentiles, as well as we. But yet it were too
great unthankfulness, and absurdity, to say, that (concerning the ministry
of the word) God meant to light them to salvation, as well as us. Nomy
brethren, let not such a thought enter into your hearts, as once to imagine, that
the Lord means no more good to you, for your salvation, by vouchsafing you the
ministry of the Gospel, then to them, whom he suffers to continue in their
ignorance, to their certain destruction.

Let no man deceive you, by saying, that the light, (as much as lies in it)
lights every man. It denies no man light, it blinds no man's eyes, it hides it
self from no man that would see it: But it offers it self to some men, it
shines into their eyes, it seeks them out, where they are in darkness, and
follows them, when they turn their backs, and flee from it. Have not we had
experience of this bountifulnes? Call to mind those days of darkness, when our
forefathers lay buried in blindness, and ignorance. Did we run after the light,
or did it come to us? Was it not scorned, rejected, hated? Did it not shine
upon our eylids, when we shut them, because we would not see? What rip I up
matters of antiquity? I will say nothing of our returning into Egypt, in
Queen Maryes days, of our persecuting the truth, and murdering the Saints of
God, for holding out the light to us, that we might see. Behold, the light is
come again unto us, it shines in at our windows, it winds it self into our
hearts, it presents it self to our sight, which way soever we turn. And is it
possible, any man should be found, that will not acknowledge an especial
purpose, and desire in the light, to make us see? What? no more, then to light
the Turks? For pure shame I will say no more of the matter: Chiefly because I
reserve this point of universal grace for a fitter opportunity.

Yet I must needs speak a word or two of the other exposition. The true light
is ready to inlighten every man. Let me grant that interpretation, what then?
Therefore is it not readier to inlighten some, then other some? How shall that
be proved? It is ready to inlighten some: Some other it does inlighten. The
former answer may suffice. It is ready, so that it refuses not to give light
to any man; but some men it never lins shining upon, till it have gotten
passage to the understanding, and informed that fully of the truth. It is given
to you (says our Savior) Mat. 13. 11.
to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.
The light shone, to the Scribes, Pharisees, and people, and as (these men say)
was ready to inlighten them: but the Apostles were enlightened indeed. It was
given them by him, that, according to his good pleasure, reuealeth the Gospel
to babes, and men Luke 10. 21.
of small understanding, and hides it from the wise, and learned. Tell me not of
the good use of Free Will, or any other preparedness, in the hearts of them,
that are enlightened; as if the difference were from man, and not from God. I
may not stand now to dispute that matter, but will take the first occasion to
handle it, that offers it self: I hope in my next Sermon to speak somewhat of
it. In the mean time, let it be enough for us, touching the point in
question, to understand, that the light, as ready as it is (and it is most
ready) never inlightens any man, whom it self does not first fit, and
dispose to receive that light; as I will show, if it please God, hereafter.

It is Christ then, even the true light, which inlightens every man. Of his
fullness (says our Evangelist) Ioh. 1. 16.
have we all received. Yea, I. Baptist himself, that shone with such
extraordinary brightness, had his light Ioh. 3. 34.
from him, who had the spirit without measure. Therefore does he truly, and
freely profess himself, that he was not worthy to carry his shoes after
him. We heard at the fourth verse, the testimonies of Zachary Luke 1. 78. 79.
and 2. 32.
and Simeon to this purpose; that he was the light of the Gentiles. I will not
spend time in repeating them: nor in urging the exhortation, which then I
pressed, of trusting to Christ with confidence, how great soever our darkness
be. Only give me leave, I pray you, to apply the generality of this
inlightning, to our particular instruction, and comfort.

Christ the true light, lightneth every man. Who may then except himself, or
any other man? Yet there are two sorts of people, that make question of this
doctrine: The poor soul, that is privy to his own ignorance, and the
desperate wretch, that would excuse his wickedness. The one discomfortes his
heart, with too much care. The other destroies his soul, with profane
carelessness. These men's cases, I confess, are very diverse; yet thus much may
be said to them both in general. The true light shines to every man in the
ministry of the word. What warrant, or reason have either of you, to exempt
your selves out of this number? Are not you, comprised under these general
terms, every one? No Country, no age, no sex, no estate, is without the
reach of them, Let me come nearer.

No particular person whatsoever is excluded; but the light shows his
brightness for all, and every one that will see it.

But the question is now of none, but them, who live in those places, where
this light does shine; that is, where the Gospel is known, and professed. Can
any such man truly say, the light is not for him? Who tells thee so? The holy
Ghost here affirms the quite contrary, It lights every man.

Well: let us examine the matter, somewhat more particularly. Stand forth,
thou, that desperately settst all at six, and seven; because (forsooth) God
will not have every man to be enlightened, or lighted. If he would have no
man, there were some reason ^n thy doing. For then, it were in vain to look
after the light; neither would there have been any means afforded to that
pupose. But since thou confessest, that some are to be enlightened, what excuse
can there be for thy carelessnesse? All shall not be enlightened; why then
should I care to seek the light? some shall be: why should thou not care
then? If all should, it would come utterly without thy care; Then might thou
reason in this sort; All shall be enlightened; and therefore I too: why should
I then trouble my self about it? But to disp^^^ as thou do; some shall not
be enlightened; Therefore I will be altogether careless; argues a senseless
desperatnesse. I am sure thou will grant, it is as clear and certain, that
God will not have all men to be learned, or to be of any one profession, or
trade, as that he will not have all men to be enlightened. Answer me then,
why thou do apply thy self to study, or to any course of life whatsoever.
For I presume, think what thou will, thou will never be so desperate, as to
say, or so absurd, as to imagine. that thou will be of this, or that
profession, whether God will, or no. Let me reason against thee, as thy self
did ere while. God will not have all men to be Scholars; Therefore will I
never bestow any pains in study. I may say the like of Merchants. Mariners,
Mercers, Grocers, and of every trade. So that, by this gay reason, no man
should ever betake himself to any course of life, but wander idly up, and
down, or rather lie still and sterue.

And yet such are the goodly arguments, by which profane men blaspheame the
unsearchable counsails of God, and procure just damnation to their own souls.
That, which they may clearly see, they will not look upon; That, which they
cannot possibly discern, they will be always gasing on. They are curious to
search out what God has determined of them in himself: Careless to understand
what he has appointed, for the^ in his word. It is set down in plain words,
and often, that God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the ^. Tim.
2. 3. Tit. 2. 11.
knowledge of his truth; that the grace of God, which brings salvation to all
men, has appeared. The Scripture is full of such speeches. All these are past
over, as many, an^ as plain as they are; and wretched men, to cloak their
own wickedness, will hear, and think of nothing, but Gods secret
predestination. I have been too long in this point already, let me conclude in
one word: where the light shines, if any man be not enlightened, it is because
he cares not for the light, not that the light hides it self from him.

Then may thou conceive good hope, that sighest, and gronest under the burden
of thine ignorance, seeking by all means to come to knowledge. Will he
(think thou) that offers his light, where it is refused, and despised,
withdraw it, where it is desired, and sought for? He came (as himself
professes) to seek, and to save Mat 18. 11. and 12. 28.
that which was lost. And will he cast away those, that seek to him? Com to me
al ye that labor, and are heavy laden. Does he call them to him, that he may
beat them away when come? No, no, the promise follows; And I will refresh you.
Him, that comes to me I cast not away, says he in another I^h. 6. 37.
place. But I cannot come to him (say thou) for want of knowledge; Nay (say
I) thou would not come to him, but that thou have knowledge: knoweledge that
thou art a sinner, knowledge that he is a Savior. Art thou not enlightened?
The darkness does not comprehend him. No man acknowledges him truly to be the
Lord of life, but he, that has learned of God, that he is so. It fares with
thee, as it did with Peter, when the Angel brought him out of prison. He
rose, and followed the Angel and knew not that it was true, Act. 12. 9.
which was done by the Angel, but thought it had been a vision. And it is
said of the Jews in the Psalm, that they Psalm. 126. 1.
were like men that dreamt, when the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion.
Thy case is much like these men's. Thou have received light, and know it not;
But admit thou were not enlightened. Surely thou may be, if thou will. The
light, thou see, shines all about thee: wherefor but to be seen, and
received? why not by th^^, as well, as by an other? It lights, it inlightneth
every man. Pluck up thy heart, wipe the tears from thine eyes, that dymme
thy sight. Do not think thou have no light, because a far of, thou see a
greater, then thine is. If an other man have a Torch, or a Cresset to light
him, and thou but a candle, to show thee the way; yet thou art not without
light. Perhaps he has farther to go, perhaps his way is more dangerous. It
may be, if thy light were greater, thy care, and heedfulnesse would be less.
God has proportioned out thy light, according to thy need; thou have light,
though not so much, as thou would have: If thou have none, thou shall have.
He inlighttens Act. 12. 9. Psalm. 126. 1
every man, that comes into the world.

Such is the effect of the light, in its own nature, such would it be in the
hearts of men, if it were received. as it desires, and ought to be. The
Evangelist told us before, that the light shines in darkness, but without any
good intertainement. The darkness comprehended it not. Those two points he
amply fieth farther in these verses; first the offer, which the light makes of
it self. He was in the world; He came to his own. Then the refusal of that
offer; the world knew him not, His own received him not. I will handle the
verses, as they ly, and speak severally of His being in the world, and not
being known; of his coming to his own, and not being received by them. So
that each verse has two parts; our Savior Christ's kindness in offering, and
men's unkindness in refusing. In the former verse, the offer is in these
words. He was in the world; the refusal in the rest. For the understanding
of the offer; we must consider these 2 things; what is meant by the world, what
by being in the world is signified. The knowledge of these two points, will
discover the Evangelists meaning.

First therefore of the world, which has diverse significations in the
Scripture, as this oneverse may teach us; where it is taken in two different
senses, at the least, if not in 3. That I may speak of it as orderly, and as
plainly as I can; we are to understand, that The world generally signifies the
whole creature, or whatsoever was created. The invisible things of God (says
the Apostle) are seen by the creation of the world. This is that Romans 1. 20.
world, which in this verse is said to have been made by Christ. The same, a
little before, was called All things. By him were all things made. Only it may
Verse. 3.
well be thought, that in the former place, the Angels are not signified;
because Saint Paul speaks of the knowledge of God by the light of nature:
which perhaps will not serve to show us the Angels. In this sense, also it is
to be understood, wheresoever there is speech of the beginning, or foundation
of the world. As he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world;
Ephesians. 1. 4.
that is, before any thing was created. All other significations of the word
flow from this one: which is the first, and principal, varyed as necessity
required, or delight persuaded.

The next most general observation is this, that the word is put for some
part, or member of the whole. Sometimes for the whole frame, and compass of
heaven, and earth; wherein the rest of the creatures are contained; So speaks
the Apostle; God Act. 17. 24.
that made the world, and all things that are therein. If every thing that
Jesus did, should be written, I suppose (says Saint John) the world would not
contain the books, Ioh. 21. 25.
that should be written. What world may be said to contain, or not to
contain, but the space of heaven, and earth? Sometimes it is taken, more
particularly, for the earth, where men live; and this Mat. 4. 8.
is very common. The Devil showed our Savior all the kingdoms of the world.
As long as I am in the world (says our Savior) I am the light of the world.
Ioh. 9. 5.
In what world was our Lord, when he said so? Here on earth among men,
whose light he was. Into this world he sent his disciples; Go into all
Mat. 28. 15.
the world; that is into all parts, and coasts of the earth. To this
signification of the word belonges that in the verse next before, and such
other places. Every man that comes into the world; that is, Verse. 9. Ioh.
16. 21.
borne. In an other text it is more plain; A woman when she is delivered of
child, remembers her anguish no more; for joy that a man is borne into the
world. These significations are common, and well known; as coming near to
the ordinary, and first use of the word.

Besides these, it is very often taken more especially or Men, who are the
principal parts of the world, and for whom the whole was made. When the
world 1. Cor. 1 21.
in the wisdom of God, knew not God by wisdom. Knowledge is proper to men,
and belongs not to any other of these visible creatures. God was in Christ 2.
Cor. 5. 19.
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins. To whom are
sins forgiven, but to men? Who are reconciled unto God by Christ, but men?
IIee took Heb. 2. 16.
not the Angels (who shall ever remain unreconciled) But he took the seed
of Abraham. Thus the world signifies in general all kind of men whatsoever.
But because that naturally men are naught, and wickked, the word is sometimes
put in particular for the wicked, and almost for wickedness. You are of the
world (says our Savior to the Jews that would Ioh, 8. 23. and 77.
not believe) I am not of this world. The world cannot hate you, (says he
in an other place) but me it hates. They are of the world (says Saint John,
of the false teachers, that denied Jesus to be come 1. Ioh. 4. 5
in the flesh) Therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears
them. In this respect is the Devil called the Prince of the world. Yea the
world is as it Ioh 12. 31. 1. Ioh. 2. 16.
were the fountain of naughtiness. All that is in the world (says John) as
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of
the Father, but of the world. I may add in the last place, that the riches,
honors, pleasures, and such like, that the world affordes, are termed
sometimes by the name of the world, though they be not so much parts, as
appurtenances thereof. What should it profit a man, though he should win the
whole world, if he lose his own Mar. 8. 36.
soul? What is this whole world, but the honors, pleasures, and riches of
the world? But I have stood too long upon this matter. Let us now apply it to
our present purpose, for the understanding of the holy Ghosts meaning.

But we cannot certainly determine, in what sense the world is here spoken of,
till we know of what being in the world, the Evangelist is to be understood.
Now our Lord may be said to have been in the world, in two respects; either
as he was God, or as he was the Messiah. In the former sense he was always,
and is still, and ever shall be, after the same sort in the world. In the
later, he was not in the world, till he took flesh of the Virgin his mother;
nor since his ascension into heaven. As God, by his providence, power, and
wisdom, he maintains, and gouernes al things. As the Messiah, he taught and
informed the world, of his Fathers will, touching the salvation of mankind. His
being in the world as God, was, and is, for the preservation of natural life:
His presence, as Messiah, was to bring supernatural life, by the light of
grace. Whether of the two is it mo^e likely the holy Ghost means in this
place? If we understand it of the former, seeing he speaks not of the nature
of the Godhead (which is the same in all three persons) but of the person of
the Son; how can the world be justly condemned for not knowing him when he
was present? For it is a ruled case in divinity, that the mystery of the
Trinity cannot be discerned by the light of nature, or gathered from any
contemplation of the creatures. It is true indeed, that since it pleased God to
reveal this incomprehensible secret, many men have labored, to set forth the
point by similitudes, and to apply somethings, in the creatures, to the
manifesting of the trinity in unity.

But all the light, they bring to this point, is such, as rather shows, that
themselves were persuaded of that truth, then is of force to convince their
Judgment, that will not believe. In one word. they give us to understand,
that such a thing, in likelihood, may be; they do not demonstrate, that, of
necessity, it must be. As for those shadows of this mystery, which seem toly
hid here, and there, in the writings of some Philosophers; neither are they
sufficient to argue, that the penners of those books acquainted with the
doctrine of the Trinity; and they are so sparingly, and fearfully delivered,
that a man may easily see, they were altogether uncertain of the truth, and
almost of the meaning of that, they writ. And in what authors do we meet
with any show of these matters? but only in the^, who profess they received
their instruction from the Egyptians, and Chaldeans; who learned those points
by Tradition from Noah, and so from Adam; to whom God revealed the knowledge
thereof; or else are known to have been the Scholars of the Hebrews from
time to time.

Neither does it suite well with the course of our Evangelists writing, to
expound this being in the world, of such natural maintaining thereof. For, the
whole discourse, from the beginning of the fourth verse (as I have showed) is a
description of the Messiah Such was the life, that we have in him; such the
light, we receive from him: wholly supernatural. Of that, John bears
witness; not of his creating, or preserving all things. That was it, which he
labored to have all men believe. That is the thing, which our Evangelist
denies of the Baptist. He was not the light. In regard of that, is our Savior
called the true light. Who shall persuade me then, to apply this verse to his
divine power of preservation, and not to the gracious work of his med^ation?
especially considering the next verse is generally (for the most part) so
interpreted, and (as it is apparent by the verse following) ought to be.
Wherefore I willingly subscribe to their opinion, who understand this place of
Gaudentius in Euang. tract. 12
our Lords being in the world, all the time, he lived here upon earth, in the
nature and shape of man. The reasons, whereby some men would prove the
contrary, are of no great force. They say, Saint John would clear our
Savior, from being thought to have been in fault, that men did not believe,
and from being supposed to be a creature. But both these doubts were satisfied
before more sufficiently: and the later arises only from that, which is here
affirmed; He was in the world; as if the Evangelist had made himself more
work then needed. It was said before, that the light shines in darkenesse^
that it lights, or inlightneth every man. Yea, the fault of not believing
was laid, where it is; The darkness comprehended it not. How then could the
light be suspected? Or how should he be taken to be a creature? but in
regard of his manhood; which is no error, nor inconvenience. He was auoucht
before to be God, and to have made all things, none excepted.

Now then seeing we have found, that This being in the world, is to be
understood of our Saviors conuersing with men, here in the flesh: it is no
hard matter to know, what is meant by the world, and from thence to gather the
meaning of the Evangelist. What is the world? what else but the earth?
Therefore when the Evangelist says, He was in the world, his meaning is, that
the Messiah of whom he has spoken so much, was conversant here upon earth
amongst men. This he delivers here in this general description, before he
come to the history it self, which sets out the course of his life, and
carriage at large. It is needless to say any thing in proof of this matter. I
shall have necessary occasion to handle it at the foureteenth verse, and the
whole Gospel is of nothing else. Yet I may not forget to note in a word, how
graciously it pleased the Son of God to deal with the world. He lived amongst
men, he kept company with men, he came (as himself speaks) eating, and
drinking. He was Luke 7. 34.
familiar with men, he applied himself to their customs, and fashions in all
things lawful; and (as a worthy Scholar of so excellent a Master says of
himself) He became all things to all men, that he might by 1. Cor. 9 19
all means save some. John Baptist (as it was fit for him) led an austere
life; withdrawing himself from the company of men, abstayning from the lawful
use of that variety, both in diet, and apparayle, which the Lord of his rich
bounty, has afforded to men. They that would in any thing use his ministry,
either for instruction, or baptism, were feign to come to him, and attend upon
him Our Savior was ready (ordinarily) at every man's call. Who ever came with
petition to him and went away unsatisfied? Sometimes he deferred Ioh. 4. 49.
the matter, and would make as if he heard not; yea, sometimes he seemed to
answer somewhat roughly, as to the woman of Canaan; but it was Mat. 15. 21.
not to deny their requests, but to increase their faith. He meant not by such
delays to continue their pain, or trouble, but to double his mercy, both
upon their bodies, and upon their souls. Where he saw need of help, and
want of means to beg it, by reason of ignorance, or some other infirmity,
he most kindly offered himself and his service. Will thou be made whole? says
he to the man, that had lain 38 years Ioh. 5. 6.
bed-red. To conclude, such was the conversation of our Savior upon earth,
that nothing wanted to show who he was; nothing hindered men (commonly) from
coming to him, but that, which, in all reason, should have allured them: so
great majesty, with so great meekness; such power to help, with such
readiness to be employed. O the blindness of men! says one: O the pride,
and frowardness! says another. They worthily perished, that made themselves
unworthy of such undeserved kindness. What would they have had, more then was
offered them? yea they could never have desired so much, as was afforded them.
And could they be so unkind shall I say, or unwise and wilful? as to make
light account of: stay your sentence a little; we are not come to that point.
Take heed least by reproving of other, you condemn yourselues. What want you,
except the bodily presence of Christ, that they had? No one man, saving those
Disciples, that continually followed him heard so many of his Sermons, saw so
many of his miracles knew so much of his kindness, as we all do, or may do.

That, which they might hear, in a long time, by peecemeale; we may read, in
a few hours, altogether before occasions of manifold business distract the
mind, and confound the memory. We see not the blind restored to sight, the
lame made to go, the dead raised to life. What could we have seen? There was
seldom a^y outward means used to these purposes, by which ^he eyes of men
might be fed, If they heard him speak to signify that he would have such or
such a thing done and saw the effect ensue accordingly, it was all the
advantage they had of us, that now live, and every day may hear, and read the
history of these things recorded. If he were then amongst men in his person,
he is now amongst them in his word. I will say nothing of the difference
betwixt these two means of bringing men to belief. Let the event speak. It
is manifest by the history of the acts, that more were converted to the faith,
in one year, after our Saviors death, by the ministry of the word, in the
mouths of the Apostles; then in all the three years, and upward of his
preaching, and working miracles. The use of this later was but to credit the
persons, that their doctrine might be received. We profess, that we are
resolved of the truth of all things delivered in the Scriptures. Then
certainly our Lord is amongst us in these days, though not in the same
manner, yet in as great measure for means of knowledge, and believing.

What intertainement had he then by them; has he now by us? The former we
must learn of the Evangelist, of the later we shall hear more anon.
Concercerning the people, that lived in our Savior Christ's time and heard, and
saw, what he spoke, and did; what would any reasonable man look for, but that
they should acknowledge him, and honor him, as the Messiah, by trusting in
him? So they should have done. And did they so? Read the record. The world
knew him not. Is it possible there should be such blindness, where there was
so good light? Could the light be unseen, that shone so brightly? It is
worth the doing, to consider this point a little better. And first, let us
examine the words, what is meant by the world, what by not knowing. The world
in the first part of this verse, signifies the earth, the place, where men
ordinarily live, and abide; so that by Christ's being in the world (as I said)
his conuersing, and living upon the earth among men was noted. In the second
part, The world was made by him (that I may dispatch this point at once) the
word is taken in the most general sense, for all things created; heaven, and
earth, and whatsoever is contained in them. This last clause affordes us a
third signification of the word, more particularly then either of the other.
The world knew him not. It was not required, nor could be looked for, that the
frame of the heavens, or the Globe of the earth, that the Sun, Moon, or
Stars, that the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, or the fishes
of the Sea should take knowledge of the Messiah. None, but such creatures, as
were endued with reason, could be capable thereof. The Angels it concerned
not: neither are they at any time called the world. It remains then, that by
the world men only are signified.

And of them it is said, that They knew not Christ. In what respecft did they
not know him. As he is God Almighty, the Creator, and preserver of all
things, he was generally acknowledged, through the world. For there never was
any people so rude, or barbarous, but they had a persuasion, that there was a
God, and that he was to be worshipped. But herein, as the Apostle says, They
are without excuse, because knowing God, they Romans 1. 21.
do not glorify him, as God, neither are thankful: yea (as it follows
afterward) they turn the truth of God into Ver. 25.
a lie, and worship, and serve the creature, rather then the Creator. By
which it is manifest, that the Evangelist does not speak here, of our Lords
being in the world, by his continual providence, and government, as I noted
before. Neither may we understand it of the Person, which by no light of
nature, either bred in the soul, or received from the creatures, could
possibly be descryed.

Therefore we must needs interpret this knowledge, of acknowledging our
Savior for the Messiah, and resting upon him, accordingly, for spiritual
deliverance from sin, death, and damnation.

It is further to be observed, in this part of the verse, that the Evangelist
changes his speech, and whereas before he had spoken the light, to which, It
should answer; now in steed of that, he says him: The world knew him
not. Whom did not the world know? In the next verse before, he mentioned
the light; Therefore he should now have said; The world knew it not. The
Greek expresses neither It nor him, in the two former clauses; but because in
this last, the Evangelist expoundes himself, saying him, and not it, therefore
we supply that word, in both the other. As for the reason, why Saint John
uses the uses the word him, we must remember, that he speaks of the
person of the Messiah, howsoever he describe him, by calling him the life, and
the light. Now to the person, He, and Him agree very fitly. In the Original,
The Word is of the same gender, that he is of; yet might we not so speak of
it in English, but that we have respect in our speech, rather to the person,
then to any titles, by which he is described to us.

Thus then we are to conceive the Evangelists meaning, that to amplify the
kindness of our Savior, in offering salvation to the world, he sets forth
the great, and incredible unkindness of men: who would not, or (at the least)
did not acknowledge him, that they might be saved. But you will say, This
complaint is too general against the world; seeing it is well known, even by
record in the Gospel it self, that, from time to time, many believed in him.
This, some men discerning, restrain the world to the wicked of the Chrysostom.
hom. 7. in Joan.
world, who refused to believe.

But the accusation in the Evangelist is all one, though we so expound it. The
world (says he) knew him not. And I think we shall hardly find the
world, any where in Scripture taken for the wicked, but where there is some
opposition expressed, or signified, betwixt them, and the godly. I pray not for
the world, but for them that thou have given me out of the world. Ioh, 17, 9,


Who sees not, that in this sentence, the world, or wicked are opposed to the
godly, whom the Lord has chosen out of the world? And yet even in this, and
the like examples, we may very well, by the world, understand men in general.
The world cannot hate Chap 7, 7.
you, but me it does hate. What is that else, but as if our Lord should have
said, men cannot hate you, but they hate me? It is true indeed, that the
reason of this hatred is the wickedness of men; but this wickedness is so
general, that it may truly be affirmed of the world, in such general terms.
The fore although some few, whose hearts it pleased God extraordinarily to
inlighten, and incline, did confess him to be the Messiah: yet generally, the
world did not know him, as Saint John, not without cause, complaynes.

For to whom may it not worthily seem strange; that a personage of such
worth, and excellency, should make himself known to men, in such a wonderful
sort, and yet not be acknowledged to be such an one, as apparently he was?
The fame of his doctrine spread it self abroad in all places; in so much, that
it was known in Rome. The light of his glorious miracles, shone far and
near to all the Countries, that bordered upon Iewrie, or had any ordinary
traffic with the Jews in those parts. Paul, and Barnabas, having wrought a
miracle upon a poor Cripple at Listra, the people lifted up their voices,
saying in the Lycaonian tongue, Gods are Act. 14. 11.
come down to us, in the likeness of men. Yea this opinion rested not among
the common sort, but stretched to the wise, and learned; in so much, that
Jupiters Priest, Ver. 13.
brought Bulls with Garlands, and would have sacrificed with the people.
Behold I pray you, what effect one miracle was able to work in the hearts of
so great a multitude. The workers of it were taken for Gods; and those none of
the meanest; They called Barnabas, Jupiter: Ver. 12.
and Paul, Mercury. Jupiter was the chief of the Heathen Gods, and Mercury
his son, of especial employment, in all matters of importance. Neither
stayed they here, but prepared their sacrifices in the best manner; Bulls with
Garlands, and brought them to be offered up. Compare our Lords many and
admirable miracles, with this one work of the Apostles; supposing it had been
done by their own power, and virtue. Look not that I should stand to reckon
up the particulars; take a view of them in gross, as they are reheaised to
John's Disciples: The blind received sight, the halt were made able to go, the
lepers Mat. 11 5.
were cleansed, the deaf had their hearing, the dead were raised up. Neither
were these things done once only, but often, and ordinarily. Some, that were
borne blind, had eyes, and sight given them, when Ioh 9 1.
they were grown to man's estate. Some, that had Chap. 11. 39. 44
lain in the grave, till they were thought to be putrified, were quickened by
his voice, and made to live again upon the earth, to the amazement of all that
knew them.

I appeal now to the judgment of all indifferent men. What could the world
imagine, in this case? To deem, that such miracles were wrought, it was absurd,
and senseless. Their own eyes refuted them. Should they have excepted against
the truth of that, which seemed to be done? Trial by sense would have
convinced them. Perhaps, they might ascribe them to natural causes. All
reason, Physic, and Philosophy disclayme that power. Must we not of
necessity confess (unless we will be altogether shameless) that none but
God, was able to do such wonders? was it possible then, he should not be
known? I see, we are all ready to inueigh against their blindness, if they
could not; their perverseness, if they would not know him. And I confess,
they deserve to be infamous for it, to all posterity. But it is more honor
to rescue a friend, then to kill an enemy: More wisdom to look, that there
be nothing in our selves worthy or such just blame, then to reprove the
faults of other men.

It was the sin and shame of those times, that the Messiah, living in that
sort amongst men, was acknowledged, by few or none of them. Are men in these
days excusable? you will say I. They are persuaded, that Jesus is indeed the
Savior of the world. Whence aryseth this persuasion? It is rather sucked in
with our nurses milk, then received by the instruction of our teachers. We
hold it, because it is commonly believed, not because it is certainly true.
We hear not of any other means; and therefore we are content to accept of
these. They are not chosen by us, upon our own judgment, but taken upon
common credit. We follow the tide, and stream of the flood, being ready to
turn with the water, whenever it shall ebb. I would to God old experience,
did not cause new doubt. It is an imputation that lies upon our Nation
generally, as the writers of histories record, that we co^quer easily, and
loose as easily; we get many Towns, and Forts, yea sometimes Kingdoms, but
we hold them not long. God forbid it should be so in religion. Our
acknowledging of the truth is not so commendable, or blessed, as our denial
would be shameful, and cursed. But I must remember not so much to what
purpose I speak, as what our Evangelist directes me to speak: yet I could
not but touch here by the way, though I be bound for another place. Let it be
my fault, so it be your benefitte.

I come now to the amplification of the worlds unkindness, and ignorance, that
it was made by our Lord and yet would not know him. Wherein (ere we meddle with
the matter, that is principally intended) we must clear this doubt, for the
better understanding of ^he text, How the creation of the world can be applied
to argue the sin of men, in not acknowledging Ieus Christ for the Messiah.
This scruple has made diverse writers expound this whole verse, of the natural
knowledge, which is to be had, by the consideration of the Creatures. But
there is no reason, to leave ^o many good proofs, as draw us the other way,
to follow this one likelihood, in so uncertain a path; I might say, so
straying from the truth, which is here propounded to all men. For out of
question (as it has been showed) the world cannot justly be condemned, for
not knowing GOD (because indeed they did know him in the creatures) or for
ignorance of the Messiah by those means, which were never able, nor intended
to give knowledge of him. Therefore it is agreeable to reason, and divinity,
rather to seek, how we may answer this doubt; then, because of it, to
forsake a manifest truth in exposition. First them, we say, Saint John
condemns the world of ignorance, and unkindness, that they acknowledged not
our Savior living amongst them, and conuersing with them, though he were
indeed the very maker of them, and author of their being. But you will ask
me how they should discern any such matter, by his carriage, and behavior in
the world. Therefore I answer secondly to that point, wherein the whole cause
of doubting lies; that the miracles, which our Savior wrought, from time to
time, in the sight of all the world, were evident proofs, that he could be
no other, but the great Commander of heaven and earth. Did he not over rule
the course of nature? Did he not give sight, hearing, health, and life, by his
bare word? Damsel, I say unto thee arise; and straight way the Mat. 9. 41.
maiden, that was dead, arose, and walked; He cried with a loud voice to
Lazarus, Come forth. Not as if he could Ioh. 11. 43.
make him, that had lain four days in the grave, hear without life; but that
all men present might know, that he used no other means, to put life into
him, but his commandment only. Who could work such wonders, but he that had
power, above, and against the course of nature? How could he by any means
better assure them, that it was he, that made the world, then by taking the
same course in changing nature, that he had followed before in creating
nature? God said, let Genesis 1. 3.
there be light, and there was light. Young man (says Christ) I say unto thee
arise, and he that was dead sat up, Luke 7. 14. 15.
and began to speak. Might not these courses have taught, and assured the
world, that he, whom they saw, and heard commanding death it self, and doing
whatsoever it pleased him by his word, was the same, by whom all things were
created?

Consider then the slothful carelessness, or the wonderful blindness of the
world, that knew not him that had made them. Why should they be so carried
away with the vain pleasures, or toylesome business of this life, as not to
bestow some little time, in the consideration of so strange, and admirable a
personage? Say, they might be this day, extraordinarily employed in their
worldly affairs, that they could not have a minutes leisure, to bethink
themselves of the wonders wrought by him: They saw the like again next day,
day after day, for the space of three years together, and vpwardes. It was
hard, if in so long a time, they could not steal one hour or two to advise
with themselves, and their friends, of so extraordinary a matter. Well, let
us yield so much to their manifold occasions, in their ordinary employments.
What will they answer for themselves, concerning those miracles, which our
Savior wrought, upon their Sabbaths? Will they say, they had no leisure from
their business, on those days? For very shame, they dare not. Were they not
privy to them? They were done in their open Synagogues oftentimes. But I know
not how I am slipped, ere I was aware, into that, which particularly concerns
the Jews, with whom I must deal in the next verse; to which I now come.

He came to his own; and his own received him not. Kindness offered,
requited with unkindness. Both so great, that the holy Ghost, having spoken of
them in general, in the very last verse, repeates them here in particular,
and that with special amplification. He had said before, He was in the
world. Therefore he might have been known of men. He adds now; He came to
his own. Therefore he should have been entertained. But the world knew him
not. He was a stranger to them, who looked not for any such guest. His own
could not plead such ignorance. They had heard of him, they longed for him. For
all this, They received him not. Is it credible? Is it possible? It is too
true. He had very mean, or rather very bad intertainement at their hands. We
may not pass over the matter so slightly.

Let us see the particulars: First, his coming to his own; then his rejecting
by his own. For the cleerer interpretation of the text, we must examine what
is meant by His own; because the understanding of that concerns both parts
of the verse. That being known, in the former part, we must consider his
coming; in the later, his rejecting.

He came to his own. Our Rhemists, who account (...)
their differing from us, a high point of their popish obedience, would not
translate as we do, To his own, but must needs have a farther trick, Into
his own. By which translation, first, they must, of necessity, understand the
place, to which he came, or else they speak but ill favored English. For no
man, that knows what belonges to our Language, will say Into, if he spoke of
persons, but to them; unless he mean to signify such a coming, as is
spiritual, into the hearts of men, or into the midst of a multitude; neither
of which, in this place can be intended by the Evangelist. Secondly, though
the place be signified; yet may our translation very well be allowed. I
appeal in this case as to all men, that can speak English; so to these
Rhemists, who translate so in other places. From that hour (say they) the
Disciple took her to his own. Ioh. 19. 27.
Here is the same word for into; and more reason, because the speech is of
Saint John's receiving the Virgin Marie into his house: yet they translate, as
we do here, to his own.

The like example we have else where They returned unto their own. The
Disciples at Tire, having (...) ^1. 6.
brought Paul, and his company to the Sea side, and seen them shipped, returned
to their own houses. To, or unto, which are all one, but not into: Therefore
there was (in their judgment) no necessity of rejecting our Translation in
this text, and forging a new.

But let the Translation pass: the sense of the words is more worth our
labor. The Original Greek, and the vulgar Latin make difference betwixt the
words, His own, in the former, and the same in the later part of the verse.
The Greek keeps the same word in both, but alters the gender. The (...)
Latin changes the word too, as well as the gender: Both the one, and the
other direct us to expound the first, of the place; and the last, of the
persons. Neither our translation nor the Rhemists express this difference.

If they had added to their, into his own, Country, or place, or some such
word to make the Evangelists meaning more plain, I would have thought, they
had rather indeauoured to be understood, then striuen to dissent. Well, let us
then by his own in the former clause, conceive, that Saint John notes the
place, whither our Savior came. Thus remains a great doubt, whether this
place, be the world in general, or the Land of Judea in particular. Not to
trouble you with any long discourse of this point, it seems most likely to me
(with reverence of other men's judgment) that the holy Ghost in this verse
speaks particularly of the Jews. Of the worlds ignorance, and carelessness in
not taking knowledge of so rare, and extraordinary a personage, he had spoken
in the former verse: and amplyfied their sin, by nothing, that he, whom they
did not know, was their Creator; as the miracles, he wrought in their sight,
manifestly testified. If this were a fault in the world (as it was a most
grievous fault) what was it for the Jews to refuse him? Should that be
observed by our Evangelist, and this past over without nothing? especially
since his whole story shows, that our Lords Chryso. hom. 7. in loa Cypr^n. ad
Qu^rin. lib. 1. cap. Cyril in loa. ^b. 1. ca. 11.
life, and miracles, were as it were shut up within the Land of Jury?
Besides the word in this later verse leads us to the Jews. He came to his
own: Coming to them argues more, then Being in the world. Ignorance was
justly imputed to the world. Not receiving, is a sin more fittely to be
charged upon the Jews.

If we consider the words used by our Evangelist, I think we shall find
small reason, to call the world Christ's own. For although it be true, that
the earth is (...) 24 1.
the Lords, etc. and that our Savior was the maker of it, and the whole
world; yet who ever observed that the world was so appropriated to GOD, or to
the second person in Trinity? The possession, that God promised to give him,
is not in regard of Creation; but (...) ^. 8. (...) ^unc locum.
of Mediation; whereas they, that expound this place, of all the world, make
Christ's right thereunto consist in the title he has to it, as the author of
it. Now that is ordinarily said to be a man's own, which is proper to him,
after some special manner, otherwise, then other things are. But what can
we imagine, to which our Savior has not as good claim by his interest of
Creation, as to the world? How then should this be termed His own? and as
some sren. lib. cap. 11
ancient writers have expressed the word His own proper? But if we apply it to
the Jews, every man knows, that, whereas all the world was GODS August. in
Ioa. tract. 2. Iu^sua propra.
he took the Land of Iewry into his especial protection. And howsoever all
nations were his, by creation; yet he chose the Children of Israel to be his
peculiar people: so that they, and their Country were his own not by nature,
but by grace indeed; yet in such sort that he made his aboade visibly amongst
them, a^ he did not in any part of the world beside. The examples I alleged
before, wherein these words were used by the holy Ghost, show plainly, that
by His own, his particular place of habitation and his Rendez-vous, as it
were, is signified. This the Lord had in Judea; and therefore I may safely
conclude, that this verse is particularly to be interpreted of the Jews. But
the time is past: that which remains, the next time of this exercise, if it
please God. To whom, etc.

THE EIGHTTH SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 11. He came to his own, and his own received h^ not etc.
THere is (ordinarily) in all men, a special affection to their Country, and
Countrymen, where they were bred, and among whom they were brought up: Either
because it proceeds from nature, who takes her advantage at the first, and
settles her self in our hearts, while there is no resistance; or for that it
pleases God, that (according to true reason) we should think our selves most
bound to them of who^ we received most help, when we were least able to help
our selves. From hence it comes, that there is a mutual love betwixt them,
that are of the same nation: So that generally an English man affects an
Englishman; so a Scot, a Spaniard, a French man, every one his own
Countrymen, more then any stranger whatsoever. Yea, the honor that any one
getts, for virtue, learning, wisdom, or valor, redounds to the whole nation;
insomuch that every particular man almost thinks himself interessed therein.
Can it choose then, but be exceeding strange to all men, that our Lord should
have so mean intertainement in his own Country? Was it not a matter of great
honor to the Jews, that one of their nation should be able to do such
admirable things? They bragd exceedingly of the Prophets, that had lived, from
time, to time amongst them. What were all they, to this one? And yet he came
to his own, and his own received him not. Neither came he, as an ordinary
man, that the refusal of him should be no more, but a matter of unkindness,
by neglecting the common bond of Country-ship: but this coming to his own,
is of more importance.

For, by His own, as I showed in my last exercise, the place, or Country, to
which he came, is signified. And not that only, as if he had no farther right to
it, the^ the title, that every man has to the place of his birth, and
education; but by those words his own, we understand an especial interest,
that he had in that Country. To which he came not as a stranger to see, and to
be seen; nor as an heir, to a Lordship, of whom the tenants had never heard
any thing; but as one, that was famously known to be rightful honor, and had
long before appointed, and was looked for daily, to take possession. Shall we
look into old Deeds, and evidences, yea better then Deeds, and evidences,
ancient records, kept most carefully, and faithfully in the highest court of
Roules, where the holy Ghost himself is master of the office; and all the
Clarks not only sworn, but certainly known to be void of ignorance, and free
from alcorruptio^? I will not meddle with the Original Grant (...) 3. 15.
from GOD, rather signified in a threatening manner against the Devil; then
expressed by any way of promise, to Adam in Paradise. This was too general, and
affordes the Jews no more advantage of claim, then any other people
whatsoever: because all Chap 9. 26
are Adams posterity. That blessing of Sem is somewhat more particular;
Restrayning the general, which (by reason of Noah the father) might seem to
be common to all three sons, to one of them only. Blessed be the Lord God
of Sem. But of Sem came diverse not only families, but Nations; The Assyrians,
Persians, Lydians, Chap. 11. 14. 2^
Aramites or Syrians, and Hebrews. Which of these has special interest to
the promise? The Hebrews, by Abraham; to whom the promise was directly made,
that in him all the Families of the earth should be blessed. Abraham; also had
many Children, of whom Ismaell Chap. 12. 3. Chap. 16. 11
was the eldest; but the blessing was settled in Isaac; In Isaac shall thy
seed be called. But we are not yet certain, Chap. 21. 12. Cha. 25. 2^. 23.
where to find this blessing. Isaac had two sons by his wife Rebeccah, two
twins, Esau, and Jacob. Of whom God himself prophesied to their mother,
that the eldest should serve the younger; And accordingly it came to pass; The
birthright, and the blessing being co^uayed Chap. 27. 3^
from Esau to his brother Jacob. We are now come where we may well rest;
Because the twelve Patriarchs, the sons of Jacob continued one people without
any division, and (except the time of their captivity) in one Country, til
the time of the Messiahs appearing. But for the greater certainty of the truth,
and better direction for the knowing of him, when he should come, it pleased God
to reveal to Jacob, and by him to his children, that Shiloh, he that was to be
sent should proceed Chap 49. 10.
out of the Loins of Judah. And as if this had not been enough, he leads the
Jews to the house of Dau. in which this deliverer should be born, and sit on
the throne of his Psalm. 132. 11. Luk 1. 3^. 33.
father David for ever. Yea the very place of his birth is named, by which
afterward the wisemen, that came from the East, were directed; Thou Bethelem
Ephrata Mi^. 5. 2. Mat. 2. 8.
(says the Prophet) art little, to be among the thousands of Judah: yet out
of three. shall he come forth to me, that shall be Act. 10. 34.
the ruler in Israel. Of him all the Prophets bear witness, To him all the
shadows, washings, and sacrifices of Col. 2. 17. Heb. 9. and 10.
the law belong, as to their body, and substance: by him the Jews look for
deliverance, to him they had an especial title. Salvation is of the Jews,
says our Savior. Ioh. 4. 22. Mat. 15. 24 26.
And in an other place more strictly. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel; in comparison of whom, the Gentiles were as dogs. Does
not the Evangelist then truly say, that our Lord came to his own, when he
came into that part of the world, which he had before prepared for his coming;
whether he had sent his Heralds to proclaim the time of his coming; as it
appears in Daniell: where the place Dan. 9. 27. Mic. 5. 2. (...). 1.
of his birth was appointed by Micah, as by an Harbinger: where John Baptist as
his Gentleman usher had given especial notice of his approach, and stood
waiting in the streets to go to meet him? Thus came he to his own; not
stealing in by night, or thrusting into some creek, where he might least be
seen, or hiding himself in the fardest parts of the land, that were most
unpeopled; but sending his Angels to reveal his birth to Shepheardes; who Luk
2. 9.
without suspicion of any devise, or complot, might spread the report of it
abroad, as they did. Directing Mat. 2. 1. 2.
wisemen from the East, by whom Herod, and all Jerusalem might be informed,
that he was come; showing himself by the space of three years, and an half,
to al his countrymen in those parts, with such a grace, and authority in his
teaching, that the Pharisees Mat. 7.
were nothing to him; with such power, and command, in working miracles, that
the winds and Seas obayed him; sickness at his word gave place to health,
blindness to sight, yea death was forced to resign up his possession, to
life. We have seen his coming: Let us take a view of his intertainement.

His own received him not, Perhaps not with such signs of joy, shows of
triumph, and significations of obedience, and subjection, as in such a case it
was fit, and necessary, they should have done. There might have bin some excuse
for them, if they had fayld in the manner of his intertainement only. They were
under the Romans government, and durst not be known of any other King they
looked for, till they might see him in the field with banners displayed,
professing himself to be in arms, for their deliverance. But they would not
at all receive him. This behavior cuts off al excuse, and lays them open to a
just imputation of rebellion. But here we must first call to mind, that by
His own, not the place, as in the former part of the verse, but the persons,
to whom he came, are signified. Secondly, let us, in a word, or two, consider
their refusal of him; What is meant by not receiving him: why the holy Ghost
uses this word of the Jews, whereas he had said no more of the world in
general, but that they knew him not. The Jews received him not. Did they not
receive him? They flockt after him, in multitudes; they came to him far, and
near, to be cured by him, of al kind of diseases: they acknowledged the power
of God in his miracles; yea so highly did they esteem of him, and so greatly
affect him, Ioh 6. 15.
that they would needs have made him a king. How the^ is it said, that they
would not receive him? To receive a messenger, that comes from a Sovereign
Prince to his subjects, is not only to suffer him to come ashore, to let him
have entrance into the City, to entertain him with good cheer, to Iodge him
well, to give him some present, to honor his person, but especially to accept
of his message, and to perform that, which he requires of them, in his Lord,
and masters name. If they be wanting, in these later duties, let the former be
done in never so good sort, they may justly be charged with not receiving him,
that comes. Shall I make it plain by an example of the like nature.

John Baptist (as our Evangelist has taught us) was sent to bear witness of
the light, that all by him might believe. Was he received by the Jews, or no?
If you look to his outward entertainment, you shall find, that he had all
the kindness showed him, that he would admit of, and might have had much
more, but that he continually refused it. Neither was this from the teeth
outward, in show without substance, but from the very affection of their
hearts, which were set on him, so that he might have led them like
children, whithersoeuer he would. But what say you to the ground of his
message, the end of his embassage from God to them? Did they receive him or
no? Did they believe, by means of him? If they did not; howsoever they
accounted of his person, they received him not. For the receiving of him, was
the entertaining of his message, that he brought, by believing that Christ was
the light, and resting upon him to be enlightened. It is not hard now to
understand, what is meant, in this place, by not receiving. And if it were; the
Evangelist makes it plain, and easy in the next verse; where Ver. 12.
he expoundes receiving to be believing in his name. So that not to receive
Christ, with which fault the Jews here are charged, is, not to believe in
him. What that is, I have already showed in part, and must handle it again,
when I come to the expounding of those words. In the mean while, let us
hold this for a certain truth, that to receive Christ, is to believe in his
name, and that the Jews are challenged for not believing therein.

The world was accused of ignorance, by our Evangelist. The worldknewe him not.
The Jews, his own people, have a farther matter laid to their charge, that
They believed not in his name: whence arises this difference? Was it enough
for the world to have known him? Were the Jews free from ignorance of him?
Neither of both. For they only have the prerogative to be the sons of GOD,
that believe in his name. The Devils knew him to be the holy one Luk 4. 34.
Mark. 3. 11.
of GOD; yea, the Son of GOD, and made open profession of that their
knowledge: as Saint James also Iam. 2. 19.
testifies of them, They believe, and tremble, to their farther condemnation.
And for the Jews, the Apostle Peter gives this testimony of them, That, He
knew, Act. 3. 13. 14. 15.
their betraying, and denying of Jesus in the presence of Pilat, their
preferring a murderer before him, and their killing of the LORD of life,
proceeded from ignorance both in the common sort, and in their governors.
Then it could not have auayled the Gentiles to have known him, without they
had also believed in him; and the Jews not believing, was of ignorance. Yet of
the former the Evangelist says, They knew him not: of the later, They
believed not in his name. In both, he speaks most wisely, and fitly. The very
first step to believing in Christ, is the acknowledging of him to be sent
from God. Of this, his many, and glorious miracles gave so manifest, and
certain proof, that the mouths of children were filled with his praises;
Hosanna to the Mat. 25. 15. 16
Son of David. Therefore if the world would not take knowledge of our
Savior, what excuse remains there for them? How can they be charged with any
less? How could they be ignorant of so much?

Now the Jews were faulty in an higher degree. They knew of old, that there
was a deliverer to come; that the time appointed for his commong was expired:
they heard every day the Sermons of ^. Baptist, who assured them, that the
kingdom of God was at hand; that he, whom they, and their Fathers had so many
years looked for, and longed for, was in the midst of them: and that nothing
might be wanting to their full instruction, he pointed out the person with his
finger; This is he, Behold Ioh. 1. 26. 29.
the lamb of God. But what belongd to the matter, that they might have benefit
by this deliverer? I see the man, I hear great commendation of him, I find my
self well ^ffected to him; but what is all this, if I know not how to make use
of him, of his power, and skill, to mine own help? It is all one, as if I had
a box of most precious ointment in my hand, which I knew to be very
sovereign, but understood not how it is to be applied. To shut out this
excuse, remember what John Baptists office was. He was sent to bear witness of
the light, that all men through him might believe. Call to mind how faithfully
Ioh. 1. 7. Act. 19. 4.
he demeaned himself in it. John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe in him, which
should come after him, that is in Jesus Christ. This being the estate of
matters among the Jews, while our Lord was here upon the earth, were they not
justly to be blamed, for not believing? Or could they plead ignorance, for
excuse? It is true indeed, that they knew him not to be the Lord of life.
But this ignorance proceeded of wilfulness, and prejudice. What can they say
for themselves? Did they not know, such an one was to come? They had it
continually in their mouths; it was the hope of their life, the joy of their
heart, the glory of their nation, whereof they were not a little proud. But
they knew not, that this was he. But they might have done: nay, they could
not have chosen but have known, if they had not wilfully shut their eyes
against the light of his miracles, and stopped their ears against John's
testimony of him. Therefore does our Evangelist, worthily charge them with not
believing in his name, whom John testified and his own works declared to be
the Savior, that was promised to Israel.

This then is the point, that the Evangelist offers to our consideration in
these words; that the Jews, being the peculiar people of GOD, to whom the
Redemption, that was to be wrought by the Messiah, first and principally
appertained, refused to accept him for their Savior: It were infinite almost,
I will not say to set out, but to set down the several injuries, they did
him, the indignities they offered him, through the whole course of his life,
and ministry amongst them. His daily working of miracles was imputed to vain
glory, as if he sought by them to make himself famous in the eyes of the
world. This vile conceit, his own kinsmen had of him. Depart hence (say they)
and go into Judea, Ioh. 7. 3. 4.
that thy Disciples may see the works, that thou do. For there is no man,
that does any thing secretly, and he himself seeks to be famous. If thou
do these things, show thy self to the world. Yea, that divine power, by which
he cast out Devils, was maliciously, absurdly, and impiously Mat. 12. 24.
ascribed to Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. His familiarity, and kindness
in conuersing with them, and applying himself to their humors, as far as
lawfully he might, was laden with the reproach of gluttony, and drunkenness.
Behold a man, which is a Luke 7. 34.
glutton, and a drinker of Wine, a friend of Publicans, and sinners. What
should I speak of the monstrous blasphemies, they often uttered against him?
That, He was a Samaritan, that he had a Devil. Yea they Ioh. 8. 48.
were not ashmed nor affraide (O the admirable patitience of God, waiting for
their repentance!) to justify themselves to his face, in such horrible
profaneness. Say we not well (I quake to repeat it) that thou art a Samaritan,
ver. 52.
and have a Devil? And least any thing should be wanting to the height of all
impretie, they add by and by after, Now know we that thou have a Devil. The
Devil himself his professed enemy, that co^fest he knew him to be the Son of
God. His own people, for whose sake he came into the world knew that he had a
Devil. What should I say, or imagine? Whence should so de^estable, and
damnable a speech proceed? Are men? Are the Jews? Are Christ's own people,
worse then the Devil?

But I will not press these things too far, because they are a degree beyond
the not receiving of him, whereof the Text speaks. If they had behaved
themselves toward him in general, as kindly, and dutifully as some in
particular, did now and then, upon occasion, all had bin nothing, as long as
they received him not by believing in his name. Saul would have offered
sacrifice to God (I take it at the best) of the fattest, and fairest of the
Amalakites cattle. But obedience is better then sacrifice. He should have
hearkened 1. Sam. 15. 22.
to the voice of the Lord by Samuel, and have slain them all. What shall we
give the Lord? say the people. Thousands of Rams? ten thousand rivers of
Oil? The first borne, the first fruit of our bodies? Do justly, (says the
Mic. 6. 7. 8.
Prophet) Love mercy. So much does it concern a man to humble himself to the
will of God. But this believing was a matter of very great importance; because
upon it depended all hope of deliverance, by the Messiah. All disobedience, and
sin, is liable to damnation, but yet there is possibility of forgiueness,
though the transgression be exceeding great. Only this one sin, of not
believing, makes a man utterly incapable of any Ioh. 3. 29.
favor, as long as he continues in it. In the maladies of the body, though
the means of Physic be not used; yet oftentimes the strength of nature
ouercomes the malice of the humor and recouereth the Patient. It is not so in
the diseases of the soul, where the corruption every day increases, and the
fault once committed, as it were the hurt received, admits no cure, but by
pardon. An easy cure, I confess, and a ready: So much the greater was their
obstinacy and folly) that I may speak of them as favorably as may be) that
would not embrace so certain, and so present a remedy.

But this will the better appear, when we understand more fully, what it is
to believe in Christ. In the mean while, I will only put you in mind, to
consider a little with your selves of this matter. I am out of doubt, every one
of us condemns the Jews; and not without cause: Let us take heed that we
give not an heavy sentence against our own selves thereby. We have offer of
salvation, by the same means: we do, or may know more, then they could, of
the particulars thereto belonging; and namely of that, which is required on our
part, to believe in his name. It is not our assenting to the truth of the
doctrine in general; our particular knowledge o^ the course of man's
redemption; our magnifying the ministers of the Gospel, as the Jews did John
Baptist; our mislike, and detestation of Popery; that can be sufficient to the
saving of our souls. I great, we go beyond the Jews in acknowledging thus much,
and in approving of it. But there is more required to the pardon of our sins,
and obtaining a right to heaven. We must believe in the name of Chr: if we do
not, it shall profit us little, that we know so much. The Luke 12. 48.
servant that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes. What have we but a bare knowledge of the Gospel? Yes, you will
say, we believe too. Do we indeed believe, that there is no life, nor
salvation, but by faith in Christ? and yet believe not in him, that we may be
partakers of them? What? Do we not care, whether we be saved or no? It is
impossible we should be so desperate: Questionless howsoever we deceiueour
selves, we do not so much as give credit to the truth of the Gospel. But of
this too much; being not intended by the Evangelist.

It follows, But to as many as received him, to them Verse 12.
he gave Prerogative, etc. Great was the Jews unkindness, that rejected our
Savior Christ, when he offered himself so friendly to them, for the
procuring of their salvation. He came to his own, and his own received him
not. Was he therefore utterly refused by all? Our Evangelist in these verses
implies the contrary: showing what privilege they got, who received, and
entertained him by faith. They became the sons of God, by believing in his
name. Being borne not of blood, etc. but of God. So that the former of these
two verses sets down the estate of them, that received him, that they were the
sons of God. The later sets forth the point more at large, declaring their
birth to be of God. In the handling of them, I will keep mine ordinary
course; First to speak of the words, as need requires: then to deliver the
Evangelists meaning.

Concerning the words, I am in the first place, to examine the translation of
some of them: Secondly to search out their signification. The translation, that
affords some cause of doubt, is of two words in the middle of the verse,
Prerogative, and to be. Not Prerogative, say our Rhemists, but Power; not to
be, but to be made: and upon these words so interpreted, they build the
Doctrine of free will. Besides these two, there are also two oother words,
which are somewhat doubtful for their significations, in the later part of the
verse. What it is To believe in; what is meant by his name. For the better
conceiving of the Evangelists meaning, I will first inquire, how these verses
depend upon the former: Secondly, what it is, that Saint John would teach us by
them.

Of translations a man may say, as of potions: that if they be not carefully,
and faithfully prepared, they may kill, in stead of curing. For although
sometimes, a man of a strong constitution, by the benefit of nature, ouercomes
the danger of such an accident: yet where one escapes, many perish. I^falls
out so in erroneous translations: some by skill in the Original, can correct
the error, when they read; other (though but a few) discerning some
contrariety, betwixt some one or two places, and the general course, that is
held in the scripture, can with wisdom reject that, which with reason they
cannot receive. Those, whom God will have especially preserved, have also a
farther teaching of the spirit, by which they are kept from approbation of that,
which might overthrow their belief and salvation. All these are but a small
number in comparison of the multitude of them, who like fishes swallow up the
hook with the bait, and feed on Rats-bane, as if it were sugar. Upon such
our Rhemists ordinarily work, by that corrupt, and poison-full translation of
the new Testament; wherein, either they take advantage of former errors, where
they find any, to continue them, or if they find none, breed some. The vulgar
Latin, and our old English translation, before that, which was printed at
Geneua, express the word, that our Evangelist here uses, by Potestatem,
Power. This interpretation the Rhemists willingly embrace, and thrust it upon
their followers, and commend it to all that will believe them, that they may
thereby lay a foundation for free will to stand upon.

Neither are they contented heerewithall: but in the second edition of their
said Testament, printed at Antwerpe, Anno 1600.
after their return to Doway, they condemn the Truth, to establish their
Error. For in the margin, at this verse, thus they write. Bezafalsely
translateth dignitatem, for potestatem. I wonder, and can not certainly
resolve, what the reason should be, why these English Papists, should forbear
to find fault with our English later translations and lash out so against
Beza. He translates Dignitatem, we prerogative. Does it more concern your
ignorant Lay English, to know what is amiss in Beza, whom some of them
(perhaps) never heard of, few of them are able to understand, none of them
almost will vouchsafe to read, or may without leave, then to be taught, what
is faulty in the English, which is in every man's hand, and sight? But
Protestants make great account of Bezas translation. And great cause they have
so to do. For although it bewray the infirmity of man in some places; yet it
has brought exceeding great light, to the true understanding of the Scripture.
Could you hope that any Protestant, would be so simple, as to condemn a man
so famous in the Church of GOD for his learning, and piety, upon the bare word
of a few Popish Priests? They, that are able to examine the matter, will clear
him, and cast you. They that have no such skill, must needs be void, not of
grace only, but of reason too, if they will be persuaded, against the truth
commonly held in all protestant Churches, by a simple affirmation of men,
whom they know not, who neither can, nor offer to bring any proof of that,
which they confidently avouch.

But it is not my purpose to enter into any commendation or defense of Beza,
farther, then it concerns our own translation; which can not be justified, if
his be condemned. You say Beza translates falsely, because he interprets the
Greek Word, dignitatem. (...)
If the translation be false in Beza, or our English, it is either because the
word will not bear it, or for that it will not stand with the sense of the
holy Ghost, in this place. For if it agree with both, out of doubt the
translation is warrantable. Now what does Beza mean by Dignity, or we by
Prerogative, but an Honor, and Authority, or Right, by which we are the
sons of God? So did Erasmus expound it, before Beza, Erasmus in Pa^aphrasi ^d
hun^ locum. Immanuell Saa^n Ioa. annot. ad hunc locum. Romans 13. 1.
a man of no mean skill in the Greek tongue. So since Beza, one of your own
side a famous Jesuit Immanuell Saa; Authority, Dignity, Pre-eminence: and for
proof of his interpretation, he brings that place of Saint Paul; Let every
soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no power but of GOD. Here
the word translated Powers, and Power: in his Judgment signifies Authority,
or Dignity; and, by a trope, them, Metonymia Adiuncti.
that are in Authority, Honor, or Dignity. Palacius, an other of your own
men, sometimes Divinity Reader Mi^hael Palacius ad Ioa. cap. 1. Enarrat 28.. I
am ^ero.
in the University of Salamonca in Spain, having recited diverse
Interpretations of this word, at the last concludes, that the most natural
sense of it, in this place, is to take Potestatem, power, for Dignitatem,
Prerogative; and he adds a little after, that if we translate as the vulgar
Latin has it, Potestatem Power, the Est sensus subobs^urus.
sense will be somewhat obscure.

You hear the judgment of some learned Papists; shall I confirm the point by
the Authority of some ancient writers? Cyril expounds Potestatem, to be
Dignitatem; that is, he shows, that the word used by the Evangelist in
Greek (wherein also Cyrill writ) signifies as much, as Prerogative, or Honor;
and to this Cyril. in Ioa. lib. 1. cap. 3.
purpose is he alleged by Palacius; who seconds this Judgment of Cyrill,
with the consent of Erasmus, though he will not name him. If all this weigh
nothing with our Rhemists; yet I am sure they will be advised, how they
dislent from Gregory the great, a Saint (as they would have it) of their
Church; indeed a learned and holy man, a Bishop of Rome, the first of that
name. Let us here how he takes the place? He gave them (says Gregor. in Ezech
homil. 6.
Gregory) this Dignity, and Excellency. Dignity, and Excellency? What is
that, but Prerogative? If Beza translate falsely, what does Gregory? Do you
not wound him, through the others sides? How shall the one be acquitted, if the
other be condemned? For howsoever Gregory makes not profession to translate
the place, as Beza does: yet he gives us his judgment of the signification,
and sense^, by alleging it in those words. And surely all the Autors, that I
have hitherto brought, serve as well to show the meaning of the word in this
Text, as the signification of it in general. To which may be added for farther
proof of the matter, the judgment of all them, who translate, or expound it,
Authority, or Right: and in a word, of all them, that acknowledge the Hugo
Cardinal Dionys. Carthu. Toletus Maldonatus.
Evangelist to speak in this place, not of power, refting in man, after grace
received, to make himself the son of God, but of his actual being the son
of God, immediately upon his believing, or having of grace. And of this mind
are most of the late Interpreters, among the Papists themselves. Yea, Maldonat
a great man, and a ^oan. Maldonat ad hunc locum.
principal Jesuit, not many years since, Divinity Reader in Paris, can not
choose, but confess, that by power, as they translate it, right is signified.
And when he had propounded our interpretation (I mean for the sense) all the
reason, he could find, to refuse it, was no more, but this, that having
formerly liked of it, afterward he grew into mislike, because he found it in a
certain heretical Interpreter. He says withal indeed, that he did better
consider of it: But he, that advisedly marks, what his better consideration
affords, may easily discern, that he had more will, then reason, to dissent
from him, whom he standerously calls an heretic.

It appears then, by the judgment of the Papists themselves, and of some
ancient writers, that the word in this place, both for the nature of it, and
the sense of the text, may well be translated, Dignity, or Prerogative. But
for the better clearing of the matter, and to make way for my answer to these
Rhemists, touching free will (whereof when I come to handle the Doctrine) I
think it not amiss, to take a little more pains, in delivering the
significations of the word. All which may be drawn to two heads. Authority,
and Power. Of the former, the Rhemists afford diverse examples. I am a man,
(says the Centurion) Mat. 8. 9.
subject to Authority. They might as well have said power, as they do three or
four times together, in an other place; Let every soul be subject to higher
Romans 13. 1. 2. 3.
Powers, for there is no Power, but of God. What should I stand to recite the
words? You may read them at your leisure, in these places. Luke 17. 8. Act. 9.
14. and 26. 10 12. 1. Cor. 15. 24. 1. These. 3 9. Sometimes they translate the
word Potentates; that is, such as have Authority, and bear rule, whether
lawfully, or unlawfully. When they shall bring you (says our Savior to his
disciples) Luke 12. 11.
into the Synagogues, and to Magistrates and Potentates. So Ephesians. 1. 21. and
3. 10. Col. 1. 16. Tit: 3. 1. 1. Pet. 3. 22. Of unlawful Authority we have
example where the Apostle says, that, Our wrestling is not against Ep (...) 6.
1.
flesh, and blood, but against Princes, and Potestates; meaning, as it is
plain by the next words, the evil spirits, or devils. Of whom, speaking in
an other Epistle, he says, that Christ spoiled the Principalities Col. 2. 15.
and Potestates. Under this signification I comprehend all those texts, where,
by this word, lawfulness to do this, or that, is understood. For example; our
Lord says, He has power to lay down his life, and Ioh. 10. 18.
power to take it up again. What power was this? Lawful Authority; that he
might do it, without any sin, or disobedience to GOD his Father. So the
Apostle says of himself, and Barnabas; that, They 1. Cor. 9. 3. 4.
had power to eat, and drink, power to lead about a wife; namely, it was
lawful for them. In this sense, our Rhemists once translate it Liberty: Take
heed least perhaps this your liberty (say they) become an offense 1 Cor. 8 9.
to the weak. Our translation has Power. All is one in effect: Liberty, or
Power, signifies there a lawfullnes to eat that meat, which was dedicated to
Idols: Although the Apostle indeed, in that place, speaks but upon
supposition, the thing as it is manifest being unlawful in the Idols temple,
whereof he there entreats. 1. Cor. 10. 21.


When the word signifies Power, it is put for ability to do something, as
these examples show: He gave them Mark. 3. 15.
power, to cure diseases, and to cast out Devils. This was that, which Simon
the Sorcerer would have bought of the Apostles. Give me also this power (quoth
he) that on whomsoever Act 8. 19.
I lay my hands, he may receive the holy Ghost. So may we understand that
place, where the chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders asked our Savior, by what
power, he did those things. And this interpretation Luke 20. 2.
agrees very well with the blasphemy of the Pharisees, who affirmed, that He
cast out Devils, Mat. 12. 24.
through Beelzebub, the prince of the Devils. If we translate it Authority,
both the word and the sense will bear it.

But wheresoever it may be translated Power, it never signifies freewill in
any place of the Scripture. That I may make good this point, I must crave a
little leave of you, to examine some especial texts of the new Testament,
which seem to require, or admit that signification. It will not be lost
labor, to bestow some time, and pains, in a matter of so great importance.
The first, and I think the principal place, that has most show of free will,
is that which I brought out of this Gospel; where our Lord tells the Jews
that he had power to lay down his life, and power to take it again. Ioh. 10.
18.
I said before, that this power, was lawful Authority. But I said it only;
which for the present occasion was sufficient: now it stands me upon to prove
it. Which how can I better, or certainlyer do, then from the Text it self?
Our Savior speaks in the later part of that verse, of a commandment, that
he had received from his Father; for the doing of that, which he says there,
he had power to do. Now that, which a man does by Commission, he does by
lawful Authority: that which he does by commandment, is not left to his
choice, to be done, or undone, at his pleasure. If our Lord had meant to show
his free will in this case, either he would have made no mention at all of
any Commandment; or at least, he would have said, that his Father had given
him Commandment, to do what he list in the matter; either to die, or not to
die; either to live again, or not to live again. And yet, to say the truth, I
do not see what reason there is in such a speech; I have commandment to do
what I list: Nay rather I have liberty, or at the most commission.

Let us examine the matter, somewhat more particularly. Is it true, that our
Savior CHRIST had such liberty, as, upon this grant of free will, must needs
ensue? I will not ask, how it can stand with the commandment, he names; that
was touched before. Was it in his choice, whether he would die or no? And when
he was dead, whether he would live again or no? I suppose, no man will be
hasty to affirm the later, whatsoever he may imagine of the former. For the
Apostle Peter, a^oucheth in plain Act. 2. 24.
terms, that it was impossible he should be held by Death. Nether was there
less necessity of his death, then of his Resurrection (I speak of both in
respect of the event). And therefore himself tells the two Luke 24. 26.
Disciples; that it could not be, but that he must have suffered such things;
which he confirms afterward to all the Disciples, somewhat more generally:
These are the words (says he) which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with
you, that all must be fulfilled, which is written of me in the Law of Moses,
in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. But the handling of this point belongs to
an other place; thus much by the way. It will be objected perhaps, that the
former part of our Lords speech seems to prove, that he speaks of the
freedom of his will, because he says, that No man takes his life from him,
but he lays it down of himself: whereas if he had not his choice, whether
he would die or no; his life were taken from him, and not not laid down by
himself. But who sees not, that our Savior speaks of the malice, and craft
of men, which he could easily have withstood, or prevented, by many means,
but that he had undertaken to yield himself into their hands. That power
remained still in him, by which he could have defeated them of their purpose,
and preserved his own life, had he not willingly made himself subject unto
death. Yet I deny not, but it was free for him, in regard of the nature of his
will, which was not altered, or forced, nor can be, to die or not to die: But
(in the event) it could not possibly fall out, that he should escape. But of
this place enough.

There is an other, in this same Gospel of the like nature; where Pilat, at
the arraignement of our Lord, says thus to him; Know thou not, that I have
power to crucify thee, and power to loose thee? Does Pilat mean Ioh. 19. 10.
he had freewill? No such matter: But that he had authority, and that it lay
in his hands, to acquit, or condemn him. This, our Saviors answer shows;
Thou could have no power over me (says he) except it were given thee from
above. Our Lord does not mean, that he could not have freewill in this case,
unless he had it from God; but that himself, had never bin at Pilats
disposition, except God had before hand so appointed, to deliver him into his
hands. This is that which the Apostles profess in their Sermon to the Jews,
that he was delivered, by the determinate Act. 2. 23.
counsel, and foreknowledge of GOD. Which afterward is repeated in their
prayer, and special mention made of Pilat, Herod, the Gentiles, and the Jews;
who are said Chap. 4. 27. 28.
to have gathered themselves together against Jesus, To do whatsoever the
hand, and the Counsel of GOD had determined before to be done. What reason is
there then, to understand the word in this place, of freewill?

In the book of the Acts, there are two texts, that seem to lean this way,
toward freewill, signified by the word here used. It is not for you (says
Christ) to know the times or the seasons, which the father, has Act. 1. 7.
put in his own power: How has the father put the times, or seasons in his
power, but by reserving all Authority to himself, to appoint them, according
to his own will, and to give men such notice of them, as he thinks good? But
the other place is somewhat harder. Ananias (you know the story) having sold a
possession, kept away part of the money, for which he had sold it, and brought
a certain part to the Apostles, making show, as if that had bin all, that he
received for it. Peter reproving him for this grievous hypocrisy, reasons thus
with him; whiles it remained, appertained it not to thee? And after it was
sold, was it not in thine Chap. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4
own power? Here, by Power the Apostle may seem to note, that it was in his
own choice, to dispose of it, as pleased him. And surely this follows upon
the Apostles speech. But the word rather signifies, that he had full
authority over it, as were after the sale, as before, to do what he would
withal. Was it not in thy hand? Might thou not lawfully have retained the
whole sum? For if we understand the speech of his free will, so he may be
said to have it in his power, though it had bin due to the maintenance of the
poor? But the Apostle would show him, that there was no reasonable excuse for
his sin; because it was not a matter, that lay upon him by any Commandment,
or law: but a thing that proceeded from his own choice, whereas lawfully he
might have done otherwise.

These are the principal places, and in a manner all of them, which (as far
as I am able to discern) ^aue any reasonable show of proof that the word may
be taken for freedom of will. As for a few other in the former Epistle to
the Corinthians, it is no hard matter to answer them in a word. First, where
the Apostle speaks of a man's having power over his own 1. Cor. 7. 37.
will, it is plain he means not free will, but command over that freedom,
by which a man has liberty, to keep or not to keep his virgin. So that this
power determines, and as it were ties the will to the one only; as the words
before declare, where he speaks of being firm in his heart; that is as it
follows in the later part of the verse, having decreed in his heart, that he
will keep his virgin. In the ninth Chapter, there is often mention of power to
eat, power to lead about a wife, power not to labor, with hands; power to
Chap. 9. 4. 5. 6.
partake of their goods, to whom they preach. What is this else, but a lawful
Authority to do, or not do these things, as in spiritual discretion, they
shall think most fit, for the edifying of their brethren? Now all, that has
bin said, being considered: I think I may safely conclude, that the word,
which our Rhemists translate power, understanding by it free will, may well be
expounded Dignity, or Prerogative in this Text; and is never so used in any
part of the new Testament, that it must needs be taken for freewill.

Of the other word, the translation and signification whereof I am now to
search out, I can not say so: because there are many places, where it can not
stand for to be, but of necessity must be taken for to be made. It is
enough to justify our translation, so far as concerns the nature of the
word it self, that it signifies, and that often, in the Scripture, yea
ordinarily, to be; as we in this place translate it. I wittingly, and
willingly forbear to allege any proof of that, I say, by bringing examples;
because it is known, and acknowledged by all, that have any little skill of
the Greek tongue. But since both may be, what reason can we bring, why our to
be should be preferred, before the Papists to be made? First it is certain,
that all they, which expound the former, by dignity, excellency, and such
like, understand by this later, a present possession of Sonship (if I may so
speak) and not a future possibility. Secondly, they also, that by it, will
have authority, or right to be meant, generally are of opinion, that they, of
whom our Evangelist here speaks, are actually, and in their present estate,
sons of God, by that grace, which is signified in the other word, though some
think it may be lost afterward. Only Maldonat the Jesuit, fearing, as it
may well be thought, least he should be taken for an heritike, as he was
sometimes accused to be; though he confess, that by the former word, right is
signified; yet he will not at any hand, agree with us, about this latter point;
but chooses rather to allow of an other exposition; and that none of the best,
neither. To them (says Maldonat) that were already truly, or indeed Vere. us.
the sons of God, he gave right, or title, that they might also be his
heirs. Can any man persuade himself, that the holy Ghost, if he had intended
to note a ^arder, and greator honor, then being a son, would not have used a
word fit for that purpose, and namely Heir, but have contented himself with
the common word sonne^? The Apostle Paul, when he had honored them, that
Romans 8. 17.
truly believe in Christ, with the title of sons, and as i^ were endued them
with the spirit, as an assurance of their being sons, adds a farther
amplification of their happiness, that they were heirs also, even heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. Questionless, if the Evangelist had
meant to signify this point, of being heirs as distinct, and superior to
that of Sons, he would either hauespoke^ as S. Paul had done before him, or
have made choice of that word, that is proper to that dignity, and interest.

But let the Evangelist declare his own meaning. What can be more plain,
then that, which follows in the next verse; which are borne not of blood,
etc. Ver. 13.
They, that believe in the name of Christ, are borne of God: Therefore are they
sons, not only have Power, Authority, or Right to be; as if they were not
so upon their beeleeuing, but must procure that afterward in time, I know not
when, by a second grace, to be purchased by the good use of the former. The
Scripture delivers an other manner of Doctrine, teaching us, that all, even
as many as believe in Christ, according to the Gospel, are the sons of God
by faith. Ye are all (says the Apostle to the Galathians) Gal. 3. 26.
the Sons of GOD by faith in CHRIST. Nay (say our Papists) not by faith, but
by charity. Faith indeed gives us a certain right, that we may become the
sons of God; but it is charity, by which we attain to this honor. As if
our love to God proceeded not from that spirit of his, by which we received
faith, and which teaches, and stirs us up to call God Father. Because ye
are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit Chap. 4. 6.
of his Son into your hearts, which cries Abba Father. See I pray you; if
there be any difference of times in these matters, we are sons, ere we
have this spirit of love. And why, or how, do we, or can we love God, but in
respect of his fatherly kindness to us in Jesus Christ? we love, because we are
sons; we are not made sons, because we love first. But I may not wade too
far in this matter, which appertains to the Doctrine here delivered;
whereas I am yet, but in search for the signification of the words. Wherein we
have found two things, that we looked for; and lighted upon a third by
occasion. First, the word used by our Evangelist, and translated by our
Rhemists, Power, does not signify free will, but dignity, or prerogative.
Secondly, the other word notes our present estate upon belief, that we are the
Sons of God; not our possibility, that we may be, if we use the grace we have
received, well. In this search, the word Son, offered it self to us in its
own proper signification, not usurping the place of his brother heir.

We are now to go forward, in the like examination of two other words, or
rather phrases: and to enquire, what it is to believe in this, or that, and so
To believe in Christ. Secondly, what is meant by Believing in his name; whether
it be all one with Believing in him, or no. Now of the former I shall need to
say the less, because I spoke of it somewhat largely, upon the first occasion,
that offered it self, in this Gospel at the seventh verse. That all men
through him might believe. The brief o^ Verse. 7.
that, which then was delivered, touching this point, is this; that To believe,
is an action, either of the understanding, or of the will. The former, that is,
Believing as it has place in the understanding, is either an holding of some
point, as a truth ingraffed in us by nature; as, we believe there is a God: or
an assenting to some thing revealed, upon the credit of him, that reueales it;
as, we acknowledge the Scripture to be the word of God, and every thing in
it, to be sure, and certain; according as we are persuaded by the holy Ghost,
to whom we give absolute credit, upon his own word. The other Believing,
which is seated in the will, and arises from the former in the understanding,
is a resting upon, or trusting to some person, or thing, for some benefit to be
obtained thereby. So the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh,
when the Hagarenes made war 1. Chr. 5. 18. 19 20.
upon them, trusted to God for succor, and were helped against them, with a
glorious victory. But the children of Israel would not trust to him, or rely
on him for food, in the wilderness; Therefore fire was kindled in Jacob. (as
it is in the Psalm) and also wrath came upon Psa. 78 21 22
Israel; Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his help. Of
this nature, and meaning, is the word Believing, when it concerns
justification, or salvation. This may easily appear by those kind of phrases,
that the holy Ghost often uses in this matter; To believe in, or upon God, and
Christ. He, that believes Ioh. 6. 47.
in me (says our Savior Christ) has everlasting life. Believe on the Lord
Jesus! Christ (say Act. 16. 31.
Paul, and Silas to the laylour) and thou shall be saved. And whereas
sometimes, in this very point of believing to everlasting life, the word is
not so significant; I showed that the sense, and purpose of the Spirit of God
notwithstanding is all one.

It will not be amiss perhaps to make it plain by an example or two; First
what is simply to believe, in Ioh. 1. 7.
this case? John was sent to bear witness, that all through him might
believe. What belief was it, that John taught? The Apostle Paul tells us; that
they should believe in him Act. 19. 4.
which should come after him, that is in Jesus Christ. Do you not see, that
under the bare word, believing, faith in Christ is employed? Sometimes there is
a little addition; as Abraham is said not only to have believed, but to have
Romans 4. 3. 4.
believed God. How does the Apostle expound this belief? By believing on or
upon God. What is that else, but Verse. 5.
resting upon God? So the same Chapter teaches us to understand that manner of
speech: which believe on him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead;
Verse. 18.
that is, trust to him, to be justified, and acquitted of their sins. Add
hereunto, if you please, that of the Apostle Peter, out of the Prophet Isai:
Behold, I put in Sion a chief cornerstone, elect, and precious: he, that 1.
Pet. 2. 6
believes thereon shall not be ashamed. How is this stone to be believed on?
but by a man's settling, and reposing himself there upon? Therefore the Hebrew
in the Prophet Isai. 28. 26.
is, shall not make haste: as if he should have said; shall cast himself upon
God to be succored by him, and wait with patience, for the performance of his
gracious promise. The greek expresses the event, that shall ensue upon this
believing, by a denial of the contrary, set out to our view by a tropicall
speech of being a shamed. For he, that looks for succor, and by failing of it
is overthrown, usually is ashamed both of his trust, and of his foil. So
shall not he be, says the Lord, that rests upon Jesus Christ, as upon the
rock of salvation. This also the Chalde paraphrase expresses; shall not be
moved: Paraph. Chald. ad Isai. 28. 16. Mat. 7. 25.
being built (as our Savior says in the Gospel) upon a Rock, against which
the winds, and waves beat in vain, making a great noise, but doing no hurt at
all, because the house is grounded upon a Rock.

But you will say, There are diverse places of Scripture, where that faith, by
which we are justified, an^ saved, is confined to the understanding, and
signify no more, but an assent to the truth of that, which is delivered by God
to be believed. Such is that, touching Abraham's faith, which was imputed to him
for righteousness. First, he is said, not to have bin weak in faith, not to
have considered the deadness of his own, or his wife Sarahs Romans 4. 3. 23.
body, not to have doubted of the promise of God, through unbelief etc. Then
this faith, or believing is expressed, to have been a full assurance, that he,
which had promised, was Verse. 21.
also able to do it. What is there in all this great commendation of Abraham's
faith, but only an amplification of his believing God, that he had promised him
no more, then he was well able to perform? So in the Epistle to Heb. 11. 3.
the Hebrews, we are said by faith to understand, that the world was ordained
by the word of God: and yet all men grant, as also the former Chapter
evidently shows, Chap. 10. 38. 39
that the Apostle speaks of such a faith, as the just live by. It is not my
purpose to enter into a full disputation, or discourse of faith: which I
reserve for my exposition of the Epistle to the Romans; yet I may not leave
these doubts unsatisfied, nor the nature of faith unknown. Therefore, to
these, and such like places of Scripture, and objections from them, I answer,
first in general, that believing (as it belongs to the understanding) is
sometimes mentioned alone; because it is the root, and fountain from which
the other does spring, and flow. For it is impossible, that any man should rely
upon God, for the performance of that, which he does not believe he has
promised, or doubts whether he be able to do, or no. Yea, I say farther, that
such a belief in the mind is signified in all such places, as is always
necessarily accompanied with trusting to God, for that, which we believe, he
can bring to pass. If you demand farther, why I should not content my self
with the former faith only, seeing it is (diverse times) set alone in the point
of Justification; I answer, that therefore I take the other also to be
employed in it, because I find it very often expressed in the Scripture; and a new
kind of speech, as it were purposely devised by the holy Ghost, to make us the
more easily, and fully understand, what faith he means, in the matter of our
justification.

I deny not that the Hebrew adds the preposition ^
often times, which the 70 sometimes express, sometimes ouerpasse: but this I
say; that the phrase, which the holy Ghost most commonly uses, in the new
Testament to express Believing in Christ, is neither in the (...)
greek translation of the old, nor (for ought I could ever yet find) in any
greek Author whatsoever, except those that writ since, and took it from the
Scripture. To believe in God, or in Christ, for the substance, and sense, is no
more, but to trust to God, or Christ; and this kind of speech is usual in the
greek tongue, and writers. To help us in the understanding of this, the 70.
in their greek afford an other phrase, marvelous significant, To (...)
believe upon, or on God. This the holy Ghost might have contented himself
withal, using it often, as he does; and by this, the Hebrew Preposition is
now, and Act. 16. 13. Romans 4. 5. 18.
then, expressed in the Greek. But, as if he would have us out of al doubt,
touching a matter of so great importance he becomes author of a new phrase
himself. To believe in Christ. Shall any man persuade me, that he means
(...).
no more by it, but a bare assenting to the truth? What needed this strange
manner of speech, which does rather darken, then inlighten the understanding,
for the right conceiving of the holy Ghosts true meaning? Abraham believed God.
Every man knows what this means; especially if it signify no more, hut giving
credit to the truth of that, which is spoken. But the Apostle expou^ds it by
Believing in, or on God. Is not this to make the matter doubtful, by an
exposition, whereas of it self, it, was plain, and certain enough? It cannot
be therefore, but that the holy Ghost, by this new kind of speech notes
somewhat more, then simply to assent to the truth of God, upon the authority of
the speaker.

In particular I say farther, touching that of Abraham; Romans 4. 5.
first that his believing (as we have often heard) is a believing in God, or
resting upon God. 2, that believing could not have profited Abraham, if he had
only acknowledgd the truth of that, which God promised, and not trusted to him,
for the performance thereof. What can it avail any man to Justification, that
he holds JESUS CHRIST to be the only Savior, and faith in himt he only means
of salvation, if he do not withal rely upon him, to be saved by his
mediation? Thirdly, it must be considered, that the Apostle, applying that
particular of Abraham, to all believers; expounds that believing, by relying
upon God. Which believe on him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.
What is it (think you) to believe on Verse 24.
him, that raised Jesus? To assent to the truth of Scripture, that tells us, he
was raised? Then should the Apostle rather have spoken thus, which believe God,
who says he has raised him. But it is required, that we believe on him; and
there is no speech, nor thought of any thing affirmed by God, which we should
believe. Let us understand it thus; which believe, that God raised Jesus.
Certainly if this had been the Apostles meaning, he would never have spoken
so doubtfully, of so weighty a matter, where he had a plain, and easy speech
to express that, which he intended, to the understanding of every man; whereas
no man would ever conceive what he meant, by these words, if they signified
no more, but giving credit to the truth of our Sauiors resurrection.

As for the other place out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, what can possibly
be concluded out of it, against Heb. 11. 7.
that, I have delivered, touching the nature of that faith, by which we are
justified? What, if by it we understand, that the world was ordained of GOD? Is
this all, that is required to the justifying of a man, in respect of faith?
There is no such thing, either expressed, or employed in the words. Nay rather,
all the examples, that follow, are so many proofs, that the faith, whereof the
holy Ghost there speaks, can not be severed from be leeuing in God. I will
not stand upon the particulars at this time; the later part of the next Chapter
before, upon occasion whereof the Apostle falls into this discourse of faith,
gives sentence for me. The just shall live Chap. 10. 38. 37.
by faith. By what faith? by that, which only gives credit to the truth of God?
No but by such a faith, as makes us rest upon God, for the performance of his
promise: which presupposes the truth thereof. How chance the^ that the Apostle
in setting forth the nature of faith, asscribes such effects thereunto, as may
be without any resting upon God? Shall we say, that this faith spreds it
self over the whole soul, and is seated as well in the understanding, as in
the affection? I see not how it can stand with reason, to place any habit, or
quality in two diverse parts, or faculties of the soul. What then? Is not
believing of the truth required to justification? Yes surely: There is no
possibility of salvation, without it. For how shall any man trust in Christ, to
be justified by him, it he do not believe, that he is appointed by God, to
be a Savior of all them, that trust unto him? But the question is; first,
whether Belief be nothing else but an assenting to the truth; Secondly,
whether the true nature of that faith, which is availeable to our
justification, consist in resting upon Christ, to be justified by him, or no:
Assent is required, as the root and foundation; but the very form of
justifying faith, is believing in Christ; as it shall appear (I hope) when I
have just occasion to define it, and handle it at large. In the mean while,
that no man may be troubled about that place to the Hebrews, let us remember,
that the Apostle being to set forth justifying faith, and to persuade
continuance in obedience thereunto, enters into a commendation of faith in
general, for the amply fying of that particular.

But for the settling of our minds in the true knowledge of that belief, which
is required to our justification, nothing (I take it) can be of greater force,
then the consideration of the word, as it is used (ordinarily) in the old
Testament. When any blessing is to be receined from God, what belief is it,
that the Lord expects of his people, to the end, they may have his
protection, and assistance? A few examples will show the nature of it. Because
thou have rested on the king of Aram, and have not rested upon the Lord thy
God, therefore is the host of the king of Aram escaped out of thy 1. Chro. 5.
18. 19. 20.
hands. Thus did Hanani the Seer reprove Asa king of Judah, showing him that
the reason, why he prevailed not against the Aramites, was his not trusting in
God. The same point he amplifyed in the verse following; The Aethiopians
(says he) and the Lybians, were Ver. 8.
they not a great host, with Charrets, and hors-men exceeding many? Yet
because thou did rest on the Lord, he delivered them into thy hand.
Therefore does Iehosaphat exhort his people to the like trust in God, and
assures them of deliverance from their enemies thereupon. Put your trust on
the Lord your God (says he) and ye shall be assured. Chap 20. 20.
We heard of the Reubenites before; that the Hagarins were delivered into their
hands, because they trusted in God. 1 Chro. 5. 20.
That the wrath of the Lord was kindled, against the Israelits Because they
believed not in God, and trusted not in his help. Psalm. 78. 22.
To this trust is blessedness ascribed: Blessed are all, that Psa. 2. 12.
trust in him. Yea, with such a blessedness, as shall never fail them. They,
that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Psalm. 125. 1.
Syon, which cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever. Taste and see (says
the Psalm) how gracious the Lord is: Psalm. 34. 8.
blessed is the man, that trusts in him: Such a man will not be afraid of
evil tidings; his heart is fixed, and believes in the Lord. This is to
believe to salvation, even to have his heart settled, and to repose himself
wholly, and only Ps. 112 7. Act. 16. 31.
upon Jesus Christ. As for that persuasion, which every man must have, and
wherein some would have faith consist; it follows him, that is justified, and
goes not before any man's justification; as faith must needs do: for the
condition, to be performed on our part, to justification, is to Believe.

So then, to believe in Christ, is to rest upon Christ: but what is it To
believe in his name? Must his name be rested upon, as if there were some
especial virtue in it? In which of his names? In JESUS, or in CHRIST? For of
Imanuell it is needless to say any thing, because he is not once so called in
all this Gospel; and if the Evangelist speak of a name, doubtless he
speaks of such a name, as was known and ordinary: neither would he have
omitted it in the history, if it had been of such importance, and use. It may
seem perhaps, that Jesus is the name, in which all men, that will be saved
must believe. For that is it, by which Saint John, commonly calls our Lord in
his gospel; and by which he was well known amongst men, as having been given
him, at the time of his circumcision, Luke 2. 21.
and continued, according to the custom of the Jews. We have found him (says
Philip to Nathaneel) of Ioh. 1. 45.
whom Moses did write in the law, and of whom the Prophets writ; Jesus the
Son of Joseph. And of this name Jesus, many excellent things are spoken in
the Scripture. That is said to have cured the man, that had been a cripple
Act. 3. 16. 6.
from his mothers womb. At that name, even at the name of Jesus, must every
knee bow: By that name wonders have been Phil. 2. 10.
wrought, according as the Apostles prayed to God, that healing, and signs.
and wonders might be done, by the name of his Act. 4. 30.
holy Son Jesus. Neither is this name effectual for bodily cures only, but
(as the Apostle Saint Peter profeseth) Ver. 12.
There is given no other name under heaven, by which we must be saved.

But is there indeed such power in the name? What then needed our Lord to have
come himself in the flesh? seeing there were more then one of that name, many
years, before he was conceived in the womb of the blessed virgin in his
mother. Jesus the Son of Iosedec is Hag. 1. 12.
famous in Hagge, being high Priest after the peoples return out of the
Captivity. But much more famous was osua. 1. 1. 2. 3.
the other Jesus, who brought the people of Israel into the Land of Canaan,
and divided to every Tribe his proper in heritance. That the names are all one,
though some would make a curious, and an idle distinction betwixt them, both
the nature of the words show, and the holy Ghost in the new testament has
made it manifest, by calling Joshua, Jesus, without any kind of difference in
the name. If Jesus had given them rest. Afterward, Heb. 4. 8.
the Apostle in the same Chapter, having occasion to name Jesus our Savior,
that he might be understood to speak of him, and not of Joshua, adds his
title, Jesus the son of God. What should that have needed, Ver. 14.
if the name it self, had afforded sufficient note of difference betwixt them?
But it is plain in the original Greek, and in the Syriake, and Latin
translations, as also in our English, that there is none. The 70. Jews, that
turned the old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek, so expressed the names both
of that Leader, and of the high Priest. Joshua. 1. 1. Now after the death of
Moses the servant of the Lord, the Lord spoke unto Joshua (Jesus says the
Greek) and so through out that whole book. So of Iehoshua the high Priest.
Zach, the third and the first. And he showed me Iehoshua or Jesus, the high
Priest, and so in the 3, 6, and 8, verses of the same Chap. If the name given
to our Savior Christ, by Gods own appointment, had been diverse from the
other; surely the holy Ghost would not have confounded them But now of purpose
the same is retained, that all men might understand the reason of it; as it is
partly signified, in that place to the Hebrews, concerning another Rest, into
which Jesus Christ has brought the people of Israel, the true children of
God. Hebrews, 4 8. For if Jesus had given them rest. (who was this Jesus, but
Joshua?) then would he not after this day have spoken of another.

What should I trouble you with many words, of this matter? By the name, the
party, whose name it is, is signified. Let the Apostle Peter expound himself.
His name has made this man sound, through faith in his Act. 3. 16.
name. Is it the name, or faith in the name Jesus; and not rather Jesus
himself, and faith in him? And the faith which is by him (says the Apostle)
has given him his perfect health. The like we have touching the same matter,
in the next Chapter; By the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, by him does this
man stand here Chap. 4. 10.
before you whole. This shows that the Miracles, which were wrought,
proceeded from the power of Christ, not from any virtue in his name. How then
should salvation come from, or by it? Hearken what the Angel says when he
gives the name. Thou shall Mat. 1. 21.
call his name, Jesus; for he shall save his people, from their sins. Not his
name, but He. For the name had neither blood, nor life to give in sacrifice:
without which there is no forgiveness of sins to be had. Heb. 9 22. Phil.
2. 10.
Neither is that honor, Saint Paul speaks of, to be given to the name, as if
the sound of those letters, so set together, deserved any special reverence;
or as if Jesus were of more excellency, the^ Christ. For (as I said once
before) then ought we to esteem the name of Jesus the son of Nun, and of
the other Jesus, the son of Iosedeck, more then of Christ the son of God.
Surely, if any name require bowing of the knee, it is that which God gave
himself, even Jehovah, and the other of the same kind, Eheieh, and Iah. But
the person is meant, when the name is mentioned: and the office of being a
Savior is that, to which all honor is due in heaven, and in earth, and under
the earth, by Angels, and men; not the Name of saving, which was common to our
Lord, with other men.

Why then does the Evangelist use this kind of speech, To believe in his name?
would he thereby note our Lords power; upon which every one, that will be
saved must rest, that he may be delivered out of the hands of sin, and
death? This may seem the likelier, because that miracle of curing the cripple
was wrought by the name of our Lord. In the name of Jesus Act. 3. 6. 16.
Christ of Nazareth (say Peter and John) rise up and walk. And where they give
account of their doing; His name has made this man sound. But I rather
persuade my self, that Saint John follows the Hebrewe phrase, by which
(ordinarily) the name is used, for the person. Ahraham called on the name of
the Genesis 13. 4.
Lord. That is, Abraham worshipped God, and offered up sacrifize unto him; for as
yet, that glorious name Jehovah was not known. I hold it altogether needless,
to Exodus 3. 14.
heap up many examples, in a matter out of question. Nothing is more common,
then to have the name of God, taken for God himself. Let him that has no
light Isay. 50. 10.
(says the Prophet Isay) trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.
The later expounds the former. To trust in the name of God, is nothing else,
but to stay or rest upon God. So that the name of God, and God himself
signify both one thing. His name also is often put for his worship; as when
the Priests are said, to despise Mal. 1. 6.
the name of the Lord, the meaning is, that they profane his worship, as a
matter of no worth. But this cannot be intended by the Evangelist.

For the better understanding of whose meaning, after the exposition of the
words, we must consider how this verse dependes upon the former; which we may
thus reasonably conceive: The Evangelist, in the next words before, showed the
unkindness, and unthankfulness of the Jews, in refusing him, that made offer
of himself unto them. His own received him not. A strange unkindness, that a
man so full of grace, and power, so holy in his life, so gracious in his words,
so mighty in his deeds, and that to the benefit of them, among whom heeliued,
should notwithstanding all this, be so peremptorily rejected. But was this
all? I grant it is not nothing, to be justly condemned of such uncivil, and
unnatural dealing. But there is worse behind, to show the folly of these men,
in being occasion to themselves of so great a loss. If an old man of fair
lands, and great wealth, should seek to be entertained of his near kinsmen,
or friends, and not be received, would not all the world charge them with
extraordinary unkindness, and condemn them of singular folly, for depriving
themselves of so goodly an inheritance, and so great an estate, as they
weresure to have enjoyed, by receiving of him? Such was the case, in the Jews
refusal of our Savior. As if Saint John should have said; His own, to whom
he came, received him not: but if they had received him, they had thereby
been made the sons of God.

For that prerogative he gave to as many, as by faith entertained him. So that
our Evangelist in this one verse both implies the unrecoverable loss of the
Jews, and all other, that refuse him; and expresses the inualuable gain of
all, that received him, whether they were Jews, or Gentiles. It seems a small
matter (perhaps) to many a man, not to believe in Jesus Christ: yea some men
think it little better, then simplicity, and baseness, to rest upon him. If
these wretches knew, what is lost by refusing him, what is gotten by receiving
him, they would run after him with all the haste, they can possibly make, and
embrace him with both their arms.

But I will leave these points to be amplyfied anon, when I have handled the
doctrine, that our Evangelist teaches us in this place: which is briefly this;
that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, has by that believing, the honor to
be the son of God. And because the matter is of so great importance,
containing the glory of a true Christian, and the means of attaining to it,
let us I beseech you, stir up our selves, with all diligence, to know and do
that, which will, certainly, bring us to the height of all true felicity. To
which purpose, I will divide my whole discourse into these two parts: The
prerogative to be the sons of God; The means of obtaining it. In the former,
I will first show, what it is: that is here vou^chsaf't us; To he the sons
of God. Secondly, that it is a prerogative; which is amplyfied by the
generality of it: that it belonges to all, that believe. The later part offers
two things to be considered, touching the means; That, this prerogative is
given; that, on our part believing in Christ is required. Many other points
will fall in here, and there: but I content my self with propounding these,
that are most general, and easy to be discerned in the Text. The first
point, concerning our being the sons of God, requires that I should show
some reason, why the Evangelist makes choice of this benefit above the rest:
that being declared, I will come to the exposition of the point it self.

Many, and excellent are the blessings, which it has pleased God, of his
infinite mercy, to bestow upon us, in his son Jesus Christ. He saues us from
our sins. He reconciles us Mat. 1. 21. Romans 5. 10: 1. Cor. 1. 30.
to God; He is made unto us wisdom, righteousness and redemption. When
should I make an end, if I should recite every particular? The question is,
why Saint John passing over all other benefittes received by him, mentions
this, rather the^ any other. What if we say, he made especial choice of this,
because it is the greatest? Surely we shall say no more, then is true, and not
un likely. For how could the Jews be more justly condemned, the hearts of all
men more inflamed with the love of faith, or the kindness of our Lord more
amplyfied, then by propounding the chiefest of all the blessings, whereof we
are made partakers by him? And what one is comparable to this? The saving us
from our sins, to speak properly, rather frees us from misery, then brings
us to happiness. Sanctification does no more, but refresh the image of God in
us, which was decayed, or restore it being lost; which can make us but good
servants, at the best. If any man think, that to be an heir, is a degree
above being a son; he must understand, that this implies, that Christ makes
none sons, but he makes them heirs too, by the same Kom 8. 17.
title. And therefore questionless, there is no blessing obtained by him, that
may stand in comparison with this, To be the sons of God. I deny not then,
but that this might be respected of our evangelist in his choice of this
benefit; but I think there were also other reasons of it.

He spoke immedately before, of the Jews not receiving of the Messiah. Now
the Jews were the men, that held themselves only to be the sons of God, by
reason of Abraham; from whom they were descended. Therefore the Lord
challenges them by the Prophet, Mal. 1. 6.
that they did not honor him. A son honors his father. If I be a father,
where is mine honor? Contrary to this conceit of theirs, the holy Ghost
gives them to understand, that the honor to be the sons of God, is not
appropriated to the Jewish nation, as they falsely imagined, but is common to
all the Gentiles, that will believe. As for them, their refusal to believe in
him, made them wholly destitute of that prerogative. What other blessing
afforded us by Christ, would so fittely have met with that proud conceit of
the unbelieving Jews? Forgiveness of sins, they little, or not at all
regarded; being puffed up with an over weening of their own righteousness. They
looked for reward, not Cyril. in Joan lib. 1. cap. 13.
for pardon. Fitly therefore, to abate this pride, does Saint John put them in
mind of other sons of God, Ambros. de fide. lib. 4. cap. 4 August. in tract
in Ioa 2. Bed. ad hu^c. loc.
such as they knew themselves not to be, for all their bragging. Another
reason is added, and may be admitted; that this was therefore especially named,
because it is that, which being proper to Christ, he, and he only could
give; that it may appear, he has wholly communicated himself unto us, if
he have imparted that, which was so truly, and nearly his own. Ought we
not then to be so much the more careful, both to know, and obtain so
incomparable a favor? Can we content ourselves, to be ignorant of it? Can we
endure one hour, to be without it? Had we rather be servants then sons?

First, let us understand what it is to be a son of God. A matter easily
known, will some man say. For what is it else, but to have our beginning, and
as it were birth from GOD? So is Adam said to be the Luke 2. 10. Mal. 2. 10.
son of God. So speaks Malachy of the Jews Have we not all one Father?
has not one God made us? If this be all; To be a son, is no more, then to
be a creature; or at the most, such a creature, as is made after the image and
likeness of God. But this we have by nature in our creation, not by grace in
regeneration. This they have, that are borne after the ordinary course of men,
of blood, of the will of the flesh, of the will of man. So are not they borne,
of whom our Evangelist here entreats. Not of blood (says he) but of God.
That manner of birth is common to all men, in all times, and places; this is a
privilege voutchsaft to some only. The former was already bestowed upon the
Jews, in that they were men.

The later was to be received by the gift of Christ, by their becoming
faithful, or believing men. To conclude, if the holy Ghost had meant such
kind of sons, he would never have required faith in the name of Christ. What
is it then, To be the son of God? The Evangelist aunsweres in the next verse,
To be borne of God. And are they, to whom our Lord gives this honor of being
sons, Borne of God? It should seem then they are the natural sons of God.
For what is it, to be the natural son of any man, but to be borne of him?
but this is merely impossible. Because our Savior Christ is the only
begotten, or borne son of GOD, and is thereby equal to his father, both in
time, and dignity; whereas these sons, have their beginning in time, and are
no way comparable to God, in any degree. Therefore we may not, at any hand,
when we read, or hear of this birth (whereof more hereafter in the next
verse, and especially in the third Chapter) once imagine, that we are properly
said to be borne of God; but that the speech is tropical; that is to say,
turned from the natural signification, and applied to another, by way of
similitude, or likeness. I will M^taphora.
speak no more of the point at this time, then is needful for our
understanding of the matter. For the help whereof, let us consider, how God
is our father and we his sons, in respect of our natural being by creation.

Every man knows, that he is not properly our father, no nor was Adams. For
then must he needs have been God by nature; and God having begotten him, as
his natural son, must of necessity have been such as Adam was, and we all
now are. How then is God Adams father. I confess he is so, though I do
think, that Saint Luke is not so to be understood in the place formerly Luke
3. 38.
alleged; where those words the son of God seem rather to belong to Jesus,
then to Adam. Well: yet is Adam the son of God: and not the natural son.
What son then? If I shall answer directly to the question, I say he is the
Tropicall, and in particular the Metaphorical son of God. To speak to the
capacity of the meanest, and simplest, who have as much interest to this
knowledge revealed by God, for our instruction, as the noblest and wisest; Adam
is the son of God by a borrowed speech. For as men are naturally the fathers
of them, who have their being (in particular) from them: so is Adam, so are all
men the sons of God; because they have their first original from him. Adam
also may be said; somewhat more particularly, to be the son of God;
because he was fashioned, and formed by him, of the dust of the ground,
without any other means, then the will and word of God himself. And in this
respect may an Image, cut, cast, or painted by any man, ^e called the son of
him, that was the maker of it. So may the books, that men write, be termed
their children. And as all men, in this sense, are the Sons of God, touching
their natural being: So are some, even as many as believe in Christ, his
sons, concerning their spiritual being. For it is God, that creates as it
were, new hearts in them, that restores that image of his, which they had lost,
that gives them spiritual life, and motion to all righteous and holy actions.
I do but name the things according to the present occasion, leaving the
handling of them, to more fit opportunity in the next verse. It is enough,
that we understand, in what meaning we are the Children of God^ because we
are borne of him, and yet not his Sons by nature.

But is this that, which the holy Ghost intends in this place, to signify,
that Christ is author of regeneration to all them, that believe? I suppose this
is not all. For it is easy for every man to discern, that the Text speaks
of such a being sons, as follows faith, and believing: whereas the birth,
that is mentioned in the verse following, goes before faith; which is one of
those ^^^ces, that are formed in us, and brought forth by that ^irth. This is
that, the Apostle says other where; Ye are Gal. 3. 26.
ill the Sons of God, by faith in Jesus Christ. First we believe, and then
by believing we are the sons of God; This is as it were the second birth: the
first is that, which necessarily must be had, before a man can have any
^pirituall life in him. For as our Savior tells Nicodemus, That which is borne
of flesh, is flesh: and that, that is John. 6.
borne of the spirit, is spirit. No man can possibly have ^aith, of the flesh:
but the spirit must beget a faithful man. There is no remedy then, but we
must seek for ^ome other being sons, or, that I may speak more ^hortly,
Sonne-ship. Give me leave to use the word, because it is fit, though somewhat
harsh, till it be worn smooth with often using. Where shall we find that
Sonne-ship, we inquire for? Let us examine what, and how many kinds of
Sons, we know amongst men; not speaking of these, which are made sons by
alliance: who is ignorant, that there are two kinds of Sons; by nature, and
by adoption? The one is borne, the other is chosen a Son. The former kind is
so well known, that it were idle to say any thing of it. Of the later we have
small knowledge amongst us by experience, save only in them, who by their last
Will, and Testament, make them their Heirs, that have no interest to their
estate, but only by the favor, and appointment of the Testator. Among the old
Romans, it was very ordinary: as their histories, and laws in that case
provided, evidently, and ple^tifully show. The scripture affords us few or none
examples of this kind. We have a shadow of it in the course, that Jacob took
with Joseph's two sons, Manasses, and Ephraim. They were indeed his grand
children, or nephews by nature. But by favor he made the^ equal to the rest
of his sons, their uncles; so that they make two of the 12. Tribes. Let my name
Genesis 48. 16.
(says Jacob) be named upon them; that is, Let them be accounted my sons, as
if they had bin begotten of my body. The like may be said of Moses and Esther:
who were, after a sort, the adopted Children of Pharaohs daughter, and
Mordecai. Of him the Text says, that his mother after she had weaned him,
brought him to Pharaohs daughter, and he was as her Son. Which Exodus 2. 10.
Heb. 11. 24.
is farther proved by the Epistle to the Hebrews; that he refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter, Of her it is recorded in the history, that
after the death of her father, and her mother, Mordecai, who was her cousin
Germane, Est. 2. 7.
took her for his own daughter. By this Sonship, the party thus adopted
obtaines a title and interest to the estate of him, that has adopted him; as
if he were his natural child.

Of this sonne-ship by Adoption from God, there are (...) in loa. lib 1. cap.
10.
two kinds in the scripture; the one a figure, and resemblance of the other.
When the Lord sent Moses to Pharaoh, for the deliverance of the children of
Israel, he gave him this instruction, for the discharge of his Embassage;
Thou shall say to Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord, Exodus 4. 22.
Israel is my son, my first borne. Would you know what sonneship this was?
The Apostle will resolve you; where speaking of the prerogative, that God
vouchsaf't the Jews, he reckens among other blessings, the Adoption: Romans 9. 4.
what was that else, but a choosing of that people, out of all the nations in
the world, to be his peculiar, under his protection? The Lord (says Moses) set
his delight in thy fathers, to love them, and did choose their seed after
them, even Deuteronomy. 10 15.
you above all people. Therefore did he bestow upon them the Land of Canaan, a
land especially furnished by him, with the blessings of this present life,
Flowing with milk, and honey. Glorious was this estate of theirs, their Exodus
33. 3.
adoption full of favor, to the envy of all the world, and their own happy
security. But as glorious, and bountiful as it was, it was for all that but a
shadow of the spiritual sonneship.

There is another manner of Adoption mentioned in the new Testament, and
imparted to them, that believe in Jesus Christ, When the fullness of time was
come (says Galat. 4. 4. 5.
Saint Paul) God sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law,
That he might redeem them, which were under the law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons. According as he had predestined v^ (says the same
Ephesians. 1. 5.
Apostle) to be adopted through Jesus Christ. To us thus adopted, he gives the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Romans 8. 15.
father. This is the sonneship, the Evangelist speaks of in this place: This
is that spiritual Adoption, by which we are truly made the sons of God. I
shall not need, to add any farther proof of the matter, because it has
appeared already, that none of the other Sonneships can agree with that, which
is here avouched. For to none of them is believing required, especially
believing in Jesus Christ, but to this only. To that Sonneship, which is by
creation, it is neither looked for, nor possible, that we should bring faith.
For we must needs be e^e we can believe: and our very being, is our being
sons. So the Jews, upon that promise of God to their father Abraham, were
borne, not made sons; their Adoption consisted not in the several choice of
particular men, but in separating the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from
all families, and nations in the world whatsoever. Neither is our spiritual
sonneship of the former kind attained to by faith; but by it we are made
faithful. Therefore to be sons, is to be adopted by God for his children in
Christ.

I will make bold (with your good liking, I doubt not) to declare the point
more fully, and plainly, by the opening of these two things; what adoption is;
how God has adopted us. Adoption, if we consider the Adoption.
word, for the nature of it, is nothing else, but choosing to a man's self,
whatsoever it be, that is chosen. From this general signification, the word
is applied, to note that particular choice of sons or children. The Greek
(...).
expresses the particular, and signifies an appointing of children. The word
being understood, it is no hard matter to know the nature of the thing it
self; which (not to stand upon any curious definition) is a choosing, or
taking of them for our Children, which by nature, are not ours. So (as we
heard) Jacob made choice of Joseph's sons, Ephraim, and Manasses. Pharaohs
daughter took the child of an Hebrew, whom she knew not. Mordicai chose
Esther, his Uncles daughter, to be his child. Let us apply this to our own
Adoption. The father, that adopteth is God: the children to be adopted, are men
and women. If they must become the children of God by Adoption, it is clear,
they are none of his by nature. Whose then? I am a shamed and affraide to utter
it. Our Lord himself has told us discovering the natural estate of all men,
in describing the Jews. We Ioh. 8. 41.
are not borne of fornication (say they to our savior) We have one father
which is God. But what does he answer them? Ver. 44.
Ye are of your father, the Devil. If the Jews, Gods own children, after an
especial manner, yea his first borne, were notwithstanding the children of the
Devil; surely no man in his natural estate, can be the child of God. Romans 9.
4.
They had the Adoption, they had the Covenant. Other people had nothing
affoorded them by God, but those general helps, which are common to all by
nature. What becomes of these children of the Devil? As many of them, as
believe in Christ, are by Adoption, made the sons of God. Being sons, they have
withal conuaied unto them, not only an interest, and claim to their fathers
estate, be it never so great, but also the inheritance of heaven. If we be
children, we are also heirs. This passes the ordinary course of Adoption. A
man may adopt many sons, and yet not make them all heirs. I do but name
these things now. They shall be amplified, if it please God, in the next point,
where the Prerogative must be declared. In the mean while, let us go forward
to show, How we are adopted.

There are two things, that offer themselves to be considered in respect of the
party that adopteth; The general motives, why he will adopt: The particular
reason, why he will make choice of this, or that person. The general motives
are ordinarily two: either simply default of natural issue; or, at the least,
want of such children as are fit for such an estate, or inheritance. I confess
it was otherwise with Jacob, who had sons enouw of his own body. The case was
extraordinary, and he directed by the spirit of prophecy, to make choice of
them to that dignity. But (ordinarily) the motives are such, as I named; and,
in likelihood, were the same, or one of the^, in Pharaohs daughter, and
Mordecat. What place had they, in our adoption by God? Certainly none at all:
Touching the former, which is the more common of the two; was God without
issue? If he had bin; seeing himself is eternal, as with out beginning, so
without end, he needed not fear the decay of his house, for want of Posterity
to succeed him. David was to be gathered to Psalm. 132. 11.
his fathers: and therefore it was a singular favor to him, that he should
have children, to sit upon his throne after him. But he, that never dies;
never grows weak, or weary, has no need of a successor, or assistant in
his kingdom. But he had issue; even a son, the brightness of the glory, and
the engraven form of the fathers person. Milk is not so like to milk, as that
son is to that father, being in nature all one with him; differing in nothing,
but that the one is the father and not the son, the other the son, and not
the Father. But perhaps he might be unfit for the managing of such an estate,
and succession to such a father. Go to: let us, for the better setting out of
these points imagine a succession, and conceive of God, for a while, as of a
man. The unfitness in a son for succession, is either from the weakness of his
body, that he is not likely to leave issue behind him, or for the badness of
his carriage, want of capacity, dissoluteness in government, or some such
matter. This son of God (that I may not dwell too long upon this point, nor
speak any thing with out due reuernce of his majesty) was every way so
qualified, and fitted to his fathers mind, that it was impossible, I will not
say that any adopted son should come near him, but that greater fitnes could
be desired, or imagined. This is my beloved son (says the father of him)
Mat. 3. 17. Chap. 17. 5.
in whom I am well pleased. And he repeats that testimony, the second time, at
his transfiguration. It was not for need then, as it is with men, that the
Lord vouchfaf't to think upon adopting of sons.

But admit the case had so stood with him, that it had bin requisite for him,
to make him sons, by Adoption. What is usually the reason of men's particular
choice? Is it not an affection, or liking, that the party has to some one,
rather then to another? There may (sometimes) be some other respects; but this
is the commonest and best, setting that of kindred aside. Consider a little the
dealing of our God, in this behalf. Must he choose some creatures to be his
sons, and joint heirs with his own natural son? He has thowsands, and ten
thousand Dan 7. 10.
thowsands of Angels round about his throne, Glorious in their nature;
Obedient in their service; Holy in their desires. Never a one of these is
chosen to this favor of Adoption. It may be, the Lord intendes to show the
riches of his mercy, by extending compassion to the^, that are in misery.
Behold the Angels, that ly 2. Pet. 2. 4. lud. ver. 6.
in darkness, reserved to the judgment of the last day. Is there any man's
estate more desperate? Have any creatures greater need of succor? Can there be
more pity showed to any? They are left in that damnable estate. The Lord
turns his face away from their misery, and casts his eyes of compassion on our
wretchedness. So makes he difference betwixt men, and Angels. He will adopt
men, rather the^ Angels; because his love is greater to men, then to Angels.
Our Adoption then proceede^ no^, for the general motives, or the particular
respects, from any other spring, then the love of God, who adopteth us; making
us, of the sons of the Devil, his own children, and giving us a sound, and
certain title thereby, to the inheritance of his glory in heaven.

And shall I need to use many words, in amplifying so rare a kindness: in
setting out so inestimable a benefitte? Small favors require enlarging;
infinite blessings will not admit it. They by amplification may be made
greater, then they are: these, the more you speak of them, the less you make
them. For what is it, but a diminishing of that, which is infinite, to attempt
in any kind of manner, I say not to enlarge, but even to express it? He, that
strives to speak much, and almost makes no end of commending that, which is
excellent, seems to have persuaded himself, and to desire, that other men
should believe, that he has spoken all, that can be said in the matter. As
for me, I profess the contrary; assuring my self, and you, that when I have
said all that possibly I can devise, I shall be as far from the infiniteness
of the benefit, as when I first began to speak of it. Yet may it somewhat
help our conceyt of the matter; though it cannot come near the excellency of
the thing. And with this persuasion, let us a little consider the prerogative
of this Sonship.

There is a great opinion, and not without good cause, of the estate of our
first pa^^nts, Adam, and Eve, while they were in Paradise, before their fall.
They had the image of God, wherein they were created, shineing Genesis 1. 26.
in them, so gloriously, that all the fishes in the sea, the fowls in the
air, the beasts in the earth, and every thing, that moves, and creeps on
the earth, were subject, and obedient to them. What ado have we, in our
estate, as now it stands, to make, not Bears, or Lions, but those of whom
we have necessary, and continual use, horses, and other cattle, to perform
any kind of service to us? The whip, the goad, the wand, the spur, the yoke the
bit, all the means of terror, and extremity, that we can possibly devise,
cannot prevail so much against these tame creatures, as authority, and
majesty, did in them, with those beasts, that are now most fierce, and cruel.
The Prophet David, though he were a King of great command, over Gods own free
people; yet when he considered those little poor services, which the
creatures, in our present estate, such as it is, ordinarily do us, and the
government, we have over them, breaks out into an exclamation of wonder: What
is man (says he to the Lord) that thou art mindful of him, and Ps. 8. 4.
the Son of man that thou visitest him! How would he have esteemed Adams
rule over the creatures, that values our government of them so highly? What
should I speak of their familiarity with God, who vouchsaf't himself to talk
with them, to inform, and direct them? It is recorded, as a singular favor,
and honor, done to Moses, that the Lord spoke unto him face to face, as a Exodus
33. 11.
man speaks to his friend. How were our first Parents favored, and honored,
that were to have ordinary conference with him, from time to time.

But, to come to the point, for which all this is alleged; what was their
estate, for all these honors, and favors, but the condition of servants? They
were threatened with death, death both of body, and soul, if they transgrest
the bounds, that were set them. Of the tree of knowledge of good, and evil,
thou shall not eat of it: for in the day thou Genesis 2. 17.
eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. Put case, they had continued in
obedience to God their Creator, according to their allegiance, and duty: What
could they have looked for, but either a confirmation of that estate, which they
then inioyed? or at the most, the reward of their service, the wages for their
work? They could never have attained to this dignity, To be the Sons of God.
And is it not a prerogative (trow you) to be brought by Christ into a more
excellent estate, then that, which Adam, in his innocence, and glory, had just
cause to wonder at? Blessed may we say, was the day, and hour (Oh the
goodness and power of God, that brings light out of darkness?) that ever Adam
harkened to the voice of his wife persuading him to eat of the forbidden
fruit. Not, that either the sin was small, to transgress the commandment of
God; or that it was the purpose of Adam in sinning, to be occasion of so great
a blessing: But for that the Lord, of his mere affection, and love, according
to his own former counsel, and predestination, turned misery to happiness,
death to life. We were servants to a bountiful, and gracious Lord: we are made
Sons to a most kind, and loving Father. Our service, if it had been never so
good, could have procured no more but wages: Our Sonship conveies unto us
assurance of a goodly inheritance.

There is no servant, though he be put in never so great trust, have never so
much authority, be never so highly in the Princes favor, like Daniell in the
province Dan. 2. 48.
of Babell, or Joseph in the Kingdom of Egypt; but is many degrees,
inferior, to the Kings Son. Genesis 41. 40.
Moses was a most faithful servant in the house of the Lord, and disposed of
all things, after the direction, and to the especial liking of his master.
Such as his service was, such was his honor. He had the government of the
people of God committed to him: no man might refuse Heb. 3. 5.
to yield obedience, or demand a reason of that which he commanded. Was
he therefore comparable to Christ, who ruled as the Son over his own Verse.
6.
house? What was Abraham's eldest servant, to his youngest Son? What was
Ioab to Solomon? David was a man of no mean employment under Saul, of no small
desert toward him, and his whole estate: yet when he was earnestly persuaded by
his fellow servants, to enter into the Kings alliance by marriage, what answer
made he? Seems it to you a light thing (says David) to be a Kings Son in
law? Did it seem so 1. Sam. 18. 23.
great a matter, to so worthy a servant, to become Son in law to a King; and
can we think it a little honor, to be made the Sons of God? Saul, though
he were a King, was but a man; David though he were a servant in condition
was a King in true virtue. We are men; nay, wretches, worms, nothing. He,
that will adopt us, is God, most mighty, most glorious, even Jehovah himself.
David, though he should become Son in law to the King, could have no title
to the Kingdom by that advancement. Our Sonship makes heaven Gauel kind, and
gives every one of us a full intrest to the inheritance. If ye be Sons, ye
are heirs. Moses could not look for any Romans 8. 17.
such preferment, though Pharaohs daughter took him for her Son. And yet it is
recorded by the holy Ghost, Exodus 2. 10.
as a certain proof of his faith, and trust in God, that when he came to age,
he refused to be called the Son of Heb. 11. 24.
Pharaohs daughter. Indeed, he was but to be called so. For Pharaohs daughter
had not liberty, to adopt whom she list. Well might she be at the charge of his
nursing, and allow him maintenance, like a Princess, and honor him with her
favor, and countenance; but she could not give him any right to the Crown of
Egypt. If then it were so great an honor, to be called the Son of Pharaohs
daughter; that Moses, for refusing of it, is registered to all posterity as a
man, that preferred the service of God before the glory of the world, what a
prerogative is it To be the Son of God?

David when he was urged, and pressed by the continual persuasion of many
Courtiers, to put himself forward and become the kings Son in law, excuses
himself by his poverty, and the meanness of his reputation. Seems it to you
a light thing to be a kings Son in law, seeing I 1. Sam. 18. 23.
am a poor man, and of small reputation? It is no great matter, for a kings
Son, to marry a kings daughter. There is no disparagement in the match to the
wife, no increase of honor to the husband. But if a man of mean estate, and
birth, be admitted to such advancement by marriage, how is he preferred, how is
he honored? It shall be fit therefore, and needful, to the end we may the
better conceive the excellency of our prerogative, in being made the Sons of
God, to consider, as the high estate, to which we arise, so the low degree,
from which we were raised. Was it not, in every man's judgment, greater
preferment, for Joseph to be made ruler of all Egypt, then for Putiphar, to
have been advanced to the same honor and authority? Joseph was taken from
prison, at the lowest step, or rather not near the stayer-foot: Putiphar was
already above the midst of the grees and could almost reach the top, from
whence he stood. Let us then cast down our eyes, from the glorious estate of
the Sons of God, to the, Shall I say mean, or base condition? The words are
too light. To the wretched, and fearful damnation of the Sons of the
Devil. Oh that I were able to utter, or you to conceive, either the misery, in
which we were plunged, or the majesty, to which we are advanced. It was cast
in Ionathans teeth, as a foul reproach, by his angry Father, that He was the
Son of a wicked rebellious woman. And co^trarywise, Salomo^ 1. Sam. 20. 30.
rekons it up amongst his titles of honor, that he was the Son of David; The
parables of Solomon, the Son of Prou 1. 1.
David. For as the dignity of the master, is a credit to the servant, and the
ones dishonor, the others disgrace: so, and much more (as the bond betwixt
them is nearer) the glory, or shame of the Father, is the reputation, or
discredit, of the Son. Who is so vile, so wicked, so odiour, as the Devil?
His former happiness makes his present misery the greater: as heat opens the
pores of the body, and prepares a way for the more cold to enter. He is cast
out of the presence of God, for ever: he is utterly forsaken of all virtue, and
goodness. He has neither power, nor will remaining to do any good. He
repines against God; he enuies the Angels; he seeks, continually, the
destruction of men. Such as the Father is, such are the Sons; Haters of God,
despisers of Angels, murderers of men; both others, and themselves too.

Are these meet persons to be made the Sons of God? Surely as the children
of Israel professed of themselves, that, when the Lord turned the captivity of
Sion, they Psalm. 126. 1.
were like them that dream; so is it with me, in the meditation of this
incredible alteration. Am I, that was the child of the Devil, become the Son
of God? Have I a title to heaven: to who^ hell had just intrest? Shall I reign,
in the glory of Christ; that served most basely, in the bondage of Satan? I am
not worthy (O Lord) to be called thy Son. It is more honor, then I durst
hope for, or Luke 15. 19
almost desire, to be made one of thy hired servants. There are a great many
degrees betwixt these two estates. It were much that thou should (at all)
receive me into service. Yet if it please thee to vouchsafe me that favor;
the meanest, or lowest place, or office, in thy Palace, were to good for me.
To be a doorkeeper in thy house? It were a service sit for thy holy Angels,
not for me a profane man. If thou would needs, of thy wonderful bounty,
prefer me higher, thou might make me free, at the most, and so rid thy
hands of me. Will not all this serve; but must I have the prerogative to be
thy Son too? Me thinks, I should but dream of these favors, and not
possess them indeed; they are so far beyond, not only expectation, but
credit too. Peter, when the Angel came to deliver him out of prison, the night
before he Act. 12. 9. 10.
should have been executed, though he arose, and followed his guide, passing
the first, and second watch, going through the iron gate, which opened by it
own accord: yet still thought, that he had but seen a vision, and could not
persuade himself that he was indeed set at liberty. How much more unlikely is
it, that poor, miserable, damned Sons of the Devil, should find such
favor, as to be made the Sons of God?

Sarah laughed, as at a thing impossible, when the Genesis 18. 12.
LORD told Abraham, that she should bear him a Son and the worthy matrone
of Shunem, that entertained 2. King. 4. 16.
the Prophet Elizah, when he promised her the like blessing from the Lord, could
not be persuaded of the truth thereof. Oh my Lord, thou man of God (says she)
do not ly unto thy handmayd. Is it as strange, for a woman, though she be
old to have a Son, as for a man to become the Son of God? This is that
mystery, which the Angels desired to behold. As if they could 1. Pet. 1. 12.
not satisfy themselves, with thinking on it. This was the Ioh. 8. 44.
prerogative, which some of the Angels could not abide should be vouchsaf't to
men, but murmured against 2. Pet. 2. 4.
God for it, and rebelled to advance themselves; whereby they lost both their
place, and their honor. It is not so easy a matter (my brethren) to believe
this point, as it is commonly thought to be. And whereas it is so generally
received for truth, of all that profess themselves to be Christians: I am
wholly of opinion, that it is rather a light persuasion, then a grounded
belief. Do thou believe, that as many, as trust in Christ, are thereby the
Sons of God? Let me reason with thee a little, and take that I shall say, in
good part. For I do it not to weaken thy persuasion, but to strengthen thy
faith. Have thou ever confidered this point seriously, and debated it
advisedly, with thine own heart? Do thou truly discern, and acknowledge
that thou art naturally the child of the Devil? What? Do thou start at
this? Do I seem to wrong thee, in abasing thy estate so much? Thou art
content to say, thou art a sinner; and it may be, thou do indeed think thy
self to have deserved the wrath of God: but thou can not abide, to have it
thought, that thou were at any time the Son of the Devil. This opinion would
disgrace thee too much, and affright thee too sore. It were a hard matter, for
thee indeed ever to believe, that God would make thee his Son, if thou had
this persuasion of thy self, that thou art the child of the Devil. I I am
naught (say thou) as other men are, and I have need of Gods mercy, and I
hope he will be as good to me, as to any other. But never think to make me
believe, that I am so bad. Then indeed I had small cause to hope for any
favor, at the hande^ of God. Tell me, I beseech you; Are not these the very
thoughts of your hearts. Do you not thus flatter your souls? If you knew
thoroughly what you are, it were impossible you should so easily believe, what
you may be.

But perhaps, though you are not willing to know the worst of your selves, in
your estate by nature: yet you are desirous to understand the uttermost of the
honor, you may a^taine to, by grace. Well: let us confer of this a little.
How many weeks, or days, or hours, have you spent, in the search of this
Adoption, which is vouchsaf't you in Christ? Have you learnd, what it is to be
a Son? Have you made any estimate of the inheritance, that is promised? Do
you know the difference betwixt a servant, and a Son? Is not al your trust
in the plea of servants? If I do my good will (says one) I know God will
accept of it. What though I be ignorant of the mystery of my redemption? Alas!
I am no Divine, no Scholar, not book learned; God looks for no such great
knowledge of me. I can tell, that I must love God above all things, and my
neighbor as my felfe. If I do this, I am sure God will be merciful to me;
and I shall go to heaven, O the blindness, the wilful blindness of ignorant
men? How long will ye despise the kind offer of the Lord? When will ye begin
to consider, what honor he has vouchsaf't you? When will you have any care,
to understand your own happiness? The Lord God would have you his Sons: you
will continue obstinatly in the condition of servants. He would bestow heaven
upon you, as an inheritance: you will needs have it as wages. He offers to
give you title to it, by adoption; you strive to lay claim to it, by your own
purchase. Would you choose to be servants rather then Sons, if you had any
knowledge of these 2. estates? You have heard somewhat of the joys of heaven,
and you have (accordingly) a plain confused motion of the good estate of them,
that are there. From hence, arises a kind of desire to be partakers of those
pleasures, and by the flattery of self love, some manner of persuasion, that
ye shall enjoy them. But ye are as far from knowing what it is to be the
sons of GOD; as I showed, you were from believing, that you are the Children
of the Devil.

Is it any wonder then, that we make so light account of it? who can desire
that, he knows not? Where men's treasures are, there also their hearts are.
Mat. 6. 21.
Who is there, that had not rather be called the son of Pharaohs daughter,
then the brother of Jesus Christ? To whom does it not seem a greater honor,
to be the son in law of Saul, then the adopted son of God? A Lordshippe
upon earth is counted more worth, then a kingdom in Heaven. O the baseness of
our thoughts! O the error of our judgment! O the vileness of our affection!
we bury our selves in the earth, liker worms then men. We esteem more of
the pleasures of sin for a season, then of the everlasting Heb. 11. 19.
joys of God in Heaven. We have greater desire to the vain titles of worldly
honor, then to the high prerogative of the sons of God? profane Esau, Genesis
25. 32.
that sold his brithright for a mess of pottage, was a holy man, in comparison
of us. He was driven to the sale, by a kind of necessity. We, by
wantonness, deprive our selves of this dignity. Hunge^ made him part with
that, which was demanded of him. Fullness makes us despise that, which is
offered to us. It was (in his conceit) but a temporal possession that he
should have enjoyed. It is an eternal inheritance, that we might possess. He
remained Isaacs son still, though he lost his birth right: we, by
neglecting the prerogative of sons, are utterly shut out of Gods presence,
and favor. It were some what yet, if we might be servants. For there is no
place in the house of God, that is not honorable. But the case stands so with
us, that we must either be sons, or nothing. I am sorry the time cuts me off,
that I cannot follow, and press these matters, as the worthiness, and
necessity of them requires. The Lord vouchsafe a blessing upon that, which
has bin spoken, and prepare us to a farther meditation of it in hearts, to his
own glory, and our present and everlasting comfort in Jesus Christ. To wnome
with the Father, etc.

THE NINTH SERmon, upon the first Chapter of JOHN.
Verse 12. But to as many as received him, to them he gave the Prerogative,
etc.
THere are two things that ordinarily make men cold, and negligent, as in the
pursuit of that, they have some mind to; so in the desire of that, which is
offered: ignorance of the worth thereof, and a conceit, that to them, it will
be of small use, or profit. To what end should a man spend his time, and
labor in the search of that, which, when he has found it, is not worth the
taking up, and carrying away? Or though perhaps it be of some value, in it
self; yet if I know not how to make any benefit of it, I were as good spare my
pains, as lose my labor. That neither of these two hindrances might hold
us, from receiving Christ by faith, that we might become the sons of God, and
heirs of everlasting life in heaven; In my last exercise, I showed both the
excellency of this prerogative in it self, and the inualuable profitte, that
would arise to us thereof. What greater honor, can there possibly be
imagined, then to be heirs apparent to the kingdom of heaven? what higher
advancement, can the conceit of men, or Angels devise, then for the children
of the devil to be made the sons of God?

As for profitte, what should I speak of it? Where is it to be found, if it
be not in a kingdom: especially such a kingdom, as is furnished, and full
fraught, within it self, with all things belonging either to commodity, or
pleasure? We have had now a weeks time, to bethink our selves, whether we
will be the children of God, or no. What speak I of a week? We have, the
most part of us, had many weeks, and months, and years: yea, some of us some
scores of years, to consider with our selves, whether we will accept of this
offer, which Christ makes us, in his fathers name, or not. We have been, or
might have been acquainted with these mysteries, a long time; ever since we
came to years of discretion. Is it not high time, we had advised, and
resolved of the matter? Is there such doubt, or hazard in the choice, that we
need take so long a day, to give our answer? Do we make question, whether
it be a prerogative, or not, To be the sons of GOD? If natural affection
can work any thing with us, to whom owe we more love, then to him, by
whom we have our being? If we reguarde justice, and equity, to whom do
we rather appertain, then to him, that first made us of nothing? So glorious
an inheritance were (in reason) to be songht for, by all possible means, though
it were not offered. An inheritance being offered, were (in kindness) to be
accepted, though it were not so glorious. And do we yet draw backward? Are
we still unresolved? Which of us does not, with a certain just disdain,
condemn the idle excuses of those men, who being bidden to the marriage of
the Kings Son, would suffer themselves to be carried a way with such vain
employments? I have bought Luke 14. 18.
afarme (says one) and I must needs go out and see it. I pray thee have me
excused. Have thou bought a farm? Nay rather it should seem the farm has
bought thee? Art thou so tied to it, that thou can not be without the sight
of it, for a dinner time? Other men take Farms to serve them for their
profit. Thou have bought one, to serve it to thy unrecoverable loss. Is any
man so mad, as to lose the favor of a prince, for the sight of a Farm?
Another says, He has bought five yoke of Oxen, and must go prove them, Ver.
19.
and therefore prays to be excused. Excused? Seems it a matter, that will
admit any excuse, to refuse the kindness of a prince, for the trial of a
yoke of Oxen? Durst thou send thy Landlord such an answer? Will thou leave
the honor thy prince vouchsafes thee, to be served at his own Table, that thou
may go wait upon Oxen? They are not yoakt so fast one to another, as thou
art to every one of them.

Let me put thee in mind of an answer, made by our Savior Christ, in a case
not unlike to this. He called one to follow him, who would needs go first, and
bury his father. What said he to him: Let the dead bury Luke 9. 60.
their dead; but go thou, and preach the kingdom of God. So may I say to thee;
Let beasts look to beasts: go thou and enjoy the princes presence, and
favor: it is not this mannerly excusing of the matter, that will serve the
turn. The party whom our Savior called, went not rudely away to bury his
father but demanded leave, that he might go. Lord, suffer me first to go
and bury my father. Ver. 59.
Who shall make this excuse for thee? Shall we, that are the messengers of God
to you in this business, seek to excuse so high a contempt against our Lord,
and Master? Alas! if we should, it would but little avail you; well might we
make our selves guilty of your sin, but we should never acquit you of it.
Farms, and oxen to be preferred before the dinner of a King, at the marriage
of his Son? O the boldness, and brutishness of men? Can ye for shame,
dare ye for fear, allege such excuses? The indignity, you offer the King,
is so great, that there will be no means to appease his anger.

And yet, what is a guest to a Son? A marriage dinner to an inheritance? If
it be so monstrous an unthankfulness, not to come to a feast, when the King
bids us: what is it, not to accept of a kingdom, when it is offered? Shall
seeing of a farm, or trying of Oxen, draw us a way from taking assurance of
so great an estate? What if thou have married a wife? (...) 4. 20.
Can thou not come to GOD because of that? Thou may be both an husband,
and a Son. bring thy wife with thee; she shall also be adop^ed the child of
God. Thou shall not need to make her any ioynture, or assign her any dower out
of thy land; she shall be joint heir of the kingdom with thee: There is
neither Jew, nor Grecian; there is neither bond, nor Gal. 3. 28.
free: there is neither male, nor female; For ye are all one in Jesus Christ.
There are, in all states, many places of honor and office, whereof the husband
is capable; but the wife does not so much as partake with him in the titles.
And what kingdom, or Commonwealth ever equalled women to men? Only God has
vouchsaf't one, and the same prerogative to both, that they may both become the
children of God. But the amplyfying of this matter belonges rather to the next
point, concerning the equality of this dignity, To be the sons of God; then
to this, whereof I now entreat, touching the prerogative, it self. With the
love whereof if any man before were not inflamed: Yet (I hope) his affection
now is kindled; Sure I am it will be, if he do but enter into a due
consideration of the matter. For how is it possible, that a man should so much
hate himself, as not to desire to be his son, whose servants the greatest
Princes of this world, have always acknowledged themselves to be?

What is it then, that we prefer before this Sonneshippe? It has been
offered us, and almost thrust upon us, a long time, and often. The dignity of
it, (according to the weak conceit, and capacity of man) has been declared,
and set out unto us. How is it come to pass, that we have not laid hold on
so extraordinary a favor, so long a time?

Are we loath to take the pains? unreasonable is that excuse, in a matter of
so great worth; and in this matter untrue also, as the condition propounded
evidently shows. Believe and be a Son. Yet perhaps this pretense might
carry some better color with it, if it were not made by them, who take
infinitely more pains, for things infinitely less in value. Shall we plead
ignorance, either of our own estate, or of the exceliency of that prerogative?
Wilful ignorance rather increases, then excuses the fault. And who can be
ignorant, that has had any desire to learn; unless like a man, that lies in
a ditch, and stre^cheth out his hands, calling for help to all them, that
pass by, he refuse to set one finger to the ground, for the raising of
himself? Do we then despise so great an happiness? Though we could be so
unthankful to God (and yet that were monstrous) yet how can we be so
injurious to our selves? What shall I say? Or upon what shall I lay the blame?
It would be very strange, and ha^sh to most men, if I should accuse them of
not believing. Who would not be foreman of the Jury to find him guilty? who
would make dainty to give sentence against his life, that does not believe
whatsoever is delivered in the Gospel? Not believe? says one. He is worse
then a Turk, or a Jew, that believes not. I confess, it seems scarcely
credible to my self, that any man professing religion should not believe. But
I hold it altogether impossible, that a man should indeed be per^waded in
his heart, that by believing in Christ, he shall become the son of God; and
yet should be altogether careless of believing. It is not unlikely, that we
have a general opinion of the ^uth of the Scripture: but either we never
marked, or never considered this, and such like points, that we might be
thoroughly rooted, and grounded in the bleefe thereof. O that I might entreat so
much of you all, and every one, as that you would be pleased to bestow a little
time, ^n the meditation of this prerogative? I make no question, but if once
you did steadfastly believe it, you would never give over, till you had made
your selves sure of so happy, and blessed an estate.

The Prophet Esaias, considering a little the backewardness of the Jews, in
receiving salvation, by the promised Messaih: and a great forwardness to other
matters, reproues them for it in this sort. Wherefore do ye lay out silver
(says he) and not for Isay. 55. 2.
bread? And your labor, and are not satisfied? May not we ins^ly take up the
like complaint, against the perverseness, and unto wardnesse of this age? Do
not men beat their brains, spend their spirits, break their sleep, wast
their time, shorten their lives, by carking, and caring for the momentary trash
of this world? We rise erly, we go late to bed, we fare hardly, we cloth our
selves simply, we toil, and moile like horses, and al for nothing. What is all
the wealth in the world to the riches in heaven? What are all the possessions
of the earth to the inheritance of that kingdom? What is all the honor, that
the world can heap upon a man, in comparison of being the Son of God? If it
continue with thee, as long as thou continuest alive; yet leaves thee, when
thou die; whereas that heavenly preferment abides with thee, and attends upon
thee after death, or rather lifts thee up, and carries thee alive to heaven.
For, what though this sinful earthly carcass be destroyed? yet the soul
mounts, immediately, up to heaven, taking possession of that inheritance, and
inioying it with all freedom, and comfort, in assured expectation of
proportionable glory wherewith the body, in due time, shall be clothed, and
beautifyed.

And do we still lie groueling upon earth? We show thereby whose children
we are: upon thy belly shall thou go (said the Lord to the old serpent the
Devil) and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. See Genesis 13. 14.
if we do not, as much as may be, resemble him in this curse? We root, and
dig into the earth, like Moles, and feed upon the white, and yellow clay,
which with infinite labor, and no small danger, we rent out of the very
bowels thereof: yea (a shame to be spoken, though we are not ashamed to do
it our immortal soul, that has nothing in it of any affinity with earth,
imploies her understanding, bestows her affections, persuades, incourages,
strengthens, thrusts forward her servant body, to so wearisome, and so
fruitless a labor. Think you that a miserable wretch, when he sits in his
counting house, looking over his bonds, when his usury money will come in (let
them be as many thousand pou^ds, as they are hundred pence) can take half that
comfort in his trash, that a poor Christian does in his meditation, when he
finds himself to be the Son of God? Set thy self up to the chin in the
heaps of thy gold, tumble and wallow in the midst of all thy pe lfe, shouell
it up by bushells into quarter sacks, stuff thy chists, as full as thou can,
till the sides and bottom are ready to fly out, reccon usury upon usury, to
the utmost farthing: but hark: do thou not hear a fearful voice, that
cries out unto thee? O fool, this night they shall fetch away thy soul from
thee: then whose shall these Luke 12. 20.
treasures be, that thou have provided? What? a man of thy state, and
abundance, in a moment come to nothing? quaking, and trembling at the very
thought of it, in the midst of al thy wealth? Would thou do so; could thou
do so, if thou knew'st, thou were going to a most glorious kingdom in heaven?
Is it possible, any man of indifferent discretion, should be loath to change a
Chamber in an other man^ house, for a royal palace in his own Realm, and
government.

But why should I so much distrust your capacities, or suspect your aflections?
I see you are able to compass great matters, and have strong desires to those
things, you like: if I may but entreat so much of you, as to vouchsase a
little time, to the meditation of this prerogative, I make no doubt, but you
will both conceive, and affect it. I do not go about to deprive you of any
natural faculty, but as it were to lead you to the right use of it. I seek
not to root out your affections, but to grift upon them such seions, as may
bring forth pleasant, and lasting sruit. Is thy understanding great? Here are
great mysteries, in the search whereof thou may employ it. For, what wit,
what judgment, what conceit, is able to sound the depth, or value the worth,
or comprehend the extent of this honor, To be the Son of God? Is thy
capacity but weak? What is plainer? what is easier, then to understand, that
by believing in Christ, thou shall be made the Son of God, and joint heir
of heaven with Christ? Yea, this doctrine will teachthee, how to satisfy thy
most insatiable desires. Does ambition prick thee forward, with love of honor:
Why will thou not set thy mind on that, which is true honor indeed? The
foolish vanity of men, has bewrayed itself, that the conquest of the whole
world would not suffice them. All the authority and glory, that the Emperors of
Rome attained to, could not quench their thirst of honor, but that some of
them would needs be worship^ as Gods. If they could once have attained the
dignity of being the Sons of God, it is apparent they had been satisfied to
the full. I confess, biulding of Churches, offering of sacrifices, making of
prayers, ascribing of all power to them, gave them no sufficient content. For
they could not be persuaded, that they were (as they were, and would needs
be, termed) Gods. But had they been assured in their own true feeling, that
they were made Gods indeed, or the Sons of God, which later is a privilege
of them, that believe in Christ, they had been settled in full quietness of
mind, and filled with joy unspeakable. Shall we proudly contemn, carelessly
neglect, or faintly accept of such an honor? yet if the mighty ons of the
world, that doat upon their present greatness, care not for, or will not
think, that there can be any greater, or better estate, then they now enjoy;
let not us refuse so goodly an opportunity, of being made heirs of such a
kingdom, as has neither measure of glory nor end of continuance: but let us,
with all care and diligene, bestow our selves upon the purchasing of that
prerogative, which being once attained to, gives us certain interest t^o
everlasting happiness.

Nay; will some man reply, you mistake the matter. The Evangelist speaks not
of any such prerogative, as you imagine, by which men are actually, and
presently made the Sons of God; but of the power that is given to them,
whereby they have free will to receive, or acknowledge Christ, and so at last,
to be made the Sons of God. There is no remedy, though I hastened all I could,
to the dispatch of that, which remains, but I must needs make a little stay;
that I may the better clear the way before me. And because our Rhemists are
the men, that prepare these forts against us, I will encounter them hand to
hand, as they have ranged themselves in order, upon their best aduisement.
There have been many skirmishes, and somebattailes, about this hold of
freewill, which is the very strength of the kingdom of popery; upon which, all
their satis faction, and merits absolutely depend; so that, if this were once
overthrown, the best part of Romish revenues, by which their wars are
mayntained, were utterly cut off, and their power exceedingly weakened. It is
not my purprse neither have I any just occasion, or opportunity, to seek out
all their force^ of this kind, in every corner; but I must, and will content
my self to take this piece in my way, and to overthrow it by the strength of
GOD, and lay it even with the groumd. But first I will give you a view of it,
as it stands in all the bravery. Because the place, of it own nature, affords
no firm ground, for such a building, they lay a forced and false foundation.
For whereas, the holy Ghost speaks of dignity, and prerogative, noting the
honor we receceiue, not the strength; they turn up that ground, and tell us
of I know not what power. This fraud of theirs I do but name, because I
discovered it to the full in my last exercise, and digd it up, with the labor,
and tools of their own workmen. Now let us see, what they build upon this
foundation.

Freewill (say they) to receive, or acknowledge Christ: Rhem. Test. Ioa. 1.
annot. 5
and power given to men, if they will, to be made by Christ the Sons of God,
but not forced or drawn thereto, by any necessity. He that carefully surueies
this building, shall find, that there is neither bewty, nor strength therein.
How ill fauouredly does the forefront show? Freewill to receive Christ, and
power given. What of this freewill? Do you mean that free will is given? Do
you sever it from power? It should seem so by your words: for, your Freewill
is referred to the receiving of Christ, your power to being made the Sons of
God; your building goes beyound your foundation. There is no mention here but
only of power, concerning the later; so that the former stands neither safely,
nor handsomely, tottering all aside, and ready to fall, with the least breath,
that shall blow upon it. Besides; how disorderly stand those words; If they
will? Power given to men, if they will, to be made etc: I pray you make us
understand your meaning. Wherein lies this choice? If they will receive the
power, mean you? Or, if they will be made the Sons of God? Questionless it
must needs belong to this later; To be made the Sons of God, if they will.
There you should have set it above, and not have cramd it in, betwixt the other
two parts, so rudely. Lastly for the increase of this deformity; the roof has
no fashion in it, nor proportion to the rest of the building. View them
together. Power given to be made, but not forced or drawn. This must be diverse
from the former; To be made, not forced. It is apparent to every man, that it
would have been much handsomer, if not needful, to have added in the later
clause, to be; thus but not to be forced. For that the sentence requires,
because of the words, that come between, to be made, but not forced. What if
we fill up the hole with those words, is all well? Nothing less. Who sees
not that it is absurd to say, that power was given men to be made, but not to
be forced? As if a man needed power to be given him, that he might be forced.
Nay rather he had need of power, that he may not be forced. I take no pleasure
in this course of reproving their imperfections: but their own insolency in
contemning al men, in comparison of their own faction, and the miserable
doting of their followers upon them, as if there were no learning, but in
their heads, makes me think it not only lawful, but also needful, to lay
open such palpable defects. Now to the strength of this Fort.

Where Freewill vaunts it self, as if it were set upon a most sure ground. The
foundation, as they would have it, is, power to be made, the Sons of God.
First, I have showed already, that the word which our Evangelist here uses,
though sometimes it signify power, yet is never taken, in the Scripture, for
freedom of will. But say it were, now, and the^, so taken, and that in this
place it belo^ged to the same matter: yet were it not well applied by these
Papists. For the holy Ghost, does not speak here of power to receive Christ,
but to be made the Sons of God. He had no meaning to show, what was given
men to enable them, for the receiving of Christ; but to declare, what they
should attain to, by receiving him: so that this first part of their
annotation, has no warrant from the Text. If any man think, that they may be
excused, as grounding this note of freewill upon those other words, As many as
received him; I will show anon, if God will, against some other popish
writers, that no such thing will follow thereupon: in the mean while it is
easy to see, that this defense, cannot help the Rhemists, who raise their
building, upon the words that follow, He gave them power.

Power given to men (say they) if they will, to be made by Christ the Sons of
God. Now power, but honor, or prerogative. But let that pass, as already
handled: And so let us pass over the other words, To be made, though the
Evangelist say to be. I may not forget to note, that they speak craftily, and
insufficiently, for the expressing of the Text, Power given to men. Why do
they not rather follow the Evangelist? And if they will needs have it to be,
Power; say as he does, given to as many as receive Christ. Given to men; say
they. To what men? To them that believe in the name of Christ. He speaks not
of comparison, betwixt men, and Angels, but of difference betwixt men, and men.
All have not this prerogative, call it power if you will, To be made the Sons
of God. It is proper to them only, that receive him, by trusting in him. As
many as received him, to them he gave the prerogative. You will say, That
honor, or power is denied no man. It is granted to no man, but to him that
believes in Christ. But every man may believe. Of that in the next point. What
then? Therefore this power is given to men, To be made the Sons of God. The
question is not so much of the truth of this speech, as of delivering the
Evangelists meaning: who intends not to show, what power is given to men in
general; but what benefit they (in particular) reap, which by faith receive
Christ that came into the world, and to his own. Trow ye it was his purpose
to say, that the world, which knew him not, and his own, that received him
not, had power given them to be made the Sons of God? I dare say ye do not
think so. But perhaps freewill was given to men. This also appertains to the
next point; yet a word, for answer to the doubt. Either it was not given at
all, or to them only, that had the Gospel preached unto them. For we may not
dream of, I cannot tell what freedom of will, whereof all men should be
partakers, by the virtue, and efficacy of our Saviors coming into the world.
There is no such matter. If free will to receive Christ be not common to all men
by nature, it is given by certain means, to certain men, and not to other.
There is no possibility of being made the Son of God, but upon a supposition of
faith, by the doctrine of the Gospel.

But if by Freewill to acknowledge Christ, and power to be made the Son of
God, they understood no more, but the contrary to that, which they deny in the
last place; namely, being forced, ordrawne thereunto, by necessity; we would
readily, and willingly subscribe to their opinion. For we know it is needless,
that God should force a man to that, to which he can, without any violence,
persuade, and incline him. Yea, we confess it is held by us for an
impossibility, that the will should be forced; that a man should will, and not
will. But this is the maine matter that must be handled against other
adversaries by and by; and I hasten to it. Only give me leave to add this one
thing, concerning the point of freewil, grounded on this place of Scripture by
the Rhemists; that is I grant them their translation: yet freewil has but a
slippry foundation thereupon. He gave them power to be made the Sons of God;
what of that? Therefore it was in their own choice, whether they would be the
Sons of God, or no, and they had power to be, if they would. It is out of
question, that they could not be, unless they would, supposing that they were
not, upon their believing. But this freedom of will cannot be drawn
necessarily out of these words. Is it al one to say, He gave them power to be
made the Sons of God; and He gave them free will to choose whether they would be
made the Sons of God, or no? Power given to such a purpose inferrs a kind of
faculty, resting in him, to whom it is given, to do that which it is given
for. This if the holy Ghost had intended to signify, he would rather have said;
He gave them power, to make themselves the Sons of God, if they would: or at
least, By which they might be willing to be made the Sons of God, by
believing they were made capeable of that prerogative. As one that is born, and
brought up in the Country, has no possibility to beco^e Mayor, or sheriff of
this City: But if he has his freedom bestowed upon him, and he has there
wit hall power given him to be made a giuernour, though his power do not
signify any freewill: So it is with them, that have attained to faith, (I
speak according to the Rhemists conceit, and translation) who have power to
be made the sons of God, and yet this power proves not any freedom of will.

Thus, and thus weakly have our Rhemists built their Forte, for the safety of
their kingdom of free will. The foundation is sandy, the building neither
fair for sight, nor strong for use. Some other of the same crew, have labored
to make good that point out of this place, by an other kind of sortification.
It is apparent (says one) that it is the power of free will, or that it is the
office of free Michaell de Palacio, in Ioa. c. 1. enarrat. 28. Liberi esse arbit
will, to receive, or not receive the word of God; because the Evangelist
tells us that some do receive, and some do not. This man made better choice
of his ground, then our Rhemists did. For he lays his foundation on the very
words of the holy Ghost rightly understood; His own received him not. But as
many as received him, etc. The first words are plain of his not being
received: the later sufficiently employed that some did receive him; else would
the Evangelist have said; But if any man had received him, he would have given
him the Prerogative, to be the Son of God. A good beginning; but he fails
in the pursuit of the matter. And yet if his meaning were no other, then his
words may well bear, he might be allowed in that, he says. For it is not
to be denied, that it is the will of man, that either receives, or refuses
Christ. This I speak according to the true nature of says, which is to rest
upon Christ for salvation: and that resting is an action of the will. But if I
were to speak, after the opinion of the Papists, (as he should have done) who
place faith in the understanding, I see not how I might truly affirm that it
it the office of the will, to receive, or not to receive Christ. For it is not
in the power of the will, to believe, or not to believe; that is to acknowledge
a thing to be true, or false, any more then it is for a man to take that to
be white, which he sees to be black, red, yellow, green, or of some other
color, then white. In such cases, there is no manner of command in the will
over the understanding. Well may it prevail so far, as to hinder the
understanding in examining of a truth, or in the professing of that it
conceiues; yea it may carry a man with violence to make contrary profession to
that, he is persuaded of and knows: but it cannot possibly be of force to
inioyne it, to hold this, or that for truth, otherwise then natural, or
supernatural light discouers it to be.

It is the will then, that receives Christ, or refuses him, believes, or
believes not: taking faith for trusting in Christ, as we do; not, as the
Papists do, for believing the truth of that which is delivered concerning him,
in the Scripture. Neither yet is it to be held for true, that there is any
such power, or office of free will, as the Papists dream of, to be concluded
out of this place. For I may not run into a large discourse of the Doctrine:
but must keep my self within the compass of this one Text. The free will,
which the Papists fight for, as for their free hold, is an absolute liberty in
the will of Man, to choose, or refuse, at his own pleasure. This they say we
have, and use in the accepting, or rejecting of grace: which is offered us by
God; but so, that it is left to us, to receive, or refuse it. This Doctrine say
I, can not be warranted by this scripture. Let any reasonable man judge. Some
refuse CHRIST, some receive him; what will you infer hereupon? That therefore
it is left to every man's choice, whether he will receive him, or refuse him?
Tell me, what you think of the first grace, by which a man is inhabled to
take, or leave. I will speak as plain, as by any means I can, that every man
may understand me. It is agreed upon, on both sides, theirs, and ours, that
naturally no man has any power to receive CHRIST, or to will to receive him.
Therefore this Ability, of the using whereof we dispute, is vouchsaf't to
every one, that has it, by God, and proceeds of him. Shall I reason now, as
as our Papists do? Some men have this grace, by which they are able to
believe, some men have it not. Therefore there is free will in men to have it,
or want it. Will this follow upon that? No more will it; that there is free
will, because some believe, and some do not.

Indeed, if there were nothing else to be found, from which this difference
might be fetched, but only the will of man; there were some good reason to
conclude freedom of will, from choice, and refusal. But the case standing, as
it does, that we can assign a better reason of this diversity, even the
work of Gods spirit by grace in the hearts of as many as believe, the Papists
conclusion is weak, and lame. Some receive, some refuse: Therefore (say they)
there is free will, by the power whereof the one sort believe, and the other,
for not using that power, believe not. Nay rather (say we) Therefore the grace
of GOD works more effectually in the hearts of some, then of other some. Is
there any Christian soul, whom this conclusion of ours will not content
better, then that of theirs? Surely he must needs love his own glory, better
then Gods, that had rather ascribe his faith, to his own free will, then to
the grace of God. Have I not yet spoken enough; or not plain enough? Be not
wearied I beseech you, though I dwell a little longer upon the matter. I hope I
shall better express my mind, and you better understand me. That ability to
believe comes of God, and not of our selves, it is out of question betwixt us.
The doubt is, touching the use of this ability.

For example; Let us suppose, that both the thieves that were crucified with
our Savior Christ, had this grace bestowed on them by God, that they were able
to believe. He on the right hand uses this grace, and believes; the other
does not use it, and continues in unbelief. The question is, whence this
difference arises. From the power of free will; say the Papists. From the
works of Gods grace, say we. We deny not (say they), that the grace of God
works more effectually in the one, then in the other: but we affirm, that
the reason of this difference in working, proceeds from the diverse use of free
will, in each of them. If he, on the left hand, had bin willing to believe,
the spirit of God would have begotten faith in his heart. If he had on the
right hand bin unwilling, the grace of God would have brought forth no faith in
him. Yet they touch not the point. I press them for a farther answer. Whence
was it, that the one was willing, rather then the other? Speak out, that all
men may hear you. Was it from himself, or from God? From both. They are half
ashamed, to be known what they hold, and therefore strive, to shift of the
matter, in this sort. But it will not serve the turn. I look for a plain and
direct answer. When both the thieves were alike unwilling, and might both
alike become willing, whence arose the beginning of difference betwixt them?
You cannot say, it came from God; for in respect of him, they were yet both
alike. What remains then to be answered, but that the one, of himself, did
yield to the motion of Gods spirit, the other might have done, but would not.
I confess, you say, there wanted assistance from God, to lead him forward to
the obtaining of Faith: but yet you still avouch, that the Original of the
difference was from the free will of man, that yielded; not from the free grace
of God, that inclined him to yielding. For that grace was common to him with
the other, in whom there was no willingness at all.

What was become of the zeal of the glory of God, when men first broch't
these devises? Is it not enough for us, that we are willing to be saved, but
that we must also take the chief glory of it to our selves? Are we so puffed
up with pride, and self love, that we had as lieue perish, as be beholden to
GOD for our salvation? Blame me not, if I charge the pride of man's Nature very
deeply in this case. It is a matter, that concerns my Lord, and master, (on
whose message I come) very near. Has he, of himself, vouchsafed means, by
which we may be saved; has he, merely of his own good will, imparted the
knowledge thereof unto us; has he, without any desert, or desire on our part,
provided, to advance us to the estate of Sons, from the condition of
Servants; and do we grudge to let him have the honor of it? A little is too
much for God; nothing is enough for our selves. We are content (with much
ado) to let it be thought, and said, that we are not able without grace, to
do that, by which the favor of GOD may be procured. But when we have once
received from God ability to believe (I speak still, as the Papists do,
against whom I reason) then it lies in our own power to be saved, or to be
damned. There is no question of the later; but the cause of damnation is
always in our selves; and so in our selves, that, of our selves, there is no
possibility, what grace soever we have received, to escape it. But the power
to receive Christ, that we may be made partakers of that Inheritance of
Sons, is wholly from God, and not from our selves. What said I? The power? It
is not enough. The will to use that power? It is not enough. The will to use
that power, is stirred up, put forward, and inclined to it, only, and
altogether by God himself. The act of the will in resting upon Christ is mine.
The inclining the will to do this act, is Gods, and not mine. I do willingly,
and by mine own choice believe in CHRIST. I am made willing, mark what I say,
I am made willing: not only I am made able to will; but directed, and
persuaded, and brought to will, yea inclined to this choice, by the power of
the spirit of God.

Does any man doubt of this point? He knows not or considers not, what it is
to give the glory of his salvation to God. Shall I so part stakes with God, in
this matter, that I take the biggest for mine own share? I will barely
propound the case; let every Christian soul judge uprightly, betwixt God, and
himself. That there is any possibility of salvation for man, it is wholly,
and only from God, who (without the counsel, or persuasion of any creature)
appointed the means to save us by, of his mere mercy, and bounty. That I,
among many other, attain to that grace, by which I am enabled to believe, and
may if I will, it is also from the same goodness, and favor of the Lord; who
does not altogether leave me in this estate, but moves, and persuades me by
his spirit, to use the grace I have received, and to believe in Christ. What
would you have more? says one. Do I not give glory enough to God, by
acknowledging, that possibility of faith, both in general, and particular
proceeds from his grace. Look not that I should answer thee. I appeal to
thine own conscience, to give sentence of the matter. Thou ascribest no more
to God, but that he has given thee grace, by which thou may believe, if
thou will. Whence have thou this inclination to will? From Gods motion, and
persuasion. Take heed what thou say. How will this stand with that opinion
of free will, which makes the first difference betwixt thee and other me^, that
believe not, though they have the like motions, and persuasions from God? It
cannot be, if thou will speak plain, but thou must profess, that this
willingness comes from thy self. So then thus stands the case; That we can
believe, if we list, it is of God: that we list to believe, it is of our
selves. For ought that God did for me, I might have continued in unbelief,
and bin damned: that I might be saved, I may thank him; that I am saved, my
self. Is there any Christian heart, that does not rise against this Doctrine?
Can we endure to think, that we are more beholden to our own will for
faith, then to the grace of God; Can we be so unthankful, so proud? But I
will stay my self, least I seem to be persuaded, that so gross an error can
find place in a true Christian soul.

Nay: says one. Rather it is a most gross error to hold, as you do, that a
man is forced, and drawn to believe by necessity, whether he will or no. Out
of question, it is indeed a gross error, to have any such conceit of a man's
attaining to faith in Christ. And yet (give me leave to speak my mind
plainly, and freely) I had rather be absurd in destroying the will of man,
then impious in overthrowing the glory of God. But he, that rightly
understands, what we teach of man's believing, sees there is no cause to fear
either the one, or the other. It is clear, and certain, that the maine chance
is safe, the glory of God being so carefully provided for, and maintained: If
we err, our error is less dangerous. For there is not so much danger in
depriving man of his free will, as in robbing God of his glory. But we do
man no wrong at all; unless it be a wrong, to give more to GOD, then to man, in
the begetting of faith. God persuades, and inclines him to believe. What
forcing, or drawing is this? Yes: say they. For you teach, that by this
inclining of the heart, GOD so works upon it, that the party cannot choose,
but believe. Not choose? For any force that is used, against the nature of his
will, he may choose. In respect of event, he can not. I will speak plainer,
if I can. God does not force a man, as the Ox is drawn to the slaughter, or a
piece of Timber thrust forward, by main strength; but inclines the heart,
sweetly, and gently, according to the nature of it to him perfectly known; yet
so powerfully, that it can not come to pass, but the party shall both will to
believe, and believe indeed. We confess there is a necessity, in regard of
the event, that, upon this inclination, faith shall certainly ensue; but we
deny all constraining, or forcing, by which the will should lose his virtue,
or action. No man believes, but willingly. No man is willing, but he that is
inclined thereto by God. No man is forced to willingness by any constraint. I
inquire not how the Lord inclines me. I believe, that he does incline me. I
find I am, of unwilling, made willing. I see not any force used to make me
willing. Other men refuse Christ willingly: I receive him willingly. They are
borne willingly to all, that is evil: I am made willing to whatsoever good, I
do will.

It is not then power of free will, but Prerogative of Honor, that our
Evangelist says is given to them, that believe in Christ. Now for the farther
amplifying of this mercy, we must consider the generality of the gift. Which
is such, that it extends it self to all men, whatsoever. As many as received
him, to them he gave, etc. There is no distinction of Jew, or Gentile, male
or female, rich or poor, bond or free, one or other; but whosoever believes in
Christ, has the Prerogative to be the Son of God. This (in general) is
that, which the Apostle delivers. But, for our better instruction, it will not
be amiss to handle the point, somewhat more largely; in these two parts:
First, to set out the vouchsafing of this privilege, to the Gentiles, as well
as to the Jews: Secondly, to apply it to the several estates, conditions, and
differences, that are ordinarily found amongst men. So shall the generality of
the benefit appear more clearly: So shall every particular man's comfort be
the greater.

There was a time, (as it is not unknown (I hope) to any man in this
Auditorie) when the Jews only were the people of GOD; To whom (as the
Apostle says) the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, Rom 9. 4.
and the giving of the Law, and the service of GOD and the promises
appertained. They only were the Children; all other Nations whatsoever, but
dogs Math. 15. 26.
The bread belonged to them, the most that other people could have, was but the
crumbs falling from then Table. What should I proceed in amplifying of this
point? I spoke of it, at large, in a former exercise, Sermon. 7.
upon the eleventh verse; when I showed, that the Jews were Christ's own,
though they received him not. As for us the Gentiles, what were we? The Apostle
Ephe. 2. 12.
tells us, that we were Alians from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from
the Covenants of promise, having no hope, being without GOD in the world. It
is worthily thought a singular favor of God, that Jacob was preserred before
Esau, the younger brother Genesis 25. 23.
before the elder; yet were both sons. What a kindness, grace, bounty, (no
words are able to express the worth of the thing) is it, to make servants
Sons, to adopt them for children, that of themselves, were no better then
dogs? The Jews thought it a strange matter, and a great wrong to their
Nation, that the Gentiles should be taught the word of God. Will he go to
them, that are dispearsed among the Grecians Ioh. 7. 36.
(say they of our Savior) and teach the Grecians? And when the Apostle Paul
told them, that he was appointed to preach the GOSPEL to the Gentiles, they
were not able to endure it, but sared like mad men, crying out, casting off
their clothes, and Act. 22. 23.
throwing dust into the air. What speak I of the Jews, that might easily be
blinded with envy and pride? We heard eue^ now, what account was to be made of
the Gentiles, by the testimony of the truth it self. Therefore our Savior
directly affirms, that He was not sent, bat to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. And accordingly Mat. 15. 26.
when he sends forth his Disciples to preach, he forbids them to go into the
way of the Gentiles, or Mat. 10, 5.
to enter into the Cities of the Samaritans. This opinion was so deeply
settled in the hearts of the Apostles, Act. 10. 28.
that Peter thought it unlawful for him to impart the Gospel to the Gentiles.
Yea so general was this conceit, that after Saint Peter had by the
commandment of God, preached, to Cornelius, he was accused for Chap. 11. 23.
it, as guilty of some heinous crime.

Such was the estate of us, that were Gentiles by nature; we were so far from
being Sons, that we were not admitted to have the lowest office, or place in
the house of God. Now, by the coming of Jesus Christ, this honor is
vouchsaf't us, that every one of us, that believes in him, does thereby become
the child of God. They that before might not be admitted to wash dishes in
the kitchen, may now seed on the Lords own dish, at his table. There is now
no difference betwixt Jew, and Grecian; but all are one in Gal. 3. 28.
Jesus Christ. It is one God, who shall justify circumcision of faith, and
circumcision through faith. But some man Romans 3. 30.
perhaps will say, that this Prerogative was always afforded the Gentiles: for
whom it was lawful to join themselves to the Jews; and to be made one with
the people of God. It is true indeed, that the Gentiles were never so excluded,
but that, if they offered themselves, to be circumcised, they might be
received, and numbered amongst the Jews. What new favor then, is vouchsaf't
them, by the coming of Christ? A full right, and interest to all the promises
of everlasting life, which before (generally) did not concern them. Now the
Gospel offers our Savior Christ no less to the Gentiles (If not more) then to
the Jews. He came to his own, for to them he was Act. 13. 46.
first, and principally sent: his own received him not; the Multitude, Rulers,
and People refused to take him for their Messiah, and Savior. What then? Shall
his coming be to no purpose? The Jews indeed had a conceit, that none, but
they, or at the most such as adjoined themselves to them, could be the Sons
of God. But they were much deceived. For as many, a^ will now believe in
Christ, though they be no Iewe^ by nature or profession, are made the Sons
of God What remains then, but to put you in mind of that exhortation of the
Prophet Esaias; Rejoice, O barren, that Isai. 54. 1.
did not bear; break forth into joy, and rejoice, thou, that did not
travel with child; for the desolate has more Children, then the married
wife, says the Lord: Let me add to this the caveat of the Apostle, and I will
conclude this point. Behold the bountifulness, and Romans 11. 22.
severity of God; toward them, which have fallen, (that is, which received him
not) severity: but toward thee, bountifullness, if thou continue in his
bountifulnes, or else shall thou also be cut off. We have that honor; happy
men, if we can keep it: and if we will, we may. It were in vain to speak
generally of the Gentiles, in this place; The exhortation belongs to this
Kingdom, this City, this Auditorie. We are all Gentiles, having no interest
in those ancient privileges of the Jews: yet are we vouchsafed by favor to
be the Sons of GOD, if by faith we trust in JESUS CHRIST. Can we despise,
or neglect, so rare a kindness, so great an honor? Do we prefer the
profits, the pleasures, the aduancements of this World, before the Inheritance
of the Kingdom of Heaven? Let us remember what we were; men without God,
without hope. See, what we are; people, to whom Jesus Christ, has a long
time offered, and does every day, even now, at this hour, in this place, offer
himself. Consider, what we shall be, if we will be the Sons of God;
Heirs of Heaven. Will none of these things move us? Oh the senseless
desperateness of men! O the wilfulness of them, that will not learn! None
receive Christ, but they, that believe in him. It is not enough to give him the
hearing, or to be persuaded, that he is the savior of the world: they only
are sons, that truly rest upon him, without hope, or desire of any other
help.

All such, whether they be Jews, or Gentiles, have the Prerogative, to be the
Sons of GOD. What? All? Yea all; without exception of any man, woman, or
child whatsoever. We heard as much erewhile, out of the Apostle; There is
neither Jew, nor Gal. 3. 28.
Grecian, there is neither bond, nor free, there is neither male, nor female:
for ye are all one in CHRIST JESUS. Do you mark, how Saint Paul, lays out
the point, in diverse particular differences, that he may take away all
exception, and doubt? Look but two verses before, and you shall see, he
speaks of the matter, we have now in hand, of being the Sons of God: for
ye are all (says he to the Galathians) Ver. 26.
that believed in CHRIST, the Sons of GOD, by faith in CHRIST JESUS. Who may
shut out any, where the Apostle sets open the door to every one? Me thinks,
if any sort were to be excepted against, servants especially should be
excluded. The Apostle naming servants, means not such as we have among us,
which serve for wages, or be apprentices, for term of years, but bondslaues,
who were wholly their masters; and reckoned as part of their substance, to be
employed, and disposed of, by sale or otherwise, as it pleased them, whether
themselves would or no. Euod. 21. 21.
This the Apostle himself knew very well, and therefore he forgets not to
mention servants, where he has occasion to entreat of these differences. By
one spirit 1. Cor. 12. 13.
(says he) are we all baptized into one body, whether we be bond or free.
Know ye, that what good thing so ever, any man does (says the same Apostle
other where) that same Ephesians. 6. 8.
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond, or free. These are still
remembered; because by reason of their mean account in the world, they might
be much doubted of. That appears by an other place of Saint Paul; where he
does especially apply himself, to assure servants, that being in CHRIST, they
are safe and well enough, though they contitinue slaves still. Art thou called
(says he) being 1. Cor. 7. 21. 22
a servant? care not for it; yet if thou may be free, use it rather: He,
that is called in the Lord being a servant, is the Lords free man. It is
evident then, that the condition of a man's life, be it never so base, cannot
keep him from this Prerogative, of being the Son of GOD, if he believe in
Christ.

Is it not an admirable kindness, an incredible favor, that bondslaues, whom
the World accounts of, as they do of their cattle, and household stuff,
should be vouchsaf't the honor to become the sons of God? He, that would
esteem it a great part of happiness, to be made a free man, in the world,
has offer made him of being the Son of God. That, which I say of this one
kind of difference, the baseness whereof seems to hinder a man from being
made the Son of God, I beseech you conceive, and apply to all other like
matters, which bring contempt, or neglect of men in the world. Poverty,
lameness, blindness, deformity, meaneness of parentage, simpleness of
capacity, and all other natural Chrysostom. in Ioa. ^omil. 9.
imperfections, and infirmities whatsoever, are covered with the riches,
beauty, nobility, and wisdom of Christ, in as many as trust in him. Go out
quickly Luke 14. 21
into the streets, and lanes of the City (says the Lord, that made a great
supper) and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, the hault, and the
blind. What do thou vexing thy self, with the consideration of thy mean
estate? Set thy thoughts upon the honor, thou may attain to. Lift up thine
eyes, that are cast down upon thy bodily imperfections, and feed thy self,
with the sight of heaven, that is offered thee. Art thou ashamed, because thou
bear no arms, to make thee a gentleman? Throw thy self into his arms,
who will make thee, the Son of the most high. Poor and miserable men (most
miserable, because they refuse to be happy) sit without the church doors,
begging of an halfe-penny, whereas they might come in, and obtain a Kingdom.
For as many, as receive him, have a Prerogative to be the Sons of God. We
find, every day, by common experience in our selves, and others, that if a man
have a Son, that is blind, lame, deaf, dumb, or any other way deformed,
he will be ready, and desirous to take some course, if he be his heir, to
settle his inheritance upon some other of his Children. Surely I think, the
man is hardly to be found, that if he had no heir, would adopt such a one
for his Son, to succeed him in his Inheritance. How should we then valewe
the inestimable favor of God, that makes offer of an Adoption, and
Inheritance, to the most contemptible wretches, that live upon the face of the
earth? Here is love; here is bounty. The favors of the greatest Princes are
but fancies, not so much as shadows, if you compare them with the kindness of
God. I confess, they had need to look to their own estate. Their Dominions,
and their treasures are finite. The greatest Monarchy, that ever was, divided
amongst as many, as would accept of it, could afford but very small shares to
every one. Oh that all men would receive Jesus Christ! There is room enough,
and wealth enough in heaven, to give full content to as many, as can desire it.

Come then I beseech you, let us settle forward to meet Jesus Christ, that we
may receive him. Let -- Non magna relinquam, -- Magna sequar-Ouid. metamorph.
lib. 7.
not Farms, Oxen, or wives hold us back: They are no great matters, we
shall leave: They are infinitely great we shall attain to. Is it not better to
exchange them now, while we may do it with such profit, then to forgo them,
no man knows how soon when we can make nothing of them? What is it we
mislike? To be Sons? No man is so base, or so foolish, as to think bondage,
better then freedom. To be the Sons of God? It were against reason, and
nature, not only against Religion, to refuse such an honor. What should I
say? Either we believe not, that there is any such Prerogative to be had, or
we think, it is not worth the pains, we must take to get it. We dare not
be known of the former, for the very shame of the world, seeing we profess
Christian Religion. If we plead the later, our own heart will condemn us;
which (if we be once persuaded, that there is any such thing) esteems of
eternal glory in heaven, as the greatest happiness, that can be obtained, or
imagined. But what if the pains be nothing, in comparison of the courses that
we would set our selves, to the obtaining of this honor: let us see what they
are, and then judge.

What is then required of us, that we may become the Sons of God? The holy
Evangelist has answered us, that Believing in CHRIST, will make us the Sons
of GOD. What it it to believe in CHRIST? To trust in him, or to rest upon him.
For as we have learned out of this twelfth verse, As many as receive Christ, by
believing in his name, have the Prerogative to be the sons of God. Can any
man look for, I will not say such a Kingdom, but the least kindness that may
be, upon easier, or better conditions? Naaman the Syrian, desiring to be cured
2. King. 5. 10.
of his Leprosy, when he was willd by the Prophet Elisha, to go wash seven
times in Jordan, went away in an anger, as if some hard matter had bin enjoined
him. But his servants (wiser in that point then their master) came, and spoke
unto him, and said; Father, if the Prophet had Verse. 11.
commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather
then, when he says to thee, Verse 13.
wash and be clean? The Noble man, considering that his servants spoke
reason, followed the Prophets direction, and was healed. Healed of what? Of a
Leprosy. By what means? By washing seven times in Jordan. What is it, that
we desire? To be made the Sons of God. A far greater matter, then to be
cured of a Leprosy. How may we attain to this honor? Believe, and thou
shall become the Son of God. Shall I need to compare these things together?
Believe; Wash. Which is sooner done. Wash seven times. If thou believe once it
suffices. Not as if we might be the Sons of God, though we cease to
believe; but because he, that once truly rests on CHRIST, can never wholly
depart from him. I see not how we could devise, to have so great honor with
so little pains; unless perhaps we would attain to it, by dreaming of it. Can
we imagine a readier course of preferment, or an easier labor in getting it,
then to be made the sons of God, by trusting in Christ? Do but cast thy care
upon him, and thou shall be sure of that he promises and thou desire.

But it will not be amiss perhaps, considering the importance of the matter,
to examine these things more particularly; especially in these two points: That
believing is necessarily required to adoption; so that without the one, the
other is not to be had, that the means of enjoying heaven, which all men
naturally propound to themselves, are of greater pains, and less (yea no)
certainty: what if I say of mere impossibility? Suspend your judgment, till
you have heard, and understood the case: then give sentence freely, and spare
not. Now for the better conceiving of the matter, I will make bold to show the
mystery of our redemption, so much as is needful, for the knowledge of that,
we have in hand; but as shortly, as I can with plainness. It is not unknown
to any man, unless he be utterly ignorant of christian Religion, that all
mankind, and every particular man, woman, and child, lost the favor of God,
and with it all hope, and possibility of happiness, by the transgression of
our first parents, in whom we all sinned. If any man be desirous to inform
himself better of this point, the Scripture is open for him: I will content my
self, with that one testimony of the Apostle. By one man sin Romans 5. 12.
came into the world, and death by sin: and so death went over all men, by
him, in whom all men have sinned. For the recovery of this loss, it pleased
God to appoint a means of reconciliation, that his anger justly conceived
against us, might be appeased, and we received again into his former favor.
This means was, his own Son, in our nature, offered up by himself in
sacrifice, to God his Father. God was in Christ (says the 2. Cor 5 19. Rom 5.
10.
Apostle) reconciling the world to himself. And in an other place, when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son. But the
manner of our reconciliation, on Christ's part, does not so much concern the
matter, we are now to handle. Let us see what is required of us.

There are two things necessary to a sound, and full reconciliation: that the
offense, which caused the breach, be pardoned, that the party offending be
admitted again into as great favor, as he was in, before he committed that
fault. If either of these be wanting, the Reconciliation is imperfect. Our
Savior Christ has fully performed whatsoever was needful, on his part, to
procure absolute Reconciliation. The Lord God is willing, and ready to be
reconciled unto us. Only the stay is in us. For the pardon of sin,
justification is offered, not imputing of sin. And whereas 2. Cor. 5. 19.
we were, before the breach, no otherwise in the favor of God, then servants
are, that please their master; now the Lord is determined, to receive us, not
as servants, but as Sons by his free Adoption. God sent his Son, etc: that
we might receive the Adoption of Gal 4. 4. 5.
Sons. Here is full, and perfect reconciliation provided; Justification, and
Adoption. But how shall we be made partakers of it? I will leave the former
point, till I have some fitter opportunity. Of the later our Evangelist speaks
in this place, teaching us, that if we believe in Christ, we have the
prerogative to be Sons. This the Apostle Paul confirms: ye are al Chap. 3,
26.
the Sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus. There is no exception against 2
such witnesses. No (says one) if they agreed in their depositions. No (says
one) if they agreed in their depositions. But there is no small difference
betwixt them. The one says we have that honor by believing; the other affirms
that faith makes us the Sons of God. The Evangelist requires the act: the
Apostle contents himself with the virtue, grace or quality. S. Paul seems to
look for no more, but that we have faith. S. John calls precisely for the use
of it; Receiving, Believing.

Is this all the difference, that can be found, in their testimonies? Then all
is nothing. First it is apparent (to begin withour Evangelist, whom we
presently expound) that S. John by enioyning us To believe, necessarily
requires faith, by which we must believe: and so his deposition includes, and
implies that, which S. Paul affirms. Secondly, the Apostle, under the name of
faith, co^prehends the act of believing; which is never any more severed from
it, then burning is from fire. A greater fire burns more, then a little one
does; but the least, that can be, does burn, as well as the greatest. So the
strongest faith trusts more firmly in Christ; but the weakest more or less,
relies truly upon him. But that we may see the full agreement of these two
witnesses; let us consider how the Apostle declares his own meaning,
oftentimes in the like matter. The righteousness of God unto Romans 3. 22. Chap.
4. 3.
all, and upon all that believe. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness. That Chapter is full of the like speeches. So are his
other Epistles, where he has any occasion to speak of Justification. And if
that, which is former in nature, cannot be had, but by believing, surely this
later, is not to be attained to, by the only having of faith.

Therefore, as often as we find in Scripture, that Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, Salvation, or any other such favor, and blessing, is ascribed
to faith, we must remember, that the act of faith, and not the gift, or quality
it self is signified. We Jews (says the Apostle) who Gal. 2. 16.
know that a man is justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ. It is
certain, that Justification is by says; the Apostle shows us how. Namely by
believing in Christ. So must we understand that, which the same Apostle has
in an other place: To him, that works not, but believes in him, that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Shall we say,
that the habit of faith was counted for righteousness? S. Paul had opened his
meaning, touching that point, a verse or 2 before; Abraham Verse. 3.
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. What was counted?
His believing, not his faith, as it was a grace, or virtue in his soul. We may
the rather be persuaded hereof, if we call to mind, and observe, both that
our Evangelist Saint John always urges believing, and not once mentions faith
in so many places, where this matter is spoken of, even diverse times in some
one Chapter; and also that our Lord himself, does most commonly, in all the
other Evangelists, follow the same course: and wheresoever he gives any
commendation to faith, it is manifest he does it, in respect of the act
thereof. I have not found (says he of the Centurion) Mat. 8. 10.
so great faith in Israel. How great faith? As to rest upon the very word of
Christ, for the curing of a sick man, that was absent. Speak the word only
(says the Captain) and my servant shall be healed. It would be Verse. 8.
too long to stand upon particulars; That one example may serve for all.

It may be, some man hearing, that faith, and believing breed such wonderful
effects, will be desirous to know how this may be. What excelllency is there
in faith, more then in other Christian virtues? Why should believing in God be
preferred before loving of God? First I must put you in mind; that it is the
act of faith (as I have often said) by which these savors are obtained, and
not the virtue it self. And therefore our Papists, who will have their first
justification (as they mince matters) to consist of faith, love, and charity,
as they are virtues, habits, graces, qualities, beautifying and sanctifying the
soul, cannot reasonably imagine, as they all commonly do, that the Apostle in
the Epistle to the Romans entreates of their justification; because he so often
requires the very act of believing; which, in that justification of theirs,
has no place: This being marked, and remembered, I say, that the act of faith,
or believing, does not bring justification, and adoption, or either of them, by
any special excellency, that it has in it self, but merely and only by the
place, and office, which the Lord, of his own will, and mercy, has assigned
it, to be the condition on our parts required, for the atchieuing of these
favors, and honors. The covenant of the law, stood in these terms, He that
does these things shall live thereby. So that the Leuit. 18. 5.
condition was righteousness, according to the exact rule of the law. By the
Gospel, the Lord enters into a new covenant with man, the condition whereof
Act. 16. 31.
is, Believe, and thou shall be saved.

This is that, which the Apostle teaches us, concerning the Lords accounting
of faith for righteousness. Whereas by the law, righteousness was necessarily
required, that a man might have an interest to heaven; now by the Gospel.
faith is accepted instead of righteousness. Do this: says the law: Believe in
Christ. says the Gospel. So that, when the question is of reconciliation, and
the parts thereof, or either of them, whether it be by faith, or no, the
meaning is this, whether believing be the condition, which we are to perform,
that we may be reconciled to God, or no. To this doubt the Apostle answers,
that Abraham believed God; and it (that is) His believing Romans 4 3. (...).
was counted to him for righteousness. Pardon me I pray you, if I do but touch
these things, or rather, but point at them, as I pass along. At some other
times (if it please God) now one, then an other of them, shall be cleared, and
proved. Yet, for all my have, I may not forget, to deliver the ground of that,
which I have said, touching the Lords accounting of faith for righteousness. I
show that the Apostle is so to be expounded, by 2 places of this same Epistle,
where the very same manner of speech is used. If the uncircumcision (says Saint
Paul) keep the ordinances of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted
Romans 2. 26. (...);
for circumcision? What is this For circumcision; Instead of circumcision; as
if he were circumcised. The other place affords us the like words, and
meaning. Romans 9. 8. (...).
The children of the promise are counted for the seed. There is no other place
in all the new Testament, out of which we may learn the sense of this
phrase; and these two are plain, being alike in themselves, and agreeing with
the Apostles words, and purpose in that other Text. What should hinder us then
from expounding the Apostle, as we do? Or rather, with what reason can we
refuse such an interpretation, as the Apostle himself points us to? The
waightinesse of the matter, has carried me farther then I meant to have gone:
I will be the shorter in that, which remains.

It is faith then, or rather believing, which the Lord requires of us, that we
may become his children: not as if there were any excellency in the thing, or
merit in the use of our freewill, for the worthiness whereof, such a favor,
and honor should be vouchsaf't us: but only, and merely because this is the
course, by which the glory, and riches of the mercy of God may be declared.
Therefore the Apostle concludes touching justification, the former part of
Reconciliation, that it is, by faith without the works of the law; because
thereby all boasting is excluded. Romans 3. 27. 28
The Papists, that make their first justification to be inherent
righteousness, consisting of faith, hope, and charity; their second, actual
obedience to God, by the performance of the works of the law, draw away the
glory, and thanks from God, to themselves. For the former, I have showed, that
they will have the difference, whereby it comes to pass, that one man receives
justifying grace, and an other does not, To proceed from every man's freewill,
and not from any special grace of God, inclining the soul to believe. Neither
rest they there; but having thus begun to magnify themselves, by the getting of
this grace, they go forward to rob God of his honor, and thanks for our
salvation; to that end, they set out the dignity of that righteousness,
whereof they make account, they are now possessed; that Faith, Hope, and Charity,
so beautify their souls, that God cannot, but acknowledge them for his
children, in whom he sees so lively, and perfect an image of himself. This is
the course, that Popish religion teaches all men to follow, who are desirous
to be made the Sonns of God. If we compare the means of attaining to this
honor, which according to the Evangelists direction, we embrace, with that
course, which they present; I doubt not but we may truly say, that our faith,
which is counted for righteousness, is more excellent, then their proud supposed
righteousness so highly magnifyed by them.

For seeing the maine end of all religion, is the glory of God, by what shall
we value the excellency of any virtue, or virtuous action rather, then by the
more, or less advancing of that glory? And by what is, or can God be more
glorified, in the salvation of man, then by our disclayming, and renouncing of
all possibibility in our selves, and in all creatures, and resting upon him
alone, as the only hope of al our happiness? By this, we acknowledge his
sufficiency to be infinite, his kindness to be incomparable. If we trust to
him for succor, it is plain we are thoroughly persuaded, that he has power,
and skill to deliver us. Wants he wisdom, to discern by what means our
deliverance must be wrought? How should we rely upon him, that knows not
whereby to help us? Admit his skill were very great, in perceiving what were
to be done for our succor. What can that avail us, if he lack power to do,
or procure that to be done, which he sees we stand in need of? Is it not a
singular honor to God, to have his wisdom, and his power thus highly
magnifyed? Reason confesses, it is beyond her reach. Learning profeseth, she
can afford us no instruction for the search thereof. Experience proclaymeth,
she never saw any thing, that might possibly be observed to give us any
direction in the business. Men and Angels are wholly to seek. All created
wisdom fayles us. God only, as being only infinite, makes supply of that to
the knowledge whereof, it was not possible for any finite wisdom to attain.
Neither is the power of any creature greater, then his knowledge: yea, who
knows (...) more, then he can do? What should I multiply words in so plain a
case? The Son of God must become man, and by his blood, powered out in
sacrifice, appease the wrath of his Father, and reconcile the world to God, by
the pardon of Sin, and adoption into the state of children. What power is there
in men, or Angels to procure this favor?

It is impossible to enforce him, that is almighty. And if he do it not
willingly, as good not do it at all. For he, that offers unwillingly makes his
offering of no value. How then? May they hire him, to do this service? What
needs he, that is Lord of heaven, and earth, and has all in his possession?
What have we to give, who our selves are not our own? As if a bond-slaue, that
has nothing, nostri Iuris
but that, which is his masters, should redeem himself, with giving some
treasure, which before he gives it, is his, to whom it must be given. What
remains then, but entreaty? To whom shall we sue? What color of reason shall
we devise, to ground our petition upon? With what face shall we come into his
presence, to whom our very coming is odious? The nearer we press to him, the
more we sin. The greater our sin is, the hotter is his wrath. The heavier his
displeasure is, the farther we are from hope of favor. What shall we but prouok
him, by praying to him; incense him, by entreating him? As for making of any
means to him, there is none in any place about him, but does truly, and
worthily hate us, as long as we continue in their Lords displeasure. If we
might have access, durst we, trow you, presume to approach unto him? When our
first parents had broken that one Commandment, and afterward heard the voice
of the Lord walling Genesis 3. 8.
in the garden, in the cool of the day, they hid themselves (says the Text)
from the presence of the Lord God, among the trees of the Garden. Why did they
not rather show themselves, and fall down before the Lord, and entreat for
mercy? The same conscience of sin, and sense of the wrath of God, would now
also take from us all heart to appear before him, to make entreaty. But
suppose we were admitted into his presence, to offer up our petition. What
should we say? How might we begin to make so unreasonable a request? Is there
any man so void of sense, as to think, that he can persuade a kind father,
to send his only son, so loving, so beloved, not only to be infinitely
abased in his estate, but also to be put to a most cruel and shameful death,
and that for strangers? Strangers, said I? It were too much if we were no
more, but strangers. What is it then to Romans 5. 6.
send him, for the behoof of enemies; of rebels and traitors? Shall we try,
if we can prevail so much with the son, as to become a sacrifice for us?
The very unreasonableness of the suit makes me ashamed to think on it: and is
it possible we should move it? Would you entreat him to dye for you? O absurd,
and ridiculous motion! O senseless, and impious supplication!

But I must remember that the time passes, and stay my self in the midst of my
race. It is enough, for the matter in hand, that we understand what honor we
do to God, by acknowledging his love, his power, and his wisdom, in resting
on him only for salvation, and giving all the glory, and thanks for it to
his majesty, and mercy. As for the Papists, that follow the other course,
whereby they look to make themselves the sons of God; though they pretend, I
know not what extraordinary love to him: yet in truth, either they love him
not at all; or if they do, it is because they imagine, that he lets them have
the chief glory of their own salvation. Seem I to any man to speak
hardlier of them, then they deserve? I appeal to the impartial judgment of
any reasonable man. Thus stands the case betwixt God, and them. He, of his
own mercy, has provided means, by which they may be saved: but he has
taken no order, that they shall be saved. If they will make use of this
general favor, they may; if they will not, choose them. God has as it were
cast his alms amongst them: happy man be his dole that seaseth on them. If
so, well; if not, so. He, for his part, could be contented, that every man
should lay hold on his offer of salvation. But he leaves it to their own
choice, and sittes by, looking on, to see who will, and who will not. If any
man believe and be saved, he may thank God, that he might attain to
salvation; but that he has attained to it, he may thank himself. Unless
the means had been prepared by God, he could not possibly have been saved.
Though they were appointed, yet he might have been damned, if he had not helped
himself, where God faild him. God, indeed gave him ability to use the means
and perhaps also persuaded him to the use thereof: but still he left it wholly
to his choice, whether he would use them or no.

So that if he think to challenge any man of unthankfulness, he may justly be
answered, that they do him no wrong; as long as they ascribe to him the
possibilty of their being saved. There is a general thankfulness due to him by
all men; for that he furnished them with ability to make choice of salvation.
But for the particulars; every man is much more beholden to himself, then to
God, if he come to salvation: That he might be saved (for I must repeatit
again) he may thank God; that he is saved, he may thank himself. Now on the
contrary side, all the glory of our salvation redounds to God. We do nothing
to save our selves, but commit our selves, to God, to be saved by him. The
faith, whereby we rest on him, is his mere gift. The use of that gift, is only
from his grace. He, He makes the difference betwixt believers, and
unbelievers: they that believe not, follow the choice of their own will. They
that believe are not only persuaded, but inclined thereto by the spirt of God;
who certainly and (in respect of the event) necessarily, brings them to
believe; not making them believe, whether they will or no, but making the^
willing to believe. Thus it comes to pass, that the whole glory, and thanks
for our salvation, are given to God, to whom only they are due: that we may not
wonder, if God vou^chsafe the privilege of being his sons, to as many as
believe in him through Jesus Christ.

These sons of God are farther described unto us in the next verse: which are
borne (says the Evangelist) Ver. 13.
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
Tertullian. de carne Chr. cap. 19. 24. Athanas. lib. 2. de vnica deit.
trinitatis.
but of God. I am not ignorant, that this has been applied to him, that is
the natural son of God, Jesus Christ himself; as if Saint John had
intended, to set forth the excellency of his birth, in whose name we must
believe. But this interpretation, though it be very ancient, has found few or
none to maintain, or approve it, but the first author of it; and the words will
not bear it, in any sort. For the Evangelist says not, which is born, as
speaking of one, but which are born, as signifying (...).
many: And so do all copies, and all translations read the place; that we may
safely go forward with the exposition of it, as it lies in our English. And
that we may do, the more boldly, because we need not fear any trouble from
our Rhemists thereabout; who agree with us both in sense, and words. But
howsoever their agreement with us is so great; yet, that they may show their
itching desire to dis^gree, and hold their purpose of making the Scriptures
unpleasant in English, and uneasy, they will not join with us in the order of
the words; but set that last, which we put in the beginning: which are borne
(say we) not of blood, etc. What English man would write, or speak otherwise?
Will you hear the Rhemists? Who not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of
the will of man. All this while, a man would wonder, what they meant to say. Not
of blood, nor of the will of flesh, etc. What is it, that they deny? we shall
know perhaps anon. What follows? But of God. Yet we are never the nearer. At
the last comes in, Are borne. Would any man, that knows how to write English,
translate in this sort, if he were desirous to have his translation
understood, and liked? what if the words Are borne, be in the last place in
the Greek and Latin? Has not every tongue his especial property, and grace,
which may not reasonably be neglected? Would you not laugh at, or pity him, who
undertaking to translate our of French into English, should thus write; The
L'escriture saint (nous disent-^ls) n'est pas suffisante.
Scripture holy, to us say they, not is sufficient? yet might such a Translater
answer for himself, that he found the words so placed in his author. There
is no man almost so ignorant, but he easily perceiues, what absurd, and
senseless translations might be justified, if it were enough to follow the
order of the words in translating. But the time will not suffer me to be any
longer in this matter: But calls upon me, to be as short, as I can, in
that, which is yet behind.

Therefore I will make but one labor of examining the words, and delivering
the sense of the place, and afterward speak somewhat of the matter. The
principal scope of the Evangelist, as it is easy to discern, is to show, that
the sons, of whom he made mention in the former verse, Are borne of God.
This point he amplifies by a denial of the contrary: a thing very usual with
our Savior Christ in his manner of teaching, as I noted before, and shall have
occasion to observe Ver. 3. 8.
ofter hereafter. Of God, not of man. The later point is farther enlarged, by
denying them to be bred of such matter, as other sons ordinarily are made
of. Not of blood; or to have man any way for the author of their being. Not of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man. Where (by the way) it will not
be amiss for us to observe, that the same word or preposition, of, is
applied both to the matter, and to the maker. Not of blood; There is the
matter, and to that does the word most properly belong: as when we say a ship
is made of timber, an house is made of brick or stone. In the rest of the
sentence, of, notes the maker; Not of the will of the flesh, or man, but of
God. The word, that is joined with it in this place, signifies as well to
beget as to bear, and is used both of the father, and of the mother. Abraham
begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob; Mat. 1. 1. 2. 3.
and so often in that one Chapter. She shall bear thee a son; says the
Angel to Zachary, of Luke 1. 13.
his wife Elizabeth: and she bare or brought forth a Ver. 57. Chap. 23. 29.
son: So in another place of the same Gospel. Blessed are the barren, and
the womb that never bare. But this kind of phrase is ordinarily referred to
the woman, in the other Evangelists. Jacob begat Joseph the Mat. 1. 16.
husband of Marie; of whom, that is, of which Mary, Jesus was borne. There are
some Eunuchs, which were Cap. 19. 12. Luke 1. 35.
so borne of their mothers belly. That holy thing, that shall be borne of
thee: says the Angel to the Virgin Marie. Yet Saint John does very often
apply this to God, who is as it were the father of his children. Except a Ioh.
3. 5. 6. 8. ^. Ioh. 3. 9. and. 4. 7. and. 5. 1. 4. 18.
man be borne of the holy Ghost: every one that is borne of God. I will only
name the places, that I may spare time. The difference might have been more
plain in English, if we had translated Of, in the three last clauses, By: By
the will of the flesh, by the will of man, by God. But then we must have
changed the word borne, and not have followed the Evangelists course, who
uses the same word (as has been said) in every part of the sentence. Our
tongue also affordes us liberty to keep the word Of, without any need of
farther difference. And so let us proceed.

Not of blood. The purpose of the Evangelist, as I signified ere while, in
these three Clauses, is no more, but to teach us, that the sons, he spoke
of, are not borne after any course of nature, or by any humane power, or
means, but only of GOD. In this first point he sets out that doctrine, by
denying, that they are made of such matter, as all men consist of. Blood, as
all Philosophers, and Physicians affirm, is no part of the body; but only a
nourishment, by which the whole, and every member of it, is maintained, and
fed. The mouth receives, and chewes the meat, then sends it down to the
stomach; from whence, after it is, as it were boiled, and concocted, it is put
over to the Liver. There it is turned into blood; and in that nature, spread
abroad from thence into all parts of the body; every one of which, by a
proper, and admirable virtue given unto it by God, changes the blood into its
own nature, and thereby receives maintenance and growth. The like course is
appointed, by the providence of GOD, for the breeding of our bodies; the
matter, whereof they are made being principally blood, as it has been
certainly observed; the Liver, which is the fountain of blood, being one of
the first principal parts, that is formed.

Much more might be said, and particularly touching our being made of blood:
but I think too little is better then too much of such a matter, in such a
place, and Auditorie. Therefore also I will forbear to propound some not very
unlikely conjectures concerning the reason, why the holy Ghost, in the
Original, says bloods, rather then blood. Not of bloods, says the Text.
Why mentions the Evangelist bloods? I am willingly of their opinion, who take
this for an Hebraisme or a speech framed orcording to the Hebrewe phrase: in
which it is usual, to put bloods for blood. A bloody man, a bloody City, 2.
Sam. 16. 7. 8. Psalm. 6. 7. and 51. 16.
is with the Hebrews, a man of bloods, a City of bloods. But those speeches
may well seem to note a multitude Ezech. 22. 2. Nahum. 3, 1.
of murders: Let us propound some of another kind. If a thief be found
breaking up, and smitten that he die, no blood shall be shed for him. Word
for word, Exodus 22, 2. 3.
not bloudes for him. So in the next verse. Bloods for him. It may be the
Evangelist, does the rather name bloods, then blood, because he speaks of
many, and not of any one. But let it here suffice us, that we understand
his meaning.

In the next two clauses, there is one word common to them both; whereof I
must needs say somewhat, ere I enter into any particular examination of them.
What is The will, which our Evangelist speaks of? Is it (as some conceive and
teach, nothing else, but Concupiscence, or lust? I could be content to think
so, but that I never find the word in that sense, in all the new Testament.
Once indeed the plural number of it, is put for desires, that are unlawful;
Among whom (says the Apostle) we also had our conversation in times past,
Ephe. 2. 3.
in the lust of our flesh, in fulfilling the desires of the flesh. But I doubt,
whether this be a sufficient warrant to take it, in the singular number for
lust, or concupiscence. For the present, let us retain the word, will or
desire, and try, what light we may have to discern the meaning of it, by
understanding the other two words, flesh and man. By flesh, some would have
the woman, or womankinde to be meant. What one place of scripture can be
brought, where the word is so used? For that in Genesis, This is now flesh
Genesis 2. 23.
of my flesh; does not prove, that flesh may signify woman, any more then
that bone may; because Eve is said to be bone of Adams bone, as well as flesh
of his flesh.

It is out of question, that our Evangelist would have us know, that the
sons of GOD, are not borne of women, any more then of men; but it is not
likely, that he intended to signify so much by that word: which is never
used to that purpose, in any part, or place of Scripture. By flesh then (as
far as I can yet conceive) it is best to understand that, which is afterward
expressed; even the nature of man, and woman. In this sense the word is common
every where in Scripture. All flesh had corrupted his way Genesis 6. 12. Romans 3,
20.
upon the earth. By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his
sight. The Scripture is full of the like; as I presume you all know. The
reason of this is manifest. Flesh by a double elegancy of speech, is put for
man: the matter, whereof the body, principally consists, is flesh; therefore
by flesh Metonymia materiae. Synecdoche membri.
the body is signified. The body is one part of man: therefore by the body the
whole man is understood. Thus flesh comes to be taken for man. In this place we
may understand by man, either Mankind, or the Sex, as man is diverse from
woman. The Greek word may seem to direct us to the later, because it does
most commonly note the sex. Yet it may also, be taken for both sexes, as in
these, and such like places; Blessed is the man, whose unrighteousness is
forgiven. Psalm. 32. 1. Romans 46. (...). Romans 11. 4. (...).
I have left to my self 7000. men. And in this sense it will be directly
opposite to the later clause, concerning our being borne of God.

You will ask me perhaps, why Saint John should mention both The flesh, and
man, if the meaning of both be one. Do you not mark, that this doubles the
denial? Not of flesh, not of man. No way, by no means of man. Therefore some
writers are of opinion, that this last clause, of man, is an explication of
both the other; Not of blood, not of Euthym. ad hunc locum. and ex^llo
Maldonatus.
flesh. I can hardly persuade my self to think so. For thought it be true,
that by flesh and blood, man oftentimes is signified; yet the words, in that
sense, are never so divided, or placed. Let us take the examples, which they
allege, that so expound these words. Flesh, and blood has not revealed these
things to thee. Flesh, and blood Mat. 16. 17. 1. Cor. 15. 50
cannot inherit the kingdom of God. All the rest are like these; wherein, who
does not easily mark, both that Flesh, is still set in the first place; and
Blood, never; Flesh, and Blood, not Blood and Flesh; and also, that they are
always joined together, and not severed the one from the other. If our
Evangelist had meant to have spoken of man, by that kind of speech, he would
have said, which are borne, not of flesh and blood. May we divide those former
places? Flesh has not revealed: Blood has not revealed: Flesh cannot inherit:
Blood cannot inherit. These were marvelous strange kinds of speech, and not
agree^ble to the phrase of the holy Ghost in Scripture. Wherefore, thoh I
acknowledge that interpretation to be true, for the general sense of it: yet I
see not, how I may like of it, in the particulars; especially seeing the holy
Ghost uses a diverse manner of speech in these 2 later, from the former. There
he said no more, but Not of blood; In the other, he denies also the will; or
desire: not of the will of the flesh, not of the will of man.

Let us then, if you please, understand by blood, the matter; by flesh, the
man, the efficient cause, and maker as it were; what shall we say of the will
of the flesh, and man? Surely I will not grratly strive with any man, who
thinks it should be taken for concupiscence: It is enough, that I propounded
the reason of my doubt before. Give me leave now to deliver what I conceive of
the matter; which is no more, but this, that I had rather understand by will,
desire, then lust. What then shall be the sense of it? This, as I take it;
that the Evangelist gives us to understand, that the Sons, of whom he
intreates, are not borne according to, or by any desire of man, which might
procure or affect, or wish that kind of Sonship. How fitly this will agree
with the scope of the place it shall appear by and by, when I have examined
that, which remains.

All, that we have said hitherto, concerning this birth, is to show, whence it
is not. Not of blood; not of man. Whence is it then? Of God. God sometimes
notes the nature of the God head, sometimes some one of the three persons. How
may we most fitly expound it, in this place? What if we refer it to the
Ioh. 3. 5. sanlen. in concord. Euang. cap. 1.
holy Ghost, the spirit of whom every man must be borne, that shall enter
into the kingdom of God? I doubt me, we shall hardly find any one place of
Scripture, where the word God signifies any several person, but the Father.
I deny not, that in some place, that is said to be don by God, which in some
other is particularly ascribed to the Son, or to the holy Ghost; but I say,
that in those places, where God is so named, the nature is to be understood,
nd not any one person.

The compareing of these places together does teach us, that the Son, and the
holy Ghost, are by nature God: but it does not prove, that where God is named
there either of these two persons is specially signified. Neither is it
necessary to apply this to God the Father. but rather the opposition stands
betwixt the divine, and humane nature, not of man: that is, not of mankind, or
of the nature of man; but of God, of the divine nature, which is one, and the
same in all three persons.

Thus have we the meaning of the Evangelist, that the Sons he spoke of,
arise not to that dignity by any power, or wisdom of man, but merely and
only by the mighty work of God himself; who begets them to himself, by the
effectual working of his spirit; and of his own gracious favor, vouchsafes
to adopt them for his Sons.

I do the rather make the sense so large, because I would not willingly
omit any thing, which, it may be reasonably presumed, the holy Ghost did, or
might intend. For the cleerer understanding whereof, let us call to mind what
was before delivered, at the twelfth verse: that there is a double Sonship in
respect of GOD; the former is that, whereof our LORD disputes with Nicodemus,
by which we are borne again Ioh. 3. 35. etc.
of the spirit, and fitted for the later, which is our Adoption by GGD the
Father. The prerogative of being the Sons of GOD; is our being adopted, which
is not vouchsaf't us by GOD at the first, while we are in our corrupt natural
estate; but then only bestowed upon us, when by believing we are become one
with JESUS CHRIST the natural Son of GOD his Father.

The other Sonne-ship is but a preparing of us thereunto; by which that belief
is begotten in us, by the powerful working of the holy Ghost, in the ministry
of the word. In this sense the thirteenth verse dependes thus upon the last
words of the twelfth. Saint John had said, that they become the Sons of GOD,
which believe in the name of the Messiah. He proceeds to show how they
attain to this belief: By being borne not of blood etc: but of God. They have
it not by nature in their birth, they get it not by any natural desire, or
will: but they are borne anew of God, and have it by him framed, and formed in
them.

The doctrine of both these points is most true; the words will bear them
both: they will both stand with the scope of the place, and purpose of the
Evangelist; Chrylost. in Io. homil. 9. The oph. ad hune locum.
that I am not afraid of doing any wrong to the Text, though I make so large an
interpretation thereof. Let us then, in the fear of God, handle these things
some what particularly, but shortly, as the time requires. What a prerogative
it is, for men to be the Sons of God, we heard in the last exercise; here
the Evangelist farther sets forth the excellency thereof, by showing the
baseness of our natural birth: which for the matter of it, is blood; for the
making, at the best, but humane; whereas the other is wholly, and only from
God. I will not amplify the former point touching our natural birth, as I
might do: but only refer you to the consideration of it, by your selves. For
your better direction wherein, I will name two Job. 10. 9. 10. 11. Ezech. 16.
4. 6.
places of Scripture, which I commend to your humble, and diligent meditation.
In the former, the natural breeding of mankind is purposely described: in the
later his birth is showed; by way of allegory, if we consider the intent of
the holy Ghost; but plainly, and truly, if we respect the matter it self.
Read them both at your leisure; and I make no doubt, but you will be ashamed
to think, that being so meanly bred, and brought forth (I speak as
favorably as I can) we should be so strangely proud, and insolent, as for
the most part we are.

VVeake and base is our natural beginning: mighty and glorious is our
spiritual adoption. By that, we are borne the Sons of men: by this, we are
chosen the Sons of God. In our first condition, we are brought forth to all
kind of misery: in our second estate, we are advanced to true felicity. The
one casts us naked, and forlorn, upon the bare earth: the other lifts us up,
from earth to heaven: That brings us out of prison to punishment: this leads
us from pain to pleasure: with our conception begins our mortality, our
adoption gives us entrance into immortality; And do we for all this, stand
doting, upon our natural estate?

Are we proud of that, of which we may rather be ashamed? What art thou,
that bear thy self so high? A Gentleman? A Nobleman? A Prince? Heir
apparent to the Empire of the whole earth? Be it so: yet was thy breeding, and
bearing no other, then Job, and Ezechiell describe. The poorest, and basest
wretch, that goes on the ground, had the same manner of beginning, and being.
Remember thy self: as thy death shall be like his, dust to dust; so was thy
birth like to his, blood of blood, flesh of flesh. Thou art the son of an
Emperor. Yet of a man. Be not deceived; thy nature is no better then his;
though thy ears, and sorrows may prove more, and greater.

A gentleman, a nobleman, a King, are not names of diverse natures, but of
diverse troubles. Adoption, adoption is that, which makes difference betwixt
Humane, and Divine; Caine and Abell, were both Adams sons: Ismaell and Isaac
Abraham's: All four were borne a-like of blood, of the will of the flesh, of
the will of man. But Isaac and Abell were adopted the sons of GOD: Caine and
Ismaell were never any more, but the sons of men.

Look how much God is more excellent, then man: so much more glorious is it to
be the son of God, then of man. Look how much the spirit exceedes the
flesh; so much better is it, to be borne of the spirit, then of the flesh. If
thou be the adopted son of God, by grace; it skils not whose son thou art
by nature.

Believe in Christ, and thou have the prerogative to be the son of GOD.
Never tell me, how mean and poor thy parents were. Never boast how rich, and
noble they were. Blood, and flesh, and man must hinder either all, or none at
all. For in all these, all are equal.

How mean soever thy blood be, it is blood; How noble soever it be, it is but
blood. Thy nobility helps not, thy baseness hinders not thy adoption. Not of
blood, not of flesh, not of man, but of God. God needs no such time, and
means, for adoption, as thy natural parents need for procreation. There is
no stay, but in thy self. Thou shall no sooner believe in the name of Christ,
but presently God will accept thee for his son. Is so excellent an estate, so
easily to be come by; and do we refuse, or delay to use the means? Surely
there needs no other proof, that our second birth of regeneration, is not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; then
that so few are so borne again.

I am come now to the last point of this Text, and exercise: which I will run
over very briefly. The prerogative to be the sons of God, belonges to them
only that receive our Savior Christ; by believing in him. Who are they, that
do so receive him? They that are borne of GOD. What is it to be borne of GOD?
To have our understanding enlightened with the knowledge of the Gospel, our
hearts inclined to embrace it; so that we wholly renounce our selves, all
trust in our own righteousness, all good opinion thereof, and rest only upon
Jesus Christ to be reconciled to GOD by him. This estate, as our Evangelist
teaches us in this place, is not attained to by any power, or desire of man;
but by the mighty working of GOD, Psalm. 51. 10.
who creates (as the Prophet says) new hearts in us, changing stone into
flesh; taking our stony hearts Ezech. 11. 19. Cap. 36. 26.
out of our bodies, and giving us hearts of flesh. For the natural man (take
him at the best, with all the helps, that nature, learning, and education
can afforde, is (notwithstanding all these) unable to acknowledge or like of
the means, which God in his own wisdom, has appointed for our salvation.
The holy Ghost gives us the reason of it. For (says he by the pen of Saint
Paul) they are foolishness unto 1. Cor. 2. 14.
him, and cannot be discerned, but by the spirit; which no man can have, but
by a second birth from GOD. I cannot stand to enlarge this point by many
proofs; neither is it greatly needful: because it has been done already in
my former exercises, and shall be done hereafter, if it please God, as occasion
shall be offered.

Yet I may not at any hand forget, because it especially concerns the glory of
God, the end of all true religion, to call to your remembrance, what has
formerly been delivered, touching the work of God, in bringing men to believe
in Christ. The sum of it is this, that it is God, which makes us both able,
and willing to believe, not waiting for the choice of our freewill, which, like
a free horse, runs headlong to infidelity; but graciously, and powerfully
inclining us to believe. Do thou then believe in Christ to salvation,
whereas many other, that have had the same word, outwardly by the ministry
of men, and the same grace inwardly by the motion of the spirit offered to
them, continue in unbelief? Take heed thou do not imagine, that this
difference proceeded from thy self. That they do not believe, it is by their
own fault. That thou do believe, it is by not by thine own virtue. Noe,
say thou. I know that and confess it. I stood in need of the grace of GOD,
as well as other men; I was not able to be saved without it, nor to procure
it. GOD, of his own goodness, found out the means, provided them, gave me
knowledge of them, enabled me to embrace them. All this I willingly ascribe to
God. Is this all, thou give him? many men, at the least as thou perswadest
thy self, have been equal to thee, in all these favors from God, who yet
never attained to belief in Christ.

I would feign know of thee, how this difference grew, that thou beleeuest,
and they do not. They would not, and I would. Thou say well: For indeed
noe man ever believes, but willingly. Yet this does not satisfy my doubt. I
demand farther, how came it to pass, that thou would, and they would not.
Do not answer me; Because I would. For if that be all, thou can say,
thou do rather condemn thy folly, then commend thy obedience in yielding. I
saw it was the only course, I could take for my salvation. Did not those
other, which believe not, see that too, as well as thou? Else the difference
proceeded not, from the choice of thy will, but from the cleerenesse of thy
judgment. I grant, they saw as much as I, but they did not like it, as well
as I. We are never a whit the nearer, for all this conference. I ask still,
how thou came to have a better liking of it, then they had. I used the
freedom of my will, better then they did. I perceive then, when all comes to
all, the difference must arise from free well. But our Evangelist says, Not
of the will of man. Otherwise there Romans 3. 27.
were very just, and great cause in men of boasting, and small glory, or
thanks due to God, every man being the principal cause of his own
salvation. For as I have showed heretofore, thus might any man that believes,
reason with GOD; Why should I be challenged of unthankfulness? (...)


