A SERMON PREACHED before the Kings MAJESTY On Sunday the seventeenth of
February last, at White Hall By Dor WREN, the Master of St PETER'S College in
CAMBRIDGE, and his Majesty's Chaplain.

Printed by Command

AT CAMBRIDGE By THOMAS and JOHN BVCK, Printers to the University. ANN. DOM.
1627.

PROVERBS 24.21. Time Deum, fili mi, and Regem. Fear GOD, my son, and the
KING.
NOLI AEMVLARI, Fret not thy self, because of the ungodly, neither be thou
envious for the evil doer, says K. David the Father, Psalm. 37.1. and, Let not
thy heart be envious for the evil doer, says K. Solomon the Son, Prove.
23.17. Why, the Son learnt it of his Father, you will say; or, 'twas a good
and a godly Lesson, and no marvel then, if the wise Kings, both of them, put
it in among their holy Advices.

Yea, but Be not thou envious for the evil doer, says K. Solomon again, at
the first verse of this Chapter. What, again? And so soon, so few verses
between? Surely then there is some extraordinary matter in it, it is not only
one of his good Counsels, but it is some special one of them, one that he would
have heeded and learned, before many, above any other.

It should seem so indeed; for, NOLI AEMVLARI, Fret not thy self because of
the ungodly, neither be thou envious for the evil doer, says he once more, in
the verses next before my Text. For fear it should not make so deep an
Impression in men's minds as was fitting, he sets it on the third time, as
loath to leave it, till it be thoroughly settled and fastened in their hearts;
but tertia jam vice, 2. Cor. 13.1.
says the Apostle, firmum erit omne verbum, the Admonition thrice repeated
will make it sure and immooveable.

Now who (in the name of God) is that evil doer, of whom he here warnes us so
often? or what is it the Wiseman would have us to do, to show that we are not
envious for him? Why, that the Spirit has set down too, and that once and
again. In the precedent Chapter, verse. 17. it is, Let not thy heart be envious
for the evil doer, but let it always be in the Fear of the Lord. TIMOR
DOMINI, that is the General Rule for it; but least that might prove not
Punctual enough, he says it over again, more particularly here at my Text,
Be not envious for the evil doer, but fear God, my son, and the King, and
then that is enough;

Timor Dei, and Regis, when he had said that, there needed (by like) no more
Instruction: The distinct performance of these two, and the district avoidance
of such as perform them not, of presumptuous and rechlesse Sinners, and of
contemptuous and awelesse Subjects, a Noli aemulari for both these, not to sort
or suit our selves with them, neither with them that fear not God, nor with
them that pretend (forsooth) to fear God, but yet fear not the King, it is the
very last, and chiefest Lesson this of all, that which Solomon (it seems) in
his wisdom chose to close up his own Book of Proverbs with.

For how'ere he spoke indeed 1. King. 4.32.
3000 Proverbs in all, and this of my Text now makes not above 700, yet as it
appears both by the verse after my Text [ Also these things appertain to the
wise] and by the first verse of the Chapter following [ These are also Proverbs
of Solomon, which Hezekiah's men copied out] it is more then probable, that
this Book of Proverbs went no further once then this, to Fear God and the
King, and then he had done; And that all which now follows, from my Text to
the end of this Book, were but fragments collected out of his other works,
gatherings and gleanings which afterward other men got together, and when they
had them, added them to this Book; but with this he himself ended it at the
first, as the very Sum and Crown and Vpshot of all, TIME DEVM, FILI MI, ET
REGEM, Fear God, my son, and the King.

The Division.
Now the Words (you see) are in all scarce twice three, yet at once they present
us with three chief Persons, and three great Relations. The Persons no less
then God, the Lord of all; and Gods Deputy, the King; and all that call God
Father, all the People.

The Relations are, first Personae, What Reference all these persons stand in,
one to another; God, to King and people; The King, to the people and God; The
people, to God and the King. Secondly, Operae, What must be done, as a Due to
God and the King, and as a Duty from the people to both; Timere, they are to
fear them. Lastly, Causae, Why it must be done, yea and Modi too, How it must
be done, Quia filii, and Qua filii, Because they are Sons, and As Sons:
Fear them therefore, and fear them so; So for the Manner, and So for the
Order too, as Sons to both, both to God and King; yet as Sons, first to
God, and then to the King. All these particulars, and more, are incircled
within this narrow compass, Fear God, my son, and the King.

Of which, that I may so speak, as that Gods people may learn the fear of God
and the King aright, I humbly beseech you, that we may here address our selves
unto GOD, that holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, etc.

Fear GOD, my son, and the KING. YOu see, what first meets us at the very
Door of the Text, and there must our Beginning be, at (...) at the Duty of
Fear; and in that, at Dei before Regis, at the Fear of the Lord first, and
then that is the best Beginning that may be.

To Begin at God, is in Nature, (...), says one of their Poets, and A Jove
princ^pium, says another; but at the Fear of God, is of Wisdom above Nature,
The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
111.11. And as it Begins, so it Goes on; it is the Increase of Wisdom also,
says Solomon, Prove. 15.33. yea, it is the very End of all, the Sum of what
can be said or done; Eccles. 12. Let us hear the end of all, Fear God, for
this is the whole Duty of man; Hoc est omnis homo, This every man must do, or
else he does nothing; and more then this need no man to do; it will be very
abundant for him, if he do truly Fear God.

Timor Dei.
Why else does the Spirit so often name us the Fearing of God, rather then any
other Christian Duty; My son, love God; or, My son, praise God; or, My
son, obey God; or, My son, trust in God? All these had been Charges holy
and good, but none of them all had been so much though: My son, fear God, is
a Project and Promise of them all; for Fear is a Catholic duty, that runs
through all duties else, and keeps them in tune; it is Gods Praepositus in the
School of Graces, it sees that none of them all be out of Order, or in any
kind Faulty;

It makes us look well to our Ear, for fear we should hear unprofitably; to
our Eye, for fear we should glance unreverently; to our Love, for fear ought
slip from us which God may take for unkind and unlovely; to our Obedience, for
fear we grow careless or presumptuous; to our Faith, for fear we become
doubting or desperate; to our Joy, for fear it be immoderate; to our Grief,
for fear it be unwarrantable; to our Devotion, for fear it be hypocritical;
to our Religion, for fear it be superstitious; to our whole Life, for fear it
be licentious. For Fear is as the Inquisitor Major over all the rest, when it
is r^ght, all offices else are right, all is well if God be but rightly feared.

Let it be no wonder then, that the Prophet attributes fear to Christ
himself, and that at the end of diverse other virtues, as a sure Guide and
Directer of them all. The spirit of the Lord upon him, says he, Esa. 11.2. But
what Spirit? The spirit of Wisdom, and of Understanding; the spirit of
Counsel, and of Strength; the spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the
Lord: without that indeed, the rest (as great as they are) would be little or
nothing; and concerning that therefore the next verse adds yet further, Et
odorabitur timorem Domini, besides his having the spirit of Fear, he shall
also hunt and seek after it above all the rest; Nay, odorabitur, it shall be
the very Breath of his nostrils, the Life and Soul of all gifts else in him,
the Fear of the Lord.

And to this suits well that excellent meditation that Irenaeus has about it.
Such things Lib. 4. cap. 3^
(says he) as upon our Forefathers were so strictly charged in the old Law,
as merely slavish and servile, all those indeed the liberty of the Gospel
pared off at once: But then Natural things, and such as comply with ingenuity
and freedom, (as the Knowing of God, the Loving of him, the Following his
Word, and the Subduing our own lusts) these were to be dilated by the Gospel,
and not dissolved; so far from abolition, that they received a far greater
augmentation. And from hence it comes (says he) that our Fear of God (that is
it which principally he chooses to insist upon) is much more grown now, then
ever the Law could expect it. And why? Because it is natural (says he) that
Sons should fear more then Servants, the very Liberty of Sons being as a
Loadstone to allure, and as a Whetstone to increase, and as a Touchstone to
try their Love, and their inbred Affection, setting such an edge on the
Reverence and Fear which they bear him, as no Slavery of the Law could ever
skill of.

That we have not then since Christ received the Spirit of Bondage to Fear any
more, S. Paul says right for that, Romans 8.15. because such Fear as that, (the
Fear that was of old) cruciatum habet, 1. John 4.18. it only vexed and
afflicted them that had it: But yet by the blessing of the Gospel, the Fear of
the Lord is highly improoved to us; for it is the Spirit of Adoption now, and
only combines with Joy and Pleasure, (...), says Sermon. (...).
Pantaleon, It is such a reverent and free disposition in us toward God our
Father, that though we were sure he should never know of our offense, or could
possibl^ say to us, I know it, and it offends me, but yet I will not punish it;
even therefore we would strive the more against it, as being loath to displease
so good a Father, and having more care not to miscarry, then not to smart for
it; and performing Duty, not for fear of suffering vengeance, but for fear
of forgoing that Duty, and of wronging so much Love, as he and we are mutually
engaged in.

And now by this I know (says S. in Psalm. 127.
Hillarie) what King David meant, when he called the faithful to school to him,
Psalm. 34.11.
Come my children, and hearken unto me, and I will teach you the Fear of the
Lord. For what needs that (says he) if there were nothing else in it? Who
teaches the Lamb to fear the Wolf? or who reads lessons against the Kite to
the Chickens? But the fear of the Lord comes by holy Rule and Instruction; it
is not what Nature trembles at, but what Grace directs to; and it is not
perfectly had, but from the lessons of Love, such Love as obliges to beware of
all offending.

Now the Psalmist indeed does not there set it down; but if any profess they
are come to learn it, I dare close up this point with an answer to that other
question of his, Quis est vir? Psalm. 25. What Man is he that fears the Lord?
For a man may soon know him now; at least, he may easily know, whether himself
be the man: If he find in his soul so pure and devoted an Affection to God
his Father, that his Joy is only how to please him, and his Study to avoid
offending of him, his whole Content is that God loves him, and securely he
rests himself upon the favor that God has to him; Hic vir, hic est, this man
may be bold that he is a good Proficient, and that he has thoroughly learnt the
fear of the Lord

But yet this is not enough though for the Time Deum here in my Text. That
there is such a thing as Fear, and that it is now in a more liberal and
Sonne-like condition, then when Solomon spoke of it, and that the mind of man
may be and ought to be entirely affected with it, and that God alone must be
the Object of it; in Speculation indeed it comes to no more, Timor Domini is
but this, and these particulars make up the full Theorie of the fear of the
Lord: But yet there goes somewhat more to the perfect duty of it; for this
Time Deum, as a present and particular Precept, aims also at the Practicing of
it, it implies the fact as well as the mind, all actual and outward
Expressions of it, besides the inward and habitual affection.

So that is the next thing which here we must look at, Expressio Timoris.
if a man's spirit be right in the Fear of God, and the right Spirit of Gods
Fear be upon him, what demonstrance withal he must make of the same, and how
it must be acted, that it may appear, God is thus Feared.

For Corpus autem aptasti mihi, if ever ye marked it, you know it is not omitted
of our Savior himself, that God having ordained him a Body, in that Body he
was to perform his will; Heb. 10.9. And much more is it so with us; we being
Bodies also and not only Spirits, the Spirit alone will not suffice us; it is
not enough that our minds and affections are inwardly endued with it, but such
expressions withal we must make, as that the performance of the Duty may be
witnessed. The Duty we acknowledge is, that we do Fear God; and but by that
which is to be read in our outward deportment, neither God nor Man will bear
us witness, that we do Fear him.

God, nor Man, I say. For expressions I shall show you there are of both kinds,
both to God and to Man. To Man, that he may know it, and so (when need is)
acknowledge it, and glorify God for it, or profit himself by it: To God,
only that he may be pleased to acknowledge it, though he knew it long before;
for he knows what is in man, better then man himself. And for this it is
brought in with a Nunc to Abraham (that Father, not of the Faithful alone, but
of the Fearful too; for He is the first that is ever said to Fear the Lord)
Genesis 22.12. Nunc cognovi, quod timeas, Now I know that thou fear God What?
Not till now, Lord? Was Abraham's mind unknown to thee before? Could not God
tell long ago, whether Abraham feared him? Yes; as S. Peter answered Christ's
third question, Whether he loved him, with Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee, and yet Christ the third time said to him, Feed my
sheep, Ioh. 21.17. As who should say, Never be sorry Simon, that I ask thee so
often, and never doubt but I perfectly know thee; but know it I will not, till
thou thus express it; for how'ere God requires truth in the inward parts, yet
the inward parts alone are not all he requires, he will not know, that he is
loved, unless that love do outwardly appear, and expression we must make of
our Fear, or else he will not acknowledge, that we do fear him.

Ipsi Deo.
NOw what expression of it can we make to God? Abraham's case forenamed shows
us, that upon special commands there may be Special ways of it, even to the
sacrificing of an only Son, if God so require. But the Ordinary way that
lies open for all men, the very word it self here will show us, that we must
express our fear to God by Acts of Religion; for so the word fear ordinarily
imports in Scripture.

When Moses had at large described the whole Duty of Gods Worship, his
conclusion is, And now Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear
him? Deuteronomy. 10.12. That special command, which God sent against worshipping of
strange Gods, was, Fear not the Gods of the land where you dwell; Judge. 6.10.
And the complaint which the Prophet makes of Israel, that the fear wherewith
they feared God, was in precepts of men's teaching, Esa. 29.13. by Christ
himself it is expounded of corrupting Gods Worship; In vain do they worship
me, teaching for Doctrines the precepts of men; Matthew. 15.9.

And in this sense I can tell what to make of it, that when the Articles were
to be sworn to, betwixt the two great Princes Laban and Jacob, how Jacob should
use Labans daughters, whom he had to wife, and how Laban should keep a
faithful league with Jacob; Laban indeed swear by his Idols, but Jacob swear a
strange oath, Per timorem Patris Isaac, by the fear of his Father Isaac; Genesis
31.53. What was that? Why, Laban swear according to his Religion, and Jacob
according to his; by the worth and truth thereof, and by that Deity which his
Father and he feared, to wit, the God of Heaven, whom they worshipped.

And with a reference to this also we must take it, what is recorded in holy
writ of religious Obadiah, holy Job, devout Cornelius, and sundry others,
still, how they feared God: For as it appears by the Wiseman, Ecclesiasticus
1.30.
(...), and (...), the fear of God and the worship of God, they are all one in
the language of the Spirit. And the Grammarians themselves have noted it so,
that (...), the most peculiar word for worship (coming of (...), and (...)) in
the nature of it imports nothing else but an eminent fear; Phavorin.
so that these two will ever go together, and where there is any true fearing
of God, there will be withal a due worshipping of him.

And does not K. David himself lead to this, in plain terms construing his
own mind? But as for me (says he) I will come into thy house; Psalm. 5.7. His
meaning is, I will come, and worship thee; For that was all the Psalm. 13^.7.
coming into Gods house in those days, when they came, they came to worship;
and worship God they did, when 'ere they came thither: they were neither too
holy, nor too stately, neither too fine, nor too foolish, to cast themselves
down when they came into Gods presence. But to make it sure, he goes on in the
next words there, And in thy fear will I worship in thy holy Temple, says he;
There we have them both expressly; not worship put alone, nor fear alone put
for worship (though either had been enough, I will worship thee, or, I will
show my fear of thee, in thy Temple) but both together; When I am there, in
thy fear will I worship, that is, I will adore thee with such Expressions of
Humility and Reverence, as of right do appertain to a Creator from his
Creature.

And how fully then meets this with the Epidemiall profanation of our times,
that will third you a difference now betwixt this fear and perfect worship,
betwixt a Religion and a due Devotion, betwixt Holiness and Holiness? Holiness
good store (for sooth) in heart and in mind, Religion in the belly and the
brain, oh, we are so full of that, we are ready to burst with it, it runs out
many times at our mouth, with, Stand farther off, I am holier then thou; yea,
Esa. 65.5*
and we are good men (you must know) and exceeding godly, such as fear God,
and hear his Word duly; That Is true, we have a great deal of Religion in our
Ears too. But yet higher or lower though we have none, None upon our Heads,
for a due Reverence before him; None in our Knees, to bow at his blessed Name;
None for our Bodies, to cast them down and worship.

Especially not in his house, in the most Sacred presence of our God; No, the
less a do there, the better, the less Superstition. Do but come in
confidently, and without any more stir, sit down, and be covered, and hear;
and who dare say, that we fear not God? Whatsoever is more then this, for
Adoration or any Beauty of Holiness, talk K. David what he will of it, yet it
is but (...), a Superstitious overfearing of God with many of us: for where
requires he any of these Expressions and External operations in his worship?

But to these unsavorie Fancies, may the Prophet Malachy have leave to reply;
many passages of whose first Chapter ( mutatis mutandis) fit these times as
well, as they did those they were made for. And they are never a whit from my
Text neither; for they are all about Expressions of Fear in the Service of
God. At the sixth verse, If I be a Father, where is my Honor? and if I be a
Master, where is my Fear, says God to you that despise my Name?

But they wondered he should complain: They feared him, and honored him, they
were sure, as they should do; (and it may well be, they meant it as we do,
within, in our hearts forsooth;) therefore they reply again; Despise? Wherein
have we despised thee? verse. 7. God tells them, In that ye say, The Table of the
Lord is not to be regarded: There Is one particular for them, of the want of
fear and honor. And are there not of us that say the same? The Table of the
Lord, and the House of the Lord, and the Presence of the Lord, would you know
how we (some of us) regard it, or what difference we put betwixt it and any
other places? A great deal less, I am sure, then some other: For the Kings
Presence, and the places where but our betters are, have a great deal more
Reverence and Worship from us; and we our selves expect a great deal more in
the presence of our Inferiors.

And yet that is Gods express argument against us there, (but that we now
adays are able to teach God better Logic) Go and do so to thy Prince now,
and see if he will be content with thee, says God, ver. 8. Worship not when
thou come in to Him, beg any thing of Him not on thy knee, bow not down in
honor of Him; but be Iack-fellow, sit still, or be covered, when He has ought
to do with thee, and will He accept thee? And yet, I am the greatest King of
all, says the Lord of Hosts, there in that Chapter.

But at this we snuff, and cry, Ecce Labor! oh, here is a do indeed for
Uncovering, and Standing, and Kneeling, and Bowing; but what reason is there,
we should be put to so much inconvenience and weariness in serving God, who as
himself is a Spirit, so he requires but to be worshipped in Spirit and truth,
and he knows our hearts well enough? And was not that the very exception then
of the Jews also? But ye have said, It is a weariness; ECCE LABOR! and ye
have snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts, ver. 13. And then what is the
Conclusion? Therefore my name is, and shall be fearful among the Heathen,
says he, at the 14 verse God upbraids and threatens them with the Heathen
their neighbors, whose Idolatrous Religion expressed more fear of a God though,
then theirs. And upbraided as well may we be, and threatened too, with the
Erroneous Religions that neighbor about us; for they are far more careful to
show the holy Signs of fear, then we: And by that (to say right) they now
stand; the opinion, and affection, and devotion of the people (I speak by some
experience) in liking of them, and loathing of ours, being by no one thing so
much carried with them, as it is by the outward Worship and Reverence.

I should then but wrong our Nation of old, when they first became English,
should I not make this a note of the excellent Spirit which then possessed
them, that as they lost (almost) all words of their own language to signify
this passion of the mind which we mean by Fear, so they borrowed none from
other languages, but only this word Fear; and that they brought from the
Latin Vereri; to show, that at first their noble Affections knew no fear, but
the fear of God, Filial and Reverentiall fear alone, such as God himself
(we see) would have his Worship performed by, and our Religion expressed by.

And if once we come to loose that in our Religion, our fear, we shall soon
come to loose Religion and all, however we soothe our selves: For that is the
way to hold even the right Religion also, S. Paul says flatly, Hebr. 12.28.
Wherefore, having received such a kingdom, (the Gospel he means of Jesus
Christ; other kingdom we have received none) let us hold the grace fast. True,
that is good counsel; but how shall we do that? How shall we hold it? It
follows, In serving him acceptably to his mind. And how that? With Reverence
(says he) and holy fear.

And wiser then thus whoever thinks himself, let him go try it with David,
that thinks him not so: For, Holy and Reverent is Gods Name, says he; and then
such a fear as this, such as performs a holy Reverence to him, and to his
blessed Name, that is the fear of the Lord, and the beginning of Wisdom, Psalm.
111.10. and, A good understanding have all they that do thereafter. They only
Understand aright, what Religion, and Holiness, and the true Fear of the
Lord is, that without all hypocrisy have it truly within in their hearts, and
without all profane contempt Express it also duly in the outward worship of
him.

Hominibus; in Genere.
ANd thus make we the Expression of our fear of God, to God himself. But yet
other Expressions there are of the same to Man. In General first; The Commerce
that passes between us and others, the Justice and Righteousness, the Mercy and
Charity, the Truth and Honesty, which we show toward all men, these are as
Broad Seals to prove it to them, and the Letters Patents that testify it,
and justify us in our fear of God.

That unrighteous Judge, that feared not God, but righted the poor widow only
to avoid trouble, yet he in denying to do it for any fear of God or Man, even
by that confessed, that the chiefest thing, which should have moved him to it,
was the fear of God, Luke 18.4. And whence was it, that Abraham could look for
no better then murder and rape among the Philistines, that they would kill
him, and force his wife, but because he thought, Surely the fear of God was
not in that place? Genesis 20.11. But Joseph on the other side, aiming to satisfy
his Brethrens mind, and to make them not doubt of fair and honest dealing at
his hand, makes that the Reason and Assurance of it, This do, and live, says
he, for I also fear God, Genesis 42.18.

And in this regard, it is worth the observing, that when God was pleased to
take the Devils own verdict concerning Jobs fearing God, how e're Job was
excellent at both Expressions, at the acts of Religion, in his holy and daily
Worshipping of God; and the acts of Honesty, in his upright Dealing with all
men; yet God questions the Devil, not of the former, his Religious fearing him,
but only of the other, his Righteous fearing of him; Have thou not considered
my Servant Job, that there is none like him upon earth, in the fearing of God?
Job 1.8. But how was that to appear to Satan? He says not, For he Prays thus
much, he Preaches thus often, he Sacrifices daily, he Professes continually,
all which might well have been said of him; but, For he is an upright and just
man, and eschewes wrong and evil, says God: Signs able to convince the
Devil himself, who not daring upon those Proofs to deny it, only sought to
blemish it with a slander of sinister respects; Timet, sed an gratis? it is
true, Job fears God, I see by that, but does he fear God for naught? at the
9. verse.

The point is so clear (say some talkers amongst us what they will) that I
shall but wrong you to illustrate it. I shall better conclude it with this
advertisement, That these two Expressions of our Fear, to God by our
Holiness, and to Man by our Righteousness, they must never be confounded, nor
the Relations misplaced. How e're by our Worship of God, men may well hope of
our fearing of him, and by our Vprightnes with men, God takes notice, how well
we do fear him; yet we mistake it fowly, if we think we may spare one of
them, and that either Expression may well enough serve Both.

It was but vainly done therefore of the proud-holy Pharisee, to tell God, by
his not being like the Publican, that he was no extortioner nor unjust, nor
adulterer; and by his often fasting, that he was no Glutton; and by his
faithful tith-payings, that he was no Church-robber: but in the mean while to
stand upon his terms with God; In trust to his own Righteousness, to stand
up, as though he challenged God, and to pray with himself Luke 18.11.
(says the Text) as though he scorned to do any more for God, and to let him
know what He was, as though God were beholding to him; And if such as that
would serve God, So; But otherwise (in the pride of his heart) to Express no
reverence, nor worship, no fear of God at all in his presence.

And every whit as vain is the other Pharisaicall trick, that is now become the
sign of a Saint among many of us, little to regard that, which our Matt. 23.23.
Savior calls the Weightier matters of the Law; Judgment, and Mercy, and
Fidelity, (he means conscientious Honesty, such as is regulated by the
glorious Law written in our hearts, and not by the outward Law of
Westminster-Hal, or of a Bishops Consistory) but to make no bones of it, to
burst (in private) with envy and malice, with hatred and all
uncharitableness, to backbite and slander, to cross and hinder, to censure
and condemn, to wallow also in oppression and usurie, in falsehood and wrong,
in lust and uncleanenes, in pride and hypocrisy, in contempt and disobedience,
in schism and faction, both Ecclesiastical and Civil: And yet
notwithstanding all this, to make full account, that our running to Church, and
crying out for Sermons, our defying the Devil, and railing against Antichrist,
our pretending of Conscience and finding fault with the State and Times, our
singing of Psalms, and talking of Scripture, our casting up of the Eye, and
making of sour Faces, must be proof enough to any man, that we fear God
extraordinarily.

Alas, no; it is a Catholic rule, that which S. James gives for our Faith; and
it equally extends to all our Affections; James 2.18. Show me thy faith by thy
works, and thy Hope by thy Works, and thy Love by thy Works, and thy fear
by thy Works. In secret ('it is true) God sees them, before, and without thy
works; but if thou would have me see them, and glorify God in them, or
edify my self by them, thou must show them to me, that way or none, by thy
works. And what works? Not of Godliness and Devotions, not by the fair but
bare show of Holiness, (No, we esteem highly of that, of all holy carriage;
but viderit Deus, we leave God to Judge of it, because the heart of man is so
deceitful, that the Ministers of Satan can in that 2. Cor. 11.14.
transform themselves into Angels of light) but by Mercy and Charity, by
Piety and Equity, and such other humane Duties: of such works, expressly the
Apostle was there treating, and by them thou must show to men, and let them
judge, whether thou fear God or no.

OR if that be too much, Speciatim, in Timore Regis.
for the Demonstration of our Fearing of God, to exact all the duties between
Man and Man, then in stead of them all, (at leastwise by way of Collection for
them all) take we but Gods way here, Express we the one by another that is next
to it, the fear of God by the fear of the King. The Text (you see) joins
them so close, that it makes but one and the same Act for two Objects, God and
the King two Persons, but conjoined in one Act of our Fear, both made one in
that, Fear God, my son, and the King; To make us know, that what holy
pretenses so e're are made for it, yet God is not feared, if the King be not;
the want of Performance in the one, implies Imperfection in the other, and the
want of Truth in the one, avouches Hypocrisy in the other: No Kings fear, no
Gods fear; God himself of purpose has here joined them together, and it is to
make God a liar, a man's self Sacrilegious, if any dare take either from other,
or put them asunder.

And the reason of it is impregnably good, or else the blessed Spirit in S. John
was but a poor Logician. For did you ever mark it, how he enforces the
absolute necessity of brotherly love among us? He has two Arguments together
for it; 1. Ioh. 4. If any man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a
liar; For how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God
whom he has not seen? verse 20. That Is the first, and it is a Topic rule
that; particularly applied by him upon this ground, because of the general
Image of God, which is upon a man's brother; He sees not him, but he sees Gods
Image in him, and God he sees not, but in some Image of him; and the livelyest
Image of God is in his brother; Et ergo, In very good reason then, How can he
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God, whom he has not seen?
No, he cannot; the Question [ How can he] is but to make the Negation more
vehement; it is a thing impossible in very Reason.

The other Argument of S. John is ab Authoritate, a sufficient Reason that in
it self, that we are commanded it; but yet it is steeled with the temper of
another Topic rule also, because Where one thing is ordained to be with
another, there the one is not as it should be without the other. Now this
commandment have we of him, says he. What? That we should love our brother?
No, that is not enough; But that he which loves God should love his brother
also; verse 21. That Is the Second.

Carry then now but these two Arguments in mind, and conclude who will for my
Text and the King, and the Spirit here will warrant him: But reply or deny who
can, for the Spirit will confound him. As good as those Arguments are in S.
John for his purpose, for the love of our brother, I dare boldly say it, (and
let me forfet my Arts and Judgment too, if I make it not appear to any honest
man's conscience) that they are far more pregnant here both for our purpose, for
the fear of the King.

I begin with the first, and I apply it expressly; If any man say, I fear God,
and fears not the King, he is a liar (And Lord! what an holy army of liars
might we then quickly muster up?) But what is the Reason? For, How can he? that
is, It is impossible for him that fears not the King whom he has seen, to
fear God, whom he has not seen. And why so? How follows that? From the very
same ground as before, Because of the Image of God which is upon Kings, and
that, not only a General Image, as they are Men; but a Peculiar Image, and
that (by far) more visible, as they are Kings; yea the Image of that in God,
for which fear belongs to God, that Image upon the King, the lively Image of
his Divine Power, and Glory both.

Power first; Whether Power to do good, and therefore Fear him, For with whom
is Mercy, therefore shall he be feared, Psalm. 130.4. Or Power to do hurt, and
therefore fear him, For he bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4.

And then Glory; The Glory of his Divine Titles: For King and Governor, Lord
and Father, Majesty and Soveraigntie, Mr. Calvin himself confesses, that they
are first and principally Gods Titles, Institut. l. 4. cap. 20.
and not Man's; and that they are so imparted from God to Kings, as his Deputies
and Vicegerents; that where e're on earth we meet with them, they ought
presently to affect us with an awefull sense of the very Divinity it self.
Yea, (for that very purpose) the Glory of his own Name upon them: Dixi, Dii
estis, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods; I have said it, God himself, it is
He that said it; and Dixi, it is his Decree and Sacred Pleasure, he has
Ordained, it shall be so.

And from this Ordinance of his, the Scriptures have often expressed it so. Jacob
of old said it (and of one, that was otherwise bad enough) of his Lord Esau,
That he saw God in him, Vidi faciem, ut faciem Dei, Genesis 33.10. that is, says
the Chaldee, God in the Prince, God in him, as he was the Prince. And it is said
of Moses so, The very Scepter he held, was Gods, not his own, Virga Dei in
manu, Exodus 17.9. and so it is said of Solomon, The Throne he sat on, was the
Throne of GOD: Sedebat super Throno Dei, 1. Chron. 29.23. And so the Argument
prooves invincible; Kings bearing both so apparent and so eminent an Image of
God, the very Image of that eminence in God, for which God is feared; How can
he, that fears not the King, whom visibly he has seen, or may see, fear
God, who never was, nor is (and I may safely add) who, without this other the
fear of the King, never shall, nor will be visible to him?

You see the maine improovement of S. John's first Argument. And it is as easy
to do the same in the second. Now this Commandment have we of him, that he
which loves God, should love his brother also. Is that a good and a concluding
Consequence? And is not this as good then? This Commandment have we of Him,
that he which fears God should fear the King also. And for proof of this, I
come but to my Text, It is a Commandment from Him, from God himself
principally, though given here by Solomon's pen, Fear GOD, my son, and the
KING.

And if you require a New Commandment for it, that is, a Commandment in the
Gospel (as Christ indeed calls the precept of Loving one another a New
Commandment, Ioh. 13.34.) then I go but to the great Apostle for it, Fear
God, Honor the King, 1. Pet. 2.17. And then I add, that by this very Argument
now, the Duty of fear is far more clearly prooved here, then there in S. John
that Duty of Love is; For this here is set down in terminis (you see) we have
the places, this of my Text, and that of S. Peter; both of them formal
Commands, and in plain Logical terms, both equally concluding for the fear
of God and the King: And so have we not for the Love of God and our Brother; No
place to be found, (I speak advisedly) in so Express, so Distinct, and so
Mandatorie a Proposition, for those two together, in all the Scripture.

But I foresee already what the issue of this will be. It is but a spice of
Court-flattery in us, or else all this labor might well be spared. For who
denies, but the King must be feared? Will not Bellarmine, or Iunius Brutus
grant that? I know they will, and yet when they have done, I will kon them
small thanks for it. For how do they do it? Dolosus ambulat in generalibus,
That Is their craft, the treacherous Jesuit in that Church, and the factious
Schismatic in ours; in General terms indeed, they stick not aloud to
profess this Doctrine, talk of it in gross, and who half so holy in
Conscience as they, or so loyal in Duty of fearing the King?

But yet bring it once down to a present instance, and lay it (as occasion
shall arise) to particular Cases and Actions, and then (you shall find) the
case is altered with them; Duty and Conscience then (for sooth) against it,
when they like not the business. As the Spirit in my Text (of purpose surely)
has most aptly described them, Fear God, and the King, and meddle not with
them that be Seditious; So we bluntly read it in many of our Translations, and
it is true that; but yet perhaps it is somewhat too course for their
hypocritical pretenses, They are godly men, and good Subjects, and defy
Sedition:

Therefore the Original meets pat with them, Non cum Mutantibus, or
Recedentibus, Meddle not with those that are given to change, not with those
that alter, or go backward; And these are they now, that when it comes to
that, from their general Profession to some particular Performance, are
notable changelings, they alter then, and falter too; backward they go, and
fall away slyly from their Profession, and from their Duty; from the King, and
from the due fear of him: Nay from the very Text it self indeed, they alter
That in the end, and take it backward; not They fear the King then, but The
King fear Them, if they may do it; and so all at last becomes changed and
altered with them, from No fear at first, to No King, e're they have done; and
from None that does fear, to None to be feared.

And when that is brought about once, I can tell them what will be next also.
For stay there they will not neither, but still they will fall back, as far as
the Text has any room; from no King, to no God, and from no fear of the one,
to no fear of the other, to no fear at all of any. Moses he plainly tells
them so, Non contra nos, sed contra Iehovam, when the Israelites murmured
against him and Aaron, Exodus 16.8. Your murmurings are not against us but
against the Lord. And the Lord himself said it as plainly to Samuel, Non Te,
sed Me, when they would needs have another King in his stead, 1. Sam. 8.7. They
have not cast Thee away, but they have cast Me away. And so Non Regem, sed
Deum, must I say to these, that now by not fearing the King as they should do,
do as much as they can to Unking him again, It is not the King, but God, whom
they principally fail; For there is not the least contempt of Majesty, but is
more then a spice of Profanation; and every step of Disloyalty is a high
degree to Atheism.

And in how high a degree then this danger of Atheism now a days rangeth,
this Text of mine (in my eye) does clearly demonstrate. It showed us before,
that the Fear of the Lord requires the Worship of him, and that the due
worship of him requires so much Beauty and Reverence, that all our saucy and
careless demeanor before him, all negligent and perfunctorie performance of
our Religion, all slight and unawful Expressions in it, as in Gods presence,
are the foulest Scorn and Abasement that may be; Vngodding him no less in true
construction, then does rash and unadvised blasphemy.

It shows us now, that next after himself, our God provides for Kings as for
himself, Sets his eminent Image upon them, sets them in his own stead, sets
but one rule of Conscience for the fear of them both, both himself, and them:
In a word, sets so much by them, whom he sets over us, that for us now not to
be abundantly Right toward them, is to be extremely Wrong toward God; to
fail the one, is to be false to the other; to defraude the one, is to defy
the other.

Take me now but a man of understanding among the very Heathen, (for still I
drive at that, to convince it from the evidence of Reason it self) and let him
see First, That however these Duties of fearing God and King are charged upon
us, not so much by any written Law, as by a Law within us also, by the Rule of
Reason, and the Divine Law of Conscience; yet many of the Great Professors of
this Religion, they that take upon themselves above others, to be this Gods
chiefest Sons and Servants, and to have the best Consciences by far; yet for
all this, they stumble and make a doubt of performing such a reasonable and
seemly worship to their God; and as for their King, they not only stand in
great suspense, but dispute it also fiercely, whether (for all his Vicinity to
God) he can of Right be invested with so Divine a Privilege.

Secondly, That in this fond uncertainty of theirs, they do not look, In quam
partem tutius peccetur, and in wisdom venture most upon that which is safest;
but for Conscience sake (for sooth) ever incline to the more dangerous part,
and out of a singular Devotion still cleave fast to the worst; choosing, rather
then afford their God or King an inch (perhaps) too much, to tedder them both
stiffely at (sure) an ell too little:

Lastly, That in this preposterous course, they have purposely so inured their
thoughts, and hammerd their Consciences to it, as that now they count it a
shrewd wrong to be but told what is right; and if any man dare be so true to God
and King, as to show them the Duty of better Devotion, they besmeare him
presently with a coal of dangerous Superstition; if of better Allegiance, they
brand him soundly with the slander of ambitious Flattery; and by all means
they reckon them, that stand least upon points with God in worshipping of Him,
the godliest men and the best Christians; but them, that stand most upon points
with the King against obeying of Him, the best Subjects, or (as now it goes
current in their own coin) good Patriots.

And now let this Pagan but say, what he thinks of a God that must thus be
used, either in Himself, or in his Vicegerents; and what difference he can
find in Reason, between such a Religion, as they by this means make of it
(and his own, I will not say, for the very Heathen in their abominations carry
themselves more Conscientiously; But between such a Religion) and a down right
Fable.

And if this be not a good Consequence, go blame S. Paul, that taught me this
kind of Argument, and that in a point of Religion too, but of much less
importance; For the whole Church (says he) when they come together but to
speak in unknown tongues, he may not abide it. And why? Because it is so
dissonant from Reason, a Confusion so unnatural, that if but a Heathen man
come in, may he not well account it a mad Religion? Shall he not justly say,
that they are all out of their wits? 1. Cor. 14.23.

And how much more then, say I, if a Heathen man come among our Religious ones,
and find such a hideous and uncouth Dissonancy? Our Profession indeed to be,
toward God, a Duty of fear and holy Worship; toward Kings, a Duty of fear
and sacred Obedience; toward both, a joint Duty, not from Policy, or Reason,
or Nature alone (though every one of these laws enforce it mightily) but from
Conscience also, and divine Law, and the very Principles of Religion: But yet
our whole Practice notwithstanding to be, to God, heedlesse and unreverent, an
arbitrary and fancifull, a rude and saucy slubbering of his worship; To Kings,
a contemptuous and faithless, a quarrelsome and graceless, a repining and
heartlesse curtalling of the Honors due to them: And may he not well take it
for a mad fabulous Religion? shall he not justly say, Non est Deus, A God upon
these cross and beggarly terms cannot be a God?

Wherefore my hearts desire, and humble prayer to God is, that he would open
our eyes (as we are, or should be Christians of ripe understanding) to see
this; and that we, who are ready enough, out of the former part of the Text,
touching the fear of God, to charge our neighbors about us, with the danger
of Idolatry, in their manner of Divine worshipings, would make some Conscience
to quit our selves as readily, in this part of the Text, touching the fear of
the King, from no less a crime, then Idolatry is, in our manner of wilful
Refusings. For the Spirit of God (we see) is express about it, 1. Sam. 15.23.
That, as to Obey is better then Sacrifice, a better sign of our Religion, and
to God far more acceptable; so, to be Disobedient and Unquiet, Nolle
acquiescere, says the Text there, to be whyning and excepting, kicking and
wincing at the sacred Commands of Authority over us (what e're we deem of it,
or how e're we please our selves in it, and, like those grand Mistakers, Ioh.
16.2.
think we do God good service by it) yet it is as bad in Gods own
construction, as Sorcerie and Idolatry too: And nothing more then this Sorcerie
and Idolatry (I fear me) it is, that of late has so much troubled our
Israel, and made the days of many so short in the Land which the Lord our God
has given us.

Sub condition Filii.
SVre I am, it is a perfect and unhalting Obedience to the Powers above us, that
must cause our days to be good and long in the Land; or else God himself
misplaced it, when he made that, as Ephesians. 6.2.
S. Paul also purposely observes, the first Commandment with such a Promise (a
Promise, that which of us all does not desire to have? and yet generally how
many, as though they did not believe God in it, or thought to have it whether
God will or no, do never regard to take his way for it? the Promise of Long
life and Welfare) bound strictly to it.

And, as sure I am, it is such an Obedience, that particularly the Spirit here
ayms at, or else he would never have spoken unto us, in the dearest language of
Love, as unto Sons, Fear God, my Son, and the King. For that is as much as
to say, Unless indeed you care not to be my Sons, unless you will be
Bastards, and not Sons, Slaves and Rebels, and any thing but Sons, you will
fear God and the King alike; not God alone, but therefore the King also; God
for himself, and the King for God; esteeming God and King (both) as your
Fathers, and accounting your selves as Sons to both: not as Servants, only
of Necessity, nor as Friends alone, of mere Courtesy; but as Sons, of
entire Duty.

Yea, as One Son All, together; My Son, says God here to All; One and All,
for none is excused; All as One, for none is excluded; To show us, that it must
be a joint and mutual Consent, of All in One; One, in the Bent of our heart
and affections, Therefore Fili mi, says he, and not Filii mei, my Son, as of
One, not my Sons, as of Many. One, in the ^enor of the Duty pe^formed,
Therefore not twice TIME, not two fears, one for God, and another for the
King, Fear God, and fear the King; but once only for both, Fear God and the
King. And lastly, One, in the very Ground of the Relation; and therefore fili
Mi, not fili Noster, My Son, not Our Son, that is, Son to the King,
because Son to God, and no otherwise then as Gods Son, so the Kings Son;
but So, All as One Son; and One Son All, to Both of them as to One; even
another sacred mystery of Numbers in our Religion (beside that of the blessed
Trinity and Unity) thus divinely couched here in this short Text, Fear God,
my Son, and the King.

And in this sacred Conjunction of all Parties, I may best conclude; In the
name of God exhorting every one of us that rejoice in this Title of being Gods
Son, to remember, First, that Time Deum stands here before Fili mi, the Duty
is enforced, before the Privilege will be allowed: We are apt to forget our
selves, (God knows) and because of Filius, in pride of our Privilege, we often
neglect Time, and make small or no regard of our Duty. But Time Fili, that is
Gods method and order here, it is that Relation to him, which makes him
retain the name of Father to us, and without a due fear of him (flatter our
selves how we will upon our Election or Predestination) we have no true
Sonne-ship with him.

Secondly, that for a trial of that, whether our Time Deum be right or no,
here is another coupled with it, Et Regem, to prove our selves by, Fear God
and the King; that is, fear God in the King, fear God by the King, send our
fear to the King of Heaven by our fear to Kings on Earth: Fili mi is out of
place, unless it stand even in the middle between Deum and Regem: to presume
we fear God, and yet to go no further, to make no Conscience of fearing Him,
that is in Gods stead, or to fear him no further, then the lash of his Laws
will reach us; it comes not from Filius that, and it is but a lame and base
fear, partly slavish, partly hypocritical, a great deal short both of Gods
Due, and of a Sons Duty.

Much less shall we find any place for Time Regem alone, and leave Deum quite
out, to begin the Text there, at the fear of the King, but no fear of God at
all; or if any, yet but heartlesse and worthless, only for fear of the King.
No, without Deum (you see) the Text has never a Time here for Regem; no right
fear of the King, if God be not first feared. He that fears God but for fear
of the King and his Laws, in truth makes the King his God; and he that fears
the King more then God, in heart wishes there were neither King nor God.

So that in the Conclusion, these two, our Time Deum, which is our Religion,
and our Time Regem, which is our Allegiance, they are sure and perfect Proofs
both, either to, either of other. Look what e're is pretended for the King, yet
it is Fraud not Fear, Craft not Allegiance, plain Brokage, and not
Obedience, unless it first issue from the Throne of Heaven, spring from true
Devotion, and be founded upon Religion. Again, look what e're is professed for
God (as where have we not swarms now of great Professors?) yet it is not
Fear, but Faction, not Devotion, but Hypocrisy, not Religion, but
Abomination, unless it fall down before the Throne upon Earth also, be the
life of spotless Allegiance, and the quickening Soul of all Civil obedience.

The Text imports no less, and God enjoynes no less, and no less can I
charge the Consciences of all that this day hear me with, but TIME DEVM, FILI
MI, ET REGEM, Fear GOD, my Son, and the KING; God and the King, both
together; show a due fear of them Both, but yet both in that Order: That so
approoving our selves respectively to God and King, as Sons to both,
ingenuous Sons, here in the life of Grace; our Fear at last may be changed
into Joy, and our Devotion into Fruition, and We be made not Sons alone, but
Kings also with GOD, in the life of Glory, by the Merits of the SON of GOD,
the KING of eternal Glory, JESUS CHRIST our Savior:

To Whom with the FATHER, and the Blessed SPIRIT, be all Honor and Glory, now
and for ever. AMEN.

