A BRIEF TREATISE IN WHICH, Is made plain, that Catholics living and dying
in their Profession, may be saved, by the Judgment of the most Famous and
Learned Protestants that ever were. Against a Minister [N. E.] who in his
Epistle exhorts an Honorable Person, to forsake her ancient Catholic Roman
Religion, and to become one of his new-found-out Protestant Congregation.

Deuteronomy. 32. Verse. 31. Et Inimici nostri sunt Iudices.

Our Enemies also are Judges.

Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XXIII.

THE PREFACE, Containing certain Considerations, as well for better
understanding the drift of this Treatise, as for avoiding all cauills, and
answearing such Objections as might be made against this Grand Protestant Jury.
The Zuinglians are to be nu^bred ( say the Lutherans) with the Anabaptists
Nestorians and Turks. And again. The Zuinglians call the Luthera^s
Eutichians, and ouerthrowers of many articles of faith. Iezler de Diuturnit.
Bell. Euchar. page 78. Stancarus. All the Churches which those men call
Reformed by the Gospel and the Son of God, and hold the faith of Geneua and
Zuricke, concerning Christ, are Aria^s: neither ca^ this he denied, which I
have above demonstrated. So he. de Trinit. c. 8. Sturmius. By these hateful
dissentions and perverse opinions, the foundatio^s of our Religion are
overthrown, the chiefest articles are called in question, many heresies are
brought into the Church of Christ, and the high way to Mahometisme and Atheism
is apparently prepared. Again. The Lutherans ( says he) do hold the
Protestant Caluinian Churches of England, France, Flanders and Scotland for
heretical, and their Martyr^ for martyrs of the devil. De ration, Concord.
ineund. l. ^. p. 2. and 24.
FOR the better understanding of what we are about to handle in this Treatise;
we must observe first, that the maine drift, and scope thereof, is to show how
it is far better, and more secure to live and dye a Catholic in the Roman
Church, then a Protestant in what Congregation soever: not only because one of
them does condemn the other for Schismatickes, and Heretics as incapable of
salvation; but also because Catholics do never affirm that Protestants
living and dying Protestans may be saved: not for want of charity in
Catholics (as some do cavil) seeing they desire nothing more the^ the
salvation of all, but for want of true faith in Protestants, without the which
it is impossible to please God. whereas Protestants do not deny, that comfort
to any vertuons Roman Catholic: so that for the salvation of ^or that brea^^
(says D. White among us Protestants) only touches some particular me^ in
matters not co^^erning f^yth ^n the way* page 13^ Rog^rs in his Preface to the
book of Articles. Willet Antilog page ^5. 20. D Georg Abbot against Hill. p.
101. 102. D. Dove. In matters of religion we all agree. Persuas p. 3^. And if
they do not agree in on faith ^ow ^^ they be the true Church which is but o^e,
and has only one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism? Ephesians. ^. C^ntic. 6. 8. My
dove is one, Symbolum Constant* O^e holy, Catholy^^^, and Apostolical Church.
Call. l 4 inst. c* ^. ^. ^. See Suarez dis^. de Ecc Sect. 4 ^. ^. l. de fide,
spe etc.
Catholics, we have not only the belief of Catholics themselves, but also
the judgment of most Famous and Learned Protestants, who teach the same,
either expressly, or at least in such terms, as with the help of their own
brethren with whom they are said to agree, at least in all material points,
may sufficiently be proved; and in this sense are to be understood the verdicts
of all those which may seem not to be so full, and sufficient as the other in
this Grand Protestant Jury. As for example, Zanchius and other Protestants
affirm that the Roman Church, as yet is the Church of God. Here in express
words is not auerred, that those who live, and die well in this Church may be
saved, which nevertheless according to the common doctrine of Catholics does
plainly enough imply the possibility of salvation to all those who are members
of such a Church. For if they cannot be saved in the Church of God, which is
but one, where else should they seek for their salvation? Or if they cannot but
be damned in the Church of God, M. Cartright. I doubt not but diverse fathers of
the Greek Church who were great Patrones of Free Will, are saved. M. Spark,
discoursing of the honoring of Saints Relics and prayer for the dead, says,
We are not so hasty to pronounce sentence of condemnation of any for such
errors. Acontius, concerning the Real presence* Both those that deny it, and
those that do hold it, are in the way of Salvation. Concerning
Transubstantiation D. Luther writes thus: Bread and wine are not in the
Sacrament of the Altar, but the shows or accidents of bread and wine: for the
bread is changed into the true and natural body of Christ, and the wine into
the true and natural blood of Christ. Sermon. de Euch. Concerning receiving
under one or both kinds, there is no commaundment, says D. Luther. Concerning
the Pope^ Supremacy, about it (says D. Luther) he is to be borne with all.
Melancton teaches, how his Monarchy is profitable. Concerning Satisfaction. It
was an error in the holy Fathers (says D. Whitaker) yet notwithstanding they
were good men and holy Fathers. Did not John H^^se that worthy Champion of
Christ (says M. Francis Johnson) and other martyrs of foretymes, hear and say
Mass even to their dy^^g day etc. Did not also diverse of them acknowledge,
some the Popes calling an^ Supremacy, some 7. Sacraments, some ^uricular
Confession? And Benedict Morgenstern. These things were pardonable in the Godly
who held the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, and head of the Church, the Papacy
for the Church, Saints for mediators, and the Mass for the Supper of the
Lord. See the Protest. Apol. page 471. and 684. You may find above three score
points of Catholic Doctrine, taught by learned Protestants, through all the
seventh Section.
how does such an assembly deserve to be styled the Church of God, and not
rather the Synagogue of Satan? But if Zanchius or any other call, the Church
of Rome the Church of God, although it have some damnable errous, which hinder
the professors thereof from their salvation; I hope by clearing those imagined
errors from being any such bars, out of Zanchius his own learned brethren,
every one may infer, that Zanchius with the help of his brethren Protestants,
affoardeth salvation to all Catholics, living well, and dying in the Church
of Rome. The helps which we have out of learned Protestants be these: To wit
that neither the belief of free will, prayer to saints, the real presence,
tra^substa^tiatio^, receiving under one or both kinds, worshipping of Images,
the Popes supremacy, and the monarchy of the B. of Rome, satisfaction, merit of
good works, private Mass, seaue^ Sacraments, or any such taught by the Roman
Church, do hinder any from being capable of their salvation: not only because
they were all believed of the holy Fathers, who notwithstanding the belief of
them have been reputed always Saints; but because diverse famous learned
Protestants, brethren to all these Jury* men, teach the same expressly: whose
names you may read in the margent, and what they say more largely in the
Protestants Apology page 471 684. etc. Which being applied to what want soever
occurreth in the verdicts of any named in the Jury, will make it clear, that
no such can be any impediment wherefore the same verdict ought not to pass, as
current and good. And therefore when either Zanchius, Mornay, Serauia, or any
other of these Iurers do accuse the Church of Rome of Adultery, committing
Idolatry, bringing up children to the devil, or of any such villanyes contrary
to the true faith, for believing any of these points now rehearsed; we must
tell them in plain words, that these be noe such letts as they imagine, but
rather their own false and forged crimes, mere untruths, and calumniations
put upon the Church of Rome to make her odious to the common people, or for
some other base end: seeing their own brethren confess against them, saying,
that the belief of these cannot either hinder their sanctity, or debar any
Catholic from obtaining their chiefest good, and everlasting salvation; which
if they had judged to be Heresies, Idolatries, and such like abominations, it
may be presumed they would never teach. Calu. l. 4. c. 1. n. 17.


2. Again, we must observe with M. Calvin, that there has been no time since
the creation of the world, wherein the Lord has not had his Church, and that
there shall be also no time to the very end of the world wherein he shall not have
it. But now as for the Church of Rome it is certain that it did continue the
true visible church from christ until the time of Constantine, as M. Calvin
hereafter avouches: and that from Constantine until the time of Luther it
never was interrupted is M. Napier upon the Revelations. page 145. 16^. 163.
19^. 237.
witness M. Napier, who says, that from the year 316. God withdrew his visible
Church from the open assemblies, to the hearts of particular godly men, during
the space of 1260. years. The Pope and his Clergy having possessed the
outward visible Church of Christians even 1260. years, the true Church abiding
so long latent and invisible: out of which we infer that all whosoever have
been saved since Christ's Church was erected, and sufficiently di^^lged, have
been saved in the Roman Church: and whosoever have dyed as members cut off
from her, or out of her, could never attain to the hopeful promises Calu. l
4. c. ^. ^. 4. D. Whitaker. Out of the Church there is no other sea^^, but the
seat of error and pestilence, and everlasting destruction.
of their chiefest good; but miscarrying of their salvation could not avoid to
be damned. For what M. Calvin delivers speaking of the visible Church is most
true, to wit: That out of her lap no remission of sins is to be hoped, nor
any salvation at all. But Milius. If Luther ^ad bad orthodoxall forerunner^*
there had been no need of a Lutheran reformation. ^o Exp^cat. Confess. Aug. art.
17. Luther says, we dare boast that Christ was first published by us. Epist.
ad Arge^^. M. Jewel, Luther and Zwinglius were appointed of God to kindle
again the light which you had q^^nched. Defens. Apol. part. 1 c. 7. diuis. 3.
page 56. Pareus. In Const^ntines time the Church begun to wax fick to death,
notwithstanding the Catholic Church remained. But where? In the desert, a^ ^^
the world* withdrawn from the eyes of ^en. lib. 4. de gratia and lib. arb.
that there was never any other visible Church of God, which has continued
since Christ's time, but the Church of Rome, with her adherents, the Protestants
themselves confess. For although some fondly imagine, that they had a Church;
yet neither Luther nor Calvin, nor any other could ever point any such out,
which was apparent or visible to the eye of men. For who can truly name any one
Lutheran before Martin Luther, or any one Caluinist before John Calvin? Verily
none: and much less a continual, and neuer-interrupted succession of
Lutherans, or Caluinists since Christ's time, who were not as invisible to the
world, and as unknown as ever were those who are as yet unborn. A most
foolish thing then it is, yea and most ridiculous to auow that indeed there
were such a company of zealous Protestants, as some are not ashamed to say, and
that for above a thousand years they were all latent and invisible: which not
only is impious, and contrary to the Majesty of the glorious Who will not say
that it was a s^^a^g^ Church that had neither beginning, nor ending, no
def^nder, no reprouer, no mouth to utter, or ea^^ to hear it, nor pen to
write, nor place to rest in. So M. Jewel in a like matter. Art. 2. diuis. 8.
S. Austin, What is this thou say? The Church to have perished in all
Nations, when as to this end the Gospel is preached, that it may be in all
Nations? Therefore even to the end of the world the Church i^ in all Nations,
and this is the shortness of her days. In Psalm. 101. Th^se Marks (says D.
Willet) cannot be absent from the Church: and it is no longer a true Church
the^ it has these mark^s. For the only absence of them does make a nullity of
the Church. In his Synops. page 69. and 71. which not to have been among
Protestants, for above a ^000. years will witness M. Nappier: but in some
fashion to have been always in the Church of Rome is granted by M. B^ny in his
Verdict: which fashion to have been the right and true fashion, is euinced from
thence, that otherwise the Ch^^ch had perished, contrary to Christ's prediction
saying, The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. M. Calvin lib. 4.
inst. c. 1. ^. 4. Call ^. 4. inst. c. ^ (...) If God did intend that the
Covenant should remain inviolable, and left Baptism a testimony thereof for
Catholic children, as here M. Calvin does insinuate; how does no^ the Couen^t
to this day remain among the^ in the Church of Rome? Again, if the faith of
Catholic parents be sufficient to place their children in the Couen^t and
state of salvation; how much more may it be thought to establish the parents
themselves in that Covenant in whom reside^ that faith, which is so beneficial
to their children? Moreover, if the foundation of the Church half cast down
does remain among Catholics, a^ M. Calvin teaches, which is the true faith
and doctrine of Christ 1. cor. 3. v. ^1. who dare deny that they are in the
Covenant, or that they may not be saved, albeit they build there upon wood,
hay, and stubble, at least by fire, seeing this is the express doctrine of the
Apostle?
Kingdom of Christ foretold by the Prophets; but likewise quite opposite to
that which they give out of the essential notes, and marks of their church,
which is the pure preaching of the Word, and the true administration of the
Sacraments: which to make invisible were rather to be thought the dreams of
mad men, and bedlams, the^ the solid and sound doctrine of such great Rabbis
and Doctors, who for their supposed virtue and learning would rather be
accounted wise Sages by the common people, yea and to be styled Reformers
forsooth, and that of the true church of God* from whence we may conclude, that
if there be no entry into life, unless (as M. Calvin says) the visibl^ Church
like a Mother conceive us in her womb, unless she bring us forth, unless she
feed us with her breasts, finally unless she keep us under custody, and
government until such time as being unclothed of mortal flesh, we shall be
like unto Angels; and noe other visible church can be assigned since christ's
time but the church of Rome, as we have seen: we must needs infer, that as
all whosoever have been saved hitherto, for all that time, were members of the
Roman church; even so all those who desire to arrive to the happy haue^ of
Heaven hereafter, must live well, and dy^ in that church; otherwise they are
never like to be partakers of that unspeakable joy, which is the salvation of
their own souls, and to live with God for ever.

3. Herehence for better understanding of M. Calvin his verdict, saying, When
God has left his Cou^nant in France Ita^y, Germany, Spain, England, since
these Pro^inces have been oppressed with the tyrany of Antichrist (whom he says
is the Pope sitting in the Church of God) yet that this Covenant might remain
inuio^able* first he there preserved baptism the testimony of his Covenant; we
gather that the Verdict which is set down for him, to wit, that the Covenant
of God has remained with them inviolable, to be most true; for seeing according
to that of M. Calvin, all those who were hitherto saved, could not attain
their salvation but in the visible Church, which was and is only the Church of
Rome, as we have seen out of M. Nappier; it follows, that in her the
Covenant of God could not but be kept inviolable. Again, if the Covenant of
God was to be kept inviolable in any company, especially in that which is the
Church of Christ, the Sanctuary and Temple of God; Serauia also will help M.
Caluins Verdict who says, That the Covenant of God to this day does remain in
the latin Church. In defens* l. de gratia Minist. page 31. As concerning the
baptizing of the ch^dre^ o^ Catholics and how they are contained within the
Couenat. Se the Protest. Apol. Tract 1. Sect. 6. p. 172. 173. and 174. M.
Calvin. It is therefore called Catholic or Universal, because we cannot find
two or three Churches, but that Christ must b^ torn in sunder which cannot be
done. l. 4. c. 1. n. 2. But betwixt the year of Christ 300. and 316. the
Antichristian and Papisticall reign beg^n, reigning universally, and without
any debatable ^ontradiction for 1260. years (last past before Luther) So M
Napp^er upon the Revel propos. 37. page 68. And no other can be assigned to
have had this universality, and therefore she is the only true Church of Christ.
but M. Calvin enobleth the church of Rome with all these titles, and therefore
we may well conclude in his judgment, that the covenant of God was kept
inviolable in the Church of Rome.

Moreover, if Antichrist who is the Pope according to Calvin, does sit in the
Church of God, or which is all one, in the Church of Rome, of the which the
Pope is head, and the church of God be but One, as himself avouches; it cannot
but follow that either the Covenant is kept inviolable in the church of Rome,
or no where: but to say it was kept no where, cannot be but most absurd, and
therefore the other must of necessity be most true, to wit, the Verdict set down
out M. Calvin, that the covenant remains with them, that is, with the
catholics, and that inviolable. Neither can any avoid this by obiecting, that
Calvin does not so much say that the Church, as the ruins thereof, and it half
thrown down, are seen under the Pope: for so the church of christ says
Bellarmine had fallen, and the truth had lied, saying, The gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. And again, neither the Luthera^s, nor the Caluinists
could be members of the true church: for the whole is fallen, and the ruins of
the church half thrown down, is among the Papists under Antichrist: if they
say, they have a new building; in that it is new, it is not christ's: and who
sees not that it is better to be in the church of christ half pulled down,
then in none; seeing that there is kept the covenant inviolable, or else no were.
To this we add, that the Apostle says not, that Antichrist shall sit in the
ruins, or rubbish of the church; but absolutely he shall sit in the Temple of
God: if the^ the Temple of God be the true church as other Protestants say, and
that in it he shall sit, that is, he shall reign and govern as the head in
the true church; how the^ can the assemblies of Lutherans or caluinists be the
true church? seeing Antichrist shall not sit and dominiere in this? or how can
the covenant be inuiolably kept in any other then in the church of Rome, which
is only the true church? We conclude therefore, that out of caluins Doctrine
with the help of his brethren, his Verdict is most certain, to wit, that the
covenant of God has remained with the catholics inviolable, yea and in her
only, and no where else, as is proved.

4. Lastly we must observe about the Verdict of Pl^ssey Mornay, which as I find
in him speaking of the church of Rome, is this. We deny her not the name of
Church, no more Mornay de Eccl. c. 2. As M. Calvin did prove the Church of Rome
to have fallen from the true faith of Christ, with three gross lies. saying
that the Popes have taught three grievous errors, to wit. That there is no God,
no Christ, no Resurrection: Eue^ so Plessey Mornay following his Father Calvin,
tells us, that the Church of Rome is an Adultresse, heretical and bringer up
of children for the devil. Se Calvin. l. 4. inst. c. 7. n. 27.
then the name of a man to a man, so long as he is alive though he be never so
sick yea we are content to call ^er Spouse, in as much as she makes a part of
the visible Church, so as they will suffervs vvithal to call her an adultresse.
But we say she is the most heretical Church of all those that ever were: a
spouse that provoked God to divorce her a mother that brings up children for
the Diue^^. That which Plessey Mornay here says in the commendatio^ of the
church of Rome we willingly admit, and have set it down for his Verdict:
persuading our selves that he could say no less truth, which is more forcible
then either rack, or torment comp^lling him thereunto. For otherwise no man
willingly lies to his own shame; nor freely confesses that which
overthrows his own cause. But what he utters against the Church of Rome,
for being accursed and anathematized by her, for so many errors and heresies,
both in Luther and Zuinglius, and other old rotten heretical Se F. Persons
Relation of the Trial, with his defense thereof against Plessy, and O. E by N.
D. Semel mendax semper praes^mitur mendax. Glossa. Admitten^u^ in l. Si cui
crimen. 1. ff. de Accusation. Alciat. and Menoch.
Rake-hells of former times, we cannot so easily believe; but rather think the^
no better then notorious untruths, and mere slanders, as proceeding from him
who had a great talent in this black Art of lying; which publickely was made
known to his eternal shame by cardinal Perone, before the most Christian
King and Court Luther. Whosoever is once taken in a lie, know most certainly
that he is not of God but ought to be suspected in all things. In Assert.
Teuton. art. 25. But Plessy Mornay was convinced before the King of France in
9. one day, and the exception that the Cardinal took against him did concern
4000. as is to be seen in the relation above cyted. The Devil has his
Prophets (says Ter^ullian) whose badg and mark is falsity and lying, so that
it must of necessity fall, whatsoever is built upon such ^ ground. de praescr.
c. 40.
of France; and therefore we purposely have forborne to disgrace the Jury with
any such foul and fi^thy stuff, as he sets down in the latter part of his
sentence, seeing it is folly (says his learned Brother Vorstius) to bring in
the guilty as vvitnesses in their own cause, or rather to bring in one that
has been condemned, not once, but so often, to rage, rail, and lie, not only
against his true and lawful Judge, but also against many other Catholics,
Peers, Princes, Kings and Emperors, who all according to Plessey, should have
been bred and borne bastards by an Adultresse, and brought up children
Idolatours by an heretical harlot for the Devil. But (o my Plessey) I pray
thee how could she be an Adultresse, against whom Hell* gates were foretold
never to prevail? or how could that Church be Heretical, which never was
condemned either by any lawful general, or provincial Council? or by any
other just commanding power? or how could she bring up children to the Devil,
or be an Idolatresse, who has brought up all to God, that ever were brought to
him since the first erecting of the Church of Christ, as we have showed before.
These then are your malicious imputations, and not those glorious tytles
beco^ming Christ's unspotted Spouse, and her, who has been accounted always the
sacred Sanctuary, and the holy Temple of the living God. And therefore detesting
your impieties, we must rather give ear and harken to that holy Bishop and
glorious Martyr S. Cyprian, who speaking of the Church writes S. Cyprian de
vnitate Eccl.
thus. One Mother (says he) there is by the fecundity of her issu^ copious and
fertile: by her increase we are borne, with her milk we are nourished, we
are animated with her spirit. The Spouse of Christ cannot play the aduoutresse,
she is imaculate and undefiled, she knows one house, she keeps with chaste
bashfulnes the sanctity of one bed. This Church preserves us in God, this
aduanceth to the Kingdom the children she has brought forth: whosoever
divided from the Church, cleaves to the aduoutresse, is separated from the
promises of the Church. To whom we add S. Augustine, the greatest of all the
Fathers and worthyest Divine the Church of God ever had since the Apostles, if
we may believe D. Field; who is styled likewise the mouth of antiquity by other
Protestants, giving us this wholesome Counsel against all such slaunderers of
the church of Rome. For writing against the S. Aug. tom. 7. de vnitate Eccles.
c. 11.
like lies of the Donatists, I know (says he) what is written in the holy and
Canonical Scriptures concerning the Church of Rome; and the faith thereof, I
know not what you say of her Apostasy, or falling from her faith. Truly as we
do read in books, the which you also do honor and reverence, of the Roman
Church, and faith thereof: So also read you out of Books unto us, the which we
also do honor and reverence, how she forsook and lost her faith. Does it
please you, that we should believe every slanderous reproach of men upon what
occasion soever it was uttered and objected against the Roman Church, the which
the Holy Ghost has both delivered, and commended unto us by his holy
Scriptures? This indeed is pleasing to you; but whom it should more justly
please, you see well enough: but you being overcome by obstinacy will not yield
to the truth.

We therefore being about to look as well into the true doctrine and verity, as
into the holiness and purity of this Church, from whence does proceed the
security of living and dying well in her lap; we are to use the testimonies
especially of Famous Protestants, to the end the banners of her glory may be
carried about, and displayed by the penns, and mouths of our Adversaries; that
all whosoever are not maliciously bent, may thereby extol and magnify the
infinite goodness of Gods providence, who has made, as we may say, eue^ the
enemies of his Church, and children, although otherwise partial witnesses,
with open mouth to cry out and blaze abroad in effect, That this is the seed,
and family of Jesus Christ, whom our Lord has blessed: yea and has made the
S. Cyprian. l. 1. ep. 3.
holy Ghost to inspire the ancient Fathers to warrant us, that this is the
Church to S. Hierom. l. 3. Apol. contra Ruffin.
which misbeliefe can have no access; which receaueth no forgery; and though
an Angel S Cyril. apud D. Thom. in catena.
teach otherwise, then has been once preached, guarded with S. Paul's
authority, it cannot be changed; which remains unspotted from S. Gregor.
Nazianz in carm. de vita sua.
all seducing and heretical circumuention; which has the true faith, even
from the times of our for^^athers; and always remains as is fit for a city,
that rules the whole world, to have ever more a sound faith to God. Out of all
which we may conclude, that this is that blessed Company of holy ones, that
household of sa^ctity, that spouse of christ, and church of the living God,
which is the Pillar and ground of truth, whose communion we may boldly embrace,
whose directions we may safely follow, and rest securely in her judgments, as
in that sacred society, the which for this 1600. years has yielded up all
those blessed Souls of the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and of all
the rest to God, which now do reign most gloriously with Jesus Christ the King
of glory in Heaven. This being so set down, let us proceed to the lury.

Faults to be corrected.
In the title of the Preface, all cauills, read, some cauills.

Page 8. lin. vlt. Subbs. read Stulbs.

Page 14. lin. 2. humble. more humble.

Page 18. lin. 23. name of a man, as, read name of a man to a man, as etc.

Page 25. in the margent, add, Luth. declarat. quorumdam artic. cited by
Coccius tom. 1. lib. 7. Thesauri page 855.

A GRANDE IVRY Of most famous and learned Protestants, assuring all Catholics
of their Salvation, if they live and dye well, in the Catholic Roman Faith
and Church.
The Names of the Jury Men.
D Luther. M Calvin. D. Whitaker. D. C^^ell. D. Morton. M. Hooker. Zanchius.
Sclusselburg. Polanus. Iunius. Boyswell. Bunny. Plessis Mornay. Serauia. D.
White. D. Willet. Sir Edwin Sands. M. Stubbs. M. Holynshed. D. Godwin. M.
Cambden. Crentremius. Theater of great Brit. M. Fox.
WE suppose as granted out of the Romans 1. Act. 18. 30.
Apostles, that the Church of Rome was once the true Church of God and so to
have continu^d for diverse hundred years, as the Protestants themselves
confess. For M. Jewel would have us believe: That as well Saint Augustine, as
also other godly Fathers Jewel in his Reply to M. Harding page 246.
rightly yielded reverence to the Sea of Rome etc. for the purity of religion
which was preserved there a long time without spot. Seeing it was a thing
notorious ( says M. Calvin) and without doubt, that after the Apostles age
Calvin in his Instit. in french lib. 4. sect. 3. Protestant. Apol. page 210.
until these times ( to wit of Saint Augustine) no change was made in
doctrine, neither at Rome nor at any other Cittyes, which was 440. years after
Christ But D. Morton confirming M. Jewels challenge auerreth, that protestants
in oppugning D. Mort. Appeal lib. 4. c. 30. page 573. ^74.
doctrines which they call new, and not Catholic, are so far off from suffering
the limitation of the first 440. years, that they give the scope of the first
600. years; within the compass of which Saint Gregory lived, who sent Saint
Augustine the Monk into England: and therefore he acknowledges that, the
Pagan and Heathenish people by the light of the Gospel through the Ministry
of Augustine, the Legate of Saint Gregory were brought into the fold of Christ.
And heerehence says B. Morton our authors called it a gracious Morton lib. 1.
page 60.
conversion. But now this being supposed that the Church of Rome was the true
Church for so many ages together, in the which salvation was to be had: It
remains that we demonstrate and show, how not only then but also ever after
that time even unto this day, that Church has been the only Arc and
sanctuary, in the which whosoever have lived and dyed well, could not miscary
nor miss of their salvation, and that therefore there is no reason why any
being a member of that Church should leave it and be take himself to any other
assembly or Congregation, seeing there is but one true Church, and that in her
salvation can be obtained, and in all others nothing but damnation is to be
expected Which we will endeavor to prove out of the testimonies of most Bale
likewise says. That Augustine was sent from Gregory to season the English with
the Popish faith and that King Ethelbert dyed one and twenty years after h^
had received Popery. Cent. 1. fol. 3. M. Napiere. The Pope with his Clergy
never suffered for the space of a thousand years after Siluester the first,
any to be seen vouchable or visible of the true Church. page 239. Holynshed in
the History of England.
grave and learned Protestants. Supposing out of Venerable Bede, that Saint
Augustine was sent by S. Gregory to this our Nation, to convert it above 1000.
years since, from Paganism to Christ. For these be his words. Saint Augustine
coming into England, delivered his errand to King Ethelbert saying, he came
from Rome, and brought a joyful message, which whosoever would obey should
have eternal joys, and a perpetual Kingdom with the true and living God.
Which is confirmed out of your own Protestant English Historiographers, and
therefore we will begin with their verdicts, and make them as the Formen of this
sufficient, full, and complete Protestant Jury, of whom we will choose
Holynshed to be the first.

Holynshed therefore speaking of Saint Augustine writes thus. Augustine ( says
he) and his company arrived at Canterbury, where he made his abode by the Kings
permission, exercised the life of the Apostles, in fasting, clothing, and
prayers, and preaching the word of God to as many as they could, despsing all
wordly pleasures, as not appertayning to them, receiving only of them whom
they taught, things seeming necessary to the sustenance of their life, all
living in all points according to the doctrine which they set forth. Item. At
last, King Ethelbert was persuaded by the good example of Saint Augustine and
his company, and by miracles showed, to be baptized.

And M. Fox speaking of Saint Augustine, writes thus. At length when the King
had Fox lib ^. page 116. of his Acts. etc.
well considered the honest conversation of their life, and moved with their
miracles wrought through Gods hands by them, he heard them I doubt not but God
affoarded many miracles to the first in^a^^y of our Church. So D* Godwin in the
life of S. David.
more gladly, and lastly by their wholesome exhortations and example of good
life, he was by them converted, and christened in the year 596.

Saint Augustine ( says Cambden) commonly called the Apostle of the English,
sent hither by Gregory the great, having destroyed the Mo^sters of Hethenish
impiety with most happy success, planting Christ in their minds, converted
them Cambden in his Britan. page 125.
to the Christian faith. Again: Straight upon the preaching of the name of
Christ the English did consecrate themselves unto Christ, in so fervent a
manner, that the diligence is incredible, they used in the propagation of the
name of Christ, in the performance of the duties thereof, in the diuulging of
Christian religion, in building of Churches, in enriching and adorning of the
same; that no Province of Christendom could have numbered more Monasteryes then
England could in Catholic times: and even Fox. page 137. That none of all
these Kings Queens, Princes, and Prelates were Protestants is proved in the
prude^tiall Balance, and the Protestants themselves confess no less. For M.
Nappiere says: That for these thousand two hundred and threescore years the
Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward and visible Church of
Christians, reigning without any debatable contradiction: Gods truth (to wit
the Protestant Church) most certainly abiding so long latent, and invisible.
upon the Revel. page 145.
some Kings have preferred religious and monastical lives before Kingdoms. So
many have been the holy men that England has brought forth, and which for
their most firm profession of Christian religion, most solid constancy and
sincere devotion therein, have been put into the Calendar of Saints, that in
this point it has not been inferior to any Christian Province whatsoever:
yea, as Britany was termed by Porphyrius a profane Philosopher, Fer^x
Tyrannorum prouincia: A province fertile of Tyrants; so likewise England may be
styled, Insula Sancto rum feracissima: An Island fruitful of Saints. So far
Cambden.

To whom ^e may add another famous Protestant author, who tells us for the time
past that more Kings and Queens in England only have becom'd Monks, and
Nuns, and now by Protestants honored for Saints in heaven, then ever were
Protestant Kings and Queens in all the world, though never so unworthy the
name of Saints or Sanctity: which are all to be seen in the Theater of
Britany.

John Fox also relates how that eight Kings of England left their Kingdoms
and became Monks, whose names are these: King Kinegil^^s, King Cead wall, King
Inas, King Ethelred, King Sigebert, King Coenred, King Offa, King Edbert. Of
whom he says, that it is most like they did it for holiness sake, thinking in
this kind of life to serve and please God better: but in this, says Fox, they
were deceived. To these we may join 19. Kings and Queens daughters, whom also
M. Fox confesses to have left their Royal estates, and became Nuns. And he
relates out of an ancient Chronicle that in the primitive Church of England,
Kings, Princes Dukes, Earls, Barons and rulers of the Churches Fox lib. 2.
page 114.
incensed with a desire of heaven, laboring and striving among themselves to
enter into Monasteries, into voluntary exile and solitary life, forsook all
and followed the Lord. And as conconcerning the piety and devotion of other
Catholics after, the Centurists write thus saying: Although in this age ( to
wit the seventh) the worship of God was darkened with man's traditions and
superstitions; yet the study to serve God and to live godly and justly, was not
wanting to the miserable common people etc. they were so attentive to their
prayers, as they bestowed almost the whole day therein. They did exhibit to the
Magistrate due obedience, they were most studious of amity, concord and
society, so as they could easily remit injuries: all of them were careful to
spend their time in honest vacation and labor: to the poor and strangers they
were Ce^turists. cent. 7. c. 7. col. 181. S^ubbs in his motive page 43.
most courteous and liberal; and in their judgments and contracts most true.

M. Subbs in his Motive to good works, says. Certainly, to speak the truth,
there is many times found conscionabler and plainer dealing among most of the
Papists, then amongst many protestants. And if we look narrowly into the ages
past, we shall find more godliues, devotion and zeal, though blind, more love
one to another, more fidelity and faythfulnes every way in them, then is now to
be found in us. And again he further says. Is it not a shame unto us Stubbs
in his motive page 72. To name one amongst many Robert Winchelsey the 49. Archb
of Canterbury: Besides the daily fragme^ts (says Godwin) of his house, he gave
every Friday and Sunday to every beggar a loaf of Bread, and there were every
such Alms days, four or five thousand people. Besides this every great
festival day, he sent a 150. pence to such poor people as could not fetch his
Alms.
that our forefathers living in the times of superstition etc. should so far
notwithstanding out pass us in good works, as that we may not once be compared
to them in any small measure? Hence, for good works, who sees not that herin
they were far beyond us, and we far behind them. For example, what memorable
famous buildings, and what monuments have they left to the world behind them?
What Churches, Chapels, and other houses of prayer did they erect, to the end
the Religion and service of God might be continued? Yea what Monasteries,
Abbyes, Priories, and other religious houses etc. what number of goodly bridges
did they make. How many Almes-houses, Hospitalls, and Spittles, did they found
etc. What high ways, what pauements and causies? in sum what famous
Colleges, Hals, and Universities, what schools? In so much as the former
Statute of Mort-main ( now needles) was yet then thought needful to be made in
restraint of such liberal devotion.

But to give some taste in particular of those famous and godly men who lived in
these times, we will begin with Saint Dunstone Archbishop of Canterbury, who
was most gracious to King Edward, and Ethelrede, as wittnesseth M. Godwin,
under whom he ruled all things, at his pleasure, and for the most part
admired for a most holy and virtuous man, and after canonized for a Saint.

Saint Elphege another Archbishop of the same sea, was (says the same
author) of great parentage, and of wonderful abstinence, never eating or
drinking nor sleeping more then necessity God win i^ his life.
compelled him, spending his time altogether in piety, study, or other
necessary business, so that with preaching and example of holy life he converted
many to Christ.

Duke William after his conquest made choice of Lanfranke for his wisdom and
faythfulnes to be Arch bishop of Canterbury, as one in all respects God win i^
his life.
most fit and worthy. He was the most perfect ( says Bale) of his time in all
kind of Logic or Bale Centur. ^^. cap. ^^.
subtility of Aristotle. He corrected and amended according to the right faith,
all the books of the old and new Testament which had been corrupted by fault
of the writers, and also the writings of the holy Fathers. He was skillfull in
science ( says Stow) prudent in counsels, and government, and for religion
and life Stow. Chron. page ^79.
most holy. He was ( says Godwin) bus^ in exhorting Rufus to virtue and
godliness. And as long as Lanfranke lived ( says Stow) Rufus seemed to abhor
all kind of vice, in so much that he was counted the mirror of Kings.

Saint Anselme likewise was a most worthy man of great learning, as his works
yet extant do declare, and for integrity of life and conversation admirable:
undoubtedly he was a good and holy man, and as worthy the honor of a Saint as
any I think ( says Godwin) ever was canonized by the Pope since his time.
None ( says Malmsbury) lived more obseruant of Justice, Malmeb. lib. 4. Regum.
None at that time so soundly learned, None so wholely spiritual, the Father
of the country and the mirror of the world.

Saint Thomas ( says Houeden) was of life S. Thomas of Canterbury. Houeden
part. 2. Anal.
irreprehensible, he received day by day 3. or 5. disciplines at the Priests
hands: his inner garment was of rugged haire-cloath of goats hair where with
his whole b^dy was covered, from the elbow to the knees: he lay upon the bare
ground before his bed, and never ceased from pray^r until for very wearines he
laid down his head upon a stone which he there placed instead of a boulster. (
Also Fox says) he was full Fox Acts. 206. God win in his life.
of devotion: and Godwin, that he was most canonically elected, and presently
after his consecration became so grave, so austere, so devout in all outward
show, as he seemed quite another man. King Henry the second, his voluntary
penance for giving some cause, or occasion of his death, the same day was
rewarded by a glorious Godwin in vit. Bald win. They lackt the doctrine and
know ledge in Christ's Ghospel, especially in the article of free justification
by faith and therefore (says Fox) they ran the wrong way. Acts. page 133. And
again speaking of our ancient Cristian Kings he uses these words. How great
the blindness and ignorance of these men was, who wanting no zeal, wanted
knowledge, seeking their salvation by their meritorious deeds: which I write
(says he) here to put us in mind how much we at this present are bound to God
for the true sinceerity of his truth, hidden so long before to our
forancestors, and opened now to us This only lamenting, to see them have such
works and want our faith, and we to have a right faith and want their works.
page 133.
Victory against his enemies. And what devotion our Ancestors had to this Saint
may be seen by the riches they gave to his Shryne: of which Shrine Erasmus
relates, that the basest part was gold, it all shined glittering, and cast
forth lightning by reason of the rare and mighty gemmes and precious stones;
yea the whole Church in every part abounded more then with royal riches. And
every one ( says Godwin) thought himself happy, that could do any thing to
his honor.

But now (as D. Barlow says) although Kings have many occasions, which may
allure them to sin, especially having that privilege in scripture, whether
ex gratia, or de facto, whether from exemption from God, or grace of men: that
no man may say unto them, Why do you this? Yet among our anncient Catholic
Kings, have been so many and so eminent in all kind of devotion, holiness, and
sanctity as we need not bring in any other for our present purpose saving only
some of them set down to have been such. Yea even by our own learned
Protestant authors. For,

King Oswald (says Stow) with a small army overcame the Brittans, and slew
Ceadwall their King. He sent for Aidan a Scot to advance the Christian Religion
among his people, gave him holy Island for his sea* he enlarged his Kingdom,
reconciled the Deiri and Bernitians which deadly hated one another: he was
slain by the ^^gans fighting for his Country; and at last ( says Stow) was
canonized for a Saint^ whose faith and devotion was so great ( says Beda) that
he did Theater page 337.
shine with miracles after his death. Of this King Oswalds hand, other
Protestants write (for being bountiful to the poor,) That after his death it
never consumed, but was shrined in silver in S. Peter's Church at Bedda, now
Bambrough, with worthy honor, was worshipped for the miracles and eures that
it did, as likewise the earth whereon his blood was spilt.

King Canutus went on Pilgrimage to Theater of great Britany. page 391. 392.
Rome, to visit the sepulcher of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, built many
Churches and Abbeyes, greatly reverenced Saint Bennet: he offered up his crown
upon the Martyrs Saint Edmunds Tomb. Most* rich and Royal Jewels he gave to
the Church of Winchester, whereof one is recorded to be a Cross worth as much
as the whole reuenew of England amounted to in one year. He set his crown on
the head of the picture of our Savior on the Cross at Winchester, never
wearing it more. Cooper says, that for his virtuous life he was Cooper. A^.
1027.
worthy to live perpetually. He was of great magnificence, and used such
Justice and temperance that in his days there was no Prince of renown,
toward God humble and lowly.

Amongst all the Saxon Kings hitherto is found none to be preferred, or almost
to be compared with Alfred, for the great and singular qualities in this King
worthy of ^^gh renown, says Fox, whether we behold his valiant acts and
manifold trauells for his Country, or his godly and excellent virtues joined
with a public and tender care of the weal public, or whether we Bale cent.
cap. 43. Cambd. page 444. Malmesb. lib* 2. c. 4. Westminster. An. 892. 871.
respect his notable knowledge of good letters with a fervent desire to set
forth the same throghout all his Realm. He fought ( says Bale) 57. times with
the Danes, and according to Camb^en repressed them at his pleasure. He wrote
and promulgated most Christian laws, and caused such peace, as he made
bracelets of gold to be hu^g up in the high way which none durst touch. He
daily hard Mass and said his hours and Matins, and in the night season
unknown to all his servants he frequented Churches to hear service. In
repayring beautifying and enriching monasteries he labored earnestly, among
which he built See Fox. page 142.
two of great renown: he was crowned and anointed by Pope Leo, and was termed
his adoptiue child, says M. Bale: to whom S. Cuthbert Fox. Acts. lib. 3. p.
154.
appeared when he was in distress, assuring him that he should overcome the
Danes, as he did indeed.

King Edgar ( says Fox) was much given to all virtuous and princely acts
worthy of much commendation and famous memory, excellent in Justice, maintained
the Godly, loved the modest, was devout to God, and beloved of his subjects,
whom he governed in much peace and quietness. No year passed in the time of
his Reygne in which he did not some singular and necessary commodity for the
commonwealth. Houed^n page 426.
A great maintener of Religion and learning. He had in readiness 3600. ships of
war* and made 8. Kings to row him in a boat he sitting at Fox lib. 3. page
154. Prud. Balance page ^31.
the stern and guiding it. Moreover he was a great patron of Monkish religion,
builded ( as some say) as many Monasteries as there be Sundays in the year,
or as Edne* ^porteth 48. Saint Editha was this Kings daugher, who from her
infancy was brought up in a monastery, and would not refuse Cooper an. 975.
Stow. p. 113.
that life to enjoy the crown after her brother King Edwards death.

Cooper and Stow write, how Saint Edward Martyr was in all kind of honest
virtues comparable to his Father Edgar, began his soueraignity Fox Acts. page
159. Cooper. An. 977. Cambd. Brittan. page 70^.
with much modesty and mildnes, and worthily favored of all: Was a virtuous
and noble Prince ( says Fox) much pitiful and bountiful to the poor: for
him ( says Cooper) after his death God showed many miracles. Of King Edward
the first Cambden writes thus. He was a Prince far excelling, in whose most
valiant mind God chose a most worthy lodging, that he might match the height of
Royal Majesty not only with fortitude and wisdom, but with beauty also and
comlines of body, whom Fortune in the prime flower of his age trained up in
many wars and most difficult times of the Commonwealth, whilst that she
disposed him for the British Empire: which when he was established in, he so
governed, having overcome the Welch-men and triumphed over the Scots, that by
good right he is esteemed another ornament of Brittany.

King Stephen (says Stow) was a noble man, and passing hardy, of passing
comely favor and personage, in all Princely virtues he excelled, as in
martial policy, affability, gentleness, and bountiful liberality toward all.
He was very noble in birth ( says Godwin) but much more in virtue, and all
good manners: many miracles ( wr^teth he) are said to be wrought at his To^be.
And this may suffice to understand in some manner the holiness and sanctity of
our ancient Catholic Kings. But to proceed concerning other famous Calikes,
D. Couell writes thus of Alexander Hales* S. D. Couell in defense of Hooker
page 241.
Bonauenture, and Saint Thomas, all three great defenders of the Roman Church.
And first of Alexander Hales he says, who made his Sum that excellent work,
by commandment of Pope Innocentius the fourth; that he was called the
fountain of life, because of that lively knowledge that flowed from him; he
was master of Bona^ent ^re, a scholar not inferior to himself, of whom he
was went to say, that in Bonauenture he thought Adam sinned not, meaning of
that illumination, which was in him ( and doubtless there was much in him) as
though he had not been darkened by the fall of Adam: and therefore the Church
called him the Seraphicall doctor. To these Aquinas was not inferior; who came
so near unto Saint Augustine; whom in his book against Burges he esteems
the chiefest doctor that ever was, or ever shall be excepting the Apostles etc.
that some thought he had all his works by heart, and by a common proverb it was
spoken, that the soul of Saint Augustine dwelt in Aquinas, in whom above all
the rest, four contraryeties were said to excel, abounda^ce, breuity,
facility and security, in respect whereof he gained the title to be called
Angelical.

Then if these men were the Popes Agents, and yet so renowned and glorious, and
their doctrine so secure and excellent, why may not we securely follow them in
the same stepps of Agency in such business. Now all this being so, it is no
wonder if our adversaries are forced to set out, magnify, and extol the Luth.
in ep. cont Anabaptist Tom. 2. Germ. fol 267. Where also he savth, that under
the Papacy there are many godly men and great Saints.
Church of Rome, and truly in that manner as they are not affrayde to deliver
their minds in such terms, as Catholics themselves could scarce desire or
wish any better. For herehence we confess says D Luther) that there is under
the Papacy most of Christian good, yea, rather all Christian good, and that
from thence it came to us: Verily we confess, that there is in the Papacy true
Scripture, true Baptism, the true Sacrament of the Altar, the true keys to
remission of sins, the true office of preaching, true Catechism; and I say
further, that there is in the Papacy true Christianity, yea rather the true
kernel of Christianity.

M. Calvin against Sadolet. We do not deny those to be the Churches of Christ,
in which Calvin against Sadolet page 128.
you govern. And in the 2. to the Thessalonians he confesses that, the papacy
is the Temple, yea and the Sanctuary of God: and else where, that the Calvin l.
4. instit. c. 2. n. 11.
covenant of God has remained with them inviolable.

Iunius. All divine things are in the Popes Church, and hitherto it is the
Church of God. Iunius. de Eccles. c 17. col. 1020.


Zanchius. The Roman Church is yet the Church of God.

Plessey Mornay. The Roman Church is the Mornay. lib. de Eccle. c. 2. and 10.
spouse of Christ, as yet not diuerted from him, she is a mother that brings
forth children to God: the name of the Church is no more to be denied to her,
then the name of a man, as long as he lives. Polan. part. 1. These de Eccles.


Polanus. The Roman Church at this day, is yet the Church of Christ.

Serauia. The Church of Rome it yet the Church: and see what I will say more:
she is Serauia in defens. lib. de gratia Minist. page 3.
our mother, in the which, and by which God has regenerated. And again The
Covenant of God to this day does remain in the Latin Church.

Boyswell. I acknowledge the Church of Boys. in co^fut. Spon. page 6* 2. 283.
822.
Rome as yet to be in the Covenant of God; yea, she is the Church, the spouse,
and the Temple of God; the Church of Jesus Christ redeemed by him.

D. Hooker. We acknowledge willingly D. Hooker. l. 3. de Politia Eccles. p. 128.
them, to wit the Papists, to be of the family of Jesus Christ.

D. Cou^ll. I affirm the members of the Cou^ll. in Apol. page 68.
Church of Rome to be members of the true Church of Christ, and that those who
live and dye in that Church, may be saved.

And D. Whitaker does confess, That amongst D. Whitaker contro. 4. 9. 5* c. 3.
p. 682.
the Papists is a ministry, and a certain preaching of the Word, which
without doubt to some is sufficient to salvation. D. White in defense c. 7. p.
356. cap. 41. p. 408.


I never deemed ( says D. White) that to be the visible Church of God, in the
which our Ancestors held the true faith, and were saved. And again. We
confess, that the Church of Rome in all ages, has been the visible Church of
God. Schluss tom 8. in catal. Haeret. page 434.


Sclusselburg. Luther says that all Christian good is in the Popedom; and
that from thence it came to us, we do not deny. Rhegius in consider. censurae
page 93.


And Johannes Rhegius. Although it be true that the ministry of the Popes was
corrupt with many traditions and inventions of men, nevertheless it had those
things, which were necessary to salvation, to wit, the Canonical books, the
Creed of the Apostles.

Leonardus Crentremius. The Bishop of Crentrem. in 1. Cor. 3.
Rome does retain this same ground of Catholic faith 1. Corinthians. 3. the which
both I do acknowledge with the Catholic and Apostolical Church, although in
certain circumstances there be some diversity of opinions. Zanch. in prefat.
lib. de natura Dei.


Zanchius. The Church of Rome in despite of Satan, did retain the principal
grounds of faith.

Boyswell. We acknowledge that the Church Boyswell in Confutatione Sondei p. 79.
of Rome is pure in the principal articles of Christian Religion.

Hooker. They hold constantly, to wit Papists, Hooker lib. 5. de polit. page
128.
the chief parts of the Christian faith.

D. White, We agree with the Church of Rome, in substantial articles of faith.
D. White in defense c. 38. 8. 273.


D. Field. The Roman and Latin Church continued the true Church of God even
till our time. And again: we doubt not but the Church D. Field of the Church
page 282.
in which the Bishop of Rome exalted himself ( he adds with more then
Lucifer-life pride) was notwithstanding the true Church of God; that it held a
saving profession of the truth in Christ, and by force thereof converted many
Countries from error to the way of truth. D. Willet. Antil. page 144.


D Willet It is not denied by any Protestant but many renowned Kings and Queens
(which might not plead ignorance of the Roman Faith) are Saints in heaven. And
speaking of his Majesty's D. Willet Antil. of English Protest. to the King.
mother, he attributes such holiness and truth to her Religion and her, that it
prevailed with God not only for herself but her son our Soueraygne also. His
words be these. The child of such prayers and tears cannot possibly fall
away. Bren. in Apol. pro confess. Wittemb p. 297.


Brentius. We doubt not, but that many have obtained true salvation in popery.
And speaking of S. Bernard, whom D. Whitaker confesses to have been a member
of the Roman Church, he writes Whitak. ad oration. 7. Campian. p. 30. Calvin.
Gregory and Bernard were holy me^. 4. instit. c. 7. n. 22. Lubbertus. we think
truly that Bernard was a Saint. l. 6. de Eccles. c. 7.
thus. I judge Bernard to have been a man endewed with great piety and
devotion, and to live now happily with Christ.

Bishop Barlow in his third sermon, The learneder writers do acknowledge the
Church of Rome to be the Church of God.

D. Some against Penry in diverse places auou^beth, that Papists are not
altogether aliens from Gods covenant. That in the judgment of all learned
men, and al reformed Churches there is in Popery a Church, a ministry, a true
Christ. If you think that all the Popish sect, which dyed in the Popish Church
are damned, you think absurdly, and dissent from the judgment of the learned
Protestants.

M. Bunny. The Church of Rome has Bunny in his Treatise tending to
pacification Sect. 14. page 89.
ever continued after a sort in profession of the faith since the time that by
the Apostles it was delivered to them etc. and has in some manner also
preserved, and hitherto maintained both the Word and Sacraments that Christ
himself did leave unto us, which surely ( says he) is a very special
blessing, and an evident work of the Holy Ghost.

S. Edwin Sands writes thus of the Roman Church. There are among them
undoubtedly, in Sir Edwin sads in his Relation. number. 48.
great multitude, men, virtuous, learned, fraught with the love of God, and the
truth above all things, men of memorable integrity of heart and affections. In
their Sermons much matter both of faith and piety is eloquently delivered by
men of wonderful zeal and spirit. The outward state and glory of their
service, does engender, quicken, increase, and nourish the inward reverence,
respect, and devotion, which is due unto soueraygne majesty and power. Their
deeds of charity are exceeding. No severity of life comparable to some of their
religious. If Protestants were, or could be at union with them, they shall find
excellent order of government, singular helps for increase of godliness and
devotion, for the conquering of sin, for the profiting of virtue.

Yet in the chief of whom they send out Ibid. ^. 25.
to preach, in the diligence and pains which they take in their sermons, in
the ornaments of eloquence and grace of action, in their show of piety and
reverence toward God, zeal toward the truth, of love toward his people,
which even with tears they can often testify, they match their adversaries in
the best, and in the rest far exceed them. But herein the Jesuits carry the
bell from all others, having attained the commendatiom, and working the effect
of perfect Orators, of whom in Lent one in each City of Italy does preach
every Day, without intermission, if their strength do serve them, so as six
days in the week they preach on the Gospel of the days, and on the
Saturday in honor and praise of our Lady. So every year changing their
preacher, there is the delight of variety, and in the daily continuing of the
same the admiration of industry. Some such like course it is to be thought the
Jesuits hold also in other Countries, their proiects being certain and
exactly pursued. But wonderful is the reputation which redounds thereby to
their Order, and exceeding the advantage which gives to their fide. For books
of prayer and piety all countries are full of them at this day in their own
language etc. In defe^ding their doctrine they dare enter into combat with the
best of their repugnants and will not doubt either to entangle them so, in the
snares of their own quirks, or at least wise so put of his blows with the
word of their distinctions, that an ordinary Orator shall never perceive them
to be vanquished; and a favorable Auditor shall report them vanquishers:
whereupon now they cry mainely in all places for trial by disputations.

Moreover such is their diligence and dexterity in instructing, that even the
Protestants themselves (in some places) send their sons to their schools, upon
desire to have them prove excellent in those arts they teach. This Order has
also their solemn Cathechizing in their Church on Sundaies, and Holidayes, for
all youth that will come, or can be drawn unto it. But this point of their
schools in instructing youth is thought of such moment, by men of wisdom and
iudment, being taught so by very experience and trial thereof, that the
planting of a good College of Jesuits in any place, is esteemed the only sure
way, to replant that Religion and in time to eat out the contrary. So far the
Protestant Relator.

But to proceed from the common multitude of lay people and Ecclesiastical
persons, to the Popes themselves, this same anthour has found much virtue,
devotion, and piety in those, which have been in these times: and of the last
Pope Clement the 8 he Relat. of Religion n. 42. 43.
writes thus. He did often weep upon piety and godly compassion at his
Masses, and processions. His eyes were still watering, sometimes streaming with
tears, in so much that for weeping he seemed another Heraclitus He was a good
Pope, a good man, a good Prelate, a good Prince. And as for the Lutheranes in
Germany Relation. n 45.
they like the Religion of Catholics so well, that both the Clergy and Layty,
openly protest they will rather return to the Roman Church, then join with
the Sacramentary and predestinary pestilence. The Puritans in this Nation, in
their late Offer of Conference, prefer the Roman Church far before their
Country Protestants. Of the Protestants there will be as little question. And
in particular M. Jacob writes thus. The Bishops M. Jacob. p. 73.
of England when they deal with the Puritans must join plainly with the
Catholics in their answers if they will maintain themselves. So that we see in
the judgment of all, both Catholics, Lutherans, Caluinists, Protestants, and
Puritans, that to remain in the Catholic Church, and to live and dye in it,
is the securest way to attain to our chiefest good, and at last to receive the
promised reward of our endless happynes, joy, and everlasting salvation: the
which is confirmed by no less a man then D. Luther himself, with whom we
will end. That the Roman Church of God ( says he) before al others is to be
honored, there is no doubt. S. Peter, S. Paul, forty six Roman Bishops and so
many hundred thousand Martyrs have shed their blood, and have overcome Hell and
death, that it may even be felt what a singular respect God has to that
Church. And if now, alas, the matter so goes at Rome, as it were expedient it
went better: yet neither is there, or can be so great cause, that a separation
or departure be made. Heerehence those Protestants Offer of co^fer. page 16.
which offered Conference, speaking of themselves say. That if the ministers (
to wit the Puritanes) be in error, they protest to all the world, that the
Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God and Christ Jesus himself) have
had great wrong and indignity offered unto them: in that they are rejected, and
that all the Protestant Churches are Schismatic, in forsaking unity and
communion with them. And a little before, speaking of some position among them,
offered then to be disputed, they write in plain terms, how diverse of the
positions are such, that if the Offer of co^fer. page 11.
ministers should not constantly hold and mainraine the same against all men,
they cannot see how possibly, by the Rules of divinity the separation of our
Churches from the Church of Rome, and from the Pope, the supreme head thereof,
can be justified.

But now if in the Church of Rome there be true Christianity and Sanctity, yea
and the very kernel of Christianity: if she be the Temple and Sanctuary of
God, in the which remaynet his Covenant inviolable and all divine things. If
she be the spouse of Christ, the family of Jesus Christ, and the mother Church
containing all things necessary to salvation. If she be the Church in which our
Ancestors lived and were saved: if she continued always adorned with all kind
of Christian good: Enobled with most learned, just and godly persons; fraught
with all kind of good works, of Miracles, piety and devotion; and if she has
bred more Kings and Queens Saints then were ever of of those tytles
Protestants in all the Christian world: and if now to conclude ^^re neither is,
nor can be any sufficient cause wy^^^ should separate themselves from that
Church. If all* his be true, as Protestants themselves have now in this
Grand-Iury acknowledged and confessed: I do not doubt, but every one may see
and perceive, that whosoever lives a true member of that Church, and strives
to go forward in all kind of virtue, may not only be saved, but ariue also to
that degree of holiness and perfection, as to become a blessed soul on earth,
and there above to be crowned a thrice happy and most glorious Saint in heaven.
Out of which we may infer, that whosoever are members of this Church, in the
which only sanctity and salvation is to be had, as our Adversaries themselves
confess, ^ught to avoid most carefully all such wicked and diabolical
suggestions, as the enemy of man, by what Minister soever, may put into their
heads, to join themselves to any other congregation: especially seeing
according to M. Calvin, out of her lap (to wit Calvin. l. 4. instit. c. 2. n.
4.
the visible Church) no remission of sins or salvation at all is to be hoped:
for the Lord does make so great account of the communion of his Church Calvin.
n. 10. For Germany D* Field says, that Luther and the rest of his Religion,
were baptized, received their Christianity, ordination and power of ministry
in that Church (to wit of Rome) as the true v^sible and appa^a^^ Church of
Christ. D. Field page 71. D. Couell in defense of Hooker p 7^. For France.
Calvin l. 4 instit.. 2. l. 4. We (says he) have departed from their Romish
Church. For England the Apologer page 188. con^esseth no less saying: we have
indeed gone from the Pope, we have sh^ken of the yoke of the Bishop of Rome.
as he shall be held a traiterous turne-coate, says M. Calvin, and a forsaker
of his Religion, whosoever disobediently alienates himself from that Christian
Society. Whence it follows that a departing from the Church is a denying of
God and Christ, and therefore so much the more must we beware of such kind of
separation or breach of faith. Seeing, neither can there be a more heinous crime
imagined, then with sacrilegious disloialty, to violate that wedlock which the
only begotten Son of God has contracted with us. So far* M. Calvin.

Pardon us therefore (good M. Parson,) if we willingly and constantly remain
where we are, without being any thing moved with your trifles and toys,
confuted elsewhere, to change our faith and profession which we have been
taught always in the true Catholic Church. And if you have any care of the
chiefest good of your souls salvation, make have to repair to us with your
miserable seduced flock, or otherwise reflect seriously upon this terrible
sentence of S. Fulgentius, who says. Believe assuredly and doubt nothing, that
every Heretic or Schismaticke, christened in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, if he not within the number of those which
are of the Catholic Church, what Alms soever he has made, albeit he shall
shed his blood for the name Christ, can by no means be saved. For neither
Baptism, nor large and charitable Alms, nor death it self, suffered for
Christ's sake, will avail S. Fulgent. lib. de fide ad Petrum.
that man who does not hold the unity of the Catholic Church, as long as his
Heretical or Schismatic wickedness, which leads to perdition, shall
continue in him.

A Note of fifty Kings and Queens of Great Britany, accounted Saints, and
their Memories celebrated for such, by our Catholic Forefathers; and this by
the testimony of Protestants themselves.
S. Lucius King of Britany and Martyr. He lived about Nauclerus genesis 6. Petr.
de Natal. l. 1. c. ^4.
the year of Christ 192. Stow and Holinshed in Chron. Cambden. in Brit. S.
Clinta^cus King of Brecknocke in Wales and Martyr. Capgrau. in catal. Capgrau*
in catal.
About anno 300. Cambd. in Brit. S. Wistan King in Wales and Martyr. About anno
400. Cambd. in Brit. S. Ethelbert King of Kent Confessor. About anno 615. Stow
Holinsh. and omnes. Bed. l. 1. hist.
S. Edwin King of Northumberland and Martyr. Anno Bed. l. 2. Hist.
634. Stow. Cambd. S. Oswald King of Northumberland and Martyr. Anno Bed. 3.
hist. Bed. l. 3. c. 24. hist. Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 18. Bed. l. 4. c. 11. Bed. l.
5. c. 7. Bed. l. 5. Ingulp and alij. Abb. Floriac.
645. Stow. Cambd. Holinsh. and omnes in Chron. S. Oswine King of Deiri, under
the Northumbers, Martyr. Anno 651. Stow. Cambd. Holinsh. S. Sigebert King of
the East Angles and Martyr. Anno 652. Stow. Holinshed etc. S. Sebb^s King of
the East Saxons Confessor. Anno 675. Stow. Holinsh. etc. S. Ceadwall King of
the West Saxons Confessor, Anno 689. Stow. Holinsh. etc. S. Ethelred King of
the Mercians Confessor. Anno Mar. Scot. Wion.
710. Stow. Holinsh. Cooper. S. Alfred King of Northumberland Confessor, Anno
Pol. Virg. Math. West. Malmesb.
720. Stow. Holinsh. Cooper. S. Inas King of the West Saxons Co^nfessour Anno
727. Stow. Cambden. Holinshed. ^. Ceolnulph King of Northumberland Confessor.
Bed. l. ^. c. 9. Westmon. Sur. tom. 1. Wion. Epit. Bed. Pol. Virg. Westmon.
Pol. Virgil. Io. Capgrau. Molan. Vincent. in spec. Mart. Romans and alij.
Malmesb. l. 1. de Reg. Ba^on. tom. 10. Annal. Malmesb. Westminster. Abbo. Flor. Petr.
in Catal. Mar. Scot. Abb. Flor. in Histor. Io. les^aeus hist. Scot. ^ol. Virg.
l. 6. Sur. in vita. Mart. Romans Sur. and alij. Hect. l. 12. hist. Scot. Leslaeus
and alij. Pol virg. Harpesfield in hist. Registr. Ecc. Windesor.
Anno 737. Stow. Cooper and alij recent. S. Richard King of Kent Confessor.
Anno 750. Camb. Brit. S. Egbert King of Northumberland Confessor, Anno 768.
Stow. Cambd. S. Ethelbert King of the east Angles Martyr, Anno 793. Cambd. in
his Brit. Hereford. S. Fremund King of the Mercians Martyr, Anno 796. Stow.
Cambd. S. Kenelmus King of the Mercians Martyr, Anno 821. Cambd. Stow. Holinsh.
S. Ethelwold King of the Northumbers and Martyr Anno 790. Cambd. Stow. Holinsh.
S. Ethelnulph King of the West Saxons Confessor, Anno 857. Stow. Holinsh. S.
Edmund King of Northumberland Martyr, 870. Cambd. Brit. in Suffolk. Stow, and
omnes. S. Ethelred King of the West Saxons Martyr. Anno 872. Stow. Holinsh. S.
Alfred King of the West Saxons Confessor, An. 899. Cambd. Stow, and omnes. S.
Duffus King of Scotland and Martyr. Anno 972. Cambd. Brit. in Murray. S. Edgar
Monarke of England Confessor, Anno 975. Stow. Holinsh. and omnes. S. Edward
King of the West Saxons Martyr, Anno 978. Stow. Cambd. and omnes. S. Edward the
Confessor K. of England, Anno 1069. Cambd. Stow, Holinsh. S. Malcolme King of
Sco^land Confessor, Anno 1092. Cambd* Stow and omnes. B. Henry the sixth of
England, at whose body in Winde^ore, very many miracles been have wrought. Anno
1479. Stow. Holinsh. Cambd. in Surrey.
Queens. Niceph. Socr. Mart. Romans In vita S. Edwini Reg. Matthew. Westmon. Pol.
Vir. Vincent. in spec. Wion. l. 4 ligni vitae. Beda. l. 4. Tritem. de vit.
Illustr. Mart. Romans Bed. l. 4. Westmon. anno. 640. Bed. l. 4. c. 26. Wion. l.
4. ligni vitae. Bed. l. 4. c. 23. Wion. and alij. Tit. de vir. illust. Pol.
Virg. Capgr. Pol. Virg. Hereb. de fastis. Sanct. Ethelwerdus in Chron. Matthew.
West. an. 904. and an* 901. and 92^. Wion in ligvi^ae.

S. Helen Empress borne at Colchester. She lived about Anno 320. Cambd. in
Britan. in Essex Stow. and omnes. S. Ethelburge Queen of Northumberland. Anno
647. Cambd. Stow. etc. S. Ermenburge Queen of the Mercians. Anno 654. Stow.
Cambd. and alij. S. Chinneburge Queen of the West Saxons. Anno 670. Cambd.
Chron. Brit. S. Ermenild Queen of the Mercians. Anno. 678. Stow. Cambd. S.
Audry Queen of Northumberland. Anno 680. Cambd. Brit. in Cambridgshire. S.
Sexburge Queen of Kent. Anno 686. Stow. Cambd. in Brit. and alij. S. Eanflede
Queen of Northumberland. Anno 690. Cambd. Brit. Stow. in Cronic. S. Hereswide
Queen of Eastangles. Anno 690. Cambd. Brit. Holinshed and alij. S. Edilburge
Queen of West Saxons. Anno 840. Stow. Holinsh. and alij. S. Osith* Queen of
the Eastangles. Anno 870. Cambd. in Brit. in Essex. and alij omnes. S. Eve
Queen of the Mercians. Anno 878. Cambd. in Brit. in Glocest. S. Ethelwide
Queen of the West Saxons Anno 904. Stow. Cambd. Holinsh. S. Eadgith Queen of
Northumberland. Anno 926. Camb. Brit. Howes. S. Algiue Queen, Mother to King
Edgar. Anno 964. Matthew. west. anno 943. 955. 974. Pol. Vir. Ranulph. Cicestr.
hist. Angl. Hist. Scot. excus Frankford l. 7. West. and Paris. an. 1067. Abb.
Flor. in eius vita. Mar. Rom Surius and omnes. Matthew. West. and Paris. Sur. in
act. S. Margar. Concert. Eccl. Angl. Didac. de Yepes Ep. Taraconens. Histor. de
schis. Anglic.
Camb. Brit. Stow. Holinsh. S. Wilfride Queen, Wife to King Edgar. Anno 987.
Camb. Brit. Stow. Holinshed. S. Agatha Queen, wife to K. Edward the Outlaw.
Anno 1072. Camb. Brit. Stow. and alj. S. Margaret Queen of Scotland. Anno.
1092. Cambd. in Scotland. Stow. and omnes. S. Maude Queen of England. An.
1118. Camb. Stow. Holinshed. B. Mary Stewart Queen of Scotland. Anno 1587.
Camb. in Britan. and in his Elizabetha fusius. D. Willet in his Antilog. of the
Engl. Protest. to the King, where he wonderfully extolls her for Holiness, and
truth of Religion.
Besides these, there are numbered above 500. Men and Women, of the Kings,
Children, and Blood Royal of our Island, that have in ancient Catholic times
dedicated themselves to God, in holy Religion: and this by the testimony of our
own Protestant writers.

FINIS.

