WORK FOR CVTLERS.

OR, A MERRY DIALOGVE BETWEEN Sword, Rapier, and Dagger.

Acted in a Show in the famous University of Cambridge.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Richard Meighen and Thomas Jones; and are
to be sold at S. Clements Church without Temple-barre. 1615.

WORK FOR Cutlers: or, a merry Dialogue between Sword, Rapier, and Dagger.

Enter Sword. Sword. NAy Rapier, come forth, come forth I say, I Will give thee a
crown, though it be but a cracked one: what wilt not? art so hard to be drawn
forth Rapier?


Enter Rapier. Rapier. S'foot thou shall know that Rapier dares enter: nay
Backe-Sword.


Enter Dagger, he holds Rapiers hands behind him. Rapier. Whose this behind
me?


Dagger. It Is Dagger sir; what will you never leave your quarrelling?


Rapier. Well Sword, Dagger has defended you a good many times; but it is no
matter, another time shall serve: shall I get you out Sword alone, that I may
have you Single-sword.


Sword. Yes if you will be single Rapier too.


Dag. Nay Sword, put the Case of Rapiers aside, that there were two of them, I
hope you were able to buckle with them.


Sword. I Will tell you what, if I go into the Field with him, hang Sword up if I
do not cut Rapiers points, and lash him when I have done: nay, you shall find
Sword mettle to the very back: 'sfoot, my teeth be an edge at him.


Dag. If you offer but to thrust toward him Rapier, I Will strike you down.


Sword. Hang him, I defy him base Spaniard.


Rap. Defy me? sirrah Sword, Rapier spits i'thy face: dare meet me in the
fields, crauenly Capon?


Sword. Capon?


Rapier. I Capon, so I say sir.


Dagg. Why any man may see that thou art well carved Sword; and yet me thinks
that Rapier should not speak of that, for it is an hundred to one if he be not
gilt too.


Sword. Well Rapier, if thou go into the fields with me, I Will make a Capon of
you before I have done with you, you shall nere come home uncut I Will warrant you.


Dagger. Nay, you shall find Sword a notable Cutter.


Rapier. He a Cutter? alas he nere went into the fields yet, but he was soundly
hackt before he came out


Sword. Nere talk you of hacking, for it is a hundred to one if you have not
the Foyle-Rapier.


Rapier. 'Sfoot if you be so Short-Sword, Rapier nere fears you: come a long.


Dagger. Nay nere go, for if you do, I Will send one after you, which shall
scowre you both. The Cutler can do it. I have seen him handle you both
bravely.


Sword. The Cutler, Alas we are the best Friends he has, and if it were not
for us, the Cutler might soon shut up his shop.


Dagger. Alas Sword, you need not talk of his shutting up of Shop, and if it
had not been for him, you had broken by this time Sword, Nay, nere talk: For
you know he can hold your nose to the Grind-stone, when he list.

And as for you Rapier, you know he brought you up first, and if you had
stayed with him still, it might have been better for you.


Rapier. Better for me? Alas he knew not how to use me.


Dagger. He used you too well indeed: for when you were with him he furnished
you with Siler and every thing, but now you are worn out of all fashion. You
are even like a Lapwing, you are no sooner Hatched Rapier, but you run abroad
presently from him.


Rapier. Yet I scorn to run away from him.


Sword. But it were more wisdom then to stand: For the Cutler is a man as
well Armed as any man I know, and has as good skill ins weapons.


Rapier. Ha Sword, is the wind in that Door? Faith now I see which way you
stand bent Sword, you had rather sleep in a whole skin, then go into the
Fields to try your self.


Sword. Sir, Sword has been proou'd before now, and yet heel prove himself
again with you, if you dare follow him.


Dagger. Do you hear Sword? If you go, look for Dagger at your backs
presently; For I am a Justice of Peace, and am sworn to keep and defend the
Peace.


Rapier. Sir, we will fight, and do you take it in Dudgeon Dagger if you
please: if you once offer to hinder us, I Will so Pummell you Dagger, that you
were never better Pummeld in your life; And howsoever, I hope there is Law
against you as well as others, and Rapier can put up a Case against you.


Dagger. Alas I care not if you were both Plaintifes against me, you shall
find Dagger your Defendant I Will warrant you: I, and if need be, I could put
up an Action of Battery against you.


Sword. What talk you of Law? Sword scorns to have any other Law then
Martial law, and that upon you Rapier.


Dagger. Away Sword, the Time was indeed when thou wast a notable
Swash-buckler, but now thou art grown old Sword.


Rapier. I, you do well, to excuse his Cowardice.


Sword. Why Sir, it is well known that Sword has flourisht in his days.


Dagger. Flourisht? in faith Sir I, I have seen Sword hang with nothing but
Scarffes ere now.


Rapier. With Scarffes? with a Halter, if he had been well seru'de, For he is a
notable Thief.


Dagger. A Thief?


Rapier. I, a Thief. Did you nere hear of Cutting-Dicke, this is the very
same man.


Dagger. Nay Rapier, nere hit Sword ith teeth with that: for you know you were
both Indicted for treason before now, and were in danger to be hanged, and drawn
too, and had escapt well if you had not been quarterd.


Sword. I hope knows how to keep his quarters


Dagger. You are a crafty Fox Sword: It were well if you knew how to keep
your friendship too, for Gentlemen and Friends should not fall out.


Sword. Rapier a Gentleman?


Rap. A Gentleman? and has Arms.


Dag. But me thinks Sword by the very sounding of his Name should be the
better Gentleman, and has the better Arms too: for if the truth were well
known, Rapier has but one arm.


Rapier. Sword bear Arms? He Is a base companion. Alas I have known you bear
a Basket Sword.


Dag. If you look ith book of Armorie, I Will warrant you, you shall find
Sword of more antiquity then you Rapier: He deriues his Pedigree from
Morglay, Beuis of South-hamptons sword; and that from S. George his sword, that
killd the Draggon.


Rapier. I, the draggon in Sussex, the other day: But I Will warrant you Rapiers
of as good a blood as he for his heart.


Dag. Byth mass, I think indeed, you are both well sanguind. Your both of one
blood, only there is this difference, that sword coms of the elder brother, and
you Rapier of the yo^ger.


Rapier. And oftentimes the younger brother proves the better Soldier.


Dagger. Nay, Dagger will defend you both for good Soldiers.


Sword. Rapier a Soldier? When did you ere know Rapier fight a Battle?


Dagger. Yes Rapier is a Soldier, and a Man as well Armed at all points as
any one.


Sword. No, no, its Sword that is the notable Soldier; Why, there is none of all
you Captains could do any thing in War without him.


Rapier. I hope Rapier has not been at Fencing-Schoole all this while for
nothing.


Dagger. Alas there is none Master of Defense but Dagger: But yet if you speak
of Soldiers, the'rs Bow, Bill, and Gunne, worth twenty such as we are.


Rapier. Indeed they say that Bow has bin an old Soldier.


Sword. Yet he is not fit for a Soldier, any man may bend him as he list.


Rapier. And as for Bow-string, I dare undertake to whip him my self.


Sword. Then let me alone to tickle Bows ownes nocke in faith.


Dagger. But what say you to Bill? he is a notable sturdy villain.


Sword. Bill, I Will pay him soundly, if ere I reach him.


Dagger. Its more then you can do, I Am affraide; For Bill's a Tall-fellow ons
hands, and will quickly be Wood: and then there is Gunne, such another
Bouncing-fellow too.


Rapier. Gunne, Alas he is Nobody: any little Boy will make him roar.

I have made him go off 'oth Fields, a good many times my self.


Dagger. Well, is Gunne No-bodie? I Am sure heel give some blows sometimes.


Sword. Its' nere but when Powder ouercharges him, then indeed heel be somewhat
hot oath matter.


Rapier. I think that Powder is a vile bragger, he does nothing but crack.


Dagger. Faith I know not what Soldier he is, but they say, He Is an
excellent pollitician.


Rapier, He a Pollitician?


Dagger. Why, he has an excellent wit?


Sword, Pish, Its nothing but a flash.


Dagger. I Am sure I can remember since he was a Parlement-man.


Rapier. He a Parlement-man: For what Shyre?


Dag. Nay ber-lady, it was for the whole Country.


Sword. I wonder they should choose him: Why he does every thing on the sudden.


Dag. Oh he plottes shrevvdly. If they had not looked too it, He had
undermined the whole parlement-house.


Sword. I but he is Nobody now-adayes, He Is blovvne up long ago.


Dagger. Well, if either you, or any body else should meet with Powder, yet
its a hundred to one, if he meet not with his match.


Rapier. Nay, you should let him alone Dagger, and you should see that Swords'
as notable a bragger as Powder. He thinks he shall nere be matched too: but
he shall, and ouer-matcht too, by Rapier; I vvarrant him. Come Sword, after
your long Parley, Dare you go into the Fields?


Sword. Dare I? You shall soon see that: Go, and I Will follovv you.


Dag. Well said, desperate Dicke. Sword, You may be ashamed to offer it. You
know you are tvvo-handed- Sword, and Rapier has but one hand (unless I
help him) to do any good vvithall, and yet youde have him go into the Fields
with you. Come, there is neither of you shall go. Do not you know that
Duells are put down?

You Will be bound to the Peace ever heere-after, if you strike but one stroke.
Therefore you had best let me decide your controversy for you.


Sword. Why, you are a backe-Friend to us both Dagger.


Dagger. Nay, you know I Am equally allied to you both, and therefore shall
prove an impartial Judge: How say you, will you be ruled by me?


Rapier. Nay let him choose, Rapiers at a good point, whether he will or no.


Dagger. Why are are you so long Sword before you speak?


Sword. Are duells put down? Then I am forc'de to be Friends: Speak then.


Dagger. Then in brief it shall be thus. Sword, you shall bear Chief force
ith Camp, and be made General of the Field, to bear sway every where. As for
you Rapier, since Duells are put down, you shall live quietly and peaceably
here 'ith Court, and go every day in Velvet: You shall be Friends with every
one, and be on every ones side, that if occasion serve, and Sword be absent,
so that matters are driven to a push, Rapier shall be the only man to perform
a Combat: And I my self will back you both, as occasion shall serve.

How say ye, are ye content?


Rapier. We are.


Dagger. Then go before to my House, to the Dagger in Cheap: and there we will
conclude all.


Rapier. A Long-Sword.


Exeunt, Sword and Rapier. Dagger. Our weapons drawn, and yet no hurt ye
find,
Did Dagger then defend unto your mind?
He that defended others not long sense,
At last he dares not stand ins own defense;
But this he hopes, with you it will suffize,
To crave a pardon for a Scholars Prize.

FINIS.

