A Summons for Sleepers Wherein most grievous and notorious offenders are cited
to bring forth true fruits of repentance, before the day of the Lord now at
hand.

Hereunto is annexed, A Pattern for Pastors, deciphering briefly the duties
pertaining to that function, by Leonard Wright.

Newly reprinted, corrected and amended.

Woe be to the inhabitants of the Earth, and the Sea, for the devil is come
down unto you, whose wrath is great, because he knows that his time is but
short.

Apoc. 12.12. Be sober and watch. etc. 1. Pet. 5.8. Happy are those servants
which the Lord when he comes shall find waking.

Luke 12.37.

1589.

The Epistle to the Reader.
TO feed thy fancy with frivolous fables gentle Reader (as to tell thee of
drowsy Endimion, who desired of Jupiter, to sleep perpetual: or Epimenides,
who in seeking his fathers sheep, took a nappe of forty and seven years
long, or those seven supposed Saints, whom the golden Legend reports to have
slept two hundredth years and odd) is no part of my purpose. But rather as one
in grief of conscience, for the zeal of my God, what in me lies, to wake and
stir up those wicked and sinful sluggards, whom the cursed serpent in
Paradise, Genesis 3.
above five thousand five hundredth sixty and two years past, applying not the
sin of the sea calfe to their heads, but that inchaunted apple of perdition
to their hearts, has so venoumously infected with contagious poison of
iniquity, and lulled so soundly a sleep in the careless cradle of security:
that neither the golden belles of Aaron* the thundering trumpe of Esaias, the well
tuned Cimbals of David, the pleasant harmony of the Evangelists, nor the
sweet comfortable pipe of Christ himself, could once as yet allure them to
repentance and amendment of life: trusting that God by this my plain rough
Summons, penned without fear, or flattery, shall now in the dawning of the
day, ring such a peale at the door of their conscience, as shall either move
them at length to love him in his mercies, provoke them to fear him in his
justice, or leave them inexcusable in the day of vengeance. But of all the
sinful crew of napping sleepers in general, is lately revealed unto us, one
notable and pestiferous sect especial: most odious to God, grievous to his
Church, dangerous to the State, and noysom to the common wealth* of whom the
holy Ghost by the pen of the Apostles, has most lovingly forewarned us:
decyphering them in their colors, with titles correspondent to their manners:
as covetous bosters, 2. Tim. 2.3. 1. Tim. 4.2. Iud. 16.18.19. 2. Cor. 11.13.14.
Apoc. 12.12.
disdainefull mockers, false accusers, murmuring complainers, dissembling
hipocrites, Authors of sects, and despisers of authority: having a similitude
of godliness, but have denied the power thereof, in whom Satan has
transformed himself into an angel of light, whose restless rage does
manifestly show the ruin of his kingdom at hand. These under a color and
shadow of religion, are so vehemently set on fire to shake off the yoke of
obedience, and seek innovation: as nothing is thought tolerable but what they
like, and what they allow must only stand for law: whereby the church is torn
in pieces, authority contemned, vice advanced, virtue neglected, and all men
in opinion wonderfully distracted. Look where they do loath, every mite is
made a monster: every gnat, a cammell: and every trifle a trespass, which
must be curiously ripped up, and made open to the view of the world. But where
they like, mountains are no moates, nor beams no blemishes: love must cover
the multitude of sins, and all things smothered up with a show of holiness.
Their pretense (as their Captain says) is to mar the Prelate, The Prelates
propounded, the Potentats pretended.

The Potentate, Prelate, and people. Mat. 7.15.16. Act. 20.29.30.


the ancient grave Pastors, reverend Fathers, and chief pillars of our
Church: the middle cord of that threefold cable, the only anchor staff and
stay of our common wealth: much like those ravening wolves, which by no means
would enter league with the poor sheep, unless their Mastiffes (whom they
feared) were delivered unto them: but dangerous was that peace, and simple were
those sheep, to yield their dogs to such as sought to pray upon their
carcass. They resemble in diverse points that notable and presumpteous crew,
Jack Straw and his fellows, who being diuelishly incensed with mutation,
pretending a cause of liberty, stirred up such trouble and civil discention in
this land, as nothing could appease, unless the king would grant to put down
all the nobles and prelates, Richard the second.
reserving only a few to be of his counsel, and the rascal rabble of begging
Friars, to live of the peoples devotion: much like the prelacie which these new
devising church-founders are now so desirous to have established: who must be
no Bishops, to bear the state and title of honor, but superintendents to
control Princes: no beneficed men, and why? because it brings a charge, as
fruits, tenthes, and subsidies to her Majesty's cofers, hospitality to their
neighbors, and general relief to the poor: but must live popularly with
their feet under other men's tables, and their tongues tied to other men's
purses. But Jack Straw was taught to know how horrible a thing it was, 1. Reg.
24. Psalm. 105.15.
once to lift up either hand, tongue or heart against the Lords anointed, or
do his Prophets any harm, by sheathing the Mayor of London his dagger in his
bosom. So would these be learned to understand, Romans 13.1.2.5. 1. Pet.
2.13.14. Tit. 3.1.9.10.11 Heb. 13.7. 1. Tim. 5.1.17.
that the word of God does teach, and our English laws command, obediently to
honor the Prince, and reverence the Prelate. To conclude (gentle Reader) I
crave only thy friendly censor without partiality, not forgetting the good
Hermit, who having three of his friends come to visit him, for want of better
dainties to entertain them, bestowed on every of them an old apple, half
putrified with spots. The first friend, to show his affection, devoured his
apple heartily, sound and rotten together as it was. The second, more nice then
wise, because his was spotted in part, disdainefully threw away the whole. The
third, making choice of the best, rejected only the rest. So do I wish thee,
not with the first friend, to devour the badde with the good: neither with the
second, to cast away that is good because of some bad: but with the third, to
accept and use that is wholesome, and refuse that is lothsom. Vale in Christo.

Leonard Wright.

A Summons for Sleepers.
AFter that the Apostle Saint Paul had taught the Romans many notable lessons
and rules, touching the doctrine of christian faith, charity, and obedience to
Magistrates. In going on to exhort and persuade them to repentance and
amendment of life, he takes occasion to speak of time, of sleep, of light,
and of darkness. And that considering the season (says he) that it is now
time, that we should wake from sleep: Romans 13.11.12.
for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed. The night is past, and
the day is at hand: let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and
put on the armor of light, etc.

This word dormire to sleep, in some places of the holy scriptures, is taken
for requiescere, to rest, as our Savior Christ came to his Disciples and found
them a sleep: Christ himself slept in the stern of the Ship, and Peter slept
between two soldiers. Again in some places, it is taken to sleep in
sepulchro, the grave, as David and Solomon slept with their Fathers: Behold
says Job, I must sleep in the dust, and Saint Paul says, The faithful that
are dead, are fallen a sleep in Christ: But that sleep which the Apostle does
here speak of, is to sleep in ignorance, darkness and sin. The way of the
ungodly is called darkness and shadow of death. To wake up this kind of
sleepers, and rebuke the world of sin, Ioh. 6.15.
is my chief intent and purpose in this book. Which is, no doubt, a
thanklesse office, and a very unthrifty occupation, veritas odium parit,
truth never goes without a scratcht face: he that will be busy with vae
vobis, let him look shortly for coram nobis. So long as Micheas prophesied
victory against the Assyrians, he was a trim Prophet: but after when he told
them the contrary, they had him in great disdain. When our Savior Christ
fed the people, 1 Thessalonians. 8.
they would have made him a king: Mat. 27.
but after when he began to rebuke their naughty manners, they desired to have
him crucified: even so in these days, our dainty ears can hardly abide to
hear our vices touched: Much like the foolish Ass, that when he is a loading
stands stock still, but in taking the load off his back, does yearke out
behind. It may aptly be said unto our people, as Martial the Poet said once
to his friends, My friends (says he) you will imbolden me to speak the
truth, and the truth is this, that you can not abide to hear the truth. He
therefore that will boldly utter his conscience without fear or flattery,
shall hardly escape without imminent danger. Notwithstanding how odious and
despised soever Gods Prophets shall seem to the eyes of the world, they must
not be afraid to speak the truth, and to beat down the infection of sin and
wickedness. How dangerous soever it be for Lot to reprove the filthiness of
the Sodomites, yet must he not cease to say unto them. Genesis 19.
I pray you my brethren, do not so wickedly. Though it cost John Baptist his
head, yet must he not forbear to say unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee
to have thy brother Philips wife. Mat. 6.18.
Though Nathans message seem never so perilous, yet must he not be afraid to
say unto David, 2. King. 12.
Thou art the man, it is thou that have done this deed. Elias must not be
afraid to say unto Achab, 3. King. 18.
It is thou and thy fathers house that has brought this plague upon Israel.
Jonas must not refuse to cry out in the streets of Niniuie, Jonas. 3.
Yet remains forty days and Niniuie shall be destroyed. Mat. 10.
Our Savior Christ sent forth his Disciples as sheep amongst woolues. I have
given thee a face of brass, Ezech. 3.
as hard as a flint stone, that thou shall not be afraid to tell my people
their sins and offenses, says the Lord. As Christ himself took all our
sins upon him, so ought every good christian to take the injuries done to
Christ as his own. The Lord hates as well him that justifies the ungodly,
Prou. 17. Psalm. 139.
as he that condemns the innocent. O Lord (says David) I have always hated
those that love not thee, and been a stranger to those that have forsaken thy
law, He that is not with me, is against me, says our Savior.
Amicum esse licet (says the Philosopher) sed vsque ad Aras. David would have
no friends but those that were Gods friends, nor enemies but those that were
Gods enemies, and he that will bear with the vice of his dearest friends
wherein God is offended, is unworthy the name of a christian. And he that
rebukes vices where amendment does follow, kills the sinner that man has
made, and saves the man whom God has made. We read in the Gospel, of
certain people that were possessed with devils, Mar. 16.9. Mat. 10.1. Luke.
4.36. Luke. 9.1.
which Christ himself did cast out, and gave power to his Disciples to do the
like. But I think, in no age from the beginning was there ever so many
possessed with devilish spirits, as in these our miserable days. In old time,
Agar was more fruitful then Sara: and in our time the Church is so barren, and
the world so fruitful to bring forth huge swarms of wicked impes, that hard
it is to find one corner, calling, or kind of life without them. We read of
seven principal or captain devils, who have always borne a great sway
amongst men. The first called Lucifer, the devil of pride and presumption,
Esaias. 14. Mat. 12. Luke. 22. Apoc. 9. Mat. 6. A gaping Idol. Tob. 3.
The second, Beelzebub, the Lord of envy and malice: The third, Satan, the
master of wrath and disdain: The fourth Abadan, the patron of sloth and
idleness: The fifth, Mammon the father of covetousness and snudgerie: The
sixth, Belphegor, the God of gluttony and drunkenness: and The seventh,
Asmodius, the ruler of lechery and whoredom. And whosoever is infected with
any of the said vices, be sure he is possessed with a great captain devil,
which must of necessity be cast out, or else of force the man must perish. And
surely the Clergy of long time have been very careful and diligent in
discharging their duty herein, Luke. 13.3.
so as the immortal seed of the Gospel, since the Apostles time was never
more plentifully sown. Notwithstanding the small testimony of amendment
declares it to be rather known then kept. The people so lovingly linckt in
league with the devil, their ears are so deaf, their senses so dull, their
wills so obstinate, and their hearts so barren, as they have neither sense to
taste, stomachs to digest, nor hearts to credit, except it feed their filthy
infected humors. I think if the preachers should go in sackcloth like Esaias,
Esaias. 15.
or with yrons about their necks like Jeremy, Ier. 28.
yet were there small hope of amendment. If those good ancient Fathers who
complained so grievously of the wretchedness of their time, did see the
horrible abuses and vile corruptions of our age, they would wonder at our
folly, and burst out in tears at our misery. Or if Saint Paul himself were
here now to see our pitiless days, when charity is grown so cold, and
humanity almost forgotten, no doubt he would wonder, and say, Surely these
people are possessed with devils, they sleep in sin, and it is high time to
wake them.

And first to begin with the great rich giants and covetous prowling
cormorants of this land: Esa. 34.
abundance of wealth has so bewitched their insatiable minds, and taken such
rooting in their flintie hearts, that neither the fear of God, the infamy of
the world, nor hell mouth that gapes for them, Esa. 5.
can once staunch their greedy desires. There is such joining of house to
house, ground to ground, field to field, land to land, farm to farm, and
living to living, to maintain their proud backs, golden heads and costly
throats, still scraping for superfluity, that the poor can not have to aid
necessity: the one wallowing in wealth, and floating in prosperity, the other
wrestling with need, and like to sink in misery. Prea. 4.
They have power to get riches, policy to keep them, and time to possess
them, but want hearts to use them: so as the more goods they have, the more they
desire, and less good they do. A number have too much, but none have enough,
having so much doings, that they can do nothing well. They swell with
intolerable pride and envy, oppressing their poor brethren, Amos. 4.1. Mich.
2.1.2.
some by force like Lions, and some by fraud like foxes, so that if rich Achab
begin once to frown, all Westminster Hall and other places to help, 3. Kin.
21.
can not keep poor Naboth his vineyarde. Again, they build great gorgeous
houses, as though they should live for ever, and surfeit with excess of diet,
as though they should dye to morrow: being less charitable then the devil
himself, who desired to have stones turned into bread: but they turn and
convert biefe and bread that was wont to feed the poor, Mat. 4.
into stones and bravery, and have brought the commonwealth to common misery.
The seely wretched souls may feed their eyes with gazing, but their bellies
may sterue for food. The goods of christians, by right, should be private to no
man's lust, but common to every man's need, according to their state and
calling: But they are prodigally spent in vain pomp and superfluity, and
made enticing baits to draw men to sin at their pleasure, and repent at their
leisure. Hypocrisy and superstition did bleare the eyes of Papists: and
ambiton and covetousness puts out the eyes of the protestants. In times
past, he that held by violence that was not his own, or converted other men's
goods to his own use, or sought either by fraudulent or violent means to
take away their lands or livings, was accounted a thief, and the laws
prescribed several punishments, and kinds of death, according to the quality
of the offense. But if there were commission granted at this day to hang up
all thieves and robbers, I think we should rather want gibbets then thieves to
furnish them. These worldlings (no doubt) are possessed with Mammon that great
master devil, they sleep in sin, and it is high time to wake them. Either
they think there is no God, or I must think they are no men.

What mean you my brethren and countrymen? will your covetous minds never be
satisfied? Christ has redeemed you from the world, and will you still be
partners with the devil in possessing the world? It will shortly pass away and
perish before your eyes, and will you make it your God? 2. Pet. 3.
What madness is it to repose your felicity in that which is nothing else but
troubles to your bodies, disquietnesse to your minds, cares to your hearts,
Prou. 15. Prou. 31.
inticements of vice to your children, seeds of envy to your neighbors, and
occasion to your enemies: Never got without travel, kept without danger, nor
left without grief. Gold is called the bait of sin, Eccle. 31
the snare of souls, and the hook of death. It is aptly compared to a fire,
whereof a little is good to warm a man, but too much will burn him up
altogether. Covetousness is called the root of all evil, there is nothing
worse then a covetous man, says Jesus Sirach, 1. Tim. 6
nor a more wicked thing then to love money: for such a one has even his soul
to sell. Eccle. 10
A covetous man's purse is called the devils mouth: The chariot of covetousness
is said to be carried of four wheels of vices, churlishness, faint courage,
contempt of God, Barnard.
and forgetfulness of death: it is drawn by two horses, called greedy to
catch, and holdfast: the carter that drives it, desire to catch, and the
carter has a whip called loath to forgo.

If rich worldlings would weigh with them selves, the great wealth they
possess, and the little good they do withal; what intolerable evils they
have committed, and how much better they might have done: how apt they are to
offend, and how slow to amend: they would be ashamed to live, and in great
fear to dye. It is hard (says our Savior) for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, Mar. 10.25. Mat. 19.23.
they are more hardly converted unto God then poor men, for three causes.
First, for that pride is always annexed unto riches. Secondly, the heart of a
rich man is choked with worldly cares. Thirdly, for as much as they are endued
with temporal comforts, they have small regard unto spiritual consolation.
Woe be unto such greedy worldlings and fat bulls of Basan, Abacuck. 2. Amos.
6. Job. 21. Esaias. 34. Iere. 12.
as couetously gather together evil gotten goods, that they may set up their
nestes on high to escape from misfortune: which wallow in wealth and prosperity
like pampered oxen preserved for the day of slaughter, kick at their duty,
break the hedge of their bounds, and run where they list: without speedy
repentance they shall shortly be turned into hell, Psalm. 22.
and all the people that forget God. Woe be unto the proud welthie rulers in
Sion, that sit in the chair of wilfulness, Amos. 6.
and lie upon soft couches, and beds of Iuorie, Genesis 25. Wisd. 6. Iere. 25.
selling their birthright with Esaw for the Potage of pleasure: for they shall
be sore punished. Go to now you rich worldlinges and Rams of the flock which
live here in pleasure and wantonness (says the Apostle) Weep and howl for
the miseries that shall come upon you: Iam. 5.
for the day is at hand, when you must yield account of every penny you have
received and were put in trust withal. When without speedy repentance your
wealth and prosperity shall be turned into scarceness and penury; your joy
and gladness, 2. Pet. 2. Esaias. 34.
into sorrow and heaviness: your mirth and pleasure into lamentation and
mourning: your peace and security, into miserable calamity: Mat. 8.12. Psalm.
11.
and your dainty diet, into weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth: fire and
brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be your portion to drink. What
profits it a man to gain the whole word, Mat. 16.26.
and yet loose his own soul.

If a nobleman sending his servant about his affairs, shall commit his money
into his hands upon trust; with a commandment in writing how to lay it out:
thus much upon such a thing, and thus much upon such: if that servant when his
master shall call him to account: shall say unto him: thus much I spent upon
pomp, pride, and superfluity, and thus much upon riote, whoredom and vanity,
so as I could spare little or nothing to bestow as you commanded: he would
surely take that malapert fellow by the ears, thrust him out of his service,
and commit him to prison for his sauciness. Even so has God himself, the
Lord of all Lords, made and appointed rich worldlings his servants and
stewards, committing his treasure into their hands upon trust, with a
commandment in writing, to bestow it in helping and relieuing his poor
distressed children, whom he has chosen to receive the glad tidings of his
gospel, and be heirs of his kingdom, whom he has left here in his own stead,
Mat. 11.5. Iam. 2.5. Luke. 6.20. Ioh. 12.8. Mar. 14.7. Deuteronomy. 15.
to supply his own absence, and whatsoever is done to them, his pleasure is to
accept it as done to himself. It was promised Moses for a blessing, that the
land where he dwelt should never be without poor people. He that considers
the poor and needy says the Psalmist, the Lord shall deliver him in the
time of trouble, but he that has this worlds good, Psalm. 41.
and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him,
says the Apostle, how dwells the love of God in him. 1. Ioh. 3.17.


Be not deceived my brethren, God will not be mocked: as worldly riches are
Gods good blessings, Galat. 6.7.
to such as can use them: so are they his fearful curses to such as abuse
them. You ought to spare neither goods nor lands to maintain the law of
charity. Seeing he that hid his talent was cast into utter darkness, no
doubt, such wicked Stewardes as do not only horde up, but also waste,
mispend, and abuse the Lords talents, shall be sore punished.

O Dives dives, non omni tempore viues,
Fac been dum viuis, post mortem viuere si vis. Barnard.

Da tua dum tua sunt, post mortem tunc tua non sunt.
He that stops his ears from hearing the poor, says the wise man, shall
cry himself and not be heard. Prou. 21.


It is true in deed that every man ought to have an honest care for his
family: nature does teach it, reason does persuade it, the word of God does
allow it, and he is worse then an infidel that neglects it: yet not for
superfluity, but according to his state and calling, to aid necessity: 1.
Tim. 5.8.
and that after the rule of our Savior Christ, first to seek the kingdom of
God and then he will bless all his labors, and increase his store, so as he
shall always have sufficient: it is not abundance, Mat. 6.33.
but the Lords blessings that makes rich: prosperity says Solomon, Prou. 10.
Prou. 17. Prou. 28.
does follow liberality: so that he which is liberal to the poor, shall
never want: and daily experience teaches how God does commonly bless the good
housekeeper with great plenty; when hard patching prowlers have often such
scarcity, 2. Cor. 9.10 Prou. 12.
as all men wonder how the devil they waste it.

An other intolerable mischief, is that incurable canker of usury, which
has brought many an honest man to misery. It is the office and duty of a
good christian, whom God has enriched with plenty, Iam. 2.13.
to be always ready and willing either by liberal giving, or charitable
lending, to help, comfort and relieve his poor needy neighbors in distress.
The law of nature does teach it, the rule of charity does will it, and Christ
himself does command it. Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you,
Mat. 7.12.
do even so unto them, for that is the law and the Prophets. Leuit. 25.
If thy brother be impouerished and fallen in decay, thou shall relieve him,
thou shall open thy hand to thy poor brother, Deuteronomy. 15.
and lend him sufficient for his need. From him that would borrow, says our
Savior Christ, turn not away thy face. Mat. 5.42.
He that has pity on the poor, says Solomon, Prou. 19.
he lends unto the Lord: and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him
again. Seeing then, that God himself the author and giver of all good
blessings: Mat. 10.29.
and without whom not so much as a sparrow falls upon the ground; whose
promise is ever most certain and sure yea and Amen, will be surety for his
poor afflicted members, and pay their debts to the uttermost farthing. Sure
there is no honest nature, nor true christian heart, having any spark of grace
or fear of God, They that fear the Lord will not mistrust his word. Eccle. 2.
Iam, 2.16.13.
knowing himself to have store to help his poor needy neighbor in distress,
that contrary to his own conscience, either would or durst so dissemble and
mock with his heavenly majesty, as to answer him with excuses.

As love and charity, are two special fruits of faith and religion: so are
free gift and favorable love two special fruits of love and charity, and
most certain tokens to know a pitiful christian from a cruel infidel.

And as we are commanded to lend, so are we to lend freely without usury. Thou
shall not oppress or bite thy brother with gain or usury: for that is not to
help or relieve, but rather to impouerish and utterly undo them: Cursed be
that lone that brings borrowing to begging. Exodus 22. Pro. 28


An old dog and an hungry flea is said to bite sore, but the covetous usurer
biteth sorer: He that is once caught in the usurers bonds, is much like a
bird snared in a lime bush, the more she wrestles, the faster she is. Cato
being asked what it is to lend upon usury, answered, Quid hominem occidere?
Cicero offic. lib. 2.

Barnard upon that canticle. Sermo. 39.

Chrisostom upon Mat. 5.


S. Barnard would have a man rather to do any slavery, tha^ sell his
patrimony: yet rather to sell his patrimony, than borow upon usury.
Chrysostom compares usury to the sting of an Asp, whose venomous infection
casting the party into a pleasant sweet sleep, disperseth into every member of
his body, that presently he dies: even so the borowing upon usury seems
sweet for the time, but in the end, the venomous infection thereof will so run
through his substance, that all that he has is soon converted into debt.

These are the devouring caterpillars of the common wealth, whose ears in
respect of any goodness, are as deaf as a door nail, their eyes as blind
as a beetle, their hearts as a flint stone, and their pouch as greedy as hell
mouth. An usurer is worse than Judas, who after he had sold Christ but once,
repented, and restored the money again: but the usurer sells him in his
members continually, and yet never repents nor restores the money again: he
is compared to infectious leapers, unmeet for any Christian assembly, or to a
noisome hog, for that he is never profitable till he die, that his friends
may strive for his wealth, the worms for his carcass, and the devils for his
soul. We are taught in the holy Scriptures, to reiecte him that is an
heretic, Titus. 3.
after the first and second admonition, as a firebrand of hell, knowing that
such a one is perverted, and sins even damned in his own judgment. And
forasmuch as the vice of usury is directly against the commandment, Exodus 22.
and yet most wilfully and obstinatlie is practiced after so many and vehement
admonitions, I think it verily in those so often warned, a sin against the
holy ghost, Mat. 12.81 Mark. 3.29 1. John. 5.16 Psalm. 15
which shall never be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come: but even as Lucifer was cast down from heaven into the horrible dungeon
of hell for pride: so shall they he cast headlong down from the earth, to fry
in hell torments for covetousness. So loathsome was that filthy brood in
times past, that they were excommunicate, as unworthy to come in any Christian
congregation, nor suffered to be buried in Christian man's burial: and if they
fell in poverty, it was not lawful for any man to relieve them, neither
might the Minister in time of sickness resort to exhort them: but were
suffered to die like dogs, as they lived.

Some think to qualify the offense, by taking somewhat less than ordinary:
but we may not seem wiser than the holy Ghost: there is no more mean in this
vice, than is in theft, adultery, and murder. He that steals a penny is a
thief, as well as he who steals an hundred pound: he that commits
fornication but once, is guilty as well as he who has offended a dozen times:
he that kills but one man* breaks the law as well as he who has killed
twenty: and he that takes out a penny of gain, is an usurer as well as he
who takes ten pound. Though the dog bite sorer than the flea, yet the flea
biteth. Adam thought it but a small offense to bite the apple, but he was
banished from Gods presence for breaking his commandment.

Some would cloak their usury by fraudulent bargains and sales: but though
such subtle worldlings, void of all conscience, charity, and fear of God, be
never so crafty and politic, to seek some means by wresting of law, to run
headlong to the devil, yet God will not be mocked: truth is truth, and falsehood
is falsehood. Whatsoever is lent out either in money or wealth, Deuteronomy. 23. Ezech.
18
if the lender receive more in gain than he delivered out, it is usury: the
alteration of the title cannot take away the badnesse of the vice.

Some to avoid the name of an usurer, deny to lend any at all, who in flying
of Scylla fall into Charibais, and in stead of an usurer become a manslaier.
The commandment has two branches, Psalm. 112 1. John. 3.17
to lend, and to lend without usury: so is there two ways for covetous rich
worldlings to run headlong to hell, the one by lending upon usury, and the
other in not lending at all: and to die for it, they will thither either by the
one way or the other: and seeing they will needs go, I think it better to
send them that way, by which other may have some use of their money, than to
stop the way clean up. These usurers (no doubt) are possessed with some great
master devil: they sleep so deadly in sin, that it is hard to awake them, and
therefore to themselves I leave them.

Some think the borower to be an offender as well as the lender, but I am not
of that mind: for God knows poor soul, whereas he is enforced through
extreme necessity, without any evil intent, would be glad to borrow freely:
Ier. 15 Esaias. 24
but he is constrained to pray heartely, and pay dearly: and so long as the
mind and intent is not defiled, no sin is committed: as a woman that is
abused by force against her will: or he that being in peril upon the seas,
casts his goods out of the ship to save his life: or he that is beset with
thieves, gives his purse freely, least his throat should be cut violently.

The next grievous abuse in this land, is the corruption of justice, by means
of too many ambitious Lawyers, who swarm as thick now* as the Friars in times
past, and are as covetous as they were superstitious: and as those wilful
beggars were maintained of devotion and charity, and the marchantes are
enriched through pride and bravery: To offend the good I mean not, and to
(...) the wicked (...) may not.
so do they live by malice and envy: by whom our good laws are abused, as
though they had been made rather to enrich the lawiers, than for execution of
justice, and become like spiders webbes, where great flies pass easily
through, but little flies are strangled: or a bait to catch birds: the
lawiers are the foulers, the judge the net, and the poor clients the birds:
for though their cause were never so plain and sure, yet were he much better
to give half the prise of his coat at the first, than to defend the whole
through bribery and corruption of justice. So long as their clients continue in
greasing their insatiable hands with vnguentum rubrum, they seem to feel
their matter, encourage them to proceed, and extolling their cause, To sell
justice is intolerable but to sell injustice, is either briberie or plain
knauerie.
as though the day were already won, till they have drawn all the money out
of their purses, and the marow out of their bones: at last when all is gone, so
as they cease to feed them, as the crow does her brats: then wax they cold as
a stone, and finding one cauell or other, send them home to agree amongst
their neighbors: ah fools, so they might have done before.

They are much like a bramble bush standing in ye midst of a plain field,
whereunto the poor sheep in time of cold storms run for succor and harbor
so long, till at last by little and little, being robbed of their fleeces, are
sent away naked. There is a pretty story of a blind man, They let the man go
that offended, and punish the purse that never offended.
who carried about his fellow being lame, these in the way by chance finding
an oyster, fell at debate which of them was most worthy to have it, the one
alleging his eyes, the other his legs: at last agreeing to be judged by the
next man they should meet, happened upon a Lawier, who taking upon him to end
this strife, opened the Oister, gave each of them a shell, and eat the meat
himself.

Thus under a cloak and color of justice, they have prowled and scraped
together the chief wealth and fat of the land, to the spoil and utter undoing
of many an honest poor man: whose proud gorgeous attire, do plainly show, they
intend to rob a sort of contentious fools purses to pay for them, by whom
they are maintained to swim in silks, while themselves roist in rags.

These Lawiers therefore are surely possessed with some great master devil,
they sleep in sin, and more dangerous than profitable for me to awake them:
But I will pray unto God to convert or confound them.

All such, whose beginning is pride and ambition, most certain their end will
be shame and confusion.

Not to keep the law is iniquity,
And not to mittigate the same is tyranny:
Pity without equity, is plain partiality:
And justice without mercy, is extreme injury.
Corrupt Lawyers are no doubt a scourge of God, sent in the old age of this
froward world, to plague such wrangling and contentious men, as of an
obstinate, wilful, and malicious stomach, refuse to have their matters ended
at home amongst their quiet neighbors, according to Gods law: for as sins
and disobedience do increase, Prou. 25 1. Cor. 6
so are punishments and injuries heaped one upon another.

There came on a time before Alexander Seuerus, two Christians proudly
contending and accusing each the other, whom the good Emperor forbad to name
themselves Christians any more, for that their pride and malice declared the^
to be no followers of him whom they professed. But if Alexander did see how
maliciously the people of our age do vex, toss and turmoile one another in
the law (not for corruption of evil manners, but rather that one may enjoy the
goods and possessions of another, without either right, conscience, or
charity: some never at quiet with themselves unless they be at strife with
their neighbors, and then seek to abuse law and justice, as a cloak to purge
their crooked stomachs, where some pay so dear for a purgation, One poor
man oppressing another by violence, is like a continual rain that destroys
the fruit: Prou. 28. He that of wilfulness delights in law, Shall strive for
a cocks comb and thrive as a daw: Tusser.
that he is constrained to live in misery all his life after) he might well
think and say, Surely these people are not inspired with the spirit of God,
but rather possessed with some great captain devil, they sleep in sin, and
it is high time to awake them. Yet some are enforced either to try law, or
loose right: to whom there be four things requisite. First, a just cause.
Secondly, a true and faithful counselor to plead the same. Thirdly, a full
purse to feed the lawiers. And further, a sure friend to solicit his cause to
the judge, and procure expedition, or else, if the matter be doubtful, to
prolong the time: to the end, his adversary being wearied, may seek to
compound. This Lesson I had of a Lawyer.

Amongst a number of intolerable abuses in this common wealth, the corruption
of negligent officers is not the least. The office of government is of many
desired, but of few well executed: they profess equity and justice, yet will
neither take wrong nor do right. Preach. 3.
They are apt and ready to revenge every little trifle committed against
themselves, but regard not most grievous offenses committed against God:
against him they favor, the truth will not be heard: but against him toward
whom they have conceived some secret displeasure, they will not stick to set
their hands and seals. They suffer all the Country to be choked and vexed
with filthy whooremongers, dronken maltwormes, and idle vagabonds, whereas the
filth of a privy, the stink of dead carrion, and the ordure of cities do not
so much infect the air, as that cursed crew infecteth the common wealth: and
yet these horrible vices remain still unpunished, borne withal, and lightly
passed over, so long, till they are grown almost incurable. Again, they make
a difference between the offenses of rich men and poor men: the one is sore
punished, the other for a privy bribe scapeth free, so that private commodity
banisheth general honesty: the law is torn in pieces, so as right and
justice can take no place. Ephraim is oppressed by tyranny, violence bears
swaie, might ouergoeth right: Abacuc. 1 Esaias. 5
the poor are despised, the wicked advanced, vice unpunished, virtue
unrewarded, and good laws unexecuted, and therefore better unmade:

Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas. Yea, Democritus would laugh to see
great thieves hang up little thieves: And Heraclitus weep to see vicious men
extolled, and virtuous men disdained: they have turned true judgment into
bitterness, Amos. 6
and the fruit of righteousness into woormewoode. In Israel might none be
chosen a Rabbine till he could speak seven languages: but I think a number
of our officers are rather possessed with seven devils. Solon being asked what
best preserved a common wealth, quoth he, when subjects obey the magistrate,
and magistrates the laws: but they sleep in sin themselves, and suffer
others to do the like, and therefore it is high time to awake them.

Forasmuch as officers appointed in authority to govern in the Church or
common wealth, 2. Cor. 19
do not execute the judgment of man, but of God himself, who sees the very
secrets of the heart, who has neither respect of persons, nor receives
bribes: It stands them in hand to be wise, diligent, and circumspect in their
callings: Iere. 22
to examine by law, direct by justice, and conclude by conscience: to keep
equity, and deliver the oppressed: 1. Tim. 5.17. Luke. 12.47. Wis. 6
for as those which govern well, are accounted worthy of double honor, so
are those that neglect their duty, worthy of double punishment. Mercy is
granted to the simple, says the wise man, but those that are set in
authority, shall be sore punished.

Though our Preachers have been very painful and diligent in discharging
their duty in some measure, yet is there noted a great fault in many: who have
gone so far in seeking reformation in doctrine, that the people are grown to
a plain deformation in life and manners: again, they make great outcries
against vice in general terms, but either they dare not, or will not tell men
their particular faults to their faces: again, they are very vehement and hot
as a toste in reprehension, amongst the inferior sort where smallest offenses
are, but in speaking against extortion, oppression, bribery, and such other
horrible crimes reigning amongst the superior powers, they are very faint, and
cold as a stone. And as a learned man said once, they are like cocks nipped
with kites claws, they cackle, but they crow not. Again, they have gone so
far beyond the bounds of modesty, in searching and ripping the blemishes and
infirmities of their fellows in open place, as their calling is almost brought
to an open contempt.

Spiritual pastors amongst our elders, were had in great estimation and
credit, but in these our wretched days, they are rather disdained, envied, and
despised, insomuch as though a graduat in schools, or a Gentleman by birth,
yet the very habit and name of a minister, seems so to disgrace his credit
and estimation, as every inferior person is preferred and thought worthy to
take his place before him. And as the four cardinal vices in the superior
sort before touched, are most grievous to the people, and cause of great
inconvenience in the common wealth: so there be three sorts of men most
grievous to the clergy, and the chief cause of that, intolerable contempt
of their function.

The first are covetous Patrones, who are so greatly infected with the golden
dropsy, as their church door will not be opened without a silver key. He that
will have a Church living (what other good gifts so ever he be endued withal)
he must needs bring this learning with him, to know who was Melchizedecks
Father and Mother, or else a dish of master Latimers apples, or he may cough
for any benefice.

The Prophet David being willing to show kindness unto Hannon, as his Father
Nahas had showed favor to him, 2. King. 10
sent his servants to comfort him in his heaviness: but the Princes and nobles
of Hannon persuading him that they were spies sent to search the City, took
David's servants, 2. Chro. 19.
and shaued half their beards, and cut off their garments hard by their
buttockes, and so sent them away. And even in like manner do greedy Patrones
deal with poor Ministers, whom God has sent unto them with the Gospel of
peace, gelding, paring, poling, and cutting off the beards and skirts of Church
livings, so as they are made but servants and slaves to their Patrones, and
brought so bare for the most part, that they have not sufficient to maintain
themselves with thin diet and simple clothes, and live out of debt nor able to
give a draught of small drink at their door: so as after their decease, a
number of their wives and children may go beg their bread.

In times past, not only the papists of a blind zeal, but also the very
heathen have bin always very beneficial and bountiful to their Priests and
soothsaiers. Pharao was a cruel tyrant, Genesis 47
yet in the time of famine he had a special care for his Priests: Iesabel a
most wicked Queen, yet fed she daily at her table four hundred of her grove
Priests: 3. King.
the popish clergy, whose doctrine was nothing but devises and fancies of men,
were holden in such reverend estimation, that nothing was thought too much or
too good for them.

But the poor Ministers of the Gospel, bringing the glad tidings of salvation,
are contemned, despised, reviled and defaced, and their livings pinched,
bribed, polled, pined and grutched at: every little being thought too much for
them, and made a pray to every catchpoll and pelting officer, that if it were
not for the favorable kindness of our gracious loving Queen, a number had
ere this day bin constrained to leave their function, and fly their Country
for want of living.

It is written how Dionisius coming to a Temple where Images were clothed in
costly coats of silver and gold: These garment (quoth he) are too heavy for
Summer, and too cold for Winter: and so taking them away, clothed them in
linsey woolsey. These (quoth he) are more light for summer, and warmer for
winter. And even in like sort both Patrones and people in these days, do
seek what possible they can, to spoil the clergy of tithes, lands, and all
Church livings, and think a cloak of linsey woolsey good enough for them: not
like innocent sheep that willingly yield their fleeces, but noisome Goats
that strike with their horns. The good old benefactors are gone, and new
startvps, who neither fear God nor devil, supply their places. Abraham, Lot,
and Job we have not. Captain Cornelius and old father Thobie are black
swannes amongst us. Elias cannot find his hostess of Sarepta: Paul the
purpuresse, nor Peter the Tanner: but many a churlish Nabal and greedy
cormorant, to pinch and proll from us what possibly they can: these Patrones
therefore are surely possessed with some great captain devil, they sleep in
sin, and it is high time to wake them.

If the Ambassador of an earthly Prince, being sent in friendly manner to his
subjects, should be so vncourteouslie entertained, as a number of Gods
messengers are in England, no doubt he would be revenged. If those that sold
doves deserved to be whipped out of the temple, sure our Church pollers, who sell
the temple it self, as Judas sold Christ, deserve to be hanged up in the
temple.

The second sort, are an intolerable crew of double faced officers, put in
trust to see the Princes laws observed, Mar. 11.15. Mat. 23.23.24.25. The
guiltles will not grieve although the galled grudge. Judas. 2. Tim. 3
ecclesiastical discipline executed, and contemptuous persons punished, who
privily, both favoring, furthering, and maintaining the causes of diverse
disordered, and seditious schismatikes, that boldly through their sufferance
dare presume to control, gainsaie, and stand against her majesty's laws
established, to feed whose humors some commonly use, under the title of an
exhortation to the Clergy, in their accustomed assemblies, at Sinods and
generals, to seek in open place with bitter inuectiues, disdainful glances,
and most odious terms, to discredit and deface them. Beating into the peoples
heads there present, that their Pastors are no better than ignorant asses:
meaning all such as show themselves obedient to public order. Whereas in truth
to speak general, there was never a more learned Clergy in any Church since
the Apostles time, than now in England, insomuch that the meanest sort, for the
most part, are better able to teach and instruct the plain people of their
Parish, in faith and good manners, than most of those spightful spurring
officers, are to speak in such a learned audience. I see no reason therefore
why they should be likened unto asses, Amos. 3.
except for bearing so quietly the heavy burdens and intolerable extortions
which those greedy prowling cormorants do daily lay upon them, being so
pinched and prowled, that their very lives are bitter unto them: otherwise
they are not so like the nature of asses, Exodus ^.
as themselves are like the nature of foxes, whereupon this question may arise,
whether asses or foxes be more intolerable beasts in a common wealth: these
peevish officers therefore, are possessed with devils, they sleep in sin, and
it is high time to awake them: the Lord of his mercy convert them, or else of
his justice confound them.

The third cause of contempt in the Ministry, is this: Whereas in times past,
the Church had but few teachers, and many learners: Iam. 3.1.
it is now given to have many teachers, and few learners: It was thought in
old time there were but seven wise men amongst the Greeks, and we think now
there be not so many fools amongst us. We all glory of our knowledge, and
presume of our wisdom, and this comes to pass through the number of
scholars in this land, Romans 12.16
who do not only increase and multiply daily without measure, It is meant by
such scolers as will be rotten before they be ripe.
but also for want of right choice of good natures, the greater sort being
fantastical, wilful, and wayward, whose wits being strained against kind,
become disordered, disquiet, and seditious: for it is hard to make straight by
art, that which is made crooked by nature, when learning and eloquence is
grafte in a wrangling, stubborn, and contentious disposition, it is a
dangerous thing. For as in a good man, learning is the armor of virtue, so
when it hits in a wicked person, it is able to work much mischief. It is said,
that fools set neighbors at variance: but a malicious person having wit,
learning, and a plausible tongue, is able to set kingdoms by the ears. One
scabbed sheep will infect a whole flock, and one iarring string brings a
whole noise of music out of all tune: A self willed fool is a perilous
beast.
and one busy headed fool that is learned, able to bring a whole Country out
of al quiet order: and as too few breed consumption, so too many breed
surfets: for certainly there is no more noisome member in a common wealth, than
a professed scholar vnbestowed to live by his profession: his conceit is
lofty, and his life loytering, whose idleness ingendereth disdaynfulnesse to
labor, which through long sufferance, must needs in the end, grow to some
great inconvenience. By this means the Church is pestered with a sort of
busy vaineglorious fools, pufte up with a certain spiritual pride, through
a vain opinion conceived of themselves, every one having a Church plat or
common wealth in his head, who despising the judgment of their elders, run
on rashly before them, till they have fallen into intolerable errors. And
having a great desire to be taken for singular wise men, zealous professors,
and diligent builders, look grimme and big with a hautie stearne
countenance, much like a windy egg, or a blown bladder. And casting off the
yoke of obedience, having a pride to be peruish, never cease brabling and
broching of new frantike follies, spreading of sects, and sowing contention
in the Church, being further wrapped in devotion, then they can pass through
with discretion: and under the color of zeal, Titus. 3
they rouse and rage without al measure: much like new wine, which without some
vent, is like to break the caske, as though Gods spirit enforced man to pass
the bounds of Christian modesty.

These, like evil birds that beray their own neast, or hateful snatching
curres, never cease barking and railing in open audience at their fellow
ministers, yea, and such as their faults and blemishes being rightly waighed,
are fewer in number, and lyghter in weight than their own, whose innocent
lives are able to confute their viperous slanders: utterly despising all those
in whom they see any infirmity of man, as though themselves were some airie
spirits. Especially, such as they perceive more pleasant and sociable of
nature, or more delighted in mirth and honest pastime for their health and
recreation than agrees with their own Stoicall disposition: or if his gifts
in preaching do not altogether satisfy their fantastical humors, and his
doctrine applied to the seditious vain: though the man be never so honest in
life and conversation, nor so careful and diligent in discharging his duty
according to his talent: yet in the eyes of these vehement accusers, he is but
a dumb dog, salt without savor, a bell without a clapper, and a feeder
without food: the children (say they) do cry for meat, but he has none,
neither for himself nor them, except they will have whole loves: as though he
could do nothing but cast the Bible at their heads. Such a wise reason made
that late sprung up heretic Brown, a brother of theirs, when he compared God
to man that loved potage well, that as a man might be glutted with too many
potage, so might God with one prayer often said. Thus they accuse without
truth, judge without authority, Luke. 6.36.42
and condemn without trial, whereby the poor Ministers of the Church, who of
a good conscience do keep themselves within compass of order, and endeavor
to continue the people in due obedience to the same, are despised, defaced, and
shaked up in open audience, as though they were most grievous and notorious
offenders, yea Iesabel was never more mad against the true Prophets, Col.
3.3.8
Herod against the innocents, nor the Scribes and Pharesies against Christ
himself, than these severe censors are against their poor brethren, to bring
them into hatred and discredit amongst the people, to the end, that by one
means or other they might hitch them out of their livings, and enjoy it
themselves. Yea, such is the misery of our days, when youth are so
fantastical to invent, and age so senseless to credit, that the one is
brought into fools paradise, and the other into open dotage, being thought a
thing seemly and tolerable for a young scholar of small learning, and less
wit, before he be either ripe in knowledge, 1. Tim. 6.7
governed in life, or reformed in manners, to prick up into the Pulpet,
blushing like a black dog, 3. King. 12
to control, discredit, and deface the ancient grave Bishops, and reverend
learned Fathers of the land: much like as a proud beardlesse Boie should sit in
a chair with a rod in his hand teaching: and Saint Augustine and Chrysostom
to say their lessons: In whose judgment they are but lasie, loiterers, dumb
dogs, Popish doctors, men pleasers, and their Churches no better than dens
of thieves, being grown so far past shame, and void of all humanity, that
now they fall from reasoning to plain round railing, scoffing, iearing,
deriding, and threatening of buffets, with bent fists: insomuch as no state or
degree can escape their venomous tongues. They look like Lions, leere like
Foxes, hiss like Adders, bark like dogs, and if they durst, they would bite
like Tygars: so maliciously measuring other men's doings by the crooked line of
their own imaginations, that I think if wise Solomon and learned Paul were
here in these days: the one would be taken for a fool, the other for a mad
man: Dumb dog is a great word in their mouths: that sermon where dumb dog is
left out is not worth a pin, it fits not their fancy: for why? their whole
felicity is in barking and snatching, yea rather than cease, for want of
other, they would bark at the Moon and seven Stars: They are much like the
dog that Cicero speaks of, that being set in Capitolio, a tower in Rome, to
fraie thieves, left the thieves and fell a barking at true men, whose doctrine
and example of life, Mat. 7.15.16.
tends only to this end, to drive the Queens subjects to a lothsomnesse and
misliking of the present government, and order established, to discredit her
Majesty's supremacy, to deface her Ministers, and contemn her laws, to
surfeit the Church with Schisms, and infect the common wealth with factions.
And if wisdom in time do not prevent it, then folly in trial will surely
repent it.

To use the laudable ceremonies of the Church, 1. Tim. 1.6.7.
they make it an heinous offense: but in disobeying the Princes laws,
backbiting their superiors, slaundering their brethren, disquieting the
Church, abusing the office of godly preaching by their vain seditious
prattling, they make no offense at all. They seem very diligent and studious,
but it is rather for novelties, and variety to make an eloquent show, that by
the persuasible words of man's wisdom, they may delight itching ears, than
for sound doctrine to convert sinful hearts: they use cunning persuasions
with fair golden phrases, but as Absolon did to steal away the hearts of the
people from David: they proclaim publik fastings, but as Iesabel did to kill
Naboth. For under color of reformation, they seek to rob God of his honor,
the Prince of her due, 2. King. 15
and the Clergy of their livings: being as is supposed, 3. King. 12
instruments of some others, who by their means seek to make the Church a
mark to shoot at, and a carcass to pray upon, to the spoil, overthrow, and
utter confusion of Church. learning, religion, and all. Deuisers and fanciers
were never good either for Church or common wealth. So Judas under a pretense
of holiness, desired to have the ointment sold for a great sum to relieve
the poor withal: but his purpose was to get the money into his own bag: so
was it pretended that the lands of Abbeys, Colleges, and Chantries, Mark. 12*
should have bin employed to the enriching of the king, maintaining of
schools, and releeuing the poor, but they are put to maintain pomp, pride
and superfluity. Fair words and wicked deeds deceive both wise men and fools.

Thus when under the name of a Sermon, these great builders have tossed their
fantastical doctrine, such as Peter never planted, nor Paul never watered,
before the light believing multitude, with such an outward show of holiness,
that Lady hypocrisy her self could not more fitly handle the matter,
spitting out their poison with cutting girdes, Mat. 23.2^
disdainful glikes, and pretty biting nips, against orders established,
Bishops, Ministers, Magistrates and all, so far as they dare. Then like unto
the late rebels that rose in the North, in the end of their traitorous
proclamations, to blind the multitude, pray for the Queen, full coldly and
craftily God wot: and forasmuch as all is done under ye title of preaching,
what soever they say, al is taken in good part, and greatly commended without
controlment or danger of punishment.

Esaias. 56 Philip. 3 Jude. 2. Pet. 2 2. Cor. 12 2. Tim. 3
These are not those dumb dogs which the Prophet speaks of, but those barking
curs, and proud stubborn, and disobedient murmurers, false accusers, authors
of sects, and despisers of authority, which the Apostle speaks of. Those
foolish Prophets and false dissembling liars that are wise in their own
conceits, follow their own spirits, and speak where they see nothing, which
Esaias and Ezechiel speaks of, Esaias. 5 Ezech. 13 Esaias. 95
and those Pharasaicall hipocrites, which say unto those that come nigh them,
touch me not, for I am holier then thou.

These are no unpreaching Ministers, but rather vnministring preachers: for so
they may have as great lordship and superiority over their parishes, as the
Prince has over the realm, the Bishop over his diocese, or the Pope in time
past over the Church: to teach what doctrine they fancy, establish what laws
they like, and observe what orders they list, without controlment, they are
contended at Christ's commandment to go forth and preach. Mat. 18.29.
But if he will have any sacraments ministered, he must go himself for all
them, for it goes against their consciences.

These are no lasie loiterers, but diligent feeders, such as John Leaden, David
George, and Knipper Doling in Germany, apt and ready to sow Schisms in the
Church, factions in the common wealth, and set the country together by the
ears. They are not idle, but sure were better be idle, then so busily
occupied, in applying their wits by art and learning, to work dissension and
mischief in the hearts of the people. They feed in deed, but their food is
such as can hardly be received without danger. Whose hipocriticall purity,
churlish stearne countenance, disdaining to give men their titles of honor,
privy conuenticles, and condemning our Christian order in baptizing of
Infants, do manifestly show them no other, but the very sect of Anabaptists.
And if that grave, reverend and learned father D. Whitegift now Archbishop of
Canterbury, had not stepped in in time, to withstand their subtle and peevish
devises: John Sleida^ in his Com.
we had ere this day felt as great hurly burly in the Church of England, as
was of late years by their predecessors in the City of Munster.

These are not hirelings in stead of shepherds, nor wolves in stead of
hirelings, but rather devils in stead of wolves. Hilaries sermon at the Synod
at Reimes. Mat. 5:9:
For if peacemakers be the children of God, sure these disturbers of peace must
needs be the children of the devil, they sleep in sin, and it is high time
to awake them.

Yet by reason of their hypocrisy and straightnes of life, such as be of
contentious natures, do follow them and commend their doings. We need not now
flee to the Poet Homer for his aid in prescription of the Sirens, seeing this
our unhappy age is so furnished with Marmaids, whose delicat tunes, pretensed
holiness and sweet venomous inticements do so ravish and tickle ye itching
ears of a sort of giddy headed people, Their tongs are much like Mercuries
pipe, that enchanted the hearers.
as they do think themselves rapt up into the third heaven. Whereby they have
hatched such a viperous brotherhoode of sycophant whelps, both dog whelps, and
bitch whelps, half saints, half devils, we busy dissentious heads, proud
disdainful stomachs, wilful wits, factious hearts, brazen faces, golden mouths,
and smooth glosing tongs, as this land before this time was never troubled
withal: Some snatching curs that bite before they bark: some barking shalts
that would bite if they durst: some fawning spaniels much like the flattering
butcher, who gently claweth the Ox, when he intends to knock him in ye head.

They take great pleasure and delight in coming to sermons, not as scholars to
learn, but rather as Judges to control, being grown so diverse in manners
and variable in conditions, yt it is easier for a cook to please an hundred
mouths, with one dish of meat, than a preacher to order one sermon to content
a dozen heads: some would have matters of faith handled, some inuectiues against
Papistrie, some vices rebuked, some sharp and hotly, some gentle and coldly,
all men other men's faults, but no man his own faults. And as they disagree in
matter, so do they in form, some like ancient doctors, some new writers, and
some call that man's doctrine, Some would have it polished with logic and
rethorike: and some call that perswasible words of man's wisdom: some would have
study in sermons, and ^ome only a sudden motion of the spirit: some would
have long Sermons, and some care not how short, and some so dainty and coy,
that they can brook no Sermons.

Thus what by the infectious crew of Papisticall heretics on the one side: and
this pestiferous sect of Anabaptisticall Schismatikes on the other side: the
Church of God is greatly troubled and disquieted, good order, the pale of our
park, or common wealth broken down: And the dear of Christ so dearly bought,
in danger to be devoured of a sort of wolves in lambs skins, and devils in
men's vizards, half Papists, half Anabaptists, who, though in some points
they seem to differ in opinions: yet in defaming her Majesty's government,
denying her supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, condemning the book of
Common prayer, and the public reading of the holy Scriptures, with diverse
other points, they jointly agree together as brethren: and under a glosing
show of obedience, like unnatural children, who at the commandment of an
adulterous stepfather, are willing and ready to thrust their swords into their
mothers belly, live gaping for a day to utter their malice. At whose hands
there is no other friendship, 1. King. 11.
or true hearts to be looked for. But as Nahas king of the Amorites, would have
made with the king of Iabes, by pulling out their right eyes. So nothing can
reform, content or satisfy these, except yielding up the authority of
Ecclesiastical government into their hands. And therefore certain they are
possessed with some great master devil, they sleep in sin, and it is high
time to wake them.

Forasmuch as heretofore their opinions have been opened, their fancies
detected, their heresies confuted, and their arguments confounded. And yet
neither reason can lead them, authority move them, nor truth it self enforce
them to yield, to confess their errors, and amend their manners: it is high
time to tie them shorter for infecting of others: such trees as lopping and
watering cannot make fruitful, must be cut down. When gentle medicines will
not help, the Physician must use bitter potions: when the grieved place cannot
be broken with plasters, the Surgeon must lanch it. So when lenity cannot
reclaim them, severity must correct them: so shall we have more religion,
and less contention. Though our savior Christ commanded to pardon our
enemies, yet not his enemies: as to be angry with sin is not anger, but
zeal: so to smite for offending God, is not to smite, but to correct to
amendment: the lives of lewd men are a sweet sacrifice unto God: it is a
greater fault to let go a Wolf, than to kill a lamb in the flock: and a
greater offense to pardon a rebel or a traitor, than to kill a true man: Prou.
17.1^
but these are not called rebels as they are, because they are not hanged up
as they should. He that has a dog that is a sheep biter, must by law
either hang him up, or else pay for the sheep he has wearied: even so the
Christian magistrate, whom it has pleased God to set in authority, and given
charge to govern and defend his poor sheep, knowing notorious biters lying
in wait to devour them, must either hang up those curres, or answer to God
for those sheep that they do weary. The bridle (says Solomon) belongs to
the horse, a whip to the Ass, and a rod for the fools back. Prou. 26. Pou.
17.10.
Correct a wise man with a nod, but a fool with club: we see that nodding will
not serve, nor becking will not serve, nor winking will not serve, it must be a
club, a hatchet, or a halter, or else such busy headed fools, as disdain to
be ruled, will never be quiet, till they may rule themselves without
controulment.

Their words and reasons unto many seem big in sound, yet in truth are but
small in weight, great in show, little in substance, full of terror, void of
wisdom, rather bugs to fray babes, than matter to move any staide Christian,
great persuasions to seduce weak flesh, yet not sufficient to satisfy
consciences: they may stir up conjectures in some vnstaide brains, which
like weak reeds will move and wagge with every blast of wind, yet not able
to stay assurance in such constant Christian subjects, as stand firm and
faithful to God, their Prince and Country, like oaks: 1. Cor. 16.13.
so that Helleborus were more fit to purge their frantike brains, than
arguments to confute their trifling errors.

To proceed, our delicate and fruitful Country has ingendered a multitude
of dainty and vicious people, proud, Ier. 4.9.
prodigal wasters, miserable pinching proulers, false dissembling liars, fair
looks, and smooth tongues without good meaning, some cruel as Lions, some
crafty as Foxes, some ravenous as Wolves, some envious as dogs, some
lecherous as Goats, some filthy as Swine: the most part either hypocrites,
wicked livers, or ignorant of God, every one in love with his own face like
Narcissus: the higher sort contemning their inferiors with snuffing scorn,
Eccle. 13.
and the lower sort sto^^aking their superiors with grudging spite. It is
said that a Cameleon can transform himself into al colors save white, and
our people have all conditions save honesty. I think in Sodom was never more
filthiness, in Flanders more dronkennes, in Crete more lying, in France more
dissimulation, nor in Iewrie more hypocrisy, than is now practiced in England.
And as good men would gladly have evil men amended, so evil men would rather
have good men consumed. Prou. 29.
The multitude of sinners have to chased away the shame of sin, that common
wickedness is taken for no private offense: there is such unmerciful bribing,
oppressing, and wringing the poor, as though there were neither God to honor,
devil to dread, heaven to hope for, nor hell to eschew. Every one is more
liberal to lend another his conscience, than his money, and his seal is of
more credit than his soul. One crow will not pick out the eyes of another:
but for money, one man will not stick to pick another to the hard bones,
according to the Proverb: Homo homini Lupus est, Man to man is no man, but a
Wolf. These people therefore are possessed with devils, they sleep in sin,
and it is high time to awake thm.

The glory of the Romans in old time, was to speak little, and do much: of
the Greeks to speak much, and do little, Hypocrisy.
and of our dissembling Protestants to talk much, but earne to amend nothing
at all. Our Elders were rude in speech, and civil in manners: we civil in
speech and rude in manners: they believed as Pagans, and lived like Christians:
we believe as Christians, and live like Pagans: they preached not the word, nor
we live according to the word: the name of God is in our tongues, but his fear
is not in our hearts: the Papists do call us Solifidians, but our works
declare us rather Nullifidians: we are like the Athenians, the more good we
know, ye less good we do: or pepper which is hot in the mouth, but cold in
the belly: so we fry in words, but freese in deeds: speak by else, but
work by inches. We read of one Pambo, who after he had heard one lesson,
would hear no mo till he had learned to practice that one: we desire to
hear thousands, and yet frame our selves to practice none: our preachers, for
the better instruction of the people in all truth and godliness, have
paynefully indeauoured themselves to beat down the superstitious abuse of
fasting, prayers, and alms deeds, commending the thing it self as very
pleasant and acceptable in Gods sight, but they understanding (as it were) with
their heels, upon a wylfull negligence, have taken occasion thereby to cast
away both fasting, prayer, and alms deeds, with feasts of the poor and all
together. Again, some Preachers teach the people, at the hearing of the name
of Jesus to bow the knee: Phil. 2.10.
another sort deny it, as unlawful to yield more reverence to that name,
than to God the Father, and the holy Ghost: the people hearing that, think
scorn to bow their knee to any of all the three. Thus they make their
liberty a cloak of looseness, turn the grace of God unto wantonness, and
the Gospel of Christ unto lewdness: they have changed works into words,
godly devotion into bare knowledge: and are become rather lip Gospellers,
than life Gospellers. The Papists were not so zealous to gilde their Temples
with gold, Judah.
but our Protestants are as neglygent to gilde their souls with virtue. They
were beneficial and diligent both in decking the false dead pictures of
Saints, and feeding the true lively members of Christ: and we seem to
condemn the one, and leave the other undone. They used fasting from meats, we
neither from meat nor sin, they prayed often, we seldom or never: they were
bountiful to the poor, but we live only to our selves: they wrought of
intent to merit heaven, but we neither do good for merit, nor yet of charity
and duty: yea, we are come from blind zeal to wylfull wickedness, and
from superstition to no religion. For the world is now grown to this point,
that if a man of godly zeal and devotion, do accustom orderly to frequent
the Church, he is accounted an hypocrite. If he be given religiously to fast
and pray, he is taken for a Papist. And if he keep a good house for relief of
the poor, he is called a merit monger. Whereby fasting is despised, prayer
contemned, and alms deeds abhorred. Thus have we cast off the works of Simon
Peter, Simulata sanctitas duplex est iniquitas.
and are become in manners like Simon Magus, that walked with Phillip as a
disciple, yet wrought with money like a worldling. Achabs wife would never put
on demure apparel but when she spoke with the Prophets, Ipsius est meta-lupus
actu voce propheta
nor our dissembling Protestants be never holy but at Sermon times. They hear
and desire like Saints, but live and deserve like devils, they can look and
speak holily, whereby they seem glorious before men, but their works are
naught, and therefore odious in the sight of God, whose outward behauior is
much like clouds without rain, whereby God himself does mock such fruitles
shows. These hypocrites therefore are possessed with devils, thy sleep in
sin, and it is high time to awake them.

Though the observing of the Sabbath day, touching bodily rest, do belong to
the Ceremonial law, and shadows which had an end in Christ: being therefore
altered from Saturday do Sunday, Exodus 20. Mat. 12.12.
yet, as the Jews did celebrate theirs in remembrance of the creation of the
world: so ought we to observe and keep our Sabbath, in remembrance of the
resurrection of Christ, and as a figure to confirm our hope in the
resurrection of our own bodies, and our spiritual rest in glory to come, as
also for a comely and decent order to be used in the Church, that in resting
from bodily work, we may charitably assemble together, Luke 4.16.
to the end the Lord by the preaching of his word, may bring forth his work in
us, to his own glory and our salvation: but our Sabbath in many places, is so
vilely abused, as though it had been rather ordained to serve Bacchus and
Venus, the people being grown so careless, negligent, and licentious, to
feast when they should fast, play when they should pray, and laugh when they
should weep for their sins, Esaie. 56.2.3.
as though there were neither God nor devil, heaven nor hell*

As every honest nature has affection and good will to his native soil and
place of birth, so ought every good Christian to have a godly desire to the
soil of his regeneration, and place of his new birth by Baptism, which is the
temple of God, the school of Christ, and nurse of Christianity, to make open
confession of his sins, and rehearsal of his faith: to entreat for pardon,
pray for things necessary, Mat. 10.32. Mat. 21.23. Act. 2.42. Romans 10.14.
give thanks for benefits past, to celebrate the Sacraments, to hear and
learn his duty, and right way to salvation, to believe truly, live honestly,
and walk uprightly. If the ground yield not sap to the tree, it will soon
sear and wither away: if the lamp be not fed with oil, it must needs go
out: if any living thing be kept from nourishing, it cannot live: even so if
the faith of a Christian do not receive continual sap and moistnes of the
heavenly word, fed with the oil of sweet promises in Christ, and nourished
with the wholesome bread of life, it cannot continue, but consume and die. The
seed of the Gospel must still be sown in our hearts, or we cannot reap the
harvest of eternal life: where prophecy fails the people perish.

When the Lord of a manor appoints his tenants a day to come to his Court,
the rolls are laid open, the Stuard is ready prepared to give the charge, the
tenants are dutiful to come, attentive to hear, and diligent to execute their
Lords will: and if any shall chance to be absent, or come after the charge be
given, no doubt the Lord will be very angry, and set a fine upon his head: even
so the Lord of all Lords, of whom and at whose will we have received and do
hold all that ever we have, does every Sabbath day keep his court, at his
temple, Church, or house of prayer, his rolls the sacred Bible is laid open,
the Stuard or Minister is ready to give the charge and tell every man his duty:
and if any of his tenants or people be absent and refuse to come, no doubt the
Lord himself will be angry, or if they come after the charge, when service or
sermon is done, they were as good not come at all: Again, such a dutiful
tenant as desire to stand in his Lords favor, will now and then prepare and
bring him a present, such as he knows his Lord loves: but no present is more
precious in the sight of our heavenly Lord, than the prayers and thanks of an
humble penitent heart, and therefore he that will please him and stand in his
favor, must often feed his appetite with such presents. The Papists of a blind
zeal, in time of darkness, would not stick to rise up at midnight to public
prayer, fast with bread and water, suffer hunger and cold, run some times an
hundred mile bare footed and bare legged, to seek a dumb image: but our
professed Protestants having the true light of the Gospel, their prayer and
devotion is faint and cold as ise, and their disobedience greater than their
fathers ignorance. When they come together, it is rather of compulsion,
custom, or fashion sake, than of any godly zeal: much like a sullen, stubborn
and froward servant, that when his master calls him, comes grudging with a
sour moiling countenance, mumbling a dogs pater noster, and with less
reverence than those threehalfepeny servants that Esop hired, to hear him
recite his fables.

1. Cor. 11.
The Apostle S. Paul says, that forasmuch as man is the image of Gods glory, he
ought not in time of prophesying or prayers, Phil. 2.10. Esaias. 45. In receiving
the communion we pray and give thanks ergo the etc. Dan. 6. Ephe. 3.14. Luke
22.41.
to cover or dishonor his head: and in another place: At the name of Jesus
every knee shall bow: and the Prophet Esaias, Al knees shall bow unto me, says
the Lord. The meetest gesture and seemliest behauior at prayer and
thanksgiving, is kneeling: so prayed Daniel, Paul, and Christ himself: but our
people are grown so stubborn, wilful, and wayward, that in stead of
humility and reverence, they fall to kick at their duty, think scorn to
uncover their heads in time of sermon or service, for hurting their cappes. Or
to kneel at the name of Jesus for wresting their joints. Or look up to heaven
when they pray, for wrinkling their ruffes. These people are therefore possessed
with devils, they sleep in sin, and it is high time to awake them.

In times past, he that had learned the seven liberal arts as Grammar the key
of knowledge, Logike the rules of reason, Rethorike the mother of eloquence,
Music the sweet recreation of wearied minds, Astronomy the secret knowledge
of nature and course of the heavens, Arithmetike the art of numbering, and
Geometry to work by rule, compass, weight, and measure, he had obtained and
gotten even a world of wealth and treasure. But in these our wretched daeis,
the eight liberal science called Ars adulandi, the golden art of flattery,
has won the gole, and sits in fortunes lap, so that without skill in that
art, though never so well seen in the rest, a man shall hardly find means to
shift in the world. Qui nescit simulare, nescit viuere: These flattering
clawbacks, students of brazen face college, are no doubt, a most dangerous and
contagious kind of vermin, as intolerable amongst men, as wolves amongst
lambs: Ravens ease not men till they be dead, but these smooth glozing
Arch-parasites, with two faces in one hood, like Ianus, True simple meaning
asks Gods blessing, and duble dealing double punishment.
two tongs in a head like Judas, and two hearts in a breast like Magus, do daily
eat men quick, and become so familiar with the superior sort, that they bring
to pass even what they list, so as the world seems to be divided between
the secret dissembler, and the open blasphemer. These parasites are therefore
possessed with some great captain devil, they sleep in sin: the Lord of his
mercy convert them, least they perish themselves, or of his justice confound
them, for infecting of others.

This land is also most vildely corrupted with intolerable pride, with such a
confused mingle mangle, and variety of apish toys in apparel, every day
flaunting in new fashions, to deforme Gods workmanship in their bodies, as
great monstrous ruffes starched in the devils licour, and set with instruments
of vanity, doublets with great burssen bellies, M. St.
as though their guts were ready to fall out, some guarded like French men, some
fringed like Venetians, French nets do catch English fools. Wis. 3.
some their heads Turkish, their backs Spanish, and their wastes Italian: some
their hair curled, and their beardes writhen to make them look grimme and
terrible, as though they had seen the devil, with long daggers at their
backs, to kill every one they meet prouder than themselves, with such riotous
excess and vain curiosity, that I think they have made a league with Satan,
a covenant with hell, and an obligation with the devil to marry his eldest
daughter: they sleep in sin, and are as easy to be waked or reformed, as
the old world was at the preaching of Noe, or the latter age at the preaching
of Christ. Pride is the mother of hypocrisy, the enemy of devotion, the
nursse of envy, and the fountain of all vice: sin was the cause why God did
first give us apparel, not as badges of pride to feed the eyes of vain
gazing fools, Chrysostom.
but to cover our shame and keep us from cold: Quid superbis terra and cinis,
quid vest nitida gloriaris, subter te sternitur tinea, and operimentum tuum
erunt vermes, haec tua vestis erit.

Again, our Country is most horribly choked and ouergrowne with multitudes
of dronken tospots, vile lecherous whooremongers, and filthy intising drabs,
which vices do so greatly offend both the majesty of God, the law of nature,
and the common wealth, that if the very stones in the street could speak,
they would cry out upon it. Yet by means of greasing, bribing, and corrupting
of officers put in trust to punish them, it is no more accounted of, but a
sport or game to laugh at, as though heaven and hell were nothing else but
old wives fables to fear and flatter children withal. These are (no doubt)
possessed with devils, they sleep in sin, and it is high time to awake them.

If filthy whooremaisters would weigh with themselves, how God does know the
very secrets of the heart, Luke. 16.
and that of his justice he will leave no sin unpunished, either in this world,
or in the world to come, they would surely be afraid to do that in his sight,
which is so shameful, loathsome, and odious to be done in the presence of an
honest earthly man. It is a thing most filthy and against nature, that a
professed Christian, an adopted child of God, Romans 8.15. 1. Cor. 6.15.19. Luke.
22.24. John. 19.34.
a member of Christ, and temple of the holy ghost, redeemed with no less
price, than by shedding the very heart blood of the dear and only beloved son
of God, should take that same body and member of Christ, and make it ye member
of an harlot. S. Gregory compares lechery to a fiery furnace, Gregory.
whereof the mouth is gluttony, ye flame, pride, ye sparkles filthy words, the
smoke an evil name, the ashes poverty, and the end, shame and confusion: at
the last (says Solomon) it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an Adder.
Prou. 13.
Whoordome, besides ye infamy of the world, it wastes ye goods, withers ye
body, decaieth ye health, shortneth the life, and makes a man stink in the
sight of God.

The vice of drunkenness in like manner consumes the wealth, surfets the
body, dulleth the wit, dimmeth the understanding, troubles the senses, and
without repentance, brings both body and soul into hell: And therefore if
either the fear of God, the shame of the world, the desire to be in their
right wits, to live in health of body, or to escape the miserable state of
beggerie may move them to repentance and amendment, it is now time to awake,
detest and avoid such horrible wickedness which do justly merit a short life
and a shameful death.

There was never more sincere preaching, nor so little following, so great
persuasions to honesty and virtue, and so many given over to vice and
naughtiness: so much exhortation to love and charity, and so many stuffed
with hatred and envy. We greatly complain of the unfruitfulness of the earth,
the corruption of the air, the vnconstantnesse of the world, and time that
slips so fast away, but we complain not against our own selves, for whose
sinful lives the very heavens do weep: we profess to be the followers of
Christ, yet in Christian behauior much inferior to ye heathen Ethnicks, that
knew not God, who passed us as far in good living. as we pass them in good
learning: we greatly delight to bear the name of Abraham's children, yet not so
willing to kill one wicked affection yt offe^deth God, as Abraham was at his
commandment, John 8.39. Gene. 22.
to kill his only beloved son. It is said that the Castor and the Elephant
being hu^ted, the one for the virtue of his genitors, the other for his tooth:
the Castor biteth off his genitors, and the Elephant finds a mean to wrest
out his tooth, and cast them away to save their bodies: but our people had
rather both preacher and pulpit were set on a fire, then they would cast away
their filthy vices to save both body and soul. The seaman knows his tide,
Ier. 8.
the Swallow her time, and the Crane her season: but our people are senseless:
the tempestuous winds, Mat. 8.27. Mar. 12.7.
the waves of the sea, and the very devils themselves did hear and obey his
word, but they sleep so soundly in sin, that neither the infamy and shame of
the world can move them, nor al gentle admonitions allure them, nor the
terrible threatenings of hell torments once fear them, nor the filthiness of
sin that seemed so odious to the very infidels withdraw them, nor the
continual preaching of all creatures under heaven persuade them to repent and
amend: Saint Anthony being a man unlearned, had no other books but these, and
he that can behold these excellent books, setting forth the wisdom and
goodness of almighty God, without praising and glorifying his name, is worse
then a bruit beast.

The Sun, Moon, and Stars, by whose heat and light the whole world is
nourished and governed, Psalm. 19.
do daily preach unto us: The beauty of the heavens, the wholsomenesse of the
air, and the plentifulnesse of the earth do daily teach us: the pleasant
valleies, delightful springs, and rich mines of treasures, Psalm. 107
do daily instruct us: the goodly fruitful trees, medicinable herbs, Mat. 6
and sweet fragrant flowers, more gloriously attyred then Solomon in all his
royalty, do daily admonish us: Job. 12
ask the beasts of the field, the fishes of the Sea, and the fowls of the
air, and they will tell thee and say, we were all created and ordained for the
use and profit of man: Yea our Savior Christ himself calls daily upon us,
Young man arise, Damsel arise, Lazarus come forth, dead sinner awake, but their
ears are deaf, their minds obstinate, and their senses without feeling.
Seeing the^ that God has knocked at the door of our consciences by so many
and sundry means, and of his mercy has tarried waiting so long for
amendment, it cannot be but great vengeance must needs follow. Heinous sins
do call down grievous plagues, every kingdom divided within it self (says
our Savior Christ) shall be desolate: Mat. 12.25
but England, by sects, factions, heresies and schisms, is divided it it
self: the Lord of his mercy defend it from that which follows. If God so
sharply punished one sin in Adam and the Angels, Judas.
what may we that have committed such a multitude of sins look for? If we
shall yield an account for every idle word, what reckoning shall we make for
such horrible offenses both in words and actions? Mat. 12.36
God is said to have feet of lead, but hands of iron, he comes slowly, but
when he comes he pays home: as one man smiting another, the higher he
lifts up his hand, the greater is the stroke: even so the longer that God
tarrieth looking for amendment, the greater will his punishment be when it
comes. If we will not glorify his name in repenting and turning unto him, he
will glorify himself in revenging and heaping plagues upon us. He is the God
of judgment and Lord of revenge, Ier. 51. Psalm. 18.
at whose word the very heavens do tremble, the earth does quake, and the
mountains shake: he is a wise and righteous Judge, Psalm. 7. Romans 8.27. Gal.
6.7. John. 5.30. Psalm. 19. 2. Cor. 1.20.
he searches the very secrets of the heart and reins, he will not be mocked
nor deceived, neither will excuses go for payment in his sight: he is
righteous and just in all his dealings, faithful and true of his promise, his
word is always most certain and sure, yea and Amen: that except we repent, we
shall all perish in our sins: those that refuse his mercy so lovingly offered,
Luke. 13.3.
shall surely feel his justice.

To fall into sin, comes of human weakness, but to lie still and sleep
in sin, after so much teaching by his creatures, his word, his writings, his
Preachers, and his own example, is proper only to the waywarde impes of
Satan. Sodom and Gomorre, Tire and Sidon, Mat. 10.15. Mat. 11.21. Luke. 11.
the Ninevites and Queen of the South, shall rise up at the last day and
condemn this generation: for if the doctrine and miracles, which have been
showed amongst these, had been done amongst them, they had long since repented
in sackecloth and ashes.

Though I be earnest, bear with me, I touch not those that be good, and say
too little to such as be naught: I appeal to God who knows these things to
be true, and to the world, who cannot for shame deny them. And if I have
said nothing but the truth, then blame not me, but go about your own
amendment: for seeing that all flesh have so corrupted the Lords way, Genesis 6.
Deuteronomy. 13.
and that such abomination is wrought amongst men, and the measure of
iniquity heaped so full, it must needs follow, that the judgments of God are
not far off. No doubt, his bow is ready bent, the arrows of his vengeance
are drawn to the head, his fire is kindled, Psalm. 7. 1. These. 1.7.8.
and his wrath is gone out, and ready to be powered upon the contemners of his
law, and therefore high time to awake from sin.

When David killed Vrias, 2. King. 11.
and committed adultery with his wife, he slept in sin, but being awaked by
Natha^ the prophet, he repented earnestly: when Mary Magdalen was possessed
with seven devils, Mark 16.9
she slept in sin, but being waked by hearing the sound of Chrstis Gospel,
Luke. 7.37.38
she lamented pitifully: when Peter forsware his master, he slept in sin, but
being wakened at the crowing of a little cock, Mat. 14.71.72
he went out and wept bitterly.

It is a common usage in cities and great towns, to awake the people from
sleep, and give them knowledge that night is welnigh gone, and the day at hand,
either by playing of waits, ringing of bells, sounding of trumpets, or singing
of Psalms: and in country villages, the Cock is a necessary bird for the same
purpose: Mar. 11.17 Esaias. 58. Eccle. 33.
even so the Preachers of the word, as Waits they have played unto you, as
trumpets they have sou^ded out the word of life unto you, as Belles they have
rung out his heavenly will unto you, as Psalmistes they have sung his wondrous
works unto you, and as Cocks they have crowed and warned you to prepare your
selves, forasmuch as ye night or time of darkness is welnigh spent, and the
day of salvation at hand. And as a little after midnight the Cock does crow a
little while and then cease: about three of the clock somewhat longer: and
when it draws near day, very long and thick, even so in the time of king
Henry the eight our English Cocks began to crow a little, and afterward in King
Edwards days somewhat longer: but now in her Majesty's happy reign, they have
crowed above thirty years together: and now to warn you, that the night is
past, and the day is even at hand, they crow thick, thick, and therefore it is
time now or else never to awake from sin, and cast away the deeds of
darkness. Whiles the husbandman slept, the enemy came and sowed tares amongst
the wheat: Mat. 15.2^
while the foolish Virgins slept without Oil in their lamps, the bridegroom
came and shut them out from the wedding: Mat. 25.10 Luke 12.40. Mar. 13.33
for as much therefore as we know not when the master of the house will come,
let us awake up and watch, least he find us sleeping: behold I come as a
thief (says the Lord) happy is he that watches and keeps his garments of
faith and charity, 1. These. 5.2 2. Pet. 3.10 Apoc. 16.15. 1. Cor. 16.13 Phil.
4.5.
lest he walk naked, and men see his filthiness: watch (says the Apostle)
stand fast in faith, be strong, continue in prayer, and quit your selves like
men, for the time is at hand.

Some learned men by certain conjectures have painted out the time and season
of the last judgment: 2. Pet. 3
alleging the Oracle of Elias yt the world should stand two thousand years
before the law, two thousand in the law, and two thousand in the time of grace:
and out of saint Peter, a thosand years with God, is but as one day, and one
day as a thousand years. And as in six days the Lord made the world, and
rested the seventh day, so within the compass of six thousand years he will
gather his Church by the ministry of his word, and the seventh keep holy his
everlasting Sabbath. Again that Henoch and Elias, the one in generation, the
other in computation in years, being the seventh from Adam, the first in not
tasting of temporal death, as ye other six fathers before him, Genis. 5. Heb.
11.5.
was a figure of the last day, the second being taken up in a fiery chariote,
did prefigure the ascension of the elect, meeting their Redeemer in the
clouds. Hereupon they conclude, 4 Kings. 2. 1. These. 4.17.
that the world shall not stand above six thousand years. And to prove it
shall not stand so long, they allege the saying of our Savior Christ, that
for the elects sake the days of our affliction shall be shortened: again where
the Angel Vriell answered Esdras about three thousand and five hundred years
after the creation of the world, Mat. 24.22. Mark 13.20. 4. Esdras. 4.
that the time past was much more then the time to come: and where it was
prescribed in the law, that about the evening of the sixth day the Sabbath
should begin. Leuit. 23.
And as the Israelites were delivered from bandage by Moses in the sixth year,
so shall the Christians be delivered from their wearisom bondage of this wicked
world by Christ in the six age. Then come they to aim at a certain year
comparing the time from the birth of our Savior Christ unto his passion, being
three and thirty years, with the time that Luther and other godly men began
to preach the Gospel, till the great persecution of the members of Christ in
Germany, by the Pope and Charles the fifth, being the like quantity of years.
And the time from his passion until the destruction of Jerusalem, a figure of
the end of the world being forty years, with the time from the said
persecution, till the year of grace 1588. the like quantity of forty years.
They note moreover, that in every 7. and 9. year of man's life called
Climacterian years do happen great alterations and dangers, diverse famous men
have ended their lives in the same: as Luther, Melancthon, Munster, and Peter
Martyr, with diverse others: so have there happened in every seventh age of the
world great alterations and changes, and in the said year 1588. the age of
the world being divided by seven, makes just seven times nine, or nine times
seven. Again after seven times seven, Leuit. 25.
was always the year of Iubile, hereunto agrees an old Prophecy recited by
Melancthon, and translated out of Germanicall rhyme into Latin by Cyprian, and
after Englished as follows:

When after Christ's birth there be expired,
Of hundreths 15. years, eighty and eight:
Then comes the time of dangers to be feared,
And all mankind with dangers it shall fright.
For if the world in that year do not fall,
If sea and land then perish ne decay:
Yet Empires all, and kingdoms alter shall,
And man to ease himself, shall find no way.
But leaving these learned men with their learned conjectures, 2. Pet. 3.3.4.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the father has put in
his own power. Mar. 13.32. 2. Pet. 3.10. Luke 17.26.27.28. Mat. 24.37.38. Genesis
7. Genesis 19.
whose judgments are yet more tolerable then those mockers which S. Peter
speaks of, who shall come in the latter days and say, where is the promise
of his coming? for since the fathers died, all things continue in the same
estate wherein they were at the beginning: and let us content our selves with
the words of our savior Christ, of that day and hour knows no man, no not
the Angels in heaven, nor yet the son himself, save the father only: the
day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, and as it was in the days of
Noe and Lot, so shall it be in the day when the son of man will come, they
eat, drank, married and were married, and the flood and the fire came and
destroyed them all. Yet our loving Redeemer of a singular affection to comfort
his poor afflicted members has forewarned us of certain signs and tokens
which should appear before his coming, by the course whereof we may easily
conjecture the events following, 2. These. 2.3. Math. 24.
as the coming of Antichrist and his false prophets, rumors of wars, hungers
and pestilence, persecutions and troubles abounding of wickedness, eclips of
Sun, and Moon, Luke. 17.
and the universal preaching of the Gospel, and left us an example of the
fig tree, which beginning to bud, do manifestly show that summer is near.
And as beholding a man whose eyes wax dim, his ears deaf, his head bald,
Mar. 23.28.29
his face wrinckled, his hair white and hoarie, his back crooked, his legs
twofold under him, his tongue to falter, his teeth to fall out of his head, his
blood to be cold, and his body feeble and sickely, which are all incident to
human nature: they be evident tokens to show that the end of his natural
life is at hand. Even so when we see these signs aforesaid come to pass, they
do most certainly premonish and forewarne all the people upon the earth, whom
the ends of the world are come upon, that the day of the Lord is not far
behind.

That Antichrist is revealed, and all these signs and tokens past already,
all christendom have felt the smart thereof, and our present age can witness.
So many authors of sects, and brochers of deuilish heresies, were never heard
of before in any age from the beginning: who has not either felt or heard what
rumors of wars, vprores and blood shed in all lands? For hunger and famine,
Samaria, Jerusalem and Sanxurie with a number of other places, where through
extremity, they have been driven to eat, not only venomous beasts and their
own ordure, but also their own children, can testify.

Again, who has not read or hard what wonderful strange eclips of sun and
moon, terrible blazing stars, glistering comets dreadful coniunctio^s of
planets, strange flashing of fire in the elements, and alteration of the
heavens, resembling as it were, the countenance of the angry Judge? What raging
and swelling of the floods, fearful trembling and quaking of ye earth,
horrible tempests, vehement winds, and unseasonable wether, what loathsome
monsters and other prodigious sights, contrary to ye course of nature, so as it
seems that al ye creatures of God are angry and threaten our destruction. All
which, no doubt, are Gods Heralds of arms to show unto the world, that himself
is not far behind. Again, the universal preaching of the Gospel in spite
of Antichrist and his cursed crew, so as no Nation can justly excuse it self,
and say they have not heard the sound thereof. And yet notwithstanding, such
grievous abounding of all wickedness, that if the Lord should not come quickly
no flesh should be saved: Mark. 13.20.
again the earth it self waxes weak and feeble for age, and therefore not
so fruitful as in times past: plants and herbs have less virtue. Again the
years do change their natural course, every year brings forth new
tidings, every living creature lives shorter time then heretofore, this is
called aetas decrepita, and therefore even by course of nature it must needs
be that the day of the Lord is at hand, Act. 1.11.
that our Redeemer is even ready coming to judge the earth, to keep his
general Parliament of reformation: to search Jerusalem throughout with candle
light, Apoc. 6.10. Psalm. 94. last verse. Math. 25.31. Math. 24.30 Apoc. 1.7. 1.
These. 4.16. 1. Cor. 15.52. Esaias. 51. Esaias. 65. Apoc. 6.14. Psalm. 50. Joshua. 6.
Heb. 11.31. Iam. 2.25.
to revenge the blood of his servants, recompense their enemies as they have
served them, and reward the^ according to their wickedness. He comes
triumphing in majesty and honor, accompanied with Angels, Archangels, and
all the hosts of heaven: he comes with the voice of a fearful trumpet, at
whose terrible sound the very heavens shall m^oue, the seas shall roar, the
clouds shall rent, and the earth shall tremble and quake: a consuming fire
shall go before him, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him:
when great Jericho shall be cast down with the blast of Iosuaes trumpets when
none shall escape safe but the house or Rahab the harlot, which received the
messengers (that is to say) those penitent sinners which obediently receive the
message of the Gospel, Math. 24.31. Apoc. 20.13.14.15.
when all souls shall be joined to their bodies, and gathered from the four
corners of the world, to receive just reward celestial or infernal: when
every one shall be called to yield account of his talent, how he has employed
his wealth, wisdom, strength, or beauty, to the benefit and profit of his
brethren, how he has ruled his affections, Mat. 25.32. 1. These. 4.17. Math.
13.39.
mortified his appetites, and behaved himself in his calling. When his
obedient children shall be divided from the wicked reprobates, and go meet
their loving redeemer in the clouds, Math. 25.34.
of whom they shall hear that joyful sentence pronounced with a cheerful
countenance, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from before the foundation of the world was laid: when the wicked shall
hear that dreadful sentence pronounced of their angry Judge, depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: Math.
25.41 Romans 9.28.
when they shall see and feel without them the world burning with fire,
within them the worm of conscience ever gnawing, above them their unappeasable
Judge condemning them, beneath them, the horrible confusion of hell torments,
prepared to devour them, on their right hand their sins accusing them, on
their left hand the cruel enemy ready to execute Gods eternal sentence
against them: then will they confess (but too late) that the Judgments of God
are true, and say, Mat. 7.22.23 Wisd. 5. Luke 13.25.28. Apoc. 6.16. Ozeas 10.
Luke 23.30 Psalm. 11. Mat. 25.
did not we hear of this? then will they cry unto the Lord, but he will not
hear them, and desire the mountains to fall upon them, but all in vain, they
will not do them so much pleasure, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest,
this shall be their portion to drink, there shall be weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth, whose doleful and lamentable shrikes, horrible grievous
groans, deep hollow sighs, terrible loathsome looks, sorrowful mourning
complaints, sad melancholy thoughts, and heavy pensive conceits, no tongue is
able to express, Esaias 65.
for they go to fry in perpetual torments wiithout remission, and utter
confusion without redemption: The dreadful place appointed for the execution of
Gods vengeance, has diverse names in the holy Scriptures, most terrible to our
senses, tending all to express unto us the grieuousnesse of punishment, as
horrible darkness, Mat. 8.12. Mar. 9.44. 2. Pet. 2.4. Apoc. 9.2.
unquenchable fire, insatiable hunger, and the gnawing of a worm: to signify
the miserable oppression and hurling down, it is called Infernus, a dungeon of
Gods wrath, or bottomless pit: to signify the intolerable pain without
ceasing or end, it is compared to a burning lake, Apoc. 19.20 Esaias. 30.
the burning whereof is fire and much wood, and the vreath of the Lord as a
river of fire and brimstone, does kindle it: it is also called Gehenna of Ge
and hinnum, which signifies a vallie, nigh unto Jerusalem, wherein was a
Chapel wherein the Idolatrous Jews did offer and sacrifice their children
unto a brazen Image called Moloch, Ierem. 7. g. Ierem. 32. f.
which being made hot enclosed them in the hollownes thereof, and so slew them,
and lest their shriking should moon any to pity them, they made an hideous
noise, with tabrets and drums: whereupon the place was called Tophet, Psalm. 2.
Mat. 25.46. 1. These. 4.17. Daniel. 12. a. 1 Timothy 5.17.
thus will the Lord speak to his enemies in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure, when his faithful obedient children shall pass the Imperial
heavens, with their loving redeemer to joy in felicity for ever with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, with all the number of godly Patriarks, the goodly fellowship
of the Prophets, the glorious company of the Apostles, the noble army of
Martyrs, with Angels, Archangels, and all the joyful troops of heavenly powers.

The joys of heaven are pleasant joys, our eyes cannot see them, our ears
cannot hear them, our hearts cannot conceive them, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor our tongues express them: as if a man should promise his horses a good
banquet, 1. Cor. 2.14.
they could imagine no other but prouender and water to be their best cheer,
because they know no daintier dishes: even so the natuall man accustomed to the
puddle of fleshly pleasure, his mind can mount no higher, to perceive,
discern, or understand the things that be of God, Math. 2.11. Apoc. 22.
so as the joyful plaeasures of heaven are hidden from his senses. But seeing
the wise men that came so far from the East, did joy so much to see Christ in
the poor manger, it must needs be much more joyful to see him in his state of
glory. Seeing our vile corruptible bodies receive of his goodness so many
benefits and pleasures to abreuiate our weariness in this wretched vale of
misery, where every of his creatures do serve us in their kind, no doubt our
heavenly palace, where we shall see him face to face, contains marvelous
great and joyful pleasures. 1. Cor. 13.12.
Seeing we receive so many comfortable blessings in the day of sorrow and
mourning, much greater shall our pleasures be in the joyful day of marriage.
Seeing the prison and painful pilgrimage contain such things, much more shall
we find in our heavenly paradise, when we shall depart from pain and misery,
John. 16.20. Apoc. 21.4. Apoc. 7.16.17
to joy and felicity, when death, sorrow and grief shall be clean taken
away, and all tears wiped from our eyes. If a seely poor man wandering alone
upon the mountains out of his way, in the midst of a dark tempestuous night,
void of company, destitute of money, beaten with rain, terrified with
thunder, wearied with travel, striffe with cold, famished with hunger, and
wrapped in all kind of misery, should presently upon a sudden, be placed in a
goodly rich palace, with clear light, warm fire, sweet smells, soft beds,
dainty meats, pleasant company, and delightful Music to comfort and cheer
him, who could express the sudden joy of that poor miserable wretch, yet is
it nothing in comparison of those unspeakable joys prepared for Gods elect
children in his heavenly paradise, where is no serpent to tempt us any more,
but glory without comparison, riches without measure, day without night, life
without death, liberty without thraldom, solace without cessing, and joy
without ending: to which kingdom the eternal God, the father, the son, and
the holy Ghost, bring us.

A prayer.
Help Lord, for there is not one godly man left, the faithful are minished
from amongst the children of men, they do but flatter with their lips, and
dissemble in their double hearts, they are become abominable in their doings,
there is no fear of God before their eyes, the Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his masters cribbe, but our people will not know the judgments of the
highest. The Turtle, the Storke and the Swallow, do know their appointed
seasons, but this people is without understanding. Oh Lord how wicked are these
our days? if the very Turks and Infidels had heard the preaching, and seen
the wonders that we have done, they had long ere this repented and amended
their lives to our confusion: Oh Lord, we hear much with our ears, but our
hearts remain still as hard as flint stones, we rather feed our fancy, than
our faith: Lord convert and amend us, create in us new and contrite hearts,
adorn our eyes with the tears of true repentance, and give us grace in some
measure to frame our lives according to thy heavenly will, that by the course
which thou have appointed for us in this vale of misery, we may yet at the
end, come to live with thee in felicity for ever, through Jesus Christ our
only Savior and Redeemer, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three
distinct persons, and one eternal God, be all honor, glory, praise, and
thanks, for evermore, Amen.

A Pattern for Pastors.
THe office of a Preacher is a dignity of great reverence, honor and
estimation. The holy Ghost does call them the Angels of the Lord of hosts,
Apoc. 2.8.12 1. Cor. 4.1.
dispensors of his secrets, Stewards of his household, and fellow workers with
Christ himself, Ioh. 15.15. Ezec. 33.
Gods Trumpetters to sound out his word through the world, whose tongues are
consecrated to instruct the ignorant, comfort the weak, edify the simple,
Ephe. 4.12 Titus 1. Mat. 16.19 Apoc. 1. Leuit. 21.
defend the truth, confute heresies, suppress vice and convert sinners unto
Christ. A calling meet for the best part of men, such as are endued with
comely personage, a grave countenance, a bold spirit, and a manly courage, a
good virtuous nature, and civil behavior, a learned mind, and a fruitful
tongue. The priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mal. 2^
that the people may seek the law at his mouth: about the skirts of Arons
Ephod were hanged golden belles, always sounding, Exodus 28.
to signify that preachers must be apt, and able to sound out the word of
truth. He must be no green plant, but hard timber well seasoned with
knowledge and experience, 1. Tim. 3.6.
to instruct and teach soundly, profound arguments and reasons, to persuade and
dissuade pithily, art and eloquence to stir up and delight pleasantly,
discretion and modesty to order and govern politikely, not only apt to
flourish in a Pulpet, but able also to play his quarter strokes, and defend
his head Christ, especially in these our dangerous days, when Satan is so
busy is sowing of sects and heresies. He must therefore be well furnished with
canonical authorities, pithie sayings, apt similies, fit comparisons, familiar
examples, and pretty histories meet both for comfortation, persuasion and
delectation: for the multitude, as Horace says, is like a monstrous beast with
many heads, and like diversity of natures, and commonly the most part
ignorant and foolish, who, though the doctrine be never so wholesome, yet
without variety are soon dulled and wearied, so greatly is the nature of man
delighted with novelties, that without change and variety, nothing seems
pleasant to his lothsom appetite. One kind of music, though never so sweet,
yet without variety it is lothsom to ye ears. One kind of meat, though never
so dainty, yet without variety gluttish to the taste, and one kind of
matter, though never so well framed, yet without variety seems tedious to
the hearers, And for that cause were figures first invented, to refresh the
audience with pleasure: and to this end serves Metaphors, fables and wise
sayings of Poets and Philosophers, which being rightly understood in sense and
allegory, and aptly applied in time and place convenient, contain very
profitable lessons, to instruct unto virtue and godliness, and as it were to
spoil the Egyptians of their jewels: and so are the arts of Logic and
Rethorick very necessary handmaides to divinity, Exodus 1^.
wherein are five things requisite, as well in a Preacher, as in an Orator. The
first, invention to find out meet arguments and reasons, to prove and
confirm every matter, whereupon question may arise. The second, disposition,
to frame and dispose the matter in right order. The third, Eloeutio^, to adorn
and beautify the same with apt words and picked sentences. The fourth, a good
memory, to preserve and keep such things as the wit has conceived. The fifth
pronunciation, which is a moderate and seemly behavior, both of voice,
gesture and countenance, with a comely motion of the body, and exactness of
speech, so as the words do agree with the matter, and the gesture with the
mind, whereby the he arers are as much moved and delighted, as with doctrine
it self. Demosthenes being asked what was the first, second, and third, points
of an Orator: answered pronunciation: meaning that art without utterance is to
small purpose. Some speak shrill, short and thick, every word tumbling over
in another neck, much like the cackeling of Jack dawes. Some are so fine and
curious, as though every word should be waighed in a balance. Some whewle and
pipe so small, as though it were a pigge whining for his breakefast. Some look
grimme and stearne with the Welchmans wagge, the Italian shrugge, and the
precisian Sneuill, as though he came to fray the audience. And some stand so
long about instructing the souls, as though they had forgotten the people had
any bodies, who do not so much edify as tedifie. Whereas a comely, grave and
moderate behavior in voice, gesture, and countenance, with a clean sensible
tongue, to deliver his words plainly, distinctly, and modestly, with
discretion to order the matter aptly, pithily and briefly, does best instruct,
soonest profit, and most edify.

A good Preacher also must be wise, circumspect and discreet in choosing the
seed most fit for the soil: remembering that as little children may not
always be fed with vinegar and sharp saulce, but rather with milk and sweet
pappe: so though sometime it be necessary to bruise and mollify the hard
stony affections of men's hearts, with the rigor of Gods fearful judgments:
yet rather to water them often with the sweet comfortable dew of his mercies
in Christ, according to the wise Physician, who tempereth his bitter medicines
with sweet sirops. He must not be high minded, wise in his own conceit, nor
curious in taking offense at every little trifle, Romans 12. 2. Tim. 2.24. 1.
Cor. 13. John 4.11. 2. Tim. 2.24.
but charitable in ^udging the best of all men, and patient in bearing the
infirmities of evil men, for common quiet sake: for from the beginning, the
Church was never either so ripe in knowledge, or purged in manners, but that
great imperfections remained. In the houses and families of godly Patriarchs
were always some wicked impes. Amongst eight persons in the arc with Noah,
was one naughty pack. Genesis 9.
Amongst the twelve chosen Apostles with Christ himself was one Judas: and
therefore, Mat. 26.
as if in Sodom there had been found but ten good men, the whole city, had
been saved for their sakes: so though some of their fellow ministers lack
grace to live as they ought, yet would charity rather bear with some badde,
Genesis 18. Malem multos nocentes condonare, quam vnum innocentem condemnare.
Wisd. 1. Romans 14. 1. Tim. 6.
because of the good, then openly to deface and discredit their brethren
because of some bad: The spirit of wisdom is loving and gentle. The Apostle S.
Paul would not have those that are endued with greater gifts to disdain their
brethren having lesser, neither an elder rebuked rigorously, nor accusation
received against him under 2, or 3 witnesses: But forasmuch as we are all
fellow servants, and none of us without his imperfections, Phil. 2.3.
he would have one to suffer and bear the weakness of another, one to help
and comfort another, that nothing be done through strife or vaineglory, but in
meekenes of mind, every one to esteem another better than himself: and
whereas we have diversity of gifts, 1. Cor. 12.
and difference of administrations, as every one has received the gift, so one
to minister to another, 1. Pet. 4.10. 2. These. 4.11. Gal. 6.
every one to meddle with his own business, knowing that every one shall
bear his own burden, and receive his reward according to his own labor:
he that stands, Romans 14. 1. Cor. 12. Romans 12. Mat. 25. Luke 12. Romans 1^.
to take heed least he fall: as for his brother, whether he stand or fall, that
pertains to his own master, who bestows not his gifts alike unto all men,
neither will he require ten talents, where he gave but one: to whom much is
given, of him shall much be required. Some are endued with wisdom, knowledge
and judgment, to discern truth from falsehood, home with utterance, memory
and boldness to instruct with stongue, some with godly devotion, christian
charity, and honest disposition to teach by example of life and conversation:
he that carries brick and mortar may be a mason, though not so expert as the
master of the building: he that diggeth ground, may be a good gardener,
though not so cunning as he that draws the knot: he that cutteth the timber
may be a good Carpenter, though not equal to him that contriueth the house:
Even so the meaner sort of ministers, being honest men, working in the Lords
vineyard in some measure, whether it be by writing, reading, or speaking
without book, may be good Preachers, though not so fit for the Pulpet as
those which are endued with greater gifts: and no doubt, their diligence in
doing their best, shall be accepted with the poor widows oblation. Though the
Fletcher want strength to draw the bow, yet is he a special mean to further
shooting: though the Smith want skill to hold the plough, yet is he a
necessary instrument to help forward the work: Luke 21.
though the whetstone can not cut of it self, yet is it needful to make
sharp the Sith: so, though some want the gift of memory and boldness to
instruct by preaching with tongue, yet may he be a profitable member in the
Church, by teaching with pen. Our God is loving and gentle, and takes in
good part the good will even of the poorest and simplest of his children:
pardons their imperfections, Exodus 35. Mar. 20.
accepts their obedience, and rewards them as liberally as the greater.

A good Preacher also must be careful to keep in credit the authority of his
office, Gal. 2. Ephe. 4.14. Hiperius.
not to vary in doctrine from his fellow laborers, neither to minister any
matter amongst the ignorant people that may breed contention or discord.
Finally, he must be a man of honest life and conversation: 1. Tim. 3. Titus. 12.
for none can effectually teach the way to die well, except himself be such
a one as lives well. The Priests of the old Law were chosen without
blemishe, Leuit 21.
to signify their lives without blame. The Apostle would have them well tried
to be honest men, and of good report, Tit. 2.7.8.
before they be admitted into that reverend function. He that will profit in
teaching, must labor with both hands, or else as fast as the one does gather,
the other does scatter: as the one does build up, the other does pull down:
he must have both Vrim and Thumim, knowledge and virtue, persuasion in words,
and example in deeds, to thunder in doctrine, and shine in life and manners.
Mat. 21.3. Act. 10.
True Christian religion consists not only in bare preaching and dumb
hearing, but rather in devout praying, virtuous living, and charitable working.
It is naturally grafted in man to speak holily, praise good sayings, and desire
rather to know much, that live well. Knowledge (no doubt) is a goodly gift, and
a great blessing of God: yet knowledge without virtue, or learning without good
living, are nothing else but as trees without fruit. At the last day we shall not
be demanded how much we have known, but how well we have lived. What avails
it a man to be able to define what faith and repentance is, Mat. 25.
not feelyng Gods holy spirit working faith and repentance in his heart: or to
tell a fair smooth tale in words, and yet stammer in his deeds, or to have all the Scriptures and witty sayings of Philosophers at your fingers ends, and yet
want grace to live accordingly? or how is he able to govern others, that has
no power to govern himself? Unto the ungodly, said God, Why do thou preach
my laws, or take my Testament in thy mouth, 1. Tim. 3.
whereas thou hate to be reformed: he that imploieth his tongue unto virtue,
and his deeds unto vice, Psalm. 50.
(...) carries treacle in one hand to resist death, Psalm. 50.
and poison in the other to take away life. A wicked liver though his tongue be
never so plausible, yet the infamy of his life decays all his doctrine and
other gifts whatsoever: for if one praise that he says, a number will blame
that he does. A teacher without virtue, is compared to a painted fire without
heat, or a fair vizor put on a deformed face: or the ship wrights that made
Noahes Arc to save others, yet perished in the flood themselves: or an Idiot
standing by the sea side, and seeing strangers pass by in danger of the
tide, crying unto them, away, away, the tide comes: who looking back, and
seeing the fool stand still, begin to say one to another, surely this fellow
does but jest, for if it were so dangerous as he says, he would certainly
make more have away himself. S. Ierom says, Ierom.
Maius est voluntatem, Domini facere, quam nosse. A virtuous liver though he
say little, yet is he a good preacher, a good pillar of Gods Church, and a right
Lay man's book, whose honest life is a seal to confirm his doctrine.

Gods building is compared to a stone wall, the Magistrates and ministers, unto
squared stones framed on each side, and the people unto little ones filling up
in the midst: and if any of the squared stones chance to slip down, a number
of the little ones will follow: even so, if the Magistrate, or teacher chance
to fall, the people will follow after by heaps, yea if the one do but limpe,
the other will halte right down, and therefore they especially must have their
rough knobs of vices hewn away, and be closely joined together with the mortar
of unity and concord, not only in respect of them selves, but also of the
common people, whose affections even by nature, do give more credit to their
eyes, then their ears, and be more aptly led by example then by persuasion:
and therefore more avails deeds without words, then words without deeds.
That good Emperor Alexander Seuerus, having sent for Origene to instruct him
in Christ's religion, would often say, that the concord, humility, patience and
charity which he saw amongst the christians did more move and stir him up,
to believe that Christ was the Son of God, then all Origens vehement and
learned perswations.

To conclude, a good preacher having a good living, must be a good housekeeper.
Peter was three times commanded to feed his flock, that is to say, Ioh. 21.
by the judgment of Saint Barnard, Barnard.
with sound doctrine, honest life, and good hospitality. When John Baptist
sent his Disciples unto Christ, to ask if it were he that should come, Mat. 11.
or that they should look for another: he bad them go again and tell John,
not only what doctrine they had heard, but also what works they had seen,
Mat. 14.16. Mar. ^.37. Luke. 3.11. Romans 12.13. 1. Pet 4.9. Heb. 13.2. Tobias.
4. Ioh. 6.26.
who did both feed the souls of his sheep with heavenly doctrine, and
example of virtuous living, and their bodies with material food of barley
loaves and fishes, which did more win the peoples hearts, then all his
wonderful miracles and divine Sermons which they saw and hard. A number in
these days do bear a great name of singular Preachers, with fine eloquent
tongues: but we find not those good old Parsons that were wont to preach in
the plural number, by example of good virtuous living and charitable
hospitality. The people do hear much, but the poor can not find their old
relief: saying Preachers are good, but doing Preachers are better, happy is
that parish where both hitteth in one man. But whosoever will mark it, shall
find that a mean learned Parson of an honest conversation, keeping a good
house in his parish, shall persuade and profit more in coming to one dinner,
then the best Doctor of divinity which keeps no house shall do by preaching
a dozen solemn Sermons. And that Gentleman who keeps a good house in the
country, shall be in better credit with the people for his liberality, then
the best Orator or lawier in England for all his eloquence. We see by daily
experience, that the Commons are not so loving, trusty, nor obedient to their
superiors, as they have been in times past: the chief cause whereof, (no
doubt) is this: whereas heretofore they have found good cheer to satisfy
their hunger, they find nothing now but fair houses, and fair words without
either care of their cause, or filling of their mawes. It is a true Proverb,
Where the gate of the Magistrate is shut against the subject, there the heart
of the subject is shut against the Magistrate.

Touching the younger sort of Ministers, it is a dangerous thing for them to be
ripe too soon, and presume to venture upon weighty causes: such self willed,
and self learned, become hurtful members in the Church. 3. King. 12.
Where wise men can keep moderation and order, such rash fools, through
ignorance fall often into errors. It is an old Proverb, the more fool the
more impudent: ignorance has always the boldest face: empty vessels make
loudst sound, and such as have least to say, are commonly most bold to speak:
none so forward as blind bayard. Unskillful Hipercian blushed not to trouble
Mercury with his rusticall dances, before whom cunning Orpheus was ashamed to
tune his harp: such arrogancy (no doubt) has bin a great hinderance unto
learning. Many might have come to wisdom, if they had not thought themselves
there already. There is a certain foresight, unto the which unripe years can
never come, til age bring discretion. Our judgments are but weak, our
appetites variable, our senses deceiuable. and our desires unprofitable: the
days of our life are short and evil, and the knowledge we learn in long time
imperfect, and full of errors: for as it is proper to God only not to err, so
it is naturally given unto man, seldom to hit the truth. And therefore young
men cannot be deep of judgment, because wisdom is gotten by experience, and
experience in long time. Truth is called the daughter of time, and time the
mother of truth: he is wise that can perceive his own ignorance. S. Bernard
allows better of him that humbly confesses his ignorance, Barnard.
than of him who proudly presumes of his knowledge: There is more hope in a
fool, then in him that is wise in his own conceit.
It is more tolerable (says D. Some, D. Some.
to open the Church door to a simple Minister, than the pulpit to a
presumptuous preacher: the ignorant are evil, the negligent worse, but the
impudent and hairbraind worst of all. S. Paul would take upon him, to know
nothing but Christ crucified, and his own infirmities. Prou. 26. 1. Cor. 2.
S. James would have men quick and ready to hear, James. 1.
but slow and circumspect to speak. S. Peter exhorts young men to deck
themselves with humility and lowlines of mind, Peter.
and to submit themselves to their elders: so says Jesus Syrach, go not from
the doctrine of thy elders: and in another place, Eccle. 6.
despise not the Sermons of such Elders as have understanding (says he) but
acquaint thy self with their wise sentences, for of them thou shall learn
wisdom: Eccle. 8.
the Prophet Esaias in his time thought it a thing intolerable, Esaias. 3.
for prickeared boys to presume against their elders, or persons of low degree
against the honorable. Wise Socrates confessed that all the time he had been
student in Athens, he had learned only this lesson, to know that he knew
nothing: who noting the heat and rashness of youth, affirmed it the greatest
virtue in a young man to acknowledge his own weakness, and to attempt nothing
too much: Pithagoras enjoined his scholars to five years silence, before they
should take upon them to teach others: Plato makes Sara the image of
divinity, and Agar the figure of humane sciences, as necessary handmayds,
wishing young men to dwell very long with Agar, before they venture upon Sara,
who will not be fruitful till riper years: a good tree is not known by the
leaves and blossoms in spring time, but the fruits being through ripe in
harvest: Christ himself remained thirty years in virtuous living, before he
began to publish his doctrine to the world: Luke 3.23.
so he that will be a fruitful teacher must first win the name of a good
virtuous liver. As deep waters seem not to run because of their stillness,
so when art and learning is planted in a good virtuous nature, he croudeth
not in to utter his stuff, til age bring experience, and such in time become
ancient grave Fathers of profound judgment, who having skill to discern,
cunning to instruct, and discretion to govern, are men only fit and meet for
such a reverend function and chargeable office, as a public Preacher is. It
were much better for the younger sort of Ministers to forbear the Pulpet, and
give themselves to distinct reading of the holy Scriptures and godly homilies,
and use catechizing, which is a very profitable kind of teaching, til age
bring discretion, and learn to prate less, and live better. Chitreus.
But they are so greatly delighted in hearing themselves speak, that they
disdain public reading of the holy Scriptures, and condemn it as a thing
intolerable, as though it belongs not to the preaching of the gospel, which is
nothing else but to teach and instruct the people in faith and good manners: and
whether it be done by writing, reading, or speaking without book, so they be
taught, the spirit of God does work effectually, as well by the one as the
other, though not in like measure: When S. Paul did write unto the Romans, no
doubt he preached unto them: when Esdras read Moses law unto the people, no
doubt he preached unto them: when Barucke read Ieremies sermons unto the
Israelites, no doubt he preached unto them: when Joshua read the whole law
before the congregation, no doubt he preached unto them. Moses had in every
City those that preached him (says the Evangelist) seeing he was read in the
Sinagogue every Sabbath day: the Apostle S. Paul exhorted Timothy to give
attendance, as well to reading as exhortation and doctrine, charged the
Thessalonians that his Epistle should be read unto all the brethren the
saints, 2. Esd. 8. Exodus 24. Deuteronomy. 31.4. King. 33. Baruk. 1. Ierem. 36. Joshua.
8. Act. 15.21.13.27, 1. Tim. 4.13 1. The. 5.27
and taught the Ephesians that by reading of his Epistle, they might know his
understanding in the ministry of Christ. Ephesians. 3.4.
Tertullian calls the reading of the Scriptures the feeding of our faith,
Tertullian.
the Evangelist says, they were written for our learning that we might believe
and live, Ioh. 20.
and are so plain and easy, (says the Psalmist) that they give light and
understanding even to the simple: Psalm. 119. Ioh. 1^.
wherein our Savior Christ has plainly revealed unto us his fathers will,
Apoc. 1.
and made h^s name manifest unto men: happy is he that reads (says he) and
those that hear and keep the prophecy of this book: 2. Cor. 4.
and if the holy scripures seem dark or hidden to any (says the Apostle) it
is only to those that are lost, who^ the God of this world has blinded: and I
think verily that a man's conscience is more moved, better edified, and
soundlier satisfied by the only words of the text distinctly read, then by
long tedious discourses of men's inventions, and more profited by reading of one
godly homely, wherein the truth is plainly opened and proved, and false
doctrine confuted, being well penned in good Method and order to help the
memory, then by a dozen of such verbal unlearned and contentious sermons, as
daily proceed from our young fantastical vpstarts, which by wreasti^^ (...)
and diminishing at their pleasure, do rather (...) malice and sedition in the
hearts of the hearers, then work any good effect. The word does not edify
the less because the eye of the speaker is turned down to the book, but
rather the book is a mean to keep his tongue within compass of truth, and
sure it were much better for the people to be but meanly fed with good
wholesome diet, then puffed up fat with meat infected with poison: course
household bread is more healthful then fine manchet mixed with gravel: as of
sound and godly knowledge with meekness, charity, and true devotion, I wish
they had more then they have, so were it better, that of such knowledge as
makes these hot talkers and contenders to swell so big, and seem so wise in
their own conceits, they had less then they have: they starve not for too
little, but rather surfeit with too much.

Touching our women preachers, I blush in their behalf, in calling to mind the
unshamefast boldness of that sex in this our crooked age: women are taught in
the holy scriptures, not to imitate their grandmother Eve in usurping the
office of teaching, neither the example of their sister Miriam, Genesis 3. Number.
12. Apoc. 2.20.
in grudging against Moses, neither such proud Iesabels as boldly dare usurp
the name of a Prophetisse to deceive the servants of God, neither such Idle
tatlers and busy bodies, 1. Tim. 5.13.
as wander about from house to house speking things which are not comely, whose
ears itching for novelties, 2. Tim. 4.^
do get them a heap of teachers, after their own lusts, ever learning, and
never able to come to the truth, having a similitude of godliness, 2. Tim.
3.5.7. 1. Pet. 3.3.
but have denied the power thereof, neither to prompe themselves in gorgious
attire like proud lecherous Venus, 1. Tim. 2.11.9 1. Cor. 14:^4.35. 1. King. 1.
Genesis 18. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Pet. 3. 1. Cor. 1.10.12.13.
or Helen of Troy, who were more honored for their beauty, then their
honesty, but in the fear of God to learn in silence with all submission, and
if they doubt of any thing, to ask their husbands at home, to deck
themselves with the modest sobriety of Anna, the humble obedience of Sara, and
the shamefast chastity of Susanna: not boldness in women, but blushing is the
right color of virtue.

Finally the Apostle exhorts to avoid strife and contention, and study to
be quiet and agree together, because we are brethren. Brethren by nature,
brethren by calling, and brethren by religion, having all one God to our
Father, one Catholic Church to our mother, Ephe. 44.5.16 Phil. 3.16. Genesis 13.
and one Jesus Christ to our redeemer, all branches of one vine, sheep of one
fold, and fellow servants of one house, all partakers of one baptism, one
faith, and one hope of salvation. Let us therefore say one to another, as
Abraham said to Lot, I pray thee let there be no strife between thee and me,
Psalm. 133.
neither between thy heardmen nor mine, for we are brethren. O how good and
pleasant a thing it is (says David) for brethren to dwell together in unity?
Ioh. 13.35.
by this shall all men know you to be my disciples, (says our savior) that
you love together as brethren. It is written how the mother of Seneca, seeing
two of her sons having their daggers drawn in their hands, the one ready to
slay the other, caught them both in her arms, and showed them her breasts, my
dear children (quoth she) what do you, behold my breasts that nursed you both,
you are brethren. Even so the Church of God, which has nursed you with her
breasts, and brought you up in the knowledge of the truth, most earnestly does
desire and beseech you with her tears, that as you will have her continue your
loving mother, you will be kind and gentle one to another, and live together
as brethren, agree together as children of one family, join together as stones
of one building, 1. Pet. 2.5. Ephe. 2.20. Ioh. 15.5. 1. Cor. 12. Mat. 20. Romans
15.6.
grow up togethe as imps of one stock: hold together as members of one body,
and one help to bear another burden, as fellow laborers of one work: that
with one heart, one will, and one voice, we may together praise, honor, and
glorify our loving redeemer for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

