THE CHRISTIAN JEWEL. OR, THE TREASVRE OF a Good Conscience. By WILLIAM
WORSHIP, Doctor of Divinity.

1. TIM. 1. 20. Having Faith, and a Good Conscience. Multi quaerunt Scientiam,
Pauci Conscientiam. Bern. in For. Hon. vit. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY,
for John Parker. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir FRANCIS BACON, Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, my very singular good Lord; All increase of true Honor, with the
glorious comforts of Grace.
THE Gospel (Right Honorable) is like the Book of Canticles; which begins
with a Kiss, and ends in Spices. The very sound of it imports Glad Tidings of
PEACE; without Romans 10. 15.
which, this Inch of time allotted, is but (...), a Dead kind of Life, as
Plato 1. De Repub.
speaks of a Guilty Conscience. Forwere a man The Darling of the World, with
Titus Vespasian; were he so replenished with all earthly good things, as that
no mortal creature durst wish the like, De Ciuit. Dei, l. 5. c. 25.
as S. Augustine speaks of Constantine the Great: yet if in this matchless
prosperity, he want the favor of GOD, and Tranquillity of mind; he is no
better than AElian. l. 1.
Xerxes Plane-Tree, which took no delight in it self, though it was richly
hung with Bracelets, Tablets, Spangles, Chains of Gold.

This Peace of GOD, so Phil. 4 7. Gal. 6. 16. Col. 3. 15.
much magnified in Scripture, is better known by feeling than Discourse; and
being the fairest Jewel under Heaven, is peculiarly given to the Elect, who
cherish the spark thereof, with works of Piety to GOD, and Equity to their
Neighbor.

Thus, in brief, has your Lordship the drift, and scope of this present
Endeavor.

Now that I, a Grasse-hopper (in respect of many learned) dare thus boldly, and
hoarcely sing in the eyes and hearing of Him, who is Magnus in Magnis, Primus
in Hieron. Ad Pammach:
Primis, (...) Heroum, is, (I confess) Piaculum: whereunto notwithstanding the
Nobleness of your Honors disposition (which is wont with Artaxerxes, to
AElian. l. 1.
take in worth Synaetas handful of water) the Correspondence of the Treatise
with that High place of Justice whereto God has advanced you; together with
the zeal of declaring my thankefulnes, and duty for so many Encouragements
vouchsafed from your Lordship, have, in a manner, instigated me.

Go on (most Noble Lord) to be a Sanctuary to Conscience; a Place of Refuge
to the Innocent, and Oppressed; and remember to serve that GOD with a faithful
heart, who so graciously has set you in the seat of your Renowned Father; and
go not only beyond Him, but Your Self too. And as hitherto your Lordship has
esteemed of Silver, as of Tin; and contemned the Wedge of Gold, which so many
great Idolaters do crouch to: so still, in this Exuberance of all things,
continue con^tant: Et nudum Christum, nudus sequere. Durum, Hieron.
Grande, Difficile; sed Magna sunt praemia.

Your Lordships most bounden, and dutiful Chaplain, William Worship.

THE AUTHOR TO HIS BOOK.
Poor Book (for all the JEWEL on thy brow)
Go, pass along; and Bellman-like awake
The Sybarite, that lives he cares not how,
And will no pleasure but in Pleasure take.
Who, while he leanes, has PINKES upon his eye,
And POPPIES on his bosom as he sits:
And streaking out his limbs, delights to lie
On Roses fair, and dainty Violits.
Bounce at his door; and if he ask, WHO IS THERE?
Tell him, A MESSENGER from CONSCIENCE:
He Will say, SHE IS HANGED: but then bid thou him fear
That Death him self: for if his skill in Fence
Shall ward the blow that fatal Land-trees lend,
Rather than fail, WAPPING may be his end.
The Contents of this Book.
CHAP. I. WHat Conscience is not. CHAP. II. What Conscience is: from the
Notation. CHAP. III. What Conscience is: from the Definition. CHAP. IIII. Of
the Offices of Conscience; and first, that it is an Arbitrator. CHAP. V. That
Conscience is a Conuincer. CHAP. VI. That Conscience is an Espiall. CHAP. VII.
That Conscience is a Peacher. CHAP. VIII. That Conscience is a Monitor. CHAP.
IX. That Conscience is a Schoolmasters. CHAP. X. That Conscience is a
Domestical Chaplain. CHAP. XI. That Conscience is a Prognosticator. CHAP.
XII. That Conscience is a Register. CHAP. XIII. That Conscience is a Judge.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the Properties of Conscience, and first, of Testification.
CHAP. XV. Of the second Property of Conscience, which is Ligation. CHAP. XVI.
Of the third and fourth Properties of Conscience, which are, Excusation, and
Accusation. CHAP. XVII. Of the kinds of Conscience, which are, Good, and
Evil: and first of the Good one. CHAP. XVIII. That the knowledge of Gods Word
is necessary to the Goodness of Conscience. CHAP. XIX. That Faith is necessary
to the goodness of Conscience. CHAP. XX. That Repentance is necessary to the
Goodness of Conscience. CHAP. XXI. That Peace is necessary to the Goodness of
Conscience. CHAP. XXII. Of the Blessedness of that Man, whose Conscience is
quieted through the Pardon of his sins. CHAP. XXIII. Of the unspeakable
Comfort of a Good Conscience. CHAP. XXIIII. That the Comfort of Conscience is
Inward, and Independent of the Creatures. CHAP. XXV, That the Comfort of
Conscience is Noble, and Sincere. CHAP. XXVI. That the Comfort of Conscience is
Immutable and Durable. CHAP. XXVII. That Peace of Conscience is the best
Music. CHAP. XXVIII. That Peace of Conscience is the best Physic. CHAP.
XXIX. That Peace of Conscience is an Inestimable JEWEL. CHAP. XXX. That a good
Conscience comfort in Infamy. CHAP. XXXI. That a good Conscience comfort
in Poverty. CHAP. XXXII. That a good Conscience comfort in Imprisonment.
CHAP. XXXIII. That a good Conscience comfort in Sickness. CHAP. XXXIIII.
That a good Conscience comfort at the time of Death. CHAP. XXXV. That a good
Conscience comfort at the Day of Judgment. CHAP. XXXVI. A complaint that
good Conscience is so little set by. CHAP. XXXVII. That Gods dearest Children
are often troubled in Conscience. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of sundry Comforts against
excessive Sorrow for Sin: and first, Of the consideration of the
Infiniteness of Gods Mercy. CHAP. XXXIX. Of the second Comfort in trouble of
Conscience, which is, The Meditation of the Blood of Christ. CHAP. XL. Of the
third Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is, the Indefinitenes of Gods
Promises. CHAP. XLI. Of the fourth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is,
The Example of Heinous Offenders, that have been pardoned upon their
Repentance. CHAP. XLII. Of the fifth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is,
The Consideration of Gods Fatherly Chastisements accompanying it. CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Sixth Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is Mourning for sin.
CHAP. XLIIII. Of the Seventh Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is Prayer.
CHAP. XLV. Of the Eighth Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is Reading of
Scripture. CHAP. XLVI. Of the Ninth Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is
Singing of Psalms. CHAP. XLVII. Of the Tenth Comfort in Trouble of Conscience,
which is the Testimony of the Minister. CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Eleventh Comfort
in Trouble of Conscience, which is Conference with the Godly. CHAP. XLIX. Of
the Twelfth Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is Painfulnesse in our
Calling. CHAP. L. Of the Thirteenth Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is
the Consideration of the Truth of Gods Promises. CHAP. LI. Of the Fourteenth
Comfort in Trouble of Conscience, which is the Consideration of the Justice of
God. CHAP. LII. That all the forenamed Comforts are ineffectual, without the
Presence of the Holy Ghost. CHAP. LIII. An Exhortation to the children of God,
that the^ stri^e against their Dumpish^^sse, and that they be cheerful in the
Lord. CHAP. LIIII. A short Prayer for Comfort in Trouble of Conscience. CHAP.
LV. Of Evil Conscience; and first, of the Large one. CHAP. LVI. Of the Second
kind of Evil Conscience, which is Nice, or Spiced. CHAP. LVII. Of the Third
kind of Evil Conscience, which is the Perverse one. CHAP. LVIII. Of the Fourth
kind of Evil Conscience, which is the Cauterized. CHAP. LIX. Of the Degrees,
and Steps that lead to this Searednesse of Conscience. CHAP. LX. Of the
fearful estate of those that have Searednesse of Conscience. CHAP. LXI. Of
the Fifth kind of Evil Conscience, which is the Desperate one. CHAP. LXII.
That it is exceeding dangerous for a Man in horror of Conscience, to kill
himself. CHAP. LXIII. Certain forcible Reasons against Despair.
THE CHRISTIANS JEWEL.
CHAP. I. What Conscience is not.
IT was the opinion of Origin, In Epist. ad Romans cap. 2. 15.
that Conscience was a certain Spirit, distinct in nature from the substance of
the Soul, and joined to it as an inseparable Companion. And to fortify this
conceit, he usurped the place of Saint Paul to the Romans; The same Spirit
witnesses Romans 8. 16
with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God. But as this assertion is
strange, and repugnant to reason, which abhorres dualitie of Souls cohabiting
in one body; so the Text alleged, is apparently wrested from the native sense,
as appears by Saint Augustine, In Exposit. quar. Prop. Ex Ep* ad Romans In
Epist. ad Romans
and Chrysostom, who fitly expound it of the Spirit of GOD, confirming man's
heart regenerate by Grace. To which Interpretation though some other Exposi^ors
do not unanimously ^end their voices, to make up the Diapason; yet favor they
no whit, the violent, and ungrounded Gloss of Origin.

If here we^ descend to the Schoolmen, they accord Scotus. Aquinas. Sum. 1. Q.
79. Art. 13.
not. Some hold it to be an Habit, others an Act: but it will be found, after
just discussion, that Habits, and Acts are transient and perishing, where
Conscience cannot be lost, though the edge of her operation be sometimes
dulled.

As for those Minuti Philosophi, Plutarch. Mor.
the Grylls, and Trough-Philosophers of the World, who degrading Conscience
from her seat of Honor, have thrust her down amongst the Humors, and there
left her in the Lees, as if her affects were but the passions of melancholy;
albeit the Paradoxe be so base, and sensual, that it deserves no answer; yet
for vindication of Truth, and out of a certain homage to Virtue, I must give
them this counter-checke, that the black and stubborn humor of melancholy,
is charmed and mastered by Physic, Diet, Music, Exercise, Society; where
the gash of Conscience can never be healed, but by a spiritual and heavenly
Balm.

CHAP. II. What Conscience is, from the Notation.
WHen the Names of things are significant, and expressiue, they are petty
Definitions, and give some light to the point in hand. Conscientia (says S. In
Form. Hon. vit.
Bernard) sounds as much as Cordis Scientia, because it knows it self, and
many other things. Conscientia (says Aquinas) is Scientia Summa. Q. 79. Szeged.
cum alio, a knowledge with another: which combination has either reference to
the Soul reflecting upon it self, or else to God, who is privy to her inmost
intents. For though Angels, and Men do not know the Heart, but by Revelation,
or Ouerture; yet the most wise Creator, who sits in the Center thereof, and
continually 1. Sa. 16. 7.
makes an unbloody dissection, must needs be acquainted with her most secret
designs.

If we take it in the first sense, it euinceth evidently, that in certain
cases of doubt, the best appeal is to a man's own Conscience. For, What man
knows the 1. Cor. 2. 11.
things of a Man, (says S. PAVL) save the Spirit of a Man, which is in him?
Therefore the answer of Saint Austen to Petilian, is excellent: Contra lit.
Pet. l. 3. c. 10.
Me Petilianus Manichaeum esse dicit, loquens de aliena Conscientia; hoc ego me
non esse dico, loquens de mea conscientia. Eligite cui credatis. Petilian gives
out that I am a Manichee, and this he speaks of another conscience; I
plainly affirm I am none of that Sect, and this I speak from mine own
Conscience. Now choose ye which of us Two ye will believe.

If we take it in the latter sense, as it has relation to God, who notes our
closest thoughts, it will teach us to stamp upon those Cockatrice eggs of our
poisonous imaginations, before their hatching. It Is an everlasting reproach to
Absalon, 2. Sam. 16. 22.
that he committed evil in the open sight of the Sun; and shall we steame
forth corrupt and noisome cogitations in the face of that GOD, with whose
glorious resplendencie if we compare the Sun, it will prove no better then a
piece of Searing-candle?

But let us pass on from the Name of Conscience, to the very Life, and Nature
of it.

CHAP. III. What Conscience is, from the Definition.
NOt to bury my self in the heap of others Definitions, I will select one
which seems most kindly to express the nature of Conscience. It is this.
Conscience is a Part of the Practical understanding, determining of things
done, and thereupon excusing, or accusing. The substance of this Definition is
found in those Romans 2. 15.
words of the Apostle; Their Conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts
(or Reasonings) accusing one another, or excusing. By this clause, Melanct.
Il^yric. Grynaeus. Szeged.
(as by a Compass) do most Expositors shape their course, when they treat of
Conscience; concluding that it is a kind of Practical Syllogism, whose Mayor
is The Law of GOD, and the Minor, and Conclusion, the Application of it,
approving what is good, and condemning the contrary. As thus:

Every disobedient child is worthy of Punishment:

But I (says Cham) am a disobedient Child:

Therefore I am worthy of Punishment.

If now (like good Chymicks) we labor to extract the very Spirit of this
Definition, we shall find that it compriseth the Essentialnesse of Conscience
with the Soul, as being a faculty, or Part thereof. Again; it sheds out the
Subjects of Conscience (that is, Men, and Angels) from all creatures that want
the Discursiue power: And therefore when we find in S. Ambrose, that the
Hound being at default, makes a kind of Syllogism, Hexam. l. 6. c. 4.
( Aut in han^ partem deflexit, aut in illam, aut certe in hunc anfractum se
contulit: Sed nec in etc.) Ergo etc. we must know that it is an Abusiue
speech, as is evident by the context, where in full meaning he ascribes this
wary casting about of the Dog, to the mere Sagacitie, and vigor of his
sense.

Further, from this Definition, do naturally spring the Offices, Properties,
and Kinds of Conscience, with her whole furniture, and Appendices, which we
are to handle in due place. So that it is (in effect) the very Base, and
Foundation of all the subsequent Discourse.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Offices of Conscience: and first, that it is an Arbitratour.
SVch is the Impatience, and surlinesse of man's nature, that struggling under
the weight of his afflictions, he breathes out complaints against the Justice
of GOD, as if the pressure exceeded the desert. Thus JOB, (the holiest man
alive) being ground to powder with the apprehension of his misery, cries Job.
14. 17. Vatablus in Loc.
out that GOD had sealed up his iniquities in a Bag, and added unto his
wickedness: as if he would say (if he durst) that the Lord kept his sins
exactly, and made them more then they were.

In another place he complains, Job 16. 12. 14. 21.
that God had taken him by the neck, and beat him, and run upon him like a
Giant, as if he would sue the Lord upon an action of Battery; for presently
Job 38. 39. 40.
after, he mumbles thus, Oh that a man might plead with God, as a Man does with
his Neighbor. But after the Lord vouchsafed to parle with him, and called in
Conscience as an Vmpier, to take up the matter betwixt them, then Job that
erewhile was so exorbitant (in an ouer-loue of himself) bewailes his state,
and falls Job 42. 6.
to deprecation.

Thus the Emperor Mauritius, what time his Children, and his most dear, and
virtuous Wife were all cruelly slain, one after another, before his eyes, at
the charge, and command of the Tyrant Phocas (himself being immediately to act
his part in the same Tragedy) his flesh (no doubt) like a grudging Israelite,
began to murmr against the Lord; but after some passionate breathings, and
pauses (his Conscience awarding him Hell, if God should have been extreme to
mark what he had done amiss he thus quietly and meekely concludes, Iustus
es, Domine, and Iustum Functius Carrion. Osiander. Melanct. Loc. Com.
Iudicium tuum; Righteous art thou (O Lord) and just is thy judgment.

CHAP. V. That Conscience is a Conuincer.
WHen I consider the force of Conscience in the Conviction of Error, me
thinks She is like the Martyr Steven. For neither Act. 5. 9. 10
Libertines, nor Cyrenians, nor they of Alexandria, Cilicia, Asia, no nor all
the transcendent, and sublimated wits of the world, that will undertake to cut
Cummin-seede, with Antonine, are able to resist the Wisdom, and the Spirit,
by which she speaks. For instance: The Diagoream, Cic. de Not. Deor.
or Atheist, would gladly threap upon his soul, that There is no GOD. Dixit in
CORD suo (says Saint Aug. in. Psa. 14. 1.
Augustine) qui^ hoc nemo ausit dicere, etiamsi ausus fuerit cogitare; He said
it in his Heart, because, for shame, he durst not utter it with his lips. O
Idol! The Heavens Psalm. 19. 1. Psa. 104. 12
declare the glory of GOD, and yet he sees them not: the Birds sing Anthems
of his praise, and yet he hears them not; the flowers diffuse sweet sents into
the Air, and yet he smells them not: in every Vine, there is Water turned into
Wine, and yet he tastes it not: and though GOD may be felt with the hand (as
S. Paul Act. 17. 27.
affirms) in every creature, yet being stark dead, he is void of that last,
and common sense. And now comes Conscience, and wakens up this Monster in
Nature, and gives him a thump on the breast, and beats it into him, maugre his
heartbloud, that There is a GOD: and summons him to appear at the great
Tribunal, for attempting to deface the Characters of the Deity, so plainly,
and deeply written with GODS own hand in the heart of every man.

Another instance of the power of Conscience is the Refutation and confusion of
those detestable Heretics (or rather more then Heretics, as Irenaeus calls
them) who charge the most Righteous GOD, to be the Author of sin; and that
either Indirectly, as Simon Tertul. Iren. Aug.
Magus, the Cerdonists, Marcionists, Manichees, Priscilli^nists, and others; or
else Directly, as Florinus, and the Seleucians, with whom we may shackle foot
to foot, the damnable sect of the Libertines, whose Ringleaders Calvin
Aduersus Libertinos. Bulling. Aduersus Anabap. l. 2. c. 14.
were Coppin, and Quintin, two Cobblers of Flanders. With these hideous Giants
incounters Conscience, and catching them by the throat, breathes fire and
brimstone in their faces, and in time of distress, and horror, compels them to
retract this fearful blasphemy.

Another instance of the strength of Conscience is in the co^futing those
slow-bellied Zanch. de Immort. Anim.
Cretians, who treading in the steps of the Sadduces, and Epicures, and some of
the courser sort of Peripateticks, would have the soul to be vaparous, and
mortal. For when once these Beasts come to be haled to the slaughterhouse,
and that they perceive their end is approaching, then steps in Conscience, and
stiffely pleades the souls Immortality, so that in the sense of the truth
thereof, they are forced to roar, and hang out the tongue.

Another Instance of the efficacy of Conscience, is in the Repulse of the
Roman Catholics both Heresies, and Calumnies. And first, for their Heresies,
since the nature of this Treatise forbids Polemical Discourse (unless
obliquely, and by occasion) I will content my self with one Article, but yet
of such weight, and consequence, as that it contains the very sap, and life of
Religion. It is the point of Justification by Faith alone, that is, by Christ
alone (for it is not the Instrument, but the Object which we stand upon.) This
sound position the Romanists utterly disauow, and in stead thereof, they set to
sale their Linsiewoolsie web, the warpe whereof is Works, and the woofe,
Faith; the long thrids man's Merit, and the short inter-iected thrids, the
Merit of Christ. But mark. When these jolly Sophisters are at their waygate,
and that they lie panting, and gasping on their Pallet, then nothing but
Christ, Christ, and then not a word of Works, and Merit: such difference is
there between Schoole-disputes on a Cushion* and the wrings of Conscience on
ones Deathbed.

And here I cannot let pass the unprosperous success of Cardinal Bellarmine,
their Pythagoras. For having gone about to prove the concurrence of Faith, and
Works in the point of Justification, and that at large, even to sacietie and
surfeit; at last, enforced by the reuerberations and recoilements of his own
Conscience, Penelopelike, he vntwists his labor, vnsaies all again, and is
driven to turn Protestant whether he will or no.

But that I may be clear from the imputation of injury, I will set down his
words as they came from his own pen, which (no doubt) like Pilats, was
ouerruled by the secret hand, and providence of GOD. They are these; Propter
incertitudinem De Iustific. l. 5. c. 7.
propriae Iustitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam
TOTAM in SOLA Dei misericordia, and benignitate reponere: By reason of the
uncertainty of a man's own righteousness, and for fear of vaineglory, it is
the safest way to repose our whole confidence in the Only mercy, and goodness
of GOD.

I confess, that close upon this Luther-like Aphorism, he settles himself to
the unfolding of his own meaning, but with such perplexnesse, and shifting, as
that but for his old friend Qu^dammodo, (Cousin-german to Non proprie, Non
absolute, and other such nice, and cheating Aduerbs) he might seem to have
been found within the compass of a Spanish Inquisition.

Now, concerning the power of Conscience in the repulse of Calumnies, though it
be not always apparent in regard of the stupefied heart of the Adversary:
yet in a disposition not wholly graceless, it gives some glimpse of an inward
conuulsion. And here, let me once again produce Cardinal Bellarmine: who
attempting the ruin of Religion, by the disgrace of her Professors, most
virulently writes, that Calvin (a man of singular learning and sanctity) was
eaten to death with Worms (like Antiochus, Herod, De Notis Eccles. lib. 4.
cap. 17.
Maximinus, Hunericus) and that he dyed blaspheming and calling upon the
Devil: Ne ipse quidem Demon Controuers. Secund. Quaest. Quint. c. 15
potuit malitiosi^s loqui (says good Whitaker) Not Beelzebub himself could
have spoken more despightfully. Now to show that he wrote this palpable lie
against his own mind, he forthwith adds, Testatur Hieronymus Bolsecus,
Jerome Bolseck says thus, not I. For he knew in his Conscience, that this
Bolseck was an impure, and perfidious Apostata, the most notorious Stigmatick
of the World, and the very Succubus of the Devil.

CHAP. VI. That Conscience is an Espiall.
COnscience is the Lords Numb. 13. 19.
Spy, dispatched (like a Caleb, or Joshua) to view the strength, and weakness
of every man. It is Gods Pinnesse, sent out to make a Discovery of the Coast,
and to return advertisement. It is the keeper of that Poor Prisoner the Non
Caro, sed Corruptela Carnis, Carcer est. Aug. in ^nar. Ps. 142. 7. Josh. 7. 21.
Soul, whom it watches, and follows at the heel, while it is in Durance, in
the corruptible body. She saw Acha^ well enough, when he hid the Wedge of
Gold in the earth. She looked David in the face, and frowned upon him, when he
shut the door, in hope to have sinned (with Bathsheba) undiscerned. 2. Sa. 12.
12.
She beheld (with Ezekiel) what the Ezekiel. 8. 12.
Ancients of the house of Israel did in the dark, when they offered up Clouds
of Incense to their Idols, and then blessed themselves with this base delusion,
Tush, The Lord sees us not, He has forsaken the Earth. And as she is an
Eagle in the sharpness of her sight; so can she ouer-heare the softest
whisperings, and Elishalike, 2. Kings 6. 8. 9.
know what is contrived in the Aramites priuatest counsels.

Since therefore each man, attended by his own Conscience, is, in this, a kind
of Scipio, Neuerlesse alone, than when he is alone, let him never think to
work wickedness unseen, unless he can find means to run away from
himself. It is Plato. Cic. Ambr^se. De Offic. l. 3 cap. 5.
not his Gyges Ring will serve the turn.

CHAP. VII. That Conscience is an Appeacher.
SVch is the folly of an unregenerate man, as he^ presumes, because Co^scienc^
is an Inmate, that she will stand by, and see, and hear, and say nothing. And
be cause it is now Vacation, he thinks it will never be Terme-time with
Conscience. But (to use the words o^ Saint Jerome) Tranquillitas Ad Heliodor.
ista, Tempestas est; This Calm is but the Mother of a Storm; for ere long he
shall epsy a Weather-gawle in the Air. The Watch of his Clock now goes not,
and the Wheels stand still, being clam'd, and rusted in their joints; but when
by Gods hand the heavy Waights of Sin shall be hung upon the Lines, (and
that without any counter poyze of mercy) then shall the Hammer strike thick,
and indistinctly, I mean, his own tongue shall blab those foul enormities,
which so long he has smothered, and concealed in his bosom. He is now at
ease, and vows if he Fesse, he will never Con; but alas (silly soul) when
Sci, and Con (to sing with him in his own Cliffe) have set him upon the Rack,
he shall perforce spell, and put together, and that without any iocular
inuersion. When Satan comes, and with his Quill blows Fig-dust into his eyes,
tell me then if he stamp not, and cry not out against himself.

O that we men would thus reason with our selves, when the bait of Pleasure is
cast before us! What? Shall Genesis 39. 9.
I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Is there any thing so
secret, Mat* 10. 26
that shall not be disclosed? If I commit it in the Wood, shall not a Bird of
the Air Ecclesiast. 10. 20.
carry the voice, and that which has wings tell the matter? If I do it in the
Forest, am I yet to learn that Numb. 22. 28.
a Beast has spoken? If in my Bedchamber, shall not Hab. 2. 11.
the Stone out of the Wall, and Beam out of the Timber cry vengeance against
me? But if all these fail, woe, and alas, I shall not be able to keep mine
own counsel; but either I shall impart it to my familiar friend, who will
prove but a riuen dish; or else in company I shall blurt it out at unawares; or
talk of it in my sleep: or utter it on my Deathbed, to mine own shame, and
scandal of the Gospel: Malum hoc, and malum De Contrit. Cord. Auth. Inc.
hoc; sed minus hoc; and maius hoc.

CHAP. VIII. That Conscience is a Monitor.
AFter Gregory had given Pastoralis Curae, Quarta Pars.
six and thirty Admonitions, concerning the several estates of men, he thus
modestly concludes: Pulchrum depinxi hominem, Pictor foedus; I have portraid a
fair man, being my self but a Bungler at the Pensill. And (in truth) there is
always some imperfection in humane Aduertisements. For either they proceed
from the humor of Revenge, and Vaineglorie, or else from flying reports, and
supposals, or from selfe-guiltinesse of the reproved fault; or if they be
free from all these distempers, and aspersions, yet can they not censure an
Interior evil. But Conscience being deputed a Monisher from GOD, and looking
in at the casement of the Soul, is not easily corrupted by the former, nor
deceived in the last.

And besides this Ingenuousnesse, and Certainty of her Items (so long as she
stands informed by the Word of God) there is found a Majesty in the manner of
their giving: for being Gods Viceroy, She prays not, but inioynes, because
Requests, and Commands Bodin. De Rep. l. 3. c. 4.
are incompatible in a Prince, as derogating from Sovereignty, and Power: for
God, and Conscience, and Kings entreat not. Wherefore when Saint Paul says, 2.
Cor. 5. 20
As though GOD did beseech you; he closely implies, that the Edicts of God are
Monitorie, and Iussorie, not Petitorie, and stooping. It is therefore a
special point of wisdom, heedfully to mind the Watchword of ones
Conscience: for, if in the prepension of some intended act, She shall descry
either turpitude, or doubtfulnesse, it is time to sound the Retrait.

CHAP. IX. That Conscience is a Shoolemaster.
COnscience, by Origin, is In Epist. ad Romans 2. Velut Padagogus ei quidam
sociatus. In Genesis
compared to a Schoolmaster, associate to the Soul to direct, and tutour it;
and by Chrysostom, to a sufficient Schoolmaster; not that it is able to lead
us to salvation in this obscurity, and corruption of natural knowledge; but
that it informs us in many things, and is available to make us inexcusable
for the Lecture Pet. Mart. Loc. Com. Mat. 7. 12.
of Conscience is,

Alteri non facere, quod nolis pati:

Not to do that to another, which thou would not suffer thy self.

And here we must remember, that (as Austen Aug. Conf^ss. 1. ca. 18
wittily and divinely notes) we be careful to a uoyd the Solecismes of
Manners. For, if we be sure of the Rod, or Ferule, if without an Aspiration
(contrary to Grammatica^ Discipline) we pronounce Ominem, for Hominem: then
let us not dream of escaping the Scourge of Conscience, if we shall
irregularly and incongruously behave our selves, in the course, and passage of
our lives.

CHAP. X. That Conscience is a Domestical Chaplain.
IT is a terrible saying of 1. Cor. 1. 26.
the Apostle, that Not many Mighty, not many Noble are called: one reason
whereof amongst the rest, is their Impatience of Exhortation, for that
(oft-times) they are of the nature of the Thistle, where they should be like
Clarie, which is soft in the hand, and has a Down, or Cotton upon it. Hence
it comes to pass, that having flattering Prophets about them, (which put Honey
into the Sacrifice, in stead of Salt) they dream of Peace, even when the Lord
of Hosts is up on Arms against them.

I know the Persons of Kings are Sacred, and their Crowns, no Ceremonies, or
Garlands, but consisting of Preeminence, and Power: I likewise am not ignorant,
that Ministers of State, and Personages nobly descended, have an extraordinary
stamp of Honor set upon them: yet because they are all the Sons of Adam,
inuolued in Sin, and Wrath, as well as others, and have greater occasions of
temptations then their Inferiors, as sailing both with Wind, and Tide against
them; it is very requisite that they sometimes be punctually dealt withal,
provided always that it be performed with great reverence, and discretion.

But because degenerate and temporizing (...) are so rife and common ^^ the
Would and those that are of a more t^anke, and generous (...) do sometim^^
(...) pass by the sins of Men in Aut^o^itie, the Lord (in mercy) has
appointed Conscience their Chaplain in Ordinary, who will not fear to
reprove them impartially, but like Nathan will tell them to their faces, one
by one; Thou art the man. Of which plain and gracious advertisement, if they
shall make good use, they are sure to partake in the glorious Privileges of
the Saints.

CHAP. XI. That Conscience is a Prognosticator.
IT is but the vain attempt of a presuming brain, to Calculate Natiuities,
and to tell you (with a trice) whether your days shall be blessed, or
unprosperous. For whether the Stars do significare potius See Aug. de Ciu.
Dei. 5. c. 1. 2. 3. etc
quam facere, rather foreshew, than cause: or whether Mars do Homicidam
facere, make a Man an Homicide, as the Mathematics determine; there was never
yet any that could exactly define, why in the life of Twins, there should be
such disparilitie in actions, events, professions, arts, honors, and even in
death it self, being borne contiguously one after another (as Jacob, who
caught Esau by the heel) and being seminate in the same moment. For if the
Answer of Nigidius concerning the swift whirling about of the Potters wheel
(so much applauded by Mathematicians) be entertained, and embraced for current,
it quite overthrows the Genethliacall profession: inasmuch as in an
incomprehensible moment of time there is such a mutation of all things, by
reason of the rapacitie of the heaven, that they become not only diverse, but
contrary: which made S. Augustine conclude, that this figment of the wheel was
more frail, and brittle, then the vessels made by the rotation of it.

Let this then be noted as a point of infallibility, that whatsoever is
decreed in the great Senate of the Stars, is ouer-ruled by the power, and
wisdom of their most glorious Creator, who has made them Attendants to man,
to comfort him, and not Lords, to sway him, and shape out his condition.

If then you would know, whether you shall be happy in the remainder of your
life, or whether wretched, and full of discomfiture; the most compendiarie way
to attain the sum of your desire, is to propound the Question to your
Conscience, which will quickly resolve you in the Prophet Esayes asseueration:

Surely it shall be well with the Just: Woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil
with him. Isaiah 3. 10, 11.


From whence you may safely, and certainly Prognosticate, that since the blood
of Christ is precious unto you, and that you loath and detest Sin, as the
very Bane, and Apollyon of the world, your days shall be good, and your
conclusion peaceable. But if at Psalm. 37. 37
this present, you be frozen in your dregs, and resolve to continue in your
rebellious courses, presuming that a Lord, Lord, will serve the turn at the
close of your life, (which is nothing else but Infidelis fi^ucia, A faithless
confidence, as S. Bernard calls it) then surely Conscience (which is the Pulse
of the soul) will tell you aforehand, that your bud shall be rottenness, and
your end wrapped up in woe, and dishonor.

CHAP. XII. That Conscience is a Register.
Conscience is a Notarie that has always the Pen in hand, and keeps a
Catalogue, or Diarie of our sins. She sets down all our debts in her Book
of Account, even an Hundred Ferus in Math. 18.
Thousand Talents; Magna summa, quam tamen omnes Deo debemus; A mighty sum,
and yet we owe (all of us) as much to GOD. She omitteth no default through
slownes of hand, for she writes by Characterie; neither strikes she out any
through deceit, like the Luke 16. 6.
unjust Steward, that bade put down fifty in stead of an hundred; nor yet
indures she to ouer-reckon, for how can Conscience be so unconscionable? Nor
can her letters be raced out, for they are written with a Pen Ier. 17. 1.
of Iron, and with the claw of a Diamond. Which ought greatly to move us to an
heedfull consideration of our ways. For if the Reverend Martyr Latimer, took
special care to the placing of his words, in his Examination, This He
testifies of himself, in his Sermon preached at Stamford.
when he heard the Pen walking in the chimnie behind the cloth: how
circumspectly ought every of us to look unto our ways, and to guard our
senses, which are Ianuae Corruptionis, the Gates of Corruption, In Ps. 49.
(as S. Austine calls them) since Conscience is continually Recording our
actions, with the time when, the place where, and the manner how they were
performed?

CHAP. XIII. That Conscience is a Judge.
AFter that Conscience has pursued the poor sinner, flowne him to the mark,
attacht him, examind him, and committed him: at last She comman death the
Prisoner to be brought forth to the Bar. And sitting on the Bench, in Robes
of Majesty, betwixt Leo, and Libra (the Emblem of Courage in executing, and
Indifferency in determining) she causes the Book of Moses Law to be spread
before him, which forthwith begins to plead for the transgression of her
precepts, requiring for satisfaction the blood of the Offender, for that he
has wilfully broken them, being for number few, for understanding plain, for
equity not contradictable.

Hereat the wretched soul is aghast, and being Selfe-condemned, confesses
(...). Tit. 3. 11.
Guilty; when being pinniond, and looking for speedy execution, his heart
would break, but for the hope of a merciful (...) And thus much (...) Offices
of Conscience (...)

CHAP. XII. Of the Properties of (...) (...)ence, and first of and ^stification.
IT follows no(...) we treat of the Pro(...) of Conscience, the first (...)
Aquin 1. Quaest. 69. Art. 13.
of is Testification, that (...) Calling to Remembra(...) such a thing was
done, (...) done. To this purpose (...) keth the Wise man to (...) Scit enim
Conscientia tua. I^r.
Householder; Oftentimes the heart, (that is, thy Conscience) knows, that thou
likewise have cursed other It was this Testifying Po^ (...) forced the
Patriarks Genesis 42. 21
(...)ke back to that un(...) sin of selling their (...)er Joseph into Egypt,
(...) ^^ey had committed (...) twenty years be(...) Euine Alicubi, aut
Aliquis? Confess. l. x. c. 6. 7. Scitis ipsi lubricum Adolescentiae iter, in
quo and ego lapsus sum etc. Ad Chrom. Virginitatem in coelum fero, non quia
habeam, sed quia magis mirer quod non habeo. Aduers. Iouin.
it was this that made (...) Augustine confess, that (...)ent his youth in
vani(...) Intemperancie, and (...)ee was sinful in his (...), yea when he was
(...) either Any where, or (...)hing. It was this that (...) S. Jerome to the
re^ew of his greener years, wherein he acknowledges he had a Slip, and came
short of that Virginity, which he so extolled in others. What shall I speak
of his Epistle (...) Eustochium, wherein he fears not to make know (...) that
though he (...) in the vast, and solitary (...) dernesse amongst Scorpio (...)
being scorched, and (...) like an Ethiopian; (...) though he was rough a
(...) squalid with sackcloth (...) lay upon the bare ground (...) and lived
with such (...) and homely fare, that (...) thought it Luxury to fee (...)
Putabam me Romany interesse delitijs. Saepe choris intereram Puellarum. Ad
Eusto. De Custod. Virgin.
on boild meat: yet for (...) that, his mind was (...) on the dainty sights
(...) Rome, and still he thought he was present there among the Damsels. I
speak not this out of the forgetfulness of duty, as if I would discover the
nakedness of the Fathers: But only to show, how this Testifying power wrought
on them to recognize theirformer courses. After whose example, I beseech thee
(good Christian) seriously to examine thy days misspent: cumque Coram Deo, in
Bernard.
Lachrymis te maceraueris, precorte, vt memor sismei.

CHAP. XV. Of the second Property of Conscience, which is Ligation.
IT is the Binding Power of Aquin. 1. q. 69.
Conscience, which judges that a thing is to be done, or not done: and
thereupon either instigateth the party to undertake it, or withdraws him
from attempting it. Hence is it that the Apostle lays down this general Romans
14. ^3. Conscientia, reclamante, and protestante.
rule, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; that is, whatsoever is done
against Conscience, is offensive to GOD: (For, that Faith is there taken for a
Persuasion of Conscience, is the opinion of S. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, Occumenius, Calvin, and others.) From this ground (as it seems)
arose that Axiom amongst Divines; Conscientia, quamuis erronea, semper ligat:
Conscience, though erroneous, always binds: with which concurreth that
other, Quicquid fit contra Conscientiam, August.
aedificat ad Gehennam, Whatsoever is performed against Conscience, helps a man
on to hell-ward; the reason is, because in so doing, he has sinned formally
against the Law, though not materially.

Here then it must be Necesse est autem and hoc s^iri, Conscientiam oportere
regi verbo Dei, Melanct. Loc. Com.
carefully remembered, that Conscience be guided, and governed by the Word of
God, which alone is the proper Binder thereof: For neither Humane Laws, nor
Oaths, nor Promises have any Coactiue power in the soul, but as they have
authority, and virtue therefrom.

CHAP. XVI. Of the third, and fourth Properties of Conscience, which are
Excusation, and Accusation.
THe Conscience judging of some fact committed, does Excuse, and comfort, if it
be good and warrantable; but if it be found swaruing from the Law of GOD, there
insueth an accusation, accompanied with the sting of sorrow, and remorse. Thus
Abimelech Genesis 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
(King of G^rar) being reproved of GOD in a dream, for taking away the wife
of Abraham, consulteth presently with his Conscience: and finding his mind
upright, and his hands innocent, he appealeth to GOD, and is cleared by him. On
the contrary, when Adam, against the express charge, and commandment of
GOD, had eaten of the forbidden fruit his Conscience smiting him, he hid
himself among the Trees of the garden; which made the Lord call to him with an
Adam, vbi es? Adam, Genesis 3. 9. De Ciu. Dei l. 13. c. 15.
where art thou? Non vtique ignorando quaerens, sed increpando admonens, says
Augustine; Not as though God knew not where he was squat, but to check, and
admonish him for his wilful praevarication. This of the Properties of
Conscience.

CHAP. XVII. Of the kinds of Conscience, which are Good, and Evil; and first,
of the Good.
NOw for the Kinds, (that I may declare my mind with popular facility)
Conscience, is either Good, or Evil. Good Conscience is that, which being
enlightened by the Word of GOD, Ephesians, 1. 17, 18. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. H^b. 9. 14. ^.
Pet. 1. 8.
and purged by the Blood of Christ from the Guilt, and Punishment of Sin, and
from dead works to serve the living GOD, is cheared up with joy unspeakable,
and glorious. In this Description are contained the Causes concurrent to the
Nature, and being of Good Conscience, which are Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Peace; of each whereof we are successively to entreat.

CHAP. XVIII. That the knowledge of GODS Word, is necessary to the goodness of
Conscience.
TO the end the People of Israel might fear the Lord, and walk in
uprightness of Conscience before him, he is ever calling upon them to harken
unto his Law, which he commands to be written upon the Posts of their house,
and Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 8. 9.
upon their gates, and to be rehearsed (or whet) continually to their children,
at home, and abroad, when they go to bed, and when they rise in the morning.
And lest any of them should exempt themselves under color of Sex, or Degree,
or Age, he anticipates with a plain, and familiar distribution, naming Men,
Women, Deuteronomy. 31. 11. 12.
Children, Strangers. Thus the Prophets also in all matters of Conscience, send
over the People, To the Law, and To Isai. 8. 20.
the Testimony; and the Apostle Paul writing to the Colosians, Col. 3. 16.
gives charge that the Word of Christ dwell plenteously in them. Whereupon
Saint Chrysostom (very earnestly urging the practice In Hom. 9. in Epist. ad
Coloss.
of this duty) speaks on this wise: Audite obsecro, Seculares OMNES!
comparate vobis Biblia, Animae Pharmaca: hoc demum malorum omnium Causa est,
quod Scripturae ignora^tur: I beseech you harken, All ye that be Laymen! in
any wise get you Bibles, the only Physic for the Soul; alas, this is the
Cause of all mischief, that men are ignorant of the Scripture.

Now there are two especial Reasons of this Necessity of the Word, to the
Goodness of Conscience. One is, because it directs the Understanding, and
points it to the middle way, between the Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
Right hand, and the Left, preserving, and staying it in all doubts, and
demurres, upon warrant of the inviolable truth thereof.

The other is, for that it is a Word of Power, working Heb. 4. 12.
mightily upon the affection, either to the battering of the heart in pieces
(in which regard it is compared Ier. 23. 29.
to a Hammer that breaks the stone) or else to the refreshing of it, when it
is bruised (in which sense it is likened to the dropping Ho^ny.) Psalm. 19. 10
Therefore, when we shall read the thundering Sentences of the Fathers,
either in their Apologies of the Christian Faith, or Exhortations to the
obedience thereunto, we must not rest in the applause of their Rhetoric, but
ascribe the power to that Word, which made Foelix tremble; or rather to Acts
24. 26.
the Lord, the Author of that Word. The like be affirmed of the incomparable
sweetness of the Bible, every Leaf whereof is be-sprint with Honie-dew. For
whereas Ps. 119. 103
it is reported of Saint Ambrose (by Paulinus that Paulinus ad August.
wrote his life) that lying in his Cradle, the Bees were seen to fly in, and
out, at his mouth; if he literally understand it, I cannot easily concur with
him in opinion; but if he mean it of his mellifluous tongue, I willingly
embrace his judgment, yet with this Corollarie, that Ambrose had all his
Ambrosia from Scripture.

And here we may take a just estimate, and scantling of the Holiness of the
Rom^n Bishops: who have shrin'd up Lady IGNORANCE for a Saint, have painted
her face, and caused her to speak fierc^ly out of the window to her Opposites,
forgetting that ere long she shall be thrown down, and trampled under foot. O
the innumerable souls that have perished in Security, and Despair, because
these Iehoiakims have Ier. 36. 23.
cut their Bibles in pieces with their Pen-kniues, and cast them into the fire.
O Conscience! thou may take it on thy death, that thou art murdered by
Conscience, even by those that vaunt themselves for thine only Champions, and
Defenders. O wicked Church, where Ignorance, Error, Ambition, and H^pocrisie,
are the four Cardinal Virtues, whereon the frame of Religion turns.

CHAP. XIX. That Faith is necessary to the Goodness of Conscience.
THE conclusion of S Paul, is very memorable: Romans 5. 1.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace toward God, through our LORD JESUS
CHRIST. For, it being generally granted (unless by the Sacrilegious Pelagian)
that the poison of Original Sin, transmitted from our first Parents, has
spread it self over all the powers of the soul; it must needs follow, that
Conscience (being a principal part thereof) is corrupted and defiled. And
because the Guilt of sin, binding over unto punishment, is that sharp-pointed
sting, that wounds unto Death; can we ever find redress, and succor, but
by looking up to the Brazen Number. 21. 9
Serpent? Is there any remission of sin, without blood? Is there any blood
that is Expiatory, but Ioh. 3. 14. Heb. 9 22.
Christ's? Will the blood of Bulls, and Goats assuage the pang of a tormented
Conscience? Will the sending out to the God of Ekron 2 King. 1. 2.
help it? Will the precious heaps of the Gold of Hauilah relieve it? Will the
comfortable Iulep, and Trochiske restore it? Will the Perfumes of the Garden,
the strains of Music, the charm of Oratorie, or the These Comedies were of
all other most pleasant: See Jerome Ad Nepotian.
sporting Scenes of Atella prevail with it? Nay, can Delight her self delight
it? Nay, can the Songs of Angels recover it? May not the Conscience (in her
agony) justly cry out to these, as Job did to his friends, Miserable Job. 16.
2.
Comforters are you all? For surely these poor and outward refreshments, are
no more available for the curing of the Impostume of the soul, than a
Plantinleafe laid unto the leg, for the remoouall of the Megrimme.

CHAP. XX. That Repentance is necessary to the goodness of Conscience.
REpentance is so necessary to the constituting of Good Conscience, that till
sin be removed, and newness of life begun, the Soul can neither be
Purified, nor Pacified. Therefore is King SALOMONS Psalm. 45. 10.
Spouse intreted to forget her Fathers House; Grande miraculum (says Saint
Jerome) Ad Eusto. De Cust. Virg.
P^ter filiam cohortatur, ne meminerit Patris sai; A strange miracle, the
Father exhorts the Daughter, not to remember her Father. And lest that moytie
of Repentance might seem sufficient, it presently follows, that the Kings
Daughter is all glorious Psalm. 45. 13.
within, that is* enriched and beautified with alspirituall graces. For when a
man has once attained to the practice of holy Duties; his Conscience, which
before looked stern upon him, begins to smile, and amiably to converse with
him. Therefore the saying of Saint Bernard is excellent: Vis nunquam esse
tristis? Be^e De Interior. Domo. ^ap. 45.
viue. Will thou never be sad? Then see thou live well.

CHAP. XXI. That Peace is necessary to the goodness of Conscience.
SO great a good is Peace Tantum est Pacis bonum, vt nihil sine Pace sit bonum.
De Ciuit. Dei. Hob. 13. 20. Luke 2. 13. To. 10. 15. Luke 10. 6. Ephesians. 6. 15. Ps.
122. 3. 1. Kings 4. 24.
(says Saint Austine) that nothing is found to be good without it. Therefore
is the Lord, the GOD of Peace; the Angels, Sing^^ of Peace; the Apostl^s,
Me^sengers of Peace; the Elect, the Sons of Peace; the New Testament, the
Gospel of Peace; Jerusalem, the City of Peace; and Solomon the King of Peace.
Nay, not the Arch-Pyrats, Bargulus, and Vitriatus, but intertaine a kind of
Peace; for they conspire in the Plot, and justly divide their unjustly gotten
booties. Nay more, not the very Devils themselves, but can (certain thousands
of them) co-habite in one body. Mark. 5. 9.


Now the reason why all things are so desirous of Peace, is the intendment ^^
their own preserua(...); for it is the nature (...) Peace, to unite, and
strengthen, as it is of War, ^o weaken, and dissolve. Therefore the Hebrews
call the one Shalom, from Integrity, and the other Milchama, from Comestion.
And we see by experience, that rotten wood lies loose, and moulders away,
because it wants the Coniumctiue virtue. As all other creatures, so likewise
Conscience aspireth after Peace, as her Perfecter, and Preserver; and therefore
can never be settled, and content, till she find sin remitted, and GOD
reconciled.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Blessedness of that man, whose Conscience is quieted
through the pardon of his sin.
THE learned Heathen, finding by moral instinct, that there was a Blessedness
attaineable in this life, spent themselves (poor souls) in the inuestigation
of it, and that with such variousnesse in their apprehensions, that they have
left behind them (as a Memorial of their weakness) about two hundred,
fourscore, Varro. Aug. De Ciuit.
and eight Opinions. Among which, though that be most specious which fastneth
one shanke of the Compass in Civil Virtue, while the other runs round in the
practice of it; Yet, if it be brought to the Balance of the Sanctuary, it
will want the weight, and substance of true Happiness. For the only Felicity
that is found among the Sons of men, consists in the Remission of Sin,
and Pacification of Conscience: of the first whereof the Philosophers knew
nothing, and in stead of the latter, betook themselves to a carnal security,
and sencelesnesse.

The Prophet David in an holy ecstasy, and infinite feeling of this comfort,
breaks forth into this Exclamation; Beati quorum Psalm. 32. 1.
sunt remissae iniquitates! Oh, Blessed they, whose iniquities are forgiven;
and quorum tecta sunt peccata, non in quibus non sunt inuenta peccata, says S.
Austine; and whose In Enarrat. in Ps. 32.
sins are covered, not those who never sinned at all! For as the same Father
notes) Si texit peccata Deus, noluit aduertere; si noluit aduertere, noluit
animaduertere; si noluit animaduertere, noluit punire; noluit agnoscere, maluit
ignoscere: If God once have covered our sins, he means not to look on
them; if he will not look on them, he will not mind them; if he will not
mind them, he will not punish them; no, he will not press them, he will
rather pardon them. Now when sin is removed (whose nature is to separate
betwixt GOD, Isai. 59. 2.
and Man) the Conscience is stilled in the view and sense of Gods favor, which
is Psalm. 63. 3.
sweeter then life it self.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the unspeakable Comfort of a Good Conscience.
KIng Solomon decyphering Pro. 15. 15.
the comfort of a Good Conscience, compares it to a continual feast. Where, if
you ask, who are the Cooks and Butlers, you are answered from Luther, that
they are the Angels. The Apostle Phil. 4. 7.
calls it a Peace which passes al understanding, carrying with it a delight
so exquisite, and peerless, as is not possible for the reach of mortality to
imagine. This it that hidden Manna, whereof that in the Wilderness was but a
countertype; this is that white stone, Reu. 2. 17.
which Christ Jesus gives, and in this stone is written a new name, which no
man knows but he that receives it.

Saint Bernard being taken In Formula Hon. vit.
up and deeply affected with the admiration of the Royalties, and Indowments of
a Good Conscience, describes it on this manner: Conscientia Bona, est Titulus
Religionis, Templum Salomonis, Ager Benedictionis, Hortus Deliciarum, Gaudium
Angelorum, Arca Foederis, Thesaurus Regius, Aula Dei, Habitaculum Spiritus
Sancti: A Good Conscience (says he) is The Title of Religion, The Temple of
Solomon, A Field of Blessing, A Garden of Delight, The Joy of Angels, The Arc
of the Covenant, The Kings Eschequer, The Court of GOD, The Mansion of the Holy
Ghost.

Let a man be arayd in Robes of Estate, powdered with Pearl, and let him have
Caesar's Laurel on his head; let him be Lord of as many Kingdoms, as the
Devil showed our Savior from the Mountain; let him raise his flight into the
clouds and perke upon the tallest Cedar; let him keep the key of Natures
Clese^, and enrich himself with her munificencie: let every wind whistle him
good news, and every Bird sing Madrigals as he goes: let him be as
prosperous as Augustus, as good as Traian, as learned as Antoninus; yet (alas)
if he have not the comfort of a good Conscience, he wants the chief flower
of the Garland, and all his joys are but faint, and imperfect If upon Earth
there be an Heaven, it is Peace of Conscience; oh, it is the Oil that feeds,
and maintains the Lamp of life: it is the pure-red inmost blood of the soul.

CHAP. XXIIII. That the Comfort of Conscience is Inward, and Independent of the
Creatures.
THe Child of GOD is not unlike the Tabernacle, Exo. Cap. 25. and 26.
which being covered with the skins of Beasts, was contemptible to look upon,
but had within, the Arc and Cherubins. And when others trust to Riches,
Honor, Alliance, and other such broken Reeds of Egypt, he has a certain
Autarchie within him, relying on none but El-Schaddai, who is Genesis 17. 1.
God All-sufficient in himself, of himself, for himself, and for all his
creatures.

CHAP. XXV. That the Comfort of Conscience is Noble, and Sincere.
THe Comfort of a Christian springs not out of transitory causes, but is of
a right noble, and heavenly temper; framed, and planted by GODS own hand in
his sanctified soul, which makes him bold, and unconquerable as a Lion, Pro.
28. 1.
and keeps him in heart, and resolution, against the outragiousnesse, and
virulencies, of al Adversaries, of all creatures. For, his Birth being Royal,
and Christ his Elder Brother (according to Ioh. 20 17
that of S. Bernard, Deus tuus factus est Frater tuus: Thy De Quad. Deb.
GOD, O man, is become thy Brother) the Angels guard him, the Saints reverence
him, the Devils fear him, and the wicked cross the streets when they spy him,
as not able to look upon the sober, and undaunted Majesty that shines in his
face. Thus mercy embracing Ps. 32. 10.
him on every side, he lifts up his head unto the Heavens, looking for the Tit.
2. 13.
blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty GOD, and of his
Savior Jesus Christ.

Besides; the Comfort of Conscience is sound, and sincere, without mixture, and
infection of attendant grief, (unless in some sharp assault, and conflict)
but is perfectly refined in the life to come, from all dross of sorrow, and
discomfiture. This, and a thousand times more than this, is his blessed estate,
that feels in his soul, the Joy of the Holy Ghost. The Lord, The Searcher of
Hearts, knows, that I use no Hyperbole, or ouer-commendation: no, I speak no
more, then the Children of GOD find daily in themselves, by sweet experience.

Now for the Delights of Unregenerate men, oh how Base they be, and how
Compounded. And first for the Vileness of Sinful Pleasure, it will the better
be discovered, if we shall unmask, and vn-muffle her painted face, and
sophisticated beauty. And, to begin with him, who loves not to come behind (I
mean the Lofty, and Elated Spirit, that spends himself, and his estate on
vanity) what can be conceived more sordid, and dishonorable, than to think to
purchase the title of Generositie, by swearing deep oaths (on no occasion) in
the presence of the living GOD, as if He were an Idol of Wo^d, or Stone, on
whose shoulder the Churchbirds sit, and proyne themselves, and sometimes pecke
him in the face? And what more in-glorious, and degenerate, than like a silken
Pompeian, to discourse of wars, and swords, and helmets, and that with a
shrug, and peaking out of the neck, and other such eluish gesticulations, as
who would say, his fingers itcht till he came to hand-blowes; when all the
world knows him to be soft, and feminine, much fitter to spin amongst Ladies
with the last Assyrian Monarke, than to dare to meet Caesar, (the Man of Men)
in the field of Pharsalia? Yet do but intimate, in friendly manner, that this
kind of life is Sybaritish, abject, and unbeseeming a Christian; he will
forthwith cast up his hair backward, and giving it a shake, will sternely tell
you, that you are a fellow, a degree below Baseness it self. Quae quidem
mihi, vox pecudis csse videtur, non Hominis. I protest, I am loath to bedabble
my pen with Rhumes, and Distillations, much more, to taint it with the noisome
steames of Luxuriousness; yet lest I become an accessarie to Intemperancie,
and partake in the plagues of Vinking Prophets, I cannot but prosecute this
subject further. Is it not absurd, that a man should so befoole himself, as to
think to wring from others, an acknowledgement of his greatness, by making a
disdainefull mouth, and casting out Smoke, which yet is but the commendation of
a Chimney? And is it not more then ridiculous, that he supposes you note not
his magnanimousnesse, unless he drink till he tumble in the floor? Does not
this rude, and brutish demeanor, rather become a Boore of Germany, then a
Gentleman of England? And what more gross, and ignominious, then to bow the
knee to Bacchus, with a Paganish devotion, and to be always offering large
sacrifice to the God Bell, nay to the God Whose God is their Belly In Sermon.
Belly (I had almost Phil. 3. 19.
said) to the Goddess Cloacina? O Augustine, thou said true; Est blandus
Doemon Ebrietas, dulce venenum, sua^e peccatum, quam qui in se habet, se non
habet; quam qui facit, non facit peccatum, sed ipse totus est peccatu^: This
same Drunkenness is a flattering Devil, a sweet Poison, a delightful Sin,
which whosoever has in himself, has not himself, and he that uses it, is not
sinful in the Concrete, but sinfulness it self in the Abstract.

Were the Prophet Amos Amos 4. 1.
alive, though he were a Magistrate of Samaria that were thus licentious, he
would call him Kow of Bashan, as one that at once, had put of both his Nature
and his Sex. I know that Lyra expounds those Kine of Bashan of the Popish
Ladies of Israel, that ran gadding to their Calves at Dan, and Bethel, and
there kissed them, and lickt them, and at their parting filled the air with
Lowing, like the Kine that went with the Cart to Bethshemesh; 1. Sam. 6. 12.
but I rather follow S. Jerome, and others, who mean it of the Gallants of
Israel.

Now as the pleasure of the sensual man is base, and course-grained; so is it
ever mingled with some unpleasant sense of evil, according to that of Solomon,
Even in the midst of laughter Pro. 14. 13.
the heart is sorrowful. Thus Haman (the Agagite) having Ester 5. 13.
the glory of riches, children, promotion, favor of the Prince; esteems them
nothing, because Mordecai the Jew would not rise up in the gate, and do him
obeisance.

CHAP. XXVI. That the Comfort of Conscience is Immutable, and Durable.
SVch is the Instabilitie of human affairs, and the calamity whereto all men
are subject, that as the Prophet Jeremy complains, Lam. 3. 5.
they that did feed delicately, are desolate in the streets, and they that were
brought up in Scarlet, embrace the dunghill. Sampson that invincible Nazarite,
and Type of Christ, that slew a thousand Philistines with a Iawbone, bare away
the Gates of Azzah on his back, and Judges 16. 21. Pet. Mart.
brake cords as thrids, when they feel the fire, had his eyes digd out of his
head with a Bodkin, so that tears o^ blood ran trickling down his cheeks.
Zedekiah, King of Judah, in the 2. King. 25.
very prime and strength of his days, had his Sons slain before his face;
after which woeful spectacle, his own eyes were put out, and he bound in
chains, and carried captive to Babel. Proud Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27, 28, 30.
that walking in his Royal Palace, spoke thus in a bravery, Is not this Great
Babel, that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Even while the word was in his mouth,
was told by a voice that came down from Heaven, O King, Nebuchad-nezzar, to
thee be it spoken, thy Kingdom is departed from thee. The very same hour was
this thing fulfilled upon him, and he was driven from men, and did eat grass
as the Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were
grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like Birds claws.

Renowned Xerxes, that Justin. l. 2.
ouer-spred the Seas with Ships, and passed over into Greece with such an huge
Army as emptied the Rivers, and made the Earth to tremble before him, was
enforced to come stealing back in a poor Fishers boat, without so much as a
Page to attend him. Valerian, an aged, wise, and valiant Emperor of Rome, was
made the Foote-stoole of Sapor, Carrion. l. 3.
King of Persia, and after all kind of disgrace, and vassallage, was flayed
quick from the head unto the feet.

What should I speak of Bajazet the Turk, (the Munster in his Cosmog.
Scourge of Greece, and Terror of Christendom,) was he not led about by
Tamerlane, the Tartar, in an Iron-Cage, as a Monster to be gazed on, and died
he not of the sullen, like a Vermin in a Trap? Was not the victorious
Emperor, Henry the Fourth, who had fought Osiand.
52. pitched fields, (at least) compelled to make suite in his old age, for a
poor Prebend, in the Church of Spyra? And was not Bellisarius, Carrion.
(sometime the only man for prowess and honor) driven to that hard exigent,
that having his eyes put out, and being led in a string to beg by the highway
side, he cried out to the Passengers, Date obolum Bellisario, For Gods sake
bestow one Halfe-penny on Bellisarius?

Thus the beauty of all Earthly excellency, is but as a fading flower, and as
Isaiah 28. 4.
the hasty fruit before the Summer; but the Comfo^ts of Grace know no end, no
stint. Temptations may obscure their verdour, but cannot hurt the inward
substance; some Leaves may fall, and some fruit may fade, but the seed, and
root shall still remain intyre. De Ciuit. Dei l. 1. 10.
Nec prodi possunt, nec perdi, says, S. Austine, They can neither be betrayed,
nor lost: but when friends, and health, and life forsake us, they will stick
unto the Soul, and accompany her to Heaven.

CHAP. XXVII. That Peace of Conscience is the best Music.
SO great is the force, and operation of Music, (which handles measures as
they are in sounds) that it does not only move the sense, by the sweetness of
the tune, and delight the reason by a skillful composition of numbers, and
proportions; but also allay the turbulencie of passion, dispose to virtue, and
make the Rocks, and Solit^des to answer it. The Author of this Science, is
GOD himself, who stirred up Iubal to Genesis 4. 21.
invent it, and afterward other Proficients to perfect it, and that for the
solace of man, who being of all visible creatures the only sinful, was
therefore deservedly the only miserable.

By the sweet warble of God used his Music as a means. 1. Sam. 16. 23. 2.
Kin. 3. 15
his Harp (whereto, no doubt, he sang sacred Ditties) did David put to flight
the Evil Spirit of Saul. Elizeus, when he was to Prophecy before the Kings of
Judah, and Samaria, calls for a Musician. The Lydian and Bodin. De Repl. l. 4.
c. 2
Ionique Music, have disarmed wild, and savage Nations of their teeth, and
claws, and made them quiet and tractable. The Dorian harmony, has been held
so grave, and pleasant, that in the Primitive Church, the Psalms, and Hymns
were sung only in that tune. We shall find in Job, that the Job 39. 28.
stern sound of the Trumpet (which is a kind of Phrygian Music) does cause
the Horse to cry, Ha, Ha, in contempt of the battle.

Thus the several sorts of true Music, have worthily their due praise, both
from their Author, and Effects. But yet there is one Harmony remaining, (which
is very Still, and unperceived of the Ear) wherewith the Soul is rapt, and
captiuated, and which for sweetness surmounts them all. It is Peace of
Conscience, that is, Peace with GOD, Peace with Ones self, Peace with Angels,
Peace with all Creatures. It was this Music, (though somewhat imperfect) that
brought to Land the Prophet Jonah, Jonah 2. 4. 6. 7. 10.
that Christian Arion (as Danaeus calls him) and that not on the back of a
Dolphin, but in the belly of a Whale.

CHAP. XXVIII. That Peace of Conscience is the best Physic.
DIseases (says Origin) Super Leuit. Hom. 8.
are either cured by the Juice of Herbs, or Liquors of Trees, or Veins of
Metals, or by the Bodies of Living Creatures: all which do either euacuate
superfluities, or restore the secret decaies of Nature. But yet no drugge, nor
precious Confection, may once compare with Peace of Conscience, it being one of
Salomons Aphorisms, that A sound Heart is the life of the Pro. 14. 30.
flesh. Does not Experience declare, that this Inward Joy inlargeth the heart,
diffuseth the spirits, cheereth the countenance, opens the pores, cleanses
the blood, fatteth the bones, strengthens the synowes, maintains the native
heat, and moisture, and spinnes out the third of Man's life at length?

How many, (alas) to the end they may purchase health, and hearts-ease, consult
with the Physician, shake off the yoke of callings, and Communion, are haunted
with Rymesters, Iesters, Pantomimes, lay the reins on the neck, and give
their souls the utmost of their desire, and yet are pale, and lean, and
ill-liking, never laughing, but faintly; never speaking, but angerly; fretting
themselves away, and hastening to the grave, because they want the Cordial of a
Good Conscience?

CHAP. XXIX. That Peace of Conscience is an Inestimable JEWEL.
THE most precious Gemmes of mighty Monarchs, which with their luster dazell
the eyes of their admirers, are no whit so glorious as Peace of Conscience, the
End, and Crown of all GODS Graces. Rollock in These.
For, if we look into their matter, it is but an earthie and watrie vapor:
and after a certain date of years, they grow sick, and weak in operation,
like a dead Zanch. De Terr. Meteor.
Pepper-corne, which has lost the heat, and byteth not the Tongue.

But this Jewel we speak of, is of a most noble, and Divine nature, not
subject to decay, but capable of Eternity. This is the true Diamond, that
flings beams of comfort upon the Soul, enliuing and quickening it, to the
cheerful performance of all Religious Duties. This is the true Rubie, that
carries in her face the Color of Virtue; a special Ruhor Virtutis Color. 2.
Ioh. 1.
Ornament for an Elect LADY. This is the true Smaragd, so fair, and beauteous
to look upon, yet withal so Chaste, that it indures not the heat of Lust, but
will Crack at such indignity. This is the true Ia^per, of color green, and
sprinkled with many drops of blood, even of the blood of the unspotted Lamb.
This is the true Sardius, which draws Wood unto it, (as the Adamant does
Iron) being able to work upon the dullest nature. This is the true Chrysolite,
of Golden hue, but cold in nature, allaying the heat of the Souls tormenting
Fever.

Oh that our haughty Daughters of Sion, would adorn themselves with this
inestimable JEWEL, and not suffer the Soul to lie neglected, and forlorn,
while the Body is curiously pranckt, and trickt up! Dominam ancillari, and
Medit. c. 3.
ancillam dominari, magna abusio est, says Saint Bernard; It Is a foul in
(...), that the ^ ^ ^ (...) to ^he (...) of Saint Cyprian who is very earnest
De Discip. and Hab. Virg.
and copious in the reproof of it.

CHAP. XXX. That a Good Conscience comfort in Infamy.
THE speech of Job, is very Job. 31. 35 36.
memorable: Though mine Adversary should write a Book against me, would I not
take it upon my Shoulder, and bind it as a CROWN unto me? His meaning is,
that in the uprightness of his Conscience, he would make himself Garlands of
the reports of Sycophants. Fideliter in conspectu Dei dico Cont. Lit. Petil.
li. 3. c. 2 and 6.
(says Saint Augustine) nihil eorum quibus Petilianus tempus vitae me^,
posteaquam in Christo baptizatus sum, criminatus est, mihi conscius sum;
id^oque non solum contristari non debere, verum etiam gaudere, and exultare: I
speak it solemnly in the sight of God, that I am not guilty of any of those
actions, wherewith Petilian charge me, since the time I was baptized in the
name of Christ, and therefore have I no cause to be sad, but rather to
rejoice, and exult.

What though Tertullus (very eloquently) do call Saint Paul a Pestilent
Fellow, Act. 24. 5. 6.
and charge him with Sedition, Heresy, Sacrilege, so long as he is able to
answer him point, by point, and to clear himself of Calvin. in Epist.
the calumnies? O bona Conscientia, quantum polles, ac vales! O innocent
Conscience, of how great force, and efficacy art thou! For if the Lord speak
peace unto my Soul, the Tongue that is as hot as coals of Juniper, cannot Psalm.
120 4.
hurt me; but if I be guilty, and conuiected in my self, what auailes an
universal acclamation of my goodness, but to my further plague, for my
palliated hypocrisy?

CHAP. XXXI. That a Good Conscience comfort in Poverty.
THE Moralist did well Eth. 3. 6.
to place Poverty in the rank of things Terrible; for, besides the nips, and
pinches it gives, which shrink up the heart, like a piece of Northern Cloth;
not Virtue herself, but shall pass unsaluted, if She go in ill clothes.
Howbeit the Christian having the Legacy of Peace bequeathed him by Ioh. 14. 27.
his Savior (in whose person 2. Cor. 8. 9.
also Poverty is sanctified) contenteth himself with the saying of Saint Ie
Ad Heliod.
rome; Affatim Dives est, qui cum Christo Pauper est: He is abundantly Rich,
that is Poor with Christ. Thus Jacob can sleep on a Pillow Genesis 28. 11 Dan.
1. 15.
of Stone: Daniel is content with Pulse, and Water; and the Disciples are glad
of Mat. 12. 1.
Ears of Corn on the Best Day of the Seven.

CHAP. XXXII. That a Good Conscience comfort in Imprisonment.
WHen Len^ulus (the Salust. Con. Cat.
Conspiratour) was carried to Prison, and put in the Dungeon called Tullianum (a
room ouer-head v^^lted with a stone-arch, and exceeding dark, and unsavory)
oh, with what horror was he surprised, having no friend to fly to but his
Conscience, which (like his Executioner) was ready to strangle him! But when
Paul, and Silas are sore beaten with Rods, are cast into the Inner Prison, and
set fast in the Stocks, they cheerfully sing at Midnight; Tantum interest,
non Aug. De Ciuit, Dei. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Qualia, sed Qualis quisque patiatur: Such difference is there, not between
the Sufferings, but the Sufferers.

These holy men had Peace of Conscience, which (as Saint Austine describes it)
is, The Garden of Eden: A Golden Bed of Rest: and the Mercie-seate of the Cheru
bins. For they were thus shamefully entreated for Christ's sake, whose sacred
Mat. 27. 2.
hands had been bound with cords for the purchase of their liberty. O Bern.
De Passion. Dom. c. 4.
Rex Regum, and Domine Dominantium, quid tibi, and Vinculis! O King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, alas, what have Bonds to do with thee!

CHAP. XXXIII. That a Good Conscience comfort in Sickness.
THE comfort that Ahaziah 2. King. 1. 2.
has, when he is cast upon his bed of sickness, is Baal-zebub, the God of
Ekron. When Asa is 2. Chron. 16. 12.
troubled with the Gowt, his only hope is the Ph^sici^n. But when Hezeki^h is
Isai. 38. 3.
^eere unto death, he has recourse to Co^s^^ence, for succor: I besecch
thee, Lord, ^emember now, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is Good Bonum. Conse^uat^uum.
Congregal^uum. Communicatiuum.
in the sight: He means it of all kinds of Goodness, whether it be
Preserving, or Uniting, or Communicating: which yet he speaks not in a vain
confidence of merit, but in a cheerful testification of his Faith. Not unlike
to this, is the behavior of GODS Children; in their languishments: for thus
they resolve from the Apostle PAVL; Whether Romans 14. 8
we live, we live unto the Lord: or, whether we die, we die unto the Lord:
whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords.

CHAP. XXXIIII. That a good Conscience comfort at the time of Death.
THere are four things that make Death formidable; The Parting with the World*
the bitter Pangs of it: the Horror of the Grave: and the Consideration of
Judgment following. Against all these does Good Conscience arm the Christian,
and enable him to encounter them, either jointly, or diuidedly. And first, for
Parting with the World, he has his witness within himself, that since the
time of his effectual calling, he never set his heart upon it; so the absence
cannot be very grievous, where the possession was but faintly taken. As for
the Pangs that clap to the heart in Death, I confess (with Saint Augustine)
that Tam molesta est Mors, vt nulla explicari locutione possit. De Ciuit. l.
13. c. 11.
they are so sharp, as that no tongue is able to express them: but yet this
is his comfort, that has a Regenerate Conscience, that the Lord in mercy will
either mitigate the pain, or proportion the patience, or else cause him to
triumph in S. Hieromes words, (which he Ad Heliodor.
borrowed from the Prophet Hosea) O mors, quae fratres Hos. 13. 14.
diuidis, and amore sociatos, crudelis, ac dura dissocias, Deuorasti, and
Deuorata es! O Death, that art wont to part owne-brothers, and (inexorable as
thou art) do separate those friends whom affection has made one, thou have
devoured, but art now devoured thy self! Now for the Grave, it is true, that
(as Job describes Job. 10. 22.
it) it is a L^nd of Darkness, and Confusion, but yet Good Conscience (that
suckes comfort out of Gall, and Worme-wood) i^ not in this case destitute For,
can Darkness strike terror, when the body is asleep? Can stinch annoy, 1.
These. 4. 13.
when the senses are bound up? Can the Worm affright, which is my Mother, and
Job. 17. 14.
my Sister? Can Scalpes, and Shin bones terrify, and amaze me, since He that
shall, one day, sever the Sheep Mat. 25. 32
from the Goats, does now presently distinguish betwixt Bone and Bone in the
Charnel-house?

And has not my Savior John. 19. 40. 41.
taken possession of the Grave, with his own blessed body, which was imbalmed
with sweet odours; and made it of a rotten Cabine, a delightful Bed of Isai.
57. 2.
Down? And for the Day of Judgment, shall I not lift up my head to think of
it, since it is the day of my Redemption? Luke 21. 28 1. Cor. 15. 14. etc.
Take away the comfort of the Resurrection, and take away the Staff of
Christianity; for then, my Faith is vain, and my zealous endeavor of holiness
is vain, and the tears vain that I have shed for my sins, and the prayers
vain that I have made for their forgiveness, and those unspeakable joys are
vain, which so often I have wished, which so long I have longed for, and the
Sacraments (the seals of my salvation) are vain, and the Book of Books (the
Holy Bible) is vain, and woe is me that ever I was borne, for the Pagan is
happier than I, and the Epicure is happier than I, and the fourefooted Beast
that eats hay, is happier than I.

CHAP. XXXV. That a good Conscience comfort at the Day of Judgment.
NOw, if the contemplation of the day of Judgment approaching, do bring with
it such a weight of consolation: oh, what unspeakable gladness of heart will
the true Professor be possessed of, when he shall actually appear before his
Redeemer! O the sweet music of Come ye Mat. 23. 34.
Blessed! and, O the thunderclap of Go ye Cursed. 41. Ad Heliod. Veniet,
veniet illa dies, etc.


To this very purpose S. Jerome speaks notably: The day will come, yes, it
will surely come, when this corruptible, and mortal, shall put on
incorruption, and immortality: and then, blessed be that servant, whom the
Lord finds waking. The Earth with her inhabitants, shall tremble at the sound
of the Trumpet, but thou, good Christian, shall rejoice. The World shall
mourn, and roar, and knock the breast: the hearts of mighty Kings shall be
seen to beat, and throb through their sides; the wanton Mistress shall be
brought forth with her Bratts, and the Iouial Yonker, with his Plume, and
Buskinlike eloquence. Then foolish Plato, and his Scholars, must answer for
their Community, and profound Aristotle, shall not have one poor Argument to
help himself withal. But thou, (now forlorn, and despised) Christian, shall
then exult, and triumphantly say, Lo, this my Judge, is the Child that cried
when he was swadled in the Manger: this is He, that (in contempt) was called
the Carpenters Son; this is He, that in his infancy did fly from man,
being God, into Egypt. This is He, that was clad in Purple, was wounded with
the Crown of Thorns, was held a Coniurer, a Samaritan, and One possessed of a
Devil. O Jew, behold the hands which thou nailedst! O Roman, look upon the
side which thou diggedst! come near, and see whether it be the self same
body, or no, because ye gave out, that his Disciples had closely stolen him
away by night. Hitherto S. Jerome.

CHAP. XXXVI. A complaint that Good Conscience is so little set by.
NOt-with-standing all that has been spoken concerning the incomparable
Treasure of a Good Conscience, what man (alas) makes any account of it? The
Ambitious is hot in the pursuit of Honor, but makes not Conscience privy to
his intent; so neglecting the one, he falls short of the other; for, Gloria
virtutem, quasi vmbra sequitur (says S. Jerome) and Ad Eustoch. Virg.
appetitores sui deserens, appetit contemptores: It is the nature of Glory to
follow virtue as her shadow, and to forsake her followers, while she follow^s
her contemners. But would he consult with the Book of God, and take in his 1 Samuel 2. 30.
way, Honorantes me Honorab^; he should find, that Conscience were the
compendiary way to true glory; which the very Heathen shadowed (as is noted by
S. Austine) when they built Aug. De Ciu. l. 5. c. 12
the Temples of Virtue, and Honor, so close together, that none could pass
unto the last, but through the former.

The Great Ill man (having discharged Conscience for coming upon his ground)
sacrilegiously takes away the Tithes, and Leu. 27. 30
Offerings, which Scripture avouches to be a part of the Lords Crown, and
ancient Demaynes: and being fleshed with the revenues of the Church, runs
with open mouth upon the Commons, and deuoures whole Towns, and Countries be
fore him; in hope, at length, to be Lord of as much ground, as a Kyte can well
fly over in a day. O Raven! For he builds his nest alone, and dips his bill
in poor men's blood, up to the eyes. He has got the advantage of the Hill,
that his deadly Pile might strike down all before it; which being cast
counter-mont, or in a plain leuill, could not be so dangerous. Which S.
Chrysostom considering, This saying of Chrysostom. is often cited by Latimer.
concludes thus severely against the whole Rank of them; Miror si aliquis
Rectorum potest saluari; I wonder if any of these Great men can be saved; where
(yet) he does not import an Impossibility, but a Difficulty.

The Usurer, and his Broker unmercifully fasten their gryping talons upon the
bosom of the decayed Borrower: tell them of Good Conscience, they term you
Pragmaticall, and with full mouth talk of their Thousands, as if they were
able to spit shillings in the face of any one that durst oppose them.

The subtle Lawyer that pleades in ill causes, sels silence, takes fees with
both hands, and like an ill Surgeon, keeps the wound of his Client green,
esteems of Conscience, as the Rich-man in S. James of his poore-apparrel'd
Iam. 2. 3. Sit thou here under my Footestoole.
Guest, that is, he makes her his Foote-stooles Foote-stoole.

The deceitful Tradesman, that keeps a weight, and a weight, because he has
an heart, and an heart, holds Conscience an utter enemy to his thrift; and
because he means to be unreasonably rich, he can well be content to be
vnmeasurably sinful.

The bold faced Stageplayer, that trades in poisoning all sorts, and ages, with
verses reezd in the smoke of lust, and blasphemous Scripture-iests, broke in
the very face of GOD, is worthily cast out (as the Bane of Conscience) to the
utmost welt of the skirt of the Suburbs.

CHAP. XXXVII. That Gods dearest Children are often troubled in Conscience.
IT is the manner of the vnreclaimed person, to bless himself in the conceit
of his light-heartednesse: and to wonder that the staid, and mortified
Christian can be so sad, and so unsociable. But (alas) he must understand,
that Sapiens miser, plus miser, quam Rusticus miser; The wise man in his
affliction, is more passionate then the unlearned; for he knows how to
exaggerate the causes of his grief, whereof the other cannot skill. And though
no outward cross lie on him, yet is he so sensible, and apprehensiue of his
sin, that the continuation of his Pilgrimage, is but a vicissitude of Joy and
Sorrow. He is ever sighing out this Prayer with S. Bernard; Eripe De Interior.
Domo. 31.
me, Domine, ab Homine malo, idest, a Meipso: Deliver me, O Lord, from the
Ungodly Man, that is, from mine own self. And casting back his eyes on the
several passages of his life, he finds it to be Peccat^m, or Sterilitas;
either Sin, or Barrenness; so his conclusion is this, after all debatements,
Nullum inuenio peccatum, a Bern. de In^. Do. 33.
quo non sim aliquo modo inquinatus: I find no sin, wherewith, in some sort, I
have not been defiled.

This, this was it, that made DAVID water his Psa. 6. 6.
couch with his tears; made him fast, and go barefoote, 2. Sam. 15. 30.
and put sackcloth on his loins, as if he had been at the brim of Despair,
Psalm. 77. 7.
as in truth, he was. And so was Job, when the Job 6. 4.
Lord set him up as a Butt to shoot at, and sent poisoned Arrows singing into
his bosom. So that it is not a matter of dislike to see a brother Afflicted in
mind, but rather of rejoicing; forasmuch as Trouble of Conscience is a
necessary part of Repentance, without which there is no hope of Salvation.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of sundry Comforts against excessive grief for Sin; and
first, of the Consideration of the Ins^n^tenesse of Gods Mercy.
IT is a worthy observation Super Cantica. Sermon. 38.
of S. Bernard, that The Ignorance of God, brings forth Despair. For when
the Christian is in his Agony, his own carnal reason will assault him on
this manner: Quid facis? Et vitam istam vis perdere, and futura^? What now?
Will thou lose this life* and the other too? Nequaquam pro tot, and tantis
peccatis, nec site excories, sufficies satisfacere; Thou shall never be able to
satisfy for thy sins (so many are they, and so enormous) no not if thou
shou^^ flay thy self. Which sharp temptation must be thus resisted: Grave est
vulnus Aug. in Psalm. 51.
quod habeo, sed ad Omnipotentem confugio: de meo tam Lethali vulnere
desperarem, nisi tantum Medicum reperirem: My wound (I confess) is deep and
dangerous, but I fly for cure to one that is Omnipotent: I should utterly
Despair, but that I have found so incomparable a Physician. For though my sins
Psalm. 40. 12.
have taken such hold on me, that I am not able to look up, and that they be
more in number then the hayres of my head, so that my heart fails me to
recount them: yet are they not Infinite, as is Gods Mercy. And therefore if
Satan shall whisper in mine ear, that my sins are greater than can be
forgiven, I will answer him out of S. Bernard, Mentiris, Latro, quia mayor est
Pietas Dei, quam quaeuis iniquitas: Thou lie, thou thief, for the goodness
of God is greater than my wickedness either is, or can be. The Lord describing
him self, for the comfort of his chosen, repeateth his Mercy, Exodus 34. 6.
eight, or nine times together: is He so Rich in Ephesians. 2. 4.
Grace, and shall I be so poor in Faith? Is it not his Mercy that is
Communis Peccantium Portus? The Common Harbor of all (Penitent) Sinners? For
it is not the Wisdom of God, nor his Power, nor Justice, that keeps the
broken heart from dying away, but his Mercy: which al men find (by experience)
to be the sweetest propriety of his Nature.

Saint Bernard in a certain De Euang. Sept. Panum.
Sermon, makes mention of a Seuen-fold Mercy, which (he says) each Child of
God may find in himself.

The First, is a Preventing 1.
Mercy, by which the Lord preserues his Elect from falling into gross evils;
Fateor, and fatebor, (says he) nisi quia Dominus adiuuit me paulo minus
cecidisset in omne peccatum anima mea: I do, and will ingenuously confess,
that unless the Lord had preserved me by grace, my Soul had gone near to
have lasht into all sin.

The Second, is a Forbearing 2.
Mercy, whereby the Lord waits for the Conversion of a Sinner. In regard
whereof the same Author writes thus: Ego peccabam, and tu dissimulabas; non
contin^bam a sceleribus, and tu a verberibus abstinehas: I sinned, O Lord, and
thou seemedst not to regard it: I contained not my self from wickedness, but
thou abstainedst from scourging me for the same.

The Third, is an Altering, 3.
or Changing Mercy, which makes a man settled in the resolution of holiness,
where before he was profane, and loose in his behavior.

The Fourth, is an Embracing 4.
Mercy, whereby GOD assures the Convert of his Favor.

The Fifth, is a Confirming 5.
Mercy, which strengthens, and vpholdeth the Righteous in his goodness.

The Sixth, is a Mercy, 6.
that sets him in the hope, and expectation of Glory. 7.


The Seventh, is a Crowning Mercy, where is Liuerie, and Seysin, and full
possession of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus the Lord has Seven Mercies, nay, Seventy times Seven Mercies, even an
innumerable multitude of compassions, for the poor distressed sinner, that
groneth under the burden of his transgressions. Therefore if I Pray, this shall
be Luke 18. 13.
my Petition, O GOD, be merciful unto me a Sinner; and if I give thanks, this
shall be Psalm. 136.
the foot of my Song, For his mercy indureth for ever; for his mercy indureth
for ever.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Second Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is the
Meditation of the blood of Christ.
NExt, when my Soul is heavy unto Death, I must have recourse to the Blood of
Christ, whose property 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
is to cleanse from Sin, and to make an atonement between GOD and Man. Col. 1.
20.
And for my further increase of comfort, I must call to mind the several
Effusions thereof, as they are recorded in Scripture.

The first blood he shed, Luke 2. 21.
was at his Circumcision, when he was but Eight days old, which Saint Bernard
De Passion. Do m. c. 36.
calls, Maturum Martyrium; A Timely Martyrdom. To which end he further adds;
Vix natus est Coeli Gloria, Coeli Diuitiae, Coeli Deliciae, dulcis JESUS, and
eccerecenti ortui Crucis dolor copulatur: Scarce was sweet JESUS come into the
World, who was the Glory, the Riches, the Delight of Heaven, but he underwent
the painfulnesse of the Cross.

The Second effusion of Bern. De Passion. Dom.
blood, was in his Agony, whereof S. Bernard speaks thus; Ecce quam
Rubicundus, and quam totus Rubicundus: Behold, how Red, and how all-ouer Red He
is: for Saint Luke 22. 44.
Luke affirms that his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the
ground.

The Third effusion of John 19. 1.
blood, was at his whipping; O cum quanta quantitate, putas illum sanctissimum
sanguinem, e conscisso corpore, and flagellato, distillasse in terram! Oh, in
what abundance, think ye, did that most Sacred blood of his, power down from
his torn, and scourged body, even unto the ground!

The Fourth effusion of John 19. 2.
blood, was when the Crown of Thorns was despightfully clapped upon his head:
Nec hic puto defuisse Riuos Sanguinis, says Saint Bernard; Nor can I think,
that at this time, there wanted Rivers of Blood.

The Fifth effusion of Ioh. 19. 18.
Blood, was upon the Cross, where his hands, and feet, and side were pierced;
Quis vnquam tam grauia, tam pudenda p^ssus fuit? Who was ever thus cruelly, and
thus shamefully handled? Contendunt Bern. De Passione.
Passio, and Charitas; illa, vt plus ardeat: ista, vt plus rubeat: His Passion,
and Love do stri^e together: that, that it may be hotter: this, that it may
be redder. O sua^^ssime vniuersorum Domine, and Saluator, Bone IESV, quales
tibi condignas gratiarum refer potero actiones! O blessed IESV, the most
graciou^ Lord, and Savior of all thy Chosen, How can I render thee sufficient
thanks! for thy Garment is dipped in Blood, and Revel. 19. 13. Isai. 53. 5.
the chastisement of my Peace has been upon thee from the beginning of thy
days, unto thy death, yea and after thy Death.

CHAP. XL. Of the Third Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is, the
Consideration of the Indefinitenesse of GODS Promises.
WHEN Satan (that Murderer from Ioh. 8. 44.
the beginning) shall lay the Razor close unto my throat, and shall labor to
threape me down, that though there were an Ocean of Christ's Blood, yet not ^
^ut drop belonged unto (...) to then stands it me in han^ ^hpitch my thoughts
up* At the Universality of Go^^- Promises, where-from Ic^^s, not exempt my
self, wi^^, out injury to GOD, (...) prejudice to mine (...) Soul. For, since
the (...) proclaims a General Pa^o^on in the Prophet, Ho, Every one that
thirsts, come ye Isai. 55. 1.
to the Waters: and that our Savior inuiteth All that ar^ Weary, and
Heauie-laden; Mat. 11. 28.
to come unto him; why should I be so cursedly ungrateful, as to except my
self, above all other, and wilfully refuse the gracious offer of my salvation?
Nay, (...) should I not rather (...) thus with S. PAVL; 1. Tim. 1. 15
^^rist Jesus came into the World, to ^^nners:

^^erefore he came to save ME, the (...) of Sinners.

CHAP. XLI. (...) the Fourth Comfort in ^^rouble of Conscience, ^^hich is the
Consideration (...) most grievous Sinners, (...) that have been pardoned upon
their Repentance.
SVCH is the subtletie of the Spiritual Adversary, ^^at in the practical
discourse before the committing of some crime, he inchanteth the Sinner with
the spell of Mercy; but when he has once entangled him in his Net, he shows
him nothing (...) the sanctions of the La^ (...) bring him to utter aba^ment,
and confusion. (...) which time I must remember those mighty Sinn^ (...) that
have been forgiven upon their serious humiliation. And thus I must reason. Am
I worse the DAVID, that went in, t^ 2. Sam. 11.
Bathsheba, and imbrued his hands in the blood of Vriah? 2. Kings 21 2. Chron.
33.
Am I worse then Manasses; Idolatrous, Murderous, Notorious Manasses? Am I
worse then Peter, that Mat. 26. 74
cursed, and band, and forswore his Savior? Am I worse then Mary Magdalen, Luke
8. 2.
that was possessed of Seven Devils? Am I worse then the Jews, that scourged and
Acts 2. 36. ^7. 41.
spit upon, and reviled, and crucified the Lord of Life^ Since these have
obtained pardon upon Repentance, what should bar ME from it, upon the same
condition? O, but my Righteousness is like the morning dew; for my Conscience
tells me, that I have had many fearful Relapses. To this I answer from
Chrysostom; In Psalm. 51. Contra Nouat.
Peccasti? Poenitere: Millies peccasti? Millies Poenitere; Millies Poenitet?
Adhuc etiam Poenitere: Have thou sinned? Repent; Have thou a thousand times
sinned? Why then, a thousand times Repent. Have thou Repented a thousand times,
I say, Despair not, but still betake thy self to Repentance.

I dare affirm it, (and Scripture will bear me out) Some of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and others.
that those damned Wretches that committed that unpardonable sin against the
Holy Ghost, might have bin forgiven, if they could but have Repented. For we
must not think, that that Hell-blacke sin is in it self irremissible: but
for that it is his nature that falls into it, to abhor all motions unto grace
and goodness. Then, blessed GOD, create in me a New heart, and give me the
singular gift of Regeneration. I crave not Riches, nor Honor, nor Long life;
but Repentance, Repentance, is the thing I sue for. O, Lord, vouchsafe it me,
for Jesus sake, upon my bare knees I ask it.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Fifth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is the
Consideration of Gods fatherly Chastisements accompanying it.
IN my importable pressures, and afflictions, when, that I feared is come upon
me: when I am bereft of Wife, Children, Parents, Health, Liberty,
Maintenance; this makes my Cup of Gall, and Vinegar to run over, that my
Conscience informs me of my life, either openly led in profaneness, or veiled
over with an hypocritical precizenesse: and besides, Satan insulteth in my
misery, and like Shemei rayles, and throws stones at me, as if I were the
Monster of the World. But as expert Physicians fetch from the Scorpion an help
against her poison: so must I extract from the Matter of my woe, a Preservative
against it. And thus I must hearten up my self: It is even so, O, LORD, Whom
Heb. 12. 8.
thou love, thou chastnest, and scourgest every Son that thou receiuest. If
I be without correction (whereof al are partakers) then am I a Bastard, and
not a Son. Hieron. ad Castrut.
Quid inter Reges, Iosia sanctius? Aegyptio mucrone intersectus est; Quid PAVLO
sublimius? Neronianum gladium cruentauit: What King was ever holier than
Icsiah? Yet was he slain by the Sword of Egypt; Who more heroical, than
Paul? yet died he by the blade of NERO. Magna ira est, quando peccantibus non
irascitur Deus: GOD is Ibid.
thoroughly angry with Sinners, when he seems not to be angry at all.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the sixth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is Mourning
for sin.
IF, when my Conscience is upon the Rack, and that I call my salvation into
doubt, I can lament my sins and rebellions, with brackish tears, or sorrows
equivalent: I have just cause of consolation. For first it is certain, that
Judging my self, I shall never 1. Cor. 11. 31.
be Judged of the Lord. Again, it is an Axiom in Scripture, that, They that
sow Psa. 126. 5.
in tears, shall reap in joy. Thirdly, I find, that the godliest men were the
greatest weepers; as David (for one) Oculus ve^uti a Tineis Corrosus est.
Vatab. in Ps. 6. 7.
whose eye was worm-eaten with blubbering. To the which consents S.
Augustine, when he says, Quanto De Ciu. Dei l. 20. c. 17.
quisque est sanctior, tant^ est eius fletus vberior: The holier a man is, the
more plentiful is he in weeping. Fourthly, the tears that flow from a contrite
heart, are accepted of God, as secret prayers: therefore says S. Ambrose,
Lachrymae, tacitae quodammodo Sermon. 46.
sunt preces: Tears (in some sort) are close supplications. Fifthly, the tears
of a pensive sinner rejoice the blessed Saints of Heaven: to this end says
Bernard, Lachrymae Super Cant. Ser. 68.
Peccatorum, Deliciae Angelorum: The tears of S^nners, are the delights of
Angels* Sixthly the merry sports of The^ters, come very far short of the
comfort that goes with tears, for so says S. Augustine, Dulciores sunt In Ps.
128.
lach^ ymae o^antiu^, quam gau^ia Theatrorum: More sweet are the t^ars of them
that pray, than the pleasures of Stageplayes. Seventhly, it is a sign that he
is respected of God, whose heart by grace is dissolved into tears. Omnis
Peccator (says S. Bernard) De modo Been viu. Ser. 10.
tunc se cognoscit visitari a Domino, quando compungitur adlachrymas: Then does
the sinner persuade himself that he is visited (in mercy) of the Lord, when
his grief for sin shows it self in tears. Eighthly, if tears (as the same
Author testifies) be miraculously turned into Wine, which issue forth in the
fervor of In Epiphan. Dom. Ser. 3.
Charity to our neighbor; then much more those, which the Sacred fire of Gods
Spirit has distilled from true remorse for sin: whereof if we drink til we
scarce know where we are, it is but Sobria quaedam Ebrietas; A certain sober
kind of Dizzinesse.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of the Seventh Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is Prayer.
AS our blessed Savior, in the days of his flesh, did offer up prayers, and
supplications unto his Father, with strong crying, Heb. 5. 7.
and tears, and was also heard in that which he feared: so is every Christian,
in the terror and consternation of his mind, to invoke Gods Name with all
Faith, and Zealousnesse. For, since Prayer is of such a prevailing nature, that
it pierces the heavens, and importunes the Lord for succor, not suffering him
to rest, until he have mercy on the Suppliant: how can Isa. 62. 7.
he want comfort, that is sedulous in the use of it? The Prophet David was
often wounded grievously in Conscience: and in all his Agonies, he* still has
recourse to God by Prayer. And this is very obseruable, that his Petitions in
that case, howsoever they begin in grief, yet they end Psalm. 6. 1.
in joy. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger! an heavy entrance: yet thus he
exulteth in the cloze, Away from 8.
me* all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping. So, when he powers out this complaint, My God, my God, Ps. 22. 1.
why have thou forsaken me? what can be imagined more sad, and rufull? yet in
the conclusion, where he 23, 44.
calls upon the faithful to congratulate Gods great regard of him, does not
the gladness more then coun teruaile the sorrow? In like manner, when he
cries out as for life, and death, Sau^ me, O Lord, for the waters are Ps. 69.
1.
entered even to my soul; what beginning can be more passionate? yet if we
descend to the latter part, it will not much differ from a Song of Triumph? It
were ^o hard matter to quote sundry other places to this purpose: but these
may suffice, as a direction to the rest.

Now the ground of our Ps. 50. 15.
hope in the Invocation of Gods name, is both a Commandment, and a Promise:
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. O the unspeakable
solace of Gods children, that are not only invited, but charged, to call upon
their heavenly Father, in all their necessities, with a most gracious assurance
to be heard, when they shall ask, nay, before they ask! O the Isa. 65. 24.
Romans 8. 15.
glorious privilege of Spiritual Ado^tion, which is a lawful Act, not
imitating, but transcending nature; found out of God, not for the comfort of a
Father that wants Children, but for the comfort of Children that want a
Father. It is this that makes us cry Abba, Father! It is this that makes us
say, Shibboleth, Judge. 12. 6.
not Sibboleth: it is this that makes us renew our strength, and lift up our
wings, as the Eagles. Isa. 40. 31.


Say, ye that are the Sons of the living God, ye that alone can speak the
Language of Canaan, if ever ye made an holy and fervent prayer, and felt not
an heavenly rejoicing after it* And say, if ye find it not true in experience,
that much prayer, much comfort; little prayer, little comfort; no prayer, no
comfort. O, it must needs De Inter. Dom. 6. 48.
be so. For, as S. Bernard well says, Quando oramus, Spiritum sanctum ad nos
vocamus: As often as we pray, we call the Holy Ghost unto us.

But here it must be remembered, that in the anxietie and perplexednesse of our
souls, we frame our petitions, (for their matter, and co^tents) according to
the pattern of the Lords Prayer, concluding also (usually) therewith our own
supplications. For (as Cyprian De Orat. Dom.
notes) Quanto efficac^us impetramus, quod petimus in Christi Nomine, si
petan^us ipsius Ora^ion^? How much sooner shall we obtain what we desire in
Christ's Name, if withal we request it in his own words? For it is to be
believed, that no Saint, nor Angel is able to match that Platform of Prayer;
whether we regard the Authority of it, or the Brevity, or the Perfection, or
the Method, or the Efficacy, or the Necessity.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Eighth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is the
Reading of Scripture.
EXcept thy Law had been Psalm. 119. 92.
my deligh^ says D^uid to the Lord) I should have perished in ^y ^ouble:
(where by Law is meant, not the D^calogue Calvin. Vatab. Molier. in Psalm. 19.
only, but the whole Covenant of God.) S. Paul calls the Scripture
(especially the New Testament) the W^rd of Life; because as it is Phil. 2. 16.
Verbu^ Domini, the Word of the Lord; so it contains nothing (in effect) but
Verbum Dominu^, The Word, The Lord. Now where Christ is the Subiect-matter,
there must needs be cause of Iubilation. Certainly, as the Lord is the God of
all Comsort: 2. Cor. 1. 3.
so the Bible is the Book of all comfort; which if we perceive not, the fault
is in our palate, according to that of S. Augustine, Mel amarum Febrienti: Not
honey In Psalm. 19.
it self, but is bitter to the Aguish.

I confess, the Books of Heathen Writers, do promise comfort in calamity,
but (alas) they perform it not: but are like a Brook Job 6. 17.
that swells in winter, when there is no need of it, and is dry in Summer,
when the Passenger faints, and pants for heat. For being ignorant both of
Sin, the wound, and of Christ, the Remedy, the succor they afford, must
needs be wearish. No: if we will have good Gold, we must go to Ophyr: if
good Balm, to G^lead: if good Wine, to Christ, at the wedding of Cana: and, if
good tidings, to the Book of God. For, to make a voyage, when the mind is
deadded, to Gentile Authors for refection (especially to their merry Poets) is
little better than 1. Kin. 10. 22.
traveling to Tharshish for Apes, and Peacocks. I appeal to all the Servants
of God, and chiefly to the old experienced Soldiers of Jesus Christ, if ever
they were eased of the Sting, and tumor of Conscience, by any writing under
heaven, but the Bible; or by some Book, that has borrowed all the sweetness
it has thencefrom. And more, let them say, if at any time they hasted to this
Fountain of living waters (taking with them their Pitcher, that is, true
Faith) and came not back with wonderful refreshment.

There is a rare, and profitable History, recorded by S. Augustine, of
Himself, in Lib. 8. c. 12.
his Confessions. His words are these: Recalling to mind, and aggravating my
misery: there arose a great storm, which brought forth a pealing shower of
tears. Whereupon I went aside from my friend Alipius, that I might more freely
give my self to weeping. And laying me down under a certain Fig Tree, mine
eyes gusht out with rivers of waters; and thus I bemoned my self to God; O
Lord, how long? how long will thou be angry with me? For ever? I beseech thee,
remember not my former wickedness. For I perceived, that still I was hopled in
it, and therefore I took up this miserable complaint; Quam diu, Quam diu,
Cras, and Cras? Quare non modo? Quare non hac hora, finis turpitudinis meae?
How long, how long shall I put off my Repentance, with To Morrow, To Morrow?
Why turn I not Now, this present hour, from the filthiness of my life? At
which words (delivered with bitter mourning) me thought I heard a voice thus
singing from the next house: Toll, Lege: Toll, Lege: Take up and Read; Take
up, and Read. Then changing my countenance, and pondering the matter carefully,
and advisedly, I returned to Alipius, where I had left my Book of the Epistles
of S. Paul; I snatched it up, and opened it, and read to my self this place,
which first presented it self to mine eyes: Not Romans 13. 13. 14.
in Gluttony, and Drunkenness, neither in chambering, and wantonness, nor in
strife, and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. Nec vltra volui Legere, nec opus
erat: Nor would I read any further, nor needed I: for so soon as I came to
the end of this clause, my mind was secured, and al doubts dislodged.

If here it be demanded what parts of Scripture are fittest to be read for
the stay of Conscience: I answer, that for the Old Testament, the Prophet
Isaiah, in the judgment of Saint Ambrose, who counseled Aug. Confess. l. 9. c.
5.
S. Augustine, propounding the same question, to be conversant in him, above
others: no doubt, because he wrote so clearly of the Messiah to come, as if
he had been already incarnate. But Athanasius, and Prolog. in lib. Psalm. Ad
Rust. Mon.
Basil, and Augustine, and Jerome, and Chrysostom, and almost all the New
Writers, stand so deeply affected to the Book of Psalms, that they hold it the
Storehouse of all good learning, the Divine M^stris both of Faith, and Virtue,
and the perfect Anatomy of the Soul. And therefore their advice is* that as
Alexander the Great, was wont to put the works of Homer, in the most precious
Casket of King Darius, which glittered all-ouer with gold, and gemmes; so, that
every Christian (especially those that are burdened in Conscience) would lock
up the Book of Psalms in the Cabinet of their hearts, as a most incomparable
Treasure.

Now for the New Testament (which is more glorious than the Old, as S. Paul
proves) I am of Zanchies De Nature. Dei. c. 3.
opinion, that those Doctrines are most excellent, which our Savior Christ
delivered with his own mouth; as his Sermon upon Mat. 5. Luke 4. John 17.
the Mount, at Nazaret, at Capernaum, and those heavenly Prayers, which he
made a little before, and at his Death. Where it must be cautiously remembered,
that though in the Sermons of our Savior, there be found some sentences of
terror and deiection: yet (as Luther Upon the Galatians.
notes) they properly belong not to his office of Mediator-ship, and were only
bent against the viperous generation of the Pharisees, and others of that
strain.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Ninth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is Singing of
Psalms.
THere are sundry Reasons, 1.
why the Lord would have the chief points of Religion included in Numbers, by
the sweet Singer of Israel. One is, that they might be transmitted pure, and
without deprauation, to posterity: for they run so eeuenly, and so
harmonically upon feet, that if there want but a word, or syllable, the error
is deprehended.

Secondly, it is done for the 2.
help of memory; for Concinnitie of Numbers is sooner learned, and longer
retained, then Prose*

Thirdly, (as Athanasius 3.
observes) it puts us in mind of the harmony of our actions.

Fourthly, it serves for the 4.
comfort of the Godly, who are often more cheared by Psalmoaie, than by Prayer.
In this last respect S. Augustine thus describes a Prolog. in lib. Psalm.
Psalm: Psalmus, Tranquillitas animarum est, and Signifer Pacis: A Psalm is
the Tranquillity of Souls, and the Standerd-bearer of Peace. With the which
agrees that of S. Ambrose; Psalmus Praefat. in Psalm.
est vox Ecclesiae, and clamor Iucunditatis: A Psalm is the voice of the
Church, and the Noise of Rejoicing. And truly it is verified in the experience
of the Saints, that devout Singing of Psalms, causes tears (of joy) to stand
in the eyes (if yet we may call them tears, and not rather the Dew of Heaven,
with Saint De Scala Claustrali.
Bernard.) To this purpose, says S. Austine, Psalmus, etiam Prolog. in lib.
Psalm.
ex cord Lapideo, Lachrymas mouet: A Psalm f^tcheth tears from a flintie
heart. Nay, he sticks not to affirm, that the Singing of Psalms and Hymns
unto the Lord, with a grace in our hearts, does inuit the Angels of Heaven to
bear us company, and does put to flight the very Devils.

Then Sing ye merrily unto the Lord, O ye servants of his, that wrestle (many
times) with Death, and Despair: for well it becomes you to be thankful,
since you are the Timbrels of the Holy Ghost. For it is not the Beast that can
Sing, nor yet the Birds that are of great size: but the Little Lark, the Little
Nightingale, the Little Linnet, I mean, the poor despised ones: and they, not
on the ground, but upon the trees, or in the air. For the best-men, if they
once begin to mind the Earth, forget their Singing.

Now, if it be objected from S. James, that merry Iam. 5. 13.
times are fittest for Singing of Psalms: I answer, first, that the sorrows,
and maladies of the Saints have ever their inter mixture of joy; and then, that
the speech is not so to be restrained to prosperity, but that it extends it
self also to cases of extremity. To this end Saint Augustine brings in In
Psalm. 50.
God, rebuking those that sung not praises to him in their Distress, in these
words: Quando parco, cantas; quando Castigo, murmuras: quasi quando parco, sim
Deus tuus, and quando non parco* non sim Deus tuus. Ego, quos amo, arguo, and
castigo. When I spare thee, thou singest; when I afflict thee, thou murmurest;
as if when I let thee alone, I were thy God, and were not thy God, when I
corrected thee. No, know, that whom I love, I Reu. 3. 19.
rebuke, and chasten.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Tenth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is the
Testimony of the M^nister.
IN the time of some gr^euous sickness, or calamity, when the Conscience of
the Believer is waked up, and the pains of Hell begin to take hold on him; oh,
how hard it is to persuade him of his Adoption! For, the Devil obtruding the
multitude of his sins, the heinousness of their rank, the holiness of the
Law, the justice of GOD, and the horror of damnation; and he judging of
himself by feeling, not by Faith, sometimes breaks forth into fearful words
of impatience, and distrust. In which combat, if the godly Minister, to whom
are committed Mat. 16. 19. Ioh. 20. 23.
The Keys of Heaven, shall perceive by his thirsting after the blood of
Christ, by his zealous prayer for increase of grace, by his humble submission
under the hand of GOD, and by other comfortable effects, and ouertures, that
his name is written in the Book of life; and thereupon shall acquit him (in
Christ) from the malediction of the Law; there is certainly offered him great
matter of rejoicing.

For, if when I shall think (because I have a great drought upon me) that I am
entered into a Dropsy, and am like ere long to be big of the disease, and to
be brought to bed of Death; there shall come unto me an expert, and
experienced Physician, who after due pause, and advised consideration, shall
confidently assure me, that there is no such matter, because my liver is not
obstruct, my Stomach swells not, my Ankle pitts not, my Urine is not waterish,
nor my Flesh spungie, nor my Complexion sallow, nor any Symptom of such evil
can be discerned; shall I not take heart, and gather up my spirits, and blush
to think that I was so timorous, and conceited? And even so should it fare
with me in my inward languishment, when the Spiritual Physician imparts the
like effectual encouragements.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Eleventh Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is,
Conference with the Godly.
IT is no small blessing, when a man that is humbled in Spirit, may repair for
ease to Christian friends to whom is given the tongue of the learned, to know
how to minister a Isa. 50. 4.
word in time to him. For, first, it is a Rule in Divinity, and in Experience,
that Two Eccl. 4. 9.
are better than One: and that A threefold Cord is not 12.
easily broken. Secondly, it is the Promise of Christ, that where two or three
are gathered Mat. 18. 20
together in his Name, there will he be present by his Holy Spirit, as he was
corporally with his Disciples, when they went Luc. 24. 15.
to Emaus. Thirdly, Godly Conference is a special part of the Communion of
Saints. Fourthly, the vicissitude of grave Discourses, and advised collation of
Evangelical contexts, exhilerateth the mind, and lifts it up above it
self. Fifthly, the inter-view of each others holiness, puts on the
dully-disposed party, and exacuates him to goodness. Sixthly, the force of
mutual encouragement, strikes fire into the affections, and inflames them with
zealousnesse, and devotion. Lastly, the prayers that are jointly made, with
united hearts, and pure hands lift up, ascend as Incense before the Lord, and
much avail in the behalf of the discomfited. But if in the fright, and
appallment of Conscience, we shall resort to pleasant companions, who with
rotten mirth undertake (as they phrase it) to drive away the Qualme from our
stomach: the event will prove, that it is but cold water in a burning Ague,
which asswageth the heat for the present, but afterward redoubleth it, and
indangereth the body.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Twelfth Comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is
Painfulnesse in our Calling.
AMongst other effectual means against drooping, and vexation of spirit, the
Diligence in our particular Calling, is not to be forgotten. For as it remoueth
the occasion of evil: so beats it back the temptation to Despair.
Therefore those men are marueilously deceived, who living in discon^ent, by
continuing in ^ome gross sin, do relinquish all d^aling in the world, and
betake themselves to a Sedentarie life, persuading themselves they shall rest
them in retyrednes, as in the center of their hopes. For, through want of due
motion and stirrage, the rust, and canker of selfeguiltinesse, will eat into
their most solid, and bestcompacted parts, and, in tract of time, consume them
to nothing.

Let us therefore shun Idleness, as the Moth of the Soul, which frets it in
pieces without making any noise: and let us bear in mind the counsel of Saint
Jerome: Facito aliquid oper is, Ad Rustic. Mon.
vt te semper Diabolus inue occupatum: Be doing something, that the Devil may
always find thee busied. And let us go (as Solomon advises Pro. 6. 6.
us) to be schooled of the Pismires; for they bestirre themselves with toil
incredible, and (as Jerome reports of them) are wittily In vit. Mal. Mon.
laborious: some bearing burdens bigger then themselves: some nipping seeds in
their mouths, as with pincers: some carrying moulds to stop the water-wayes:
some cutting Corn in the middle, that it grow not: some running to help them
that lie struggling under their load: and others officiously conueighing out the
bodies of the dead, for fear of annoyance.

CHAP. L. Of the Thirteenth comfort in trouble of Conscience, which is, The
Truth of Gods Promises.
ANother Anchor-hold, for the Soul to stay her self, in the surges of
temptation, is the infallible Truth of Gods Promises. For God is not as man,
that Number. 23. 19.
he should lie, neither as the son of man, that he he should repent: has He
said, and shall He not do it? Has He spoken, and shall He not accomplish it?
Is he not true in him self, in his words, and in his works? Is not his Truth
sincere without imperfection? first, without dependence? eternal without
succession? immutable without variation? Is not his Word the Ioh. 17 17.
Truth by an excellency? and shall it not remain in violate, when the
constant Mat. 5. 18.
frame of heaven and earth shall be shaken, and dissolved? And has not the
Ier. 31. 34.
Lord made a Covenant with the Believer, and confirmed it by handwriting, 1.
Cor. 11. 25.
and seals, that he will forgive his iniquity, and remember his sin no more?
Then why do I listen to the deadly Knell of Satan, as if I were a firebrand
of Hell, without all hope of life, and salvation: and not rather cry with
tears, as the Man did in S. Mark, Lord, Mark. 9. 24
I believe, help my unbelief?

CHAP. LI. Of the Fourteenth Comfort, which is the Justice of God.
AS out of the Eater came Judge. 14. 14
meat, and out of the Strong came sweetness: so may there matter of
consolation, be fetched from the propriety of Gods Justice. For, first, it is
never executed against the nocent, without some mixture of mercy; insomuch
that the Devils themselves are not altogether punished so severely as they See
Hier. Zanch. de Not. Dei. c. 5.
deserve. Secondly, it being against the nature of Justice, that a Debt should
be twice paid, by the Surety once, and again by the Principal: why should I
fear the attachment of my person, since my Bonds long Col. 2. 14.
since were canceld at Golgotha, and nayld to the Cross of my Redeemer?

CHAP. LII. That all the forenamed Comforts are vneffectual, without the
Presence of the Holy Ghost.
But in vain does Paul 1. Cor. 3. 6.
plant, and Apollos water, unless the Lord do give increase. It is not bread,
but the Staff of bread that nourishes. It is the Holy Ghost that is the
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, Ioh. 14. 16, 17.
whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him:
but the Children of God know him; for He dwells in them with an unspeakable
joy, which goes a degree beyond Peace of Romans 14. 17. De Scala Claust.
Conscience. Inexperti talia non intelligunt (says Bernard) nisi ea expressius
legant in libro Experientiae, quos ipsa doceat Vnctio: Inexpert men cannot skill
of these things, nor any but those that expressly read them in the Book of
Experience, being instructed therein by the Unction of the Spirit. Hanc autem
gratiam cui vult, and quando vult, Sponsus tribuit; non quasi iure Haereditario
possidetur: Now the Bridegroom (CHRIST JESUS) conferres this grace upon whom
he will, and when he will: for no man can challenge it as an Heritage.

The signs (says Saint Bernard) that declare the De Scala Claust.
presence of the Holy Ghost, are chiefly two: Suspiria, and Lachrymae: Sighs,
and Tears. O, Domine IESV! si adeo sunt dulces istae lachrymae, quae ex
memoria, and desiderio tui excitantur; quam dulce erit gaudium, quod ex
manifesta Tui Visione capietur? Lord IESV! if the tears, that are shed in the
remembrance, and desire of Thee, be so sweet, and delightful; how
unspeakable will that joy be, that shall be conceived in the manifest Vision
of Thee? Si adeo dulce est flere prote; quam dulce erit gaudere de te? If there
be such pleasure in weeping for thee, Oh, what comfort will there be, in
rejoicing in thee?

CHAP. LIII. An Exhortation to the Children of GOD, that they strive against
their Dumpishnesse, and that they be Cheerful in the Lord.
Rejoice in the Lord, O Psalm. 33. 1.
ye Righteous; for it becomes well the Just to be thankful. Rejoice in the
Phil. 4. 4.
Lord, always, again, I say, Rejoice. Sing ye merrily unto Psalm. 81. 1.
GOD your Strength, make a cheereful noise unto the GOD of Jacob. O Sing
Praises, sing Praises unto your GOD; O sing Praises, sing Praises unto your
King. O give thanks Psalm 47. 6.
unto the LORD, for he is Gracious, and his Mercy indureth for ever. O give
thanks unto the GOD of all GODS, for his Mercy indureth for ever. O thank
Psalm. 136. 1. 2. 3.
the LORD of all LORDS; for his Mercy indureth for ever. Yea, let the Dumb
Isai. 35. 6.
man Sing, and the Lame man leap as an Heart.

Hearten up your selves Psalm. 42. 5.
with the Prophet DAVID'S Apostrophe: Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul; and
why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in GOD. Fear not, thou
woorme Jacob, for thy Redeemer, Isai. 41. 14.
the Holy One of Israel will help thee. Why should thou say, The LORD Isai.
49. 14.
has forsaken me, and my LORD has forgotten me? Can a Woman forget her
Child, and not have compassion on the son of her Womb? Though they should
forget, yet will not the LORD forget thee. Behold, he has engraven thee upon
the palms of his hands, thy Walls are ever in his sight. For a moment, Isai.
54. 8.
in his anger, has he hid his face from thee, for a little season: but with
everlasting Mercy will he have compassion on thee. Who shall lay any thing to
thy charge? It is GOD that justifies Romans 8. 33. 34. etc.
thee. Who shall condemn? It is CHRIST which is dead, yea rather, which is
risen again, who is also at the right hand of GOD, and makes request for
thee. Who shall separate thee from the love of CHRIST? Shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No, thou
may persuade thy self, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate thee from the love
of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus thy Lord.

Consider that the Godly (...). ^ th. 7. 11.
man is a Blessed man, and therefore has his name of Rejoicing. Consider the
saying of Athanasius (which is cited by Saint Bernard) De modo Been Viu. Ser.
11.
Homo tristis semper malitiatur, and contristat Spiritum Sanctum, sibi a Deo
donatum: A man that is customably sad, and dumpish, is always hammering some
mischief, and grieueth the Holy Spirit, which the Lord has given him.
Consider that a sorrowful Pro. 17. 22.
mind dries up the bones, and riueleth the body, which is a part of the
Image of GOD. Consider, that it disableth a man to the performance of the
Works of his Calling. Consider, that it is exceeding liable to temptations,
and is usually barren in the very disposition to do good. Consider, that
Listlesnesse, and Unthankfulness, are never severed, but go hand in hand
together. Consider, that it is the Sister of Doubtfulnesse. Consider, Bern. De
Mod. Been Viu. Ser. 11
that Melancholy is a Black humor, and the Seat of the Devil, if it be not
well looked to. Consider, that immoderate Sorrow 2. Cor. 7. 10
causes Death, and is the Forerunner of Despair. Consider, it argues a
defect of Wisdom, since the wrath of GOD belongs Ephesians. 5. 6.
not to the Elect, but to the Children of Disobedi^nce Consider, that as in the
Laughing of the wicked, the Pro. 14. 13.
heart is sorrowful, and the end of that Mirth is Heaviness: so in the sorrow
of the Godly, the heart should be lightened, because the end of that Heaviness
is Mirth. Consider, that it prouokes the Lord to anger, when one serves him not
with Ioyfulnesse, and Deu. 28. 47
with a Good heart.

CHAP. LIIII. A short Prayer for Comfort in trouble of Conscience.
MOst mighty, and most glorious GOD, the brightness of whose countenance the
very Angels are not able to behold, and before whose wrath none is able to
stand: how dare I vile, and miserable Sinner, once offer to speak unto thee by
Prayer, who am guilty in my self, of so many treacheries, and rebellions;
whereby I have made my self liable to everlasting vengeance? But, Lord, it is
thine infinite goodness, and tender compassion in Jesus Christ, that thus
imboldneth me. For, though I be Hell, yet thou art H^auen. And still thou
most kindly offerest thy self unto me in thy Word, and Sacraments, and
smitest my stony heart with remorse, that so I may be converted, and live.
Yea, Gracious Lord, thou see at this present, that I lie bleeding in wardly
before thee, and that my sins pursue me unto Death. My belly trembles, my
lips shake, and rottenness enters into my bones, for fear of thy Judgments.
For, O Lord, I confess from the bottom of my heart, that, in mine own
feeling, I am the most notorious Offender, that ever begged mercy at thy hand,
or that ever was saved.

For Christ his sake, have mercy upon me and speak Peace unto my Soul. O
thou that killest, and make alive, bring down to the Grave, and raysest
up again; forgive me my manifold, and crying sins, and restore the joys that
I was wont to find in thee. O blessed Father, look upon me in thy Beloved: O
Jesus Christ, one drop, one drop of thy blood to comfort me: O Holy Ghost,
inspire me with the sweet motions of grace, and give me a Certificate of mine
Election, and Salvation. Good Father, forsake not the work of thine own hands;
but glorify thy name, in vouchsafing pity to me poor wretch, who in all
humility do crave it further, in the name, and words of my Savior, saying,
Our Father, etc.

CHAP. LV. Of Evil Conscience: and first of the Large one.
Having thus copiously discoursed of the nature of Good Conscience, and of
Trouble of Mind, which (being sanctified) is in the way to it: it now
remains that we treat of Evil Conscience, which has sundry kinds, or
distinctions; the first whereof is called Conscientia Dilatata; A large or
Cheuerill Conscience; because it sticks not at any sin, unless it be
notorious, and capital. Thus many will swear deep and fearful oaths,
which yet will pause in a case of Perjury; will digest Fornication, but shrink
at Incest; will make no bones of Usury, Brokage, and such dry murder; yet will
sit down, and demurre, ere they bathe their hands in blood.

This Conscience is that, which is termed Sleepie, or Benumbed; for that it
lies still, and couches close, till the time of Sickness, Death, or other
extremity; and then (like a wild Beast) it starts up with fiery eyes, and is
ready to pluck out the throat of the soul. Now the causes of this Security,
are Ignorance, Passion, Hartsease, Employment; which either lull the Conscience
asleep* or else cry down her voice with clamours, as the Drums in the
sacrifices to Moloch, were wont to drown the shriekes of the Infants.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Second kind of Evil Conscience, which is Nice, or Spiced.
Again; there is a Byrdey'd Conscience, which starteth back at the least
occasion* and makes more Commandments that Ten. Against this causeless
scrupulositie, is bent that sage advice of Solomon, Be not Ecclesiast. 7. 18.
thou Just Overmuch: which speech may seem strange at the first sight,
because Iustitia quanto mayor, tanto Dionys. Carthus.
melior; The greater Justice is, the more commendable it is. But we must
consider, that albeit Justice (in it self) be a virtue, where in there is no
Excess, directly; because the Augmentation is the Completion of it: yet in the
Exercises, and Acts thereof, superfluity may be found. So that (no doubt) it
is displeasing to GOD, that a man should maceratehimself, by watchings,
fastings, and immoderate labor, refusing lawful meats, and refections, which
serve for the sustentation of life, and furtherance of his calling: howsoever,
in a certain strictness, and morositie, he persuade himself that this
Austerenesse pleases him. But we need not press this point too far, in
this Intemperate Age, which is rather pampered to surfeit, than abridged of
Necessaries.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Third kind of Euil^ Conscience, which is the Perverse one.
ANother kind of Evil Conscience, is the Wayward one; whose property is to
strain out a Gnat, and swallow a Camel. This Mat. 23. 24.
was the Conscience of the Pharisees, who cried out against Mat. 12. 2.
the poor hungry Disciples for plucking a few ears of Corn on the Sabbath;
but could bawke their own sins, which were so palpable, and shameful, that
they deserved to be hooted at. In like sort, they tythed M^nt, Annise, and
Mat* 23. 23.
Cummin: but left the weightier matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy, and
Fidelity. Not that it was reproueable to regard the smallest documents of the
Law: but for that they committed a threefold error. First, in the neglecting
of greater duties: Secondly, in placing their hope in these little ones: and
Thirdly, in their superstitious commendation of them. Of the Successors of
these Pharisees, complained Dionysius In Mat. 23. 23.
Carthusianus in his time. Tales (proh dolor) says he, iam pene innumerabiles*
sunt in Ecclesia Christi, Pastores, and Praelati: qui Decimas, and caetera quae
ad eorum commodum pertinent, cum omni diligentia exigunt, and non dantes
increpant dure, non tam diuino, quam priuato amore inducti: si vero subditi
peccent in Deum, vel se inuicem laedant, nil curant, vel parum: There are at
this day (I s^eake it with grief of heart) an innumerable This is meant of the
Romish Pharisees.
sort of Pastors, and Prelates in the Church (of Christ) who demand their
Tithes, and other profits, with all diligence and strictness, and take them up
roundly, that deny them; not led so much hereto by any love to God as out of
desire to benefit themselves: but if they perceive that the people sin
immediately against GOD, or else oppress and wrong one another, they respect
that, little or nothing at all.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Fourth kind of Evil Conscience, which is the Cauterized.
THere is a Conscience worse then all the former, which S. Paul calls 1. Tim.
4. 2.
Seared; because it is bereft of life, and sense, and motion; as an arm, or
leg, that is cut off from the body, and burnt with an hot iron. This kind of
Conscience is found in none, but obstinate Heretics, and heinous Malefactors;
such, as in Scripture, are said to be Vines of Sodom and Gomorrah, to be Deuteronomy
32. 32.
fat, and gross, and laden with fatness, to add drunkenness Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 1 Kin. 21. Isaiah 5 18 Zeph. 1. 12. Ier. 3. 3. zach. 7. 12.
to thirst, to sell themselves to work wickedness, to draw sin with
Cart-ropes, to be frozen in their dregs, to have Harlots foreheads, and hearts
of Adamant. These are they that are said (by the Schoolmen) to be Habituati in
malo; Accustomed to do Evil; and being Black-moores, will not Ier. 13. 23.
change their hue, though you wash them with Soap, and Nitre.

This hard, and irrelenting De Considerat. l. 1. Quid est Cor Durum? Quod
semetipsum non exhorret, etc.
heart is thus described by Saint Bernard: An hard heart is that which fears
not it self, because it feels not it self: It is that which is not rent with
compunction, nor softened with piety, nor moved with prayers: which yields
not to threats, and grows tough with scourges: unthankful for benefits,
unfaithful in counsels, in judgments cruel, in vileness impudent;
unfearful of danger, discourteous to the gentle, vnreuerent in Gods worship:
unmindful of things past, negligent of things present, improuident of things
to come. And that I may wind up all in one word, Ipsum est, quod nec Deum
timet, nec hominem reueretur; It is that which fears neither GOD, nor man;
like the Unrighteous Luke: 8. 2.
Judge decyphered in the Gospel.

CHAP. LIX. Of the Steps, and Degrees, that lead to this Searednesse of
Conscience.
THere are (says Gregory) In Pasto. Cura.
three principal Stairs, that descend to the chambers of Death: Suggestion,
Delectation, and Consent; the first is effected by Satan, the second by the
Flesh, and the third by the Soul. Suggestione peccatum agnoscimus,
Delectatione vincimur, Consensu ligamur: By Suggestion, we take notice of
sin, by Delight we are vanquished, by Consent inthralled. S. Augustine
sometimes Confess. 8. 5.
makes this Gradation: Will, Perverse Desire, Custom, Tom. 10. Hom. 27.
Necessity: and sometimes this; Suggestion, Delectation, Consent,
Perpetration. De Conscien.
Saint Bernard makes seven Descents into Hell; Importabile, Grave, Leave,
Insensibile, Delectabile, Desiderabile, Defensibile: In effect thus much:
First, Sin is Intolerable, then Heavy, then Light, then Past feeling, then
Delightful, then Desirable, then Justifiable. From all these places, and some
other of the like nature, we may observe Eight several Degrees, which I reckon
thus in their order.

The First is the Suggestion 1.
to sin, against which we must arm our selves with watchfulness, and
Government of the Senses. For there were two things that undid DAVID; Otium,
and Oculus: Idleness, and his Eye. And here we must remember, that Suggestion,
Bern. De Conscien.
without Ingestion, (that is, A temptation offered, without yielding to it) is
not Vulnus, but Corona; no Wound, but a Garland.

The Second Degree, is 2.
Cogitation, which is Ad peccatum dispositiue, in the way to Sin, if it be
not prevented. For (as Saint Ad Paul and Eustoch.
Jerome writes) the Devil, when he means to take up his lodging, is wont to
send a Thought before, to try whether he shall be welcome, or no. So that a
wicked thought (as the same Father notes,) is, Primogenita Diaboli; Satan's
Eldest Daughter. Now the Thoughts of Man, (as S. Bernard De Conscien.
distinguishes them) are either Burdenous, such as thrust themselves upon the
mind vnavoidably: or Affectuous, belonging to the pleasure of the body: or
Obscene, as being in the nature of unclean dregs: or Idle, as the imagination
of Birds, flying in the Air: or Curious, tending to the exploration of
secrets: or Suspicious, inclining to sinister interpretation: or lastly,
Distentorie, when the reason is stretched ^o the contemplation of farre-distant
Regions, or to the speculation of causes, or else to worldly negotiations.

The Third Degree is Delight, 3.
whereby an evil thought received, and re^ained in the mind, inueigleth the
will, and lays a bait for it. And this tickling of the affection, (if it be
dwelt upon) is a Mortal Sin, even by the verdict of the Schoolmen
themselves: Pet. Lomb. l. 2. Did. 24.
which must stir up every one to be circumspect in this case; to which end
tends that History, which Saint Jerome records in the life of Paulus,
concerning a godly yongman, a Soldier of Decius; who being at the commandment
of the Tyrant, laid upon a fine Downe-bed, and tied down hand and foot with
silken Towels, was most dangerously enticed by the kisses, and imbracements of
a beautiful Harlot; and being not able to break away from her (as Joseph did
Genesis 39. 12
from his wanton Mistress) to check himself in the occasion of pleasure, he
bit off his tongue, and spit it in her face.

The Fourth Degree, is 4.
Consent, or Resolution to venture upon the Action And here the Devil (that
Prince of Darkness) binds a Napkin close to the sinners eye, lest he behold
the danger ensuing; and sets a Skriene betwixt him and Hellfire, that he may
not feel the least heat of it. Of this Determination to commit sin, S.
Bernard thus De Jnter. Dom. c. 19.
writes: Solus Consensus reos nos facit, etiamsi aliquid impediat, ne opera
subsequantur: Consent alone makes us guilty before God, though the fact
intended be never accomplished.

The fifth Degree is Operation, 5.
which may be called the Birth of sin. For now Iam. 1. 15. Ps. 7. 14.
the Brat lies wralling in the lap, which before was silent, In Sermon. de vilic.
Iniq.
and concealed. Habet and opus vocem sitam, says Bernard: Every evil work
has a kind of voice, whether it be done Contra Natural, aut Contra Legem, aut
Contra Consuetudinem: Against Nature, Law, or (warrantable) Custom.

The Sixth Degree is Custom 6.
in evil: which has brought the profane to such an haunt, Vt iam, non modo
placeat peccatum, sed and assidue placeat: That he does not now only delight in
sin, but does nothing else but delight in it. Thus Consuetudo vertitur in
Naturam: The Habit is grown to a Necessity. Hic Peccator foetet, Hic Bernard.
Quatriduanus est: This Sinner stinketh, and rotteth like Lazarus, when he had
Ioh. 11. 39.
been dead four days.

The Seventh Degree is 7.
the Defense of Sin, which is fearful to think upon. At this pass were the
Jews, who being reproved from the Lord, for their gross Idolatry, returned
this answer, We have loved Strangers, and Ier. 2. 25.
them WILL we follow. Thus the Blasphemer alleges Joseph, to excuse his
swearing; the Drunkard, Noah; the Adulterer, Da^id; the Oppressor, Zachee: but
these wicked men (as Gregory Pastor. Cur. 3. pars.
well advises) are to be admonished, Vt eis perditio priuata sufficiat: That
they would hold it sufficient to be cast awayes themselves, and not by their
lewd and licentious speeches, to draw others with them into the same damnation.

The Eighth, and last Degree, 8.
is the Boasting of Sin, to the which when a man is come, he is in the gall
of Act. 8. 23.
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. The trial of Isa. 3. 9.
his countenance witnesses against him; he declures his sin, as Sodom, he
hides it not: woe be unto Ier. 6. 15.
his soul, for he has rewarded evil unto himself. Is he a shamed when he
Ier. 8. 12.
has committed evil? No, he is not ashamed, neither can he have any shame,
but turns unto his race, even Ier. 8. 6.
as the Horse that rusheth into the battle. Thus the Tyrant Boasts, that he
Psa. 52. 1.
can do evil; like Lamech, G^^. 4. 23. (...) V^^ab.
(the first Bigamist) who Vaunted to his wives, that he would slay a man in his
wound, and a young man in his heat. And thus the ungracious Old man, whose
thoughts are green, though his head be gray, delights to brag of his
Sabbathdancings, and other vanities of his youth; forgetting that such abusing
of the whole body with foolish gesticulations, and profanation of the Lords
Day, may truly be defined to be Circulus, cuius Centrum Diabolus: A Circle,
whose Center is the Devil. I will end this point with that worthy sentence of
Saint Bernard: Nihil eque De Conscien.
exasperat illius tremendi Iudicis Maiestatem, quam peccare, and secure
peccare, and de vitijs, quasi de virtutibus gloriari: There is nothing in the
world, that provoke so much to anger the Majesty of the most dreadful Judge,
as first, to sin, and then, to sin securely, and at last to glory in the
perpetration of it, as if we had performed some notable exploit.

CHAP. LX. Of the fearful Estate of those that have Searednesse of Conscience.
TO the end the Obstinate, and Obdurate, may be brought to the consideration of
the dreadful danger, where with he is environed (like the Host of the 2. Kin.
6. 20
Aramites in the midst of Samaria) I will stand a little, to describe the
woefulness, and forlornenesse of his estate.

First then, the Man that Deuteronomy. 28. Leu. 26.
has his Conscience seared, is liable to all the plagues that are under
heaven: to hunger, to thirst, to nakedness, to Famine, to War, to
Banishment, to Shame, to Beggerie, to Contempt, to Imprisonment, to the
Pestilence, to the Frenzy, and to the Botch of Egypt, to Abridgement of Life
by a sudden, and ignominious Death; at what time his Soul is like to go to
Hell, while his Body is devoured of the Fowls of the Air; or at the best,
lies rotting like a Carrion in the earth, til the Day of Judgment.

Secondly, the Scripture brands him for a Cursed 2. King. 9. 34.
Man; than which, what can be imagined more terrible? For as the sweetest word
in all the World, is, Come ye, Mat. 25. 34. 41.
BLESSED: so the very bottom of the Violl of GODS wrath, is, Go, ye CVRSED.

Thirdly, he does enough to bring a plague upon his Posterity, to the third
and Exodus 20. 5.
fourth Generation: for ofttimes the Curse is intayled to the Children of
irreligious Parents, the rather, because they usually tread in the by-ways of
their Progenitors.

Fourthly, the Sinner that has made a league with Hell, and with Death, is
transformed into a Beast, and has lost the name, and nature of a Man; and
therefore in the Dialect of Scripture, Psalm. 10. 9. ^ sal. 22. 12. Luke 13. 32.
Mat. 3. 7.
he is a Lion, a Bull, a Fox, a Viper, and (at the best) a Nebuchadnezzar
turned Dan. 4. 30.
out to grass.

Fifthly, the Word of GOD, which is as Fire, and as the Ier. 23. 29.
Hammer that breaks the stone; which has been a powerful instrument of
salvation to thousand thousand souls that have heard it, (as we read of Three
thousand Acts 2. 41.
that it wanne to the Church at one time) cannot prevail with the flagitious
liver; but the more Sermons he resorts to, the worse he is; like a raw, and
vnbaked Brick, which the more it is washed, the fouler it is.

Sixthly, the Sacrament is altogether ineffectuall to him, though it be the
Conduit of Grace, and the Lauer of the Soul. Thus Judas receiving the Bread of
the Lords Supper, at the blessed hand of our Savior, and yet retayning a
Traiterous disposition, received the Ioh. 13. 27.
Sop, but withal gave the Devil the full possession of himself.

Seventhly, (which is enough to make one quake to think of it) our Savior
Ioh. 17. 9.
Christ has left it in express words, that he will not Pray for him. Jeremy
Must not: Christ Will not. Ier. 7. 16.


Eighthly, when in his affliction he prays, and howles upon his Bed, he does
no better than cut off a D^gges Isa. 66. 3.
neck, or offer Swines-bloud, or bless an Idol. Insomuch that the action of
Prayer, which in the Elect is a singular grace, (as being the principal fruit
of Faith, and Bez. Conf. c. 4. Art. 16.
the most honorable service that can be tendered to GOD) is, in him,
unfruitful, and abominable.

Lastly, this Hardness of Exodus 7. 3.
Heart, and high degree of Spiritual desertion, is Pharaohs punishment, that
is, the Plague of Plagues, and the very Master-pocke, that eats out the eye
of the Soul.

CHAP. LXI. Of the Fifth kind of Evil Conscience, which is the Desperate one.
THe last, and worst kind of Conscience, is the Desperate: the horror whereof
but to shadow, (for who is able to express it at life?) were enough to split
the heart of a Christian. For, First, it is an Inward pang, a Secret torment,
and conuulsion; which by so much the more is into lerable, by how much the
less it is capable of vent. For the wicked is like the raging of the Isai. 57.
20.
Sea, whose waters cast up m^re and dirt; being not only tossed with Storms
and Counter-blasts from without, but most of all troubled with it own
reciprocal motion. Thus the huge, and massiue body of the Earth, is shaken
with vapors from within, where the most boisterous winds that assault her
vpper-face, cannot stir her.

Secondly, he is a Fugitive, and is run away from GOD, who (as Saint
Augustine In Psalm. 139
speaks) is not only an Inquisitour, but an Inuestigatour: does not only
inquire of him but traces him step by step, and will find him out, though he
hide himself in the top of Carmel: Amos 9. 3.
nay, though he lay close in the bottom of the Sea, yet thence would he
command the Serpent, and he should bite him.

Thirdly, the LORD has Deuteronomy. 28. 28, 67.
smitten him with Madness, (as he threatened in the Law) so that he knows
not what to do, nor where to rest; nor how to pass the time: but when it is
morning, he wishes it were night; and when it is night, he wishes it were
morning; and cannot sleep sweetly, but starts out of his Bed, and is ready to
kill himself, like the Keeper Acts 16. 27
of the Prison at Philippi.

Fourthly, he is a Malefactor, condemned, and adjudged to Death; expecting
hourly his deserved Execution; and therefore lives in continual fear, and
punishment: for, Timor supplicamentum Id est, supplicium. De Fug.
habet, says TERTVLLIAN: Fear has ever punishment annexed to it.

Fifthly, he is like the man, Possessed of the Devil, who Mark. 5. 3.
had his abiding in the Graves: for the most pleasant prospects are to him but
Golgothaes.

Lastly, there is a Worm The Heathens shadowed this by the Eagle or Vulture,
that fed upon the heart of Prometheus, Macrob. l. 1. in Some Scip.
which lies gnawing, and grabling continually at his heart, which shall never
die, never leave tugging, no not when he has lien thousand thousand years in
Hell. For the certainty whereof, it has pleased the Holy Ghost to repeat it
three several times, within the compass of five Verses, in these words;
Where the Mark. 9. 44. 46, 48.
Worm dies not, and the fire never goes out

CHAP. LXII. That it is exceeding dangerous for a man in horror of Conscience,
to kill himself.
AFter the Arch-enemie of Mankind (the Devil) has ensnared a man many years
together, in sensuality, and worldliness, and trailed him along with the
vain conceit of Mercy: at last he presents himself in a ghastly shape, with
knives and halters in his hand; continually urging him to become his own
Deaths-man, that so he may be rid of his present anguish. Against which
bloody temptation, the Christian is most carefully to arm himself with the
consideration of the danger that will accrue. For if Cleombrotus Aug. De Ciu.
Dei, l. ^
did ill to kill himself, that he might be possessed of those joys of
Heaven, which his Master Plato so excellently had described: and if Cato have
got him an everlasting reproach (amongst the truly wise) by dispatching
himself in a disdain to yield to Caesar (a man of incomparable valor, and
clemency:) and if Lucretia, (chaste, and innocent Lucretia,) have wronged her
name, by the wilful abridgement of her life, in a false supposall of
dishonor: and, if the best commendation that they got, was, that they did it
Aug. De Ciu. Dei. l. 1. c. 22.
Magne, but not Been: how shall they escape the judgment of GOD, who in the
bright sunshine of the Gospel, do most cruelly bereave themselves of the
great blessing of this present life, which God has allotted them for their
comfort, and Repentance?

Has not the Lord said, Thou shall not kill, without adding the word Neighbor
(as S. Augustine well De Ciu. Dei l. 1.
notes) that thou might take heed of admitting the least thought of
destroying thy self? Again, 2. Sam. 17. 23.
are not Achitophel, and Judas, that strangled Act. 1. 18.
themselves, left to all posterity as most fearful spectacles of GODS
vengeance? (For, as for the fact of Sampson, it is extraordinary; and more (as
Saint De Ciu. Dei
Austine observes) Spiritus latenter hoc iusserat: The Spirit of God had
secretly commanded it.) Besides; the same Father does peremptorily affirm,
that for a man to slay himself, is Detestabile facinu^, and damnabile; De Ciu.
Dei l. 1. c. 25.
A crime, that is both Detestable, and Damnable. Further, M^ns Body, is a Part
of the Image of God, and all the Three Persons in the Trinity Genesis 1. 26.
consulted about the making of it; and all the creatures in Heaven, and in
Earth, are not able to make the least hair of ones head. Lastly, after death,
Locu^ salubris De Ciu. Dei l. 1. c. 25.
Poenitentiae non datur; There is no fitting place for Repentance: and
therefore, O man, stay thy hand; and commit not that Murder in one instant,
which thou can never wash out with thy tears, in infinite Millions of years.

CHAP. LXIII. Certain forcible Reasons against Despair.
TO the end the Devil may not sink down the soul irrecouerably into Hell,
the distracted sinner is to know, that none in this life are apparently
debarred from hope of forgiveness, but only the Reprobate angels. Diaboli,
and Enarrat. in Psa. 54.
angeli eius (says S. Austin) manifestati sunt nobis, quod ad Ignem aeternum
sunt destinati: Ipsorum tantum desperanda est Correctio: Concerning the Devil
and his angels, most certain it is, that they are Praedestinate to everlasting
fire: and we are to despair of their correction only. Again, it must be well
weighed, that there is no Offender so hellish, and abominable, but that the
Church of God receives him into her arms, upon his unfeigned Conversion:
according to that sweet saying of S. Augustine: In quibuscunque Tom. 10. Hom.
27.
peccatis, non perdit viscera, Pia Matter Ecclesia: Our Holy Mother, the Church,
does not forgo the bowels of her love, in any sin, be it never so heinous.
Of this very mind is the blessed Martyr Cyprian: Nec quisquam (says Ad Demetr.
he) aut Peccatis retardetur, aut annis, quo ^^inus veniat ad consequendam
salutem: Let no man be kept back from seeking mercy, have he been never so
mighty, never so inueterate a Transgressour. In isto adhuc mund^ manenti, nulla
Poenitentia sera est: so long as a man is in this World, Repentance never
comes too late. ^^ sub ipso licet exitu, and vitae temporalis occ^su pro
delict is roges, venia confitenti datur, and ad Immortal^tatem, sub ipsa morte
transitur: Though thou have d^ferred the craving of forgiveness, even till
thou be drawing on, and (in a manner) at ^he last gasp: yet, if thou then
p^rforme it sincerely, thy sins a^e pardoned, and thou art p^ssed from death to
life. Which words are not written by this godly Father, to bolster up any man
in his presumption; but only to comfort the distressed soul, surcharged with
his iniquities.

Mo^eouer, the wounded Sinner is to take notice, that to add Despair unto his
other wickedness, is (with the Amorites) to make it Full. For it is the
judgment of Saint Augustine, Tom. 10. Hom. 27.
that Judas sinned more grievously by Despayring, than by Betraying Our
Savior. His words are these: Iudam Traditoren, non tam scelus, quod conmisit,
quam Indulgeniae Desperatio, fecit penitus interire: It was not so much the
cursed fact of Judas the Traitor, that cast away his soul, as the Despairing
of the Mercy of God.

Lastly, the Sin of Despair is so notorious, that some learned men have
thought it to be the Unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost: because it is
Di^nys-Carth. in Euang. Math. c. 27. Pet. Lomb. l. 2. Did. 43
committed direct contra Diuinitatem; Directly against the Godhead: videlicet,
contra Infinitatem Bonitatis, and Misericordiae Dei; that is, against the
Infinitenes of Gods Goodness, and Mercy. The Lord, for his Christ's sake,
confirm us in the assurance of his favor, by the testimony of his Spirit,
and the comfortable fruits of a Sanctified life; that after this wearisome
pilgrimage, we may keep holy to him, an everlasting Sabbath in the Heavens.
Amen.

Deo Gloria.
Qui primas non potuit habere Sapientiae; secundas habeat parts Modestiae.
Aug. in lib. Retract.
