A NEVVE Anatomy of whole man, as well of his body, as of his Soul: Declaring
the condition and constitution of the same, in his first creation, corruption,
regeneration, and glorification. ()

Made by JOHN WOOLTON Minister of the Gospel.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Lucrece. Anno Dom. 1576.



To the right worshipful William Moune Esquire, John Woolton wysheth
prosperous success in all vvorldly affairs, and in the life to come, Joys,
and Immortal felicity.
THOSE THAT HAVE employed their studies and labors, in the diligent inquisition
and description of Anatomy, how the parts of man's body are coupled and
knitte together, what properties and powers they have, what things are
healthful, or hurtful unto the same: have always purchased great praise and
commendation amongst all honest and virtuous men. And although it be accounted
of some, an yrkesome and cruel thing, to cut and mangle man's lymmes and
members: yet The knowledge of Anatomy profitable for man's life.
the end and use of the same is both necessary and profitable, in all the
course and trade of man's life. The cause why those things are so studiously
sought after, is, that salues and medicines may be more commodiously and
skilfully applied and ministered unto living bodies. For how, or to what end
can they use applications to any part, if they know not the position,
constitution, property, and nature thereof?

Besides this commodity, the inspection of The knowledge of anatomy do induce
us to think y^ there is a God. Galen vsu part. and alijs locis. Job. 10. 37
38. 39. Psa. 19. 33 133. Wysd. 7.
Anatomy (as Galene divinely writes) deduceth the creature, to some knowledge
of his Creator. And even so Job, David, Solomon, and many other in the holy
Scripture, after they have moved us to behold the glory of God, by his handy
works: when they come to the vewe and consideration of man's body, they so
speak thereof in way of admiration and wondering, that we may well gather
the strange and almost divine composition of the same, very much to excel all
other earthly creatures.

Now if men for the declaration of these corporal things, have bin always
heretofore so well loved and liked: Then those can not be misliked, The
consideration of the spiritual anatomy and y^ fruit thereof.
that in a general Anatomy of whole man, as well of his soul, as of his
body, do endeuer to describe man's excellency before his fall, and his
miserable ruin, together with the causes and consequences thereof. And then
descend in order to Regeneration and restitution of Gods Image in man, vvherby
the Christian lives, eu^ by death: his body shall rise again, and be coupled
with the soul, and so at the last be glorified eternally in the heavenly
kingdom.

But we can have no help in the doctrine of these high mysteries, neither of
Hypocrates, The knowledge of the se things comes out of gods word.
Galene, nor any other bodily Physician: for they conteyne them selves within
the limits of their profession. Those Scriptures then, which be called (and are
in deed) Holy, do plainly reuele this doctrine unto us: fir those that have
excelled in vvitte, learning, and judgment among the Heathen, vewing the
conposition of man, were even amassed, in considering principally two things.
First, that amongst all corporal Man partly the fairest, partly y^ foulest of
visible creatures.
and visible creatures in this world, there was none so fair and beautiful
in wit, accions, and stature of body. Secondly, that amongst all the said
creatures, there was none found subject to so many miseries and calamities.
For this noble and excellent nature of man decays much more horribly, then
an Ox, or an ass: and nature abhors man's carkas more then any other living
creatures: and if it be not interred and buried, there will Serpents, and
Todes, quickly spring out of the same, as experience has often times declared.

But from whence man has contracted such excellency on the one side, and such
deformity and destruction on the other side: these wise worldlings The Ethniks
know the disease of our nature, but they know not y^ cause.
were not able, with any wisdom to enquire and find out. For as S. Aug. well
says, They felt the disease of our nature: But the cause they knew not. God
therefore of his infinite and great mercy, has comprehended in the holy
scripture, the history and doctrine of these great matters, out of whom I
have drawn this brief abstract of Anatomy. And albeit I acknowledge
willingly my own Aug. contra Iulia. lib. 4. ca. 14.
imbecilitie, and do confess that many are fitter for this matter then my
self: yet because it is the duty of a minster of Gods word, to point (as it
were) with the finger, out of that rich store and treasure of the holy
scripture, what men ought to think and hold of such necessary matters: I shall
be accounted (I trust) neither arrogant, nor presumptuous, in handling those
things which are within the precinct of my office and calling. And for that by
experience I right well know (if any other) how busy disdayners will be with
my phrase, style and method, yet because many of them have been long hatching
their adled eggs, and have yet brought forth nothing: Let them now finish
their labors in* karping other men's good endeavors: surely they shall sooner
pyne away with their malice and envy, then fear me from honest labors, to do
good to my country. Let them not spare their Crystal eyes on Gods name to
reprehend my words and matter, my invention, definitions, and divisions: yea
if they will they may note the escapes in the impression. etc. It shall be
sufficient unto me, if the Christian reader, will conster well my good intent:
Being also of opinion for my own part, that none can excuse his idleness, that
may be profitable any ways to others.

Now for that this weak and seely Anatomy was loath to go abroad without some
especial pro ^ectio^: I have selected your worship to be a Patro^ for the same:
Moved thereunto with that great courtesy and goodwill, which from your first
acquaintance with me, you have showed toward me. Moreover your ardent zeal
and love of the gospel somewhat emboldned me in this enterprise, which amongst
many other your comme^dations chiefly commends you. It is a great matter to
come of a great parentage, to have large hereditamentes and possessions,
wherein none at all in Cornwayll do pass you, and very few are comparable
with you: But with those things, to be the servant of Christ, a lover of his
gospel, and a foster, and nurce to his church, (as you and that virtuous
gentlewoman your Wife, are well known to be in your country) is, Hom. in
aliqu. scrip tos locos.
as Basilius Magnus says, most laudable. In the which, and all other virtues,
I beseech God to continue you to your latter end: and to increase you also in
all vvorldly worship and dignity. From Exceter the.xij. of March.

Your worshippes humbly John Woolton.

The first part of the Anatomy, declaring the state of man before his fall.
IT IS BOTH TRVly Cicero his sentence of man's soul. De finibu^ liber. 1. and
Tus. quest. li. 1. and. 3. and. 5.
and excellently written by Cicero, not only the best Orator, but the best
Philosopher amongst the Latin vvriters: If we were borne and brought forth
into this world such persons that we could vewe Nature, we should need
neither learning nor instructions, because nature her self should abundantly
suffice us. But now there are left unto us certain seeds or sparks of
virtue, which we over hastily quench with corrupt conditions, and peruers
opinions, that the light of Nature can not any where Nature yel death to
corrupt affections.
shevve it self: For verity gives place to vanity, and nature eftsoons
yields to corrupt and preiudicate opinions. In the which words the Divine
writer (taught by experience, reason, and learning) signifies that nature has
yet left in mankind some small power and operation, which he names sparks
or seeds of virtue, meaning no doubt, the sincerity of the heart and
conscience, and the light of the will and understanding, which by corruption of
nature are so blotted and shadowed in us, that we can not behold our
Creator, neither yet sufficiently see what is convenient and honest in a moral
life, which the second Table proposes unto us.

Before the fall of our Parents, when Man's nature before his fall.
nature was innocent and uncorrupted, this light of wisdom, and intelligence
of things divine and human, did shine brightly in man: neither had he the^
only sparks and seeds, but a plentiful storehouse and flowing fountain of all
virtue: which the same author seems to have seen in a glimmes, whiles that he
speaks after this manner: Man's mind being deryued Cic. tus. 1. and. 4.
from the Divine mind, may not be compared with any other thing (if I may
presume to say so) but with God him self. Which Mind if it be so instructed,
and as it were cured, that it be not seduced with error, then is it a perfect
mind, that is to say, absolute reason, which is all one with virtue. Cicero
seems to have received this Cicero his speech consonant to y^ scripture.
opinion from the ancient writers: For in that he says our minds are taken
out of the heavenly Mind, it is that which the scripture utters: And God
inspired into man a living Soul. And vvheras he says, that it may in some
sort be compared unto God him self, he means that which the Scripture
says: And God created manne after his own similitude. And whereas he says,
that if it were instructed and cured in such sort, that it might not be
blinded with the darkness of Errors: he means, if man had not so filthely
fallen, it should have been a perfect mind, and an absolute reason, that is, a
sincere and vncorrupt nature. But the same Writer speaks more plainly hereof
in annother place, after this manner:

What is there (J will not say in Man, Cicero lib. de legibus.
but thoroughoute Heaven and Earth) more Divine then Reason? Which when it
comes to perfection, it is very apte^y named Wisdom. Seeinge then that
Reason rests both in God, and Manne, and that there is nothing more divine
then the same: it follows that through reason only there is a communion or
partaking between God and m^n: and amongst whom reason is common, right
reason is also common. Whereof it follows that those only do know God,
who understand and consider their origin and of spring. By these and such
other like sentences we may see how the Philosophers entreating of the
excellency of man's nature, did guess, (and as it were dream) of the divine
qualities and operations of Man's soul in the state of Innocence: Which they
named a good captain and Man's soul in the state of innocence a good captain
or guide to live well.
guide to live well and blessedly, admonishing us that we should not
extinguish and obscure the same with corrupt opinions, and peruers manners: but
rather stir up and perfectly confirm the same with laudable exercises, and
wholesome instructions and documents.

But lest any man should say that I discourse such great and weighty matters,
proper unto the divines, with the authorities of Ethnicks and heathen
Philosophers: let him also consider that S. Paul, that elect vessel of
salvation, to have expressed the excellency of man's first estate notably, yea
and almost sensibly, after this manner: For when the Gentiles which Romans 2.
have not the law, do of nature the things contained in the law, then they
having not the law, are a law unto them selves, which show the deeds of the
law written in their hearts: vvhiles their conscience bears witness unto
them, and also their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing them. In the
which words Man in the state of innocence a sufficie^tscholemaster to him
self.
the Apostle plainly declares, how that God in the creation of man planted,
and as it were ingraffed a kind of divine nature, and perfect power: whereby
without further help of external doctors or doctrine, he was both able to
fulfill gods commandments, and also to be a sufficient law and scholemaster
to himself, whiles that his own thoughts and proper conscience gives true
verdites, and pronounces just judgment unto him in all his accions and
cogitations.

This excellent estate and perfect virtue inspired into man by God in creation,
which now (more is the pity) is lost and extinguished, may the better be
known by the nature and disposition of brute beasts, unto whom with
indignation the holy scripture oftentimes remitteth us. For that wise and
omnipotent Creator has expressed his heavenly wisdom A plain explication of
the premises, by a co^pa^^son of the nature of brute ^eastes.
in all his works, as Cicero right well says, and has given to all living
creatures both ability and instruments to execute their operations and
functions. And although the power of brute beasts together with the nature and
efficacy of all natural things, by means of man's rebellion against his God,
are wonderfully impaired, yet we may see also by comparison from them, the
steps and print of divine qualities in man's nature: whereof Tullie
according to his Cic. tus. 5.
manner speaks as follows: From whence may we more aptly take our beginning
then from nature her self the common Parent of us all? Who not only in all
living Nature the common parent of all thing.
creatures, but also in Trees, Plants, and Herbs, has in every of their
kinds wrought perfection. And therefore as well Trees and Vines, as also those
things which are more base and lower; have their conueniencie, for some are
always fresh and green, and some being bare in the vvinter, in the spring
time being comforted, and as it were revived with the heat of the sun,
do shoot forth their blossoms again. Neither is there any thing so mute
and closely created, but that sometime it gives forth a show of his nature,
and bears either flowers, or fruit, or beries, or shows some one thing or
other, whereby his property and quality may be known. But if we
proceed further, to behold the nature of beasts, albeit brute and
unreasonable, yet because they have sense in them, their powers and operations
may be more easily considered. For Nature Nature has given to diverse beasts
diverse inclinations.
has appointed some beasts to live in the water, some to fly at pleasure in
the wide air, some to creep upon the ground, some to walk, some to
wander by them selves, some vvilde, some tame: and finally other some to lie
hid covered in the earth. Now every one of these, for that they can not
usurp the trade and condition of other kinds, do contain them selves within
the inclosiers of their own Natures. And as every beast has his several and
proper, either inclination or condition, and reteyneth the same: so has man
his nature much more divine and excellent, if we may call those things
excellent that are so by comparison.

We see then by the vewe and contemplation of brute beasts, that they had in
the beginning, and yet retain that inclination which is apt and convenient
to their natures, in procreating, in cherishing, and in defending them selves
and A special disposition of some particular living creatures.
their young ones. The ox, the sheep, the hen, with many other beasts and
birds, do know their peculier foster and friend: they make nestes and dens
for them selves and their issue. And if we behold the nature, or rather the
common wealth of Emets and Bees, we shall without any great difficulty
perceive that god has inspired into them a far more Man instructed by a
consideration of the nature of brute beasts. Jere. 1.
excellent nature. All which things the Scripture oftentimes incultateth to
our confusion and shame, sending us to them, that we may the rather know our
corruption and rebellion. The Ox (says the Prophet) knovveth his owner, and
the Ass his masters cribbe, but my people has not known me. And again:
The Storke and the Svvalovve have known their time, and goo thou sluggard unto
the Emmet. By the comparison then of very brute beasts, unto whom God has
given in each of their kinds an apt conueniencie to execute those qualities
miraculously infused unto the^ by God: we may in some part perceive the
heavenly and divine nature of Man, to be much more noble and excellent, The
excellency of man's nature.
unto whom the mighty God gave power and dominion over all earthly creatures,
and made him lord and ruler over the works of his hands, breathing into him a
reasonable soul, and fashioning him after his own similitude and likeness.

These blessings so plentifully povvred upon man by almighty god, has caused
men vveerie of this world, and greedy gaping after heavenly things, to
break out into these words: Examine (I heartily Melan. de anima and in locis
com.
pray you) what is that image of God in Man. It is Gods good pleasure that
man's mind should be as it were a glass wherein we may behold him. His
will is that man should be like books, wherein he would write his wisdom
with his own fingers. These vvonderfull things we learn and consider in
the consideration of man's mind. Neither is there any eloquence, either of men
or of Angels, that is able condingly to express that great honor and dignity,
wherewith God has adorned and beautified us, in imparting to us his own
similitude and likeness. Whereby he had power Man's power before his fall.
to think and will of all things, especially of his creator, which gods
pleasure was to have him will and think, having as Tertullian writes, the
same senses and Tert. contra Marcionem.
motions which god himself had: which things were so natural in our first
parents, as man's eye does see and behold objects. In the which words albeit
few and Luthe. in Genesim.
short, we have an evident and plain description of perfitte nature, whereof
the philosophers did rather divine and dream, then know any thing
effectually, to vvitte, that it was the sincere eye of the soul, alvvayes
fixed upon, never dazeled or dimmed with errors, but poynting unto man
alvvayes, as it were with a finger, both the majesty of god, and persuading
him to follow his precepts and commandments. The necessity of this doctrine.


The doctrine therefore of the image of god in man is very needful in the
church of god: both because it proposes unto us evident testimonies of gods
favor and love tovvarde mankind, and declares the excellent estate of man
before his fall, in the which god did as it were stamp and imprint the radiant
beams of his wisdom, rectitude and liberty of will, that man might be his
mancion place and temple: Unto whom as he purposed to communicate blessedness
and felicity, so he required at his hands again to be reverenced and
worshipped. Moreover it does not only describe the estate and co^ditio^ Col.
1. 2. Co. 4. Heb. 1.
of the first man, but it does also express the abominablenes of sin, how the
image of god was corrupt in man's nature, and therwithall shows wholesome
remedies by the son of god, who is the very perfect and substantial image of
god the father, restoring to those that be regenerate through the holy ghost,
the created Image of god blemished in the^. Of the which image of god created,
I mean to write some thing at this present, if not so much as the matter
requires, yet so far forth as in this imbecility of our nature, we may by
the help of gods spirit select out of the holy scriptures. And for that
through ignorance of words, as Aristotle says, men often times err in the
truth of matters, I will first examine the property of the word, that my
Treatise may be less intricate for my Reader to conceive, and more facile for
my self to prosecute.

(...), Imago, in English an Image, signifies Of y^ word Image or ^imilitude.
generally a representation or purtrature of any thing which is made either by
creation or cogitation, or generation, or propagatio^, either in paynting or
grauing, or by any other means expressed after the example of an other Gene. 1.
matter. Moses says that man was made after the image and similitude of God.
Almighty God then is the lively example after whom man was created, that he
might in certain properties of his whole substance express him. The son of
God was not made after the image of his father, as the ancient Fathers have
right well observed, but he was begotten of God the father, and is the
coessentiall and the eternal Image of the everlasting father. The Hebrews use
the word Zelem for an Image, and Demuth for a similitude, the which the
Grecians express in eikona kai omoiosin. But the learned Divines do use these
words indifferently. For in the same text where this work Calu. Inst. lib.
1. Gene. 1.
of God is repeated, Moses speaks after this manner: And God created man
after. etc. And again he uses only one of the words, God created man after
his Gene. 5.
own similitude. By this repetition of one and the self same thing, which
is expressed only in one word: one and the self same thing is described.

Notvvithstanding I will not hide from A difference between image and
similitude.
my loving Reader the difference which certain notable and famous expositors
of the holy Scriptures have put between the words Image, and similitude.
Saint Augustine says: The Soul is like unto God, Ex Augu. de quantit^te anim^
for it is made immortal and indissoluble. The word Image therefore
apperteyneth unto the form, and similitude unto nature. And an excellent man
of our time: An Image is Pet. Mar. in cap. 1. Gene.
an outworde bodily form or fashion, expressing or representing any man: but a
similitude is a quality of the mind which we imitate and follow. And that
famous clarke Luther vvriteth thus: Albeit almost all the learned Luth. super.
5. Ge.
do take the words Image and similitude for one thing, yet in reading of
things I have noted some difference betvveene those words. For Zelim
signifies properly an image or figure: As when the scripture says, destroy
the aulters of your images. In that place the word signifies nothing else then
pictures and images, which were set up. But Demuth which is a similitude, is
the perfection of the image: as for example. When we speak of a dead image
stamped in coin or money, we say this is the image of the king or queen:
But that image has not the similitude, neither does it show the liniaments
and proportions. In that Moses says therefore, that man was made after Gods
similitude, he shows, that man does not only represent god, in that he has
reason and understanding, but also that he has such intelligence and will,
whereby he both perfectly knevv god, and also had a will to execute gods
commandment. Other some there be that say, that gods image rests in man's
substance, and the similitude in the accidents. Let every man enjoy his own
cogitations, I am of this opinion, that because Moses describing this notable
work of god sometime used one word sometime another, that both these words
are used for better declaration, plainly to express one thing. Two
significations of y^ image of God.


This one thing I think more convenient to be considered in the entry of this
matter, that the image of god in the holy scripture is attributed both to the
only begotten son of god, Jesus Christ, and to godly men, his sons by
adoption: But in diverse consideratio^s. It is written of the only begotten
son Colo. 1.
of god: Who is the image of the invisible god, the first begotten before all
creatures. And in 2. Co. 4.
another place, Christ is the image of God. In these places Christ is called
the image of God, in respect of his heavenly father. Ioh. 14.
And therefore he says: Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the father,
shevving that his father is known, in and only Now christ is y^ image of
God, and how ^^ is the image of God.
through him. Our savior Jesus Christ then is the total, and coessentiall
image of God his father, of like majesty and glory: For so he pronounces of
him self, saying, I and the father am one: and the Apostle: who is the
brightness of his glory, and the image of his substance, bearing all things
with the word of his power. But when man is named the Image of God, it is
not meant that he is all one with the Gene. 1. Colos. 3. 1. Cor. 11.
son of God, but that he is his Image create, Gratuite by grace or adoption,
much inferior to the natural image Jesus Christ. And yet it is not to be
accounted any small prerogative that man and Angels severally, above all other
creatures, have this title and dignity given unto them, that they have and
bear the similitude and image of the living God, of the which second Image, I
will only write at this present.

What this Image of God is in man, there are diverse opinions amongst the
ancient vvriters. Theodoretus cites Theodret. quest. 20. in Gene. what this
Image of God in man is
sundry of them in his questions upon Genesis. First, some said that the Image
of God is that which is invisible in the soul. Secondly, some said that
man's body is that Image: which opinion he ascribes to one Milito. Thirdly,
some said that whole man was the Image of God, because he is placed as it
were in the middle betvveene all creatures compact of body and soul. Fourthly,
some affirmed the image of God in man, to be nothing else but that power and
authority which he has over al worldly creatures. And finally he concludes,
that this image of god is in the reasonable soul, Aug. li. 14 detrinitate ca.
8. Pet. Mar. in. 1. cap. genesis et. in locis com. lo. xij. fol. 101. Call. lib. 1.
inst. Luth. in. genesis ca. 1.
vanderstanding, judging, and executing things justly. Saint Augustine sometime
takes this Image of God to be the very substance of the soul, mind, and will,
sometime the qualities of the same. Calvin acknowlegeth the image of God most
clearly to shine in man's soul, and yet to show it self in the whole body,
and in all powers of the same. Luther that excellent writer, defines, or
rather describes this image after this manner: The image of god, after the
which Adam was created, was a matter most noble and excellent: For as yet no
leprosy of sin had infected either whether man is the image of God in
respect of his soul or body, or of both.
the mind or will. But all the interior and exterior senses were pure and
clean. For the understanding was most pure, memory prompt and ready, the will
sincere, resting in a divine security, without pensive thought or dreadful
fear of death. Hereunto was annexed a notable beauty and comeliness of all
the external members of the body, wherein man passed and surmounted all other
inferior Creatures.

And albeit he vvryteth that the Arabian heresy.
Image of God is in the whole manne, both in body and soul: yet he was
far, asvvell from the Arabyan heresy, which was Anno Dom. 230. as from the
Anthropomorphites, and other Monks Anthropomorphites.
of Egypt, who affyrmed this image to be only in the body, because the
scripture oftentimes makes mention of the face, eyes, ears, nose, hands, and
feet of God. Which phrases the Scripture undoubtedly uses only for our
capacity, and better understanding: for touching Gods substance, our Savior
Christ plainly affyrmeth him to be a spirit: And I know that some very
Ioh. 4.
learned Writers have acquitted the Anthropomorphites from such gross
opinions, and that they had a far other sense in those phrases.

The reason that makes many men abhor, Doubts answered and resolved
touching this matter.
yea and detest this positio^ of Luthers, that the image of God in man
consists both in the body and soul, is this: God is not any corporal
substance: therefore no part of his image ca^ be in any corporal substance. But
we must consider that whole man consisting of body and soul, was fashioned
after the Image and likeness of God. Moreover the perfection of man's corporal
substance, and the proportion or apt co^ueniency thereof with the soul, which
was appointed to express his powers to the organical or external instruments
of the body: and Immortality which was also given to this corporal matter,
did clerly expres and represe^t some portion of gods image. Albeit therefore it
can not be denied, but that the chief and principal degrees of this divine
Image is in man's soul, as in the most noble and excellent part: yet the body
so divinely united unto the soul, and endued with such notable ornaments, is
not to be defrauded of that which of right ought to be yielded unto it. So that
as those do offend in excess, that ascribe this image of God to man's body
only: so do they also err in defect, that place it only in the mind. For
that the holy scripture eftsoon repeteth, that God made not only man's
Soul, but whole man after his own similitude and likeness.

It was the vvil and pleasure of almighty The duty of man in y^
consideration of these things.
God, that through this his Image tranfused into man, he might both represent
and express his maker, and be obedient unto him: appoynting man (as I said
before) to be as a glass, wherein he would shine and be seen, and as a book
wherein with his own finger he would write his vvisdome. Teaching us in
this image what God is, to vvitte, an eternal and everlasting mind: and what
manner of God he is, namely, wise and true, loving chastistie and justice, of a
free power, embracing men with a fatherly affection, he being the creator,
and they his creatures: requiring of us that our mind and will should accord
with his will and commandment. And this is that vvonderfull vvisdome,
justice, goodness, and power of his: which his pleasure was to be read and
known in the consideration and contemplation of man, whom he made of such
excellency that he was capable of his Image, that in his soul and body, and
in all his interior and exterior powers and accions he might shevve forth
some likeness of God, but fynyte, and such as was convenient for a creature.

This Image of God in man gratuite or create, had before his fall many
excellent qualities. First, in respect of the Mind, Will, and Heart, wherein
was a marvelous divine Harmony and consent. Saint Augustine went about
Augu. lib. 14. de Tr. cap. 8.
too shevve the difference of the three persons in Trinity, by the
consideration of this Image of god in man: Jn manne (says he) there be three
principal The excellent qualities of man before his fall.
things, The Mind begetting or breeding the Cogitation. And the cogitation,
which is the Jmage of the thing cogitated: And the Will, wherein there is
both joy and love. These three things he applies after this manner: The
eternal Father signifies the Mind begetting in Cogitation the eternal word,
the second person in Trinity. The Jmage formed in cogitation, signifies the
son of God: And the Will shadoweth the holy Ghost. This collation must
needs be pleasant to humble Minds: For therein we see that man is
appointed to be a testimony of God, namely, that he is an Essence
intelligible and moving him self. And although saint Augustine do
understand the image of God in manne, of the substance of the Soul, Mind,
and Will: yet all the learned men almost do comprehend the gifts together
with the substance, or as they usually speak, the virtues of perfect Nature
in each part of the Soul, agreeing with the divine Mind. For so saint
Paul in the word Image understood not only man's substance, but the gifts
or powers wherein such virtues do shine as are consonante with the mind
divine: which gifts were distinct and separable from the substance it self,
as it is manifest by man's fall, wherein these excellent proprieties were
lost, the substance of the Mind, Will, and Heart, unto this day abiding and
remaining.

But to return to these excellent properties The excellency of man's mind
of the soul before man's fall: There shyned a clear light in man's Mind, to
vvitte, a perfect knowledge of God, and a communication of his divine
wisdom, whereby he knew both Gods substance and will: And also that man was
to this end created, that not only this knowledge might shine in him: but also
that he should with a grateful willing mind show obedience to his creator.
Besides this knowledge of all divine things which were nedeful to man in the
service of God, and toward the attaynement of eternal life: the Lord endewed
him with a right excellent knowledge of matters Moral and Natural, that he was
able to conceive the qualities and inclinations of all living things. So that
as soon as he saw Eua, he said by and by, This is bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh: and she shall be called Virago, because she was taken of the Man.
He was profoundly seen in Philosophy, as it appears by the History of
Creation: wherein we read how he gave names to every living creature
according to their natures and qualities.

In man's will there was a conversion to Man's will.
god, that is to say, an universal obedience to his law, having an ardent
love of God, and all virtues: flagrante, bent, and direct to that end, that
the first example might be known and honored: and therewith was annexed a
liberty in all accions, that he might both show unto god willing obedience,
and also avoid all things with judgment that were displeasant to his
Creator.

In the heart all affections and appetitions (...) heart and affections,
did obey his mind and will, neither was there dissetion in any thing. So that
there was a Divine harmony of the mind, will, and heart. For as the mind
did rightly know god and his will: so the heart and the will did think one
thing, he loved god earnestly, neither was there any thing in man's nature which
was not pure, holy, and sincere. And every orgaine part and instrument of man's
substance had faculty and readiness infused into them by god, that they were
both vvilling and hable to do the things required by god at their hands,
which god according to the law of obedience had imprinted, and as it were
stamped in Reasonable natures.

There was also in this image of god in Man had a lordship over al wiling
creatures.
man, a preheminencie and superiority above all other inferior creatures, whom
he excelled many ways, both in reason and quicknes of senses, as well in form
and stature of body upright and looking toward heaven, as also in agilitie and
mobilitie of accions, and especially in that sovereign power and dominion
which he had over all inferior creatures, as it were an Emperor over his
subjects. For as God is the universal Lord, king, and governor ouerall
creatures: even so it pleased him to collate unto man a certain dominion
particular and limited, unto whom they would have yielded obedience gladly, and
have reputed him for gods Lieuetenant, if he had retained the image of god in
him sincere and uncorrupted: which dominion albeit by our ruin it be
exceedingly impaired in mankind, yet it is somewhat restored by faith. Thou
shall tread upon the Adder and Cocatrice. Psalm. 91. Great beasts ruled by
little children.
Daniell was cast to the Lions: The Lord prays with the wild beasts in the
wilderness: Paul was not hurt of the Viper: Sa^son and David overcame lions:
and we may daily see little children with a stick to rule huge and mighty
bodied beasts, through the majesty of gods image, which yet after a sort
shines in man, and is very fearful and terrible unto them.

Hereunto we may add man's authority Man's beginning and end.
and pre-eminence in consideration of his beginning, coueniencie, and end: For
as god is the beginning of all things in creation, so is Adam the beginning of
all men by generation: And as god has a conueniency with all things, and all
things ought to look upon God: So is man microcosmos, that is to say, a
little world, and a lord in respect of inferior creatures, that they all
should reverence and honor him. And as God is the end of all things: So is
man the end of all inferior creatures, they being made for man's sake, that he
might be a ruler over Sap. 2.
the^. And according to the wise ma^s saying, moderate and govern the round
world in equity and justice.

Finally this image had an assured hope Man's immortality.
of immortality, that his life should be blessed and eternal, not subject to
death. For the divinity it self is immortal, after Genesis 3. 5.
the which as the scripture says, man was created. If therefore man had not
fallen into sin, this nature and blessed estate in creation had endured for
ever, it should never have been we^ke or old, it should not have been consumed
with heaviness or diseases: But yet living in Paradise, should have been thence
translated into the celestial and spiritual life. And unto this image God
added over and besides the blessings before mentioned, a certain and especial
kind of If m^^ had not sinned he shou^de have b^ne translated ^ute et Paradise
into heaven.
worshipping of god, exacting an obedience unto the same, in proposing unto him
that law of the tree of knowledge of good and evil: In the which he gave unto
man, formed after his image, as it were a remembrance that he should be both
obedient and tha^kfull unto him for his blessings: and that he would afterward
translate him unto the place of endless joy and felicity, where he might
continually behold the very essential image of God most brightly shining in
his son our savior Jesus Christ. So that immortality being annexed in the tree
of life, did both Immortality annexed to y^ outward Sacrament.
admonish man inhabiting this elimentall regio^: and being endued with
profou^de knowledge of things divine and human that he should use that tree
as a remedy against sickness, diseases, and mortality it self: and thervvithal
that he should have a manifest assurance of a better life: Into the which
godly men should be removed, out of and above all elimentall regions, vvherin
he might behold god face to face, inioying infinite blessedness, where Gods
majesty shall be all in all, to his glory and our endless comfort. And these be
the proprieties of the image of God, imprinted and ingraffed in man's
substance, at such time as he breathed into him the beams of his light:
Whereof it is requisite that our minds should be well informed and instructed,
when we ponder and examine with our selves, what manner of image that was
which Adam had, how it was spoiled and defaced in man's fall, after what manner
it is repaired in us by the holy ghost, and of the glorious perfection thereof
in the world to come.

The second part of the Anatomy, showing the ruin and de struction of Gods
image in Man.
SECONDARELY LET How man lost Gods Image.
us consider how this image of God was destroyed in ma^s fall: In so much
that there scarce remain any remnants of that notable monunent and building of
man's best estate: For when man, who was left in the hands of his own
counsel, and in the liberty of his will, did eat of the fruit which was
forbidden him, and shaking off all fear of God (unto whom all creatures owe
obedience) did transgress his just and good law: And being seduced with the
Dragons voice, turned him self ftom God, casting away all piety, reverence
and fear, which was due to the eternal majesty: He then lost the The deadly
wounds which man received by transgression.
image of god, and death seized upon man, according to the commination of god
before uttered, and became the image of the devil: and so losing the holy
ghost, he fell into the horrible wrath of god, and even then tasted certain
beginnings of the same: he saw the miseries of mind, will, and heart, and
death everlasting, threatened in the law: For being infected with the poison of
sin, he could not reteyne any longer the image of justice, wisdom and
life, which was stamped in him: But whole man was miserably deformed,
corrupted, and lost all his ornaments and qualities, in so much that he who
was before in his whole substance, qualities and powers, a bright glass of
justice and holiness: became the mask and dounghill of the filthy dragon of
hell, and the child of wrath and everlasting death.

And to deal somewhat in perticularities, the good things and ornaments
Bonauentura.
which our first parents, and all their progeny lost in this heavy fall and
lamentable shipwreck, were partly natural, partly gratuite (and as
Bonauenture says) Man was utterly spoiled of his gratuit gifts, and wounded
in th^naturals: For in his mind he lost the perfect knowledge of his God: So
that alvvayes after it was full of darkness, ignorance, folishnesse, and
rebellion against God: And in external and corporal things also, that light
is exceeding shadowed and obscured. For who is now able to discern wounds
in man's mind.
and view the nature of living creatures but half so well, as was out father
Adam before his fall.

The will of man also quite turned away wounds in man's will.
from God, lost all good inclination and ability to obey him, so that we
feel our selves a very conspiracy and open rebellion against his majesty: as
S. Paul dolefully deploreth, saying: I feel in my members another law,
fighting against the law of God: O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the death of this body. etc. In man's heart the love of god is utterly
extinct, and flames of raging affections do burn, whereof almighty god
complains in this wise: The lump or mass of Genesis 6.
man's heart is evil from his mothers womb.

This destruction of Gods image in wounds in his whole nature.
man's nature, and the putting on of the filthy form of Satan, is plainly set
forth in the accions of Adam, straight after his fall, as well in him self,
as in all his posterity: When as he being pricked with the sting of a guilty
conscience, did both run away from God, and savve his miserable nakedness,
whereof he was ashamed. For the very nakedness, which man did see in him
self most evidently: does not only signify the outward, but also the
inward deformity both of body and soul. By means therefore of Adams fall
the image of God was destroyed in man's nature, all his powers and faculties
were either depraved or utterly lost. He was spoiled of all his gifts, in
mind, will, and heart: And the whole mass or lump of man, was with gods
wrath, with the tyranny of the devil, with all sickness and sorrows of body
and mind corrupt: where by we to our great grief feel the burden of sin, the
biting and gnawing of a wounded conscience, pityfull passions of the soul, and
finally in this world, the destruction and dissolution of our bodies into
dust of the earth.

These evils and grievous wounds Adam Adam felt y^ grievous sores and smartes
of these wou^des.
savve and felt after he had entered into league and society with the devil:
And therwithall tasted of gods horrible wrath, the pauors and torments of
eternal death, and the strength of the law, whereof the Apostle speaks:
By the law comes knowledge of sin, and the law works wrath: Through the
bitterness and weight of these great dolors and torments, he must needs
have presently perished, and incurred eternal damnation, if the merciful
Lord had not taken pity on the misery of man, by the supplication of his
son Christ, in How Ada^ in these miseries was comforted.
respect of whom he uttered the promise of the gospel, made joyful mention of
the blessed seed of the woman: and turning away his angry countenance, looked
upon man with the eyes of his mercy.

Besides al these things, Adam saw the Adan saw some effects of his sin in
his children. Cayne.
fruit of his fall, and the detestablenes of his offense, not without great
sorrow and heaviness of heart. For his first begotten son Cayne that Parriside,
bathing his hands in his brothers blood, did abu^da^tly declare the calamity
of nature corrupted, the cruelty of sin, blindness bred naturally in his
breast, the prauitie of his will, and wickedness of his heart.

Almighty god him self lame^teth this God himself lamenteth man's fall.
soul fall of man in Paradise, and appoints condign punishments for the
same: and therwithall protests that himself was not the author of this
corruption of creatures, which was created by him, in his son, in justice
and holiness of truth: wherein he taught mankind that sin and all the effects
thereof had his origin of the devil, and of man: as it is written, Gene. ^.
It irketh me that ever I made man. Again, He that commits sin, is of the
Devil. For the devil sinned from the beginning. And also, By one man sin
entered into the world, and through sin death.

Now albeit man received so grievous a wound in his body and mind, vvherevvith
not only the image of god in him was defiled and destroyed, but also his
powers and ornaments every way were maruelously decayed: besides the
removing of immortality, whereof by word and sacrament god assured him before
his transgression: and in place thereof a subjection to sicknesses and death it
self. Yet the second death did not out of hand The second death came not by
and by after man's fall.
sease upon Adam, but God left him like a Pylgreme or banished man out of
Paradise many years, in this animal or corporal life, after the act and
decree was published, that god of his immence and infinite mercy would repair
his Image blotted and defaced: and his good pleasure was, that man passing his
time, Man left as a pylgrime or exiled man upon the earth.
and running his race prefixed here in this world, should in his body (which
was made so subject and servile unto sin) be resolved into dust and earth:
but in soul he appointed him to be immortal, because the same was breathed
into him by god: which he also ordained to be a daily testimony and
remembrance unto man as well of his estate before his fall, as of his
glorification after the day of judgment.

Which bodily death all the children of All the children of Adam subject to
death.
Adam are subject unto, by means of sin abounding, yea and reigning in them,
being nothing but dust poisoned, which must return into dust: after which the
second death, to wit, eternal condemnation both of body and soul, follows,
and is assuredly to be looked for of all those that do contemn the son of
God, man's mediator and advocate: and do not seek to be delivered from Gods
wrath and indignation by the effusion of his most precious blood, which
only is able to purify and wash men clean from all their sins.

And to the end that this great ruin A do^eful and lamentable (...) of man's
(...) by certain ancient fathers.
and decay of man after his fall may be more evidently perceived, I will put
down the lamentable complayntes of diverse Writers concerning this matter,
whereby at the first view the matter will most plainly appear and show
it self.

And first, that is a notable and memorable Aug. co^tra Iulianu^. li. 4. cap.
14. repetit ex lib. 3. Cic. de repub.
saying of Cicero, repeted by S. Augu. touching the corruption of man's nature:
Man is brought forth, and as it were expelled into this world by nature,
being rather his stepdame then a loving mother. In body naked, frail, and
infyrme: and in mind, careful in sorrows, abashed in fear, vveake in labors,
prone to pleasure, having in him notwithstanding certain sparks and seeds of
a divine nature. Wherein as saint Augustine says, he rightly deplored and
bevvayled our miserable and pitiful case, and savve the horrible event: Yet
was he ignorant of the cause, neither did he perceive that a heavy yoke was
laid upon all the children of Adam, from the time of their birth until their
death, by means of original sin, wherewith they are infected and corrupted.

Saint Augustine him self writes De Ciuita. ^^ dei. lib* 22. ca. 22
after this manner: I do omit how God created Man right: But touching our
discente from our first Parents, that we are thereby a generation forlorn,
and cast away, this very life of ours (if it be to be called a life which is
so full of deadly miseries) does most playne^y declare. For what other thing
can we gather of that horrible and deep ignorance (whereof all Error
proceeds) which possesses and deteyneth the children of Adam in profounde
darkness so violently, that a man can not rid him self thereof without great
labar, sorrow, and fear? What other thing does that love of vain and
deceitful things import, and therwithall such consuming cares, perturbations,
sorrows, fears, disceitfull joys, discordes, adulteries, fornications,
incests, rapes, and unclean commixtions against nature, which may not be
well named: and therewithal heresies, blasphemies, periuries, oppressions of
Innocents, slanders, false witnesses, unjust judgments, and other such like
mischeefes, which we see incident to man's nature? And to conclude, as Viues
writing in the same place says: There vvoulde Ludouicus Viues in 22 August* de
Ciui. ca. 22
be found no beast more savage and unbridled then man, if he were not
chastised and amended with discipline and good education: for if he might
run his own race, he would convert all his force and power to satisfy his
filthy lusts and appetites: neither were it possible to find any brute
beasts more fierce and vvylde then manne.

And saint Barnarde writes very pleasantly Barnar. in sermon 1. paruorum
sermonu^.
of this matter in this sort: That blessed and eternal Trinity, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, one God of chief power, wisdom, and goodness,
did create another trinity after his image and similitude, which had
certain resembla^nces of that eternal Trinity: I mean the reasonable Soul
which consists of Reason, memory, and will. And he created the same in
such sort, that by participation of him he might be blesssed: and being
a^erted from him, should be most miserable. And this created Trinity did
rather bend it self to follow the motion of his own will, then to stand
in that liberty which was given unto it. And therefore it sell through
suggestion, delectation, and consent from that fair and beautiful trinity,
that is to say* from power, wisdom, and purity, into a contrary and filthy
trinity: verily into infirmity, bundnesse, and uncleanness. For Memory is
become impotent and infirm, Reason improuident and dark, and the will
impure. More^^er Memory falling as it were upon hard Rocks, was broken and
rent into three parts, namely into affectionate, heavy, and idle cogitations.
I call those affections, vvherewithall man is encombred about cares of things
necessary, as in eating, drinking, and such like. And those are to be
accounted heavy, which we spend about the exercise of external and hard
business. And those are vain and feeble wherewith man's mind is neither
affected nor greatly molested, and yet notwithstanding is drawn from the
contemplation of heavenly things: as to spend his time in beholding how
birds do fly, or dogs do run. The light of Reason also has three
manner of vvayes fallen into ruin. For whereas it was his property to
discern between good and evil, truth and falsehood, profit and disprofite:
It is now covered with such darkness, that it is carried most commonly into a
peruers judgment, receiving evil for good, falsehood for truth, inco^moditie
for commodity. Wherein it could never have erred so miserably, if it had not
been deprived of that light which it had in the first creation. Whereby it is
now commen to pass, that man has left that usual and necessary instrument
to understand wisdom, that is to say, Ethicke, Logike, and, Phisike: which we
may otherwise call the science Moral, Contemplative, and Natural. For by
Ethicke good things are elected, and evil things refused: by Logic we
discern truth from untruth: by Physic we distinguishe between things
profitable and unprofitable. After this follows man's will, which has had
a triple ruin. For whereas it was the property of will to cleave fast to
virtue and Innocence, and entierly to love the supreme majesty: through
selfewill and pride it is fallen from heaven to earth, and thorough
concupiscence of the eyes, lust of the flesh, and pride of life, does now
love and embrace vvorldly things. Now what can be more unhappy then this
fall and ruin of man's estate, whereby his memory* reason, and will, are
so pitifully empayred, and whole man so miserably corrupted? ()

The third part of the Anatomy, showing the remnants of Gods Image in man
after his fall.
BECAUSE THE CONsideration what is retained in man's nature of gods image
of contraries do most plainly explicate all things, therefore I will as
briefly as I can show by collation of Antitheses, what is retained in man's
nature of the image of God: For that we have sustained a great loss, and an
horrible shipwreck of heavenly induments and qualities, it has been plainly
and evidently declared. As for the The Gentiles and Ethnicks are ignorant of
the fall of man.
Ethnicks and Gentiles, they are altogether ignorant of Adams transgression,
and do suppose that through malicious nature, mankind has been subject to
thraldom and miseries, even from the beginning.

Man has lost that excellent wisdom and knowledge which he had in divine
and spiritual matters: Especially what know ledge remains in man touching y^
first table.
touching the essence and worshipping of God, properly apperteyning to the
first table. And has left in him only certain sparks and seeds of the same
^^ his heart, to wit, That there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped: that
he is a sincere and just power, rewarding virtue, and punishing vice. Which
knowledge although it be obscure: yet is it a prick or stinge in the
conscience, vexing the heart in heinous offenses, and breeding terrible terrors
of Gods wrath and indignation: Hereof arise those notable sentences of the
conscience in the wrytinges of the Heathen. This small knowledge is marvelous
obscure in man forlorn, and is oftentimes even buried, and utterly blotted out
by man's wilful obstinacy: whereof the Phalmist speaks, The foolish body
has said in his heart, there is no God. And again: All his cogitations are
that there is no God, God does not see it. Much like to the Cyclops, whereof
the Poet makes mention: I force not for the threats of the Gods.

Man has also almost lost perfect what knowledge he has left unto him in
the second table.
wisdom in the second table, that is to say, of mundayne and worldly things:
But he has left unto him a certain wisdom in external accions and virtues
apperteining to the second table, that is to say, a power to discern between
things honest and dishonest, and to understand the grounds of liberal arts, of
good laws, and of honest accions. This knowledge of reason, as the
Philosophers call it, was not altother extinct in man's ruin. For it was Gods
good pleasure, that there should yet be some difference between reasonable
man and brute beasts. And surely they differ in nothing so much as by reason,
^ difference between man and brute beasts.
that light which yet in some sort thineth in man's heart, containing a certain
rule or pattern of all arts and accions. And although the Psalmist seems to*
take away this difference, Man being in Psalm. 49.
honor, endured not, but became like the beasts of the field: yet we must
call to mind that similitudes do hold but in some respect. For in this
place man is compared to brute Beasts, because he is no less subject to
death then they be: Even as Saint Augustine do the August. de peccat. ori.
contr^ Pelagia^^^.
well expound it, saying, he is compared in corruption, and not in whole
nature unto brute beasts. This remna^t of vvisdome and knowledge, albeit
imperfect, is called the law of nature, or natural law: and is set out by
saint Paul, with excellent Romans 1. 2.
terms and speeches, as that it is the doctrine of God, and the work of the
law written in man's heart. Hereof comes the knowledge of manuarie and liberal
sciences, so needful for man's life: hence all civil laws have their
origin, together with discipline and society between man and man, the desire
of praise, the avoiding of dispraise, the honor of virtue, and the punishment
of vices.

That knowledge which was so notable Man's knowledge in the properties of
things altogether lost.
in our first parents, touching the property of things, is altogether lost,
and what so ever we have, we have it by observation and experience. For our
eyes do behold the course of the planets: and reason deuiseth instruments to
take the altitude, longitude, and latitude of the^. Again with our eyes we
look upon herbs: but reason searches out the strength, use, and
application: And so with our senses we comprehend living creatures: But man's
industry by use and experience, understands their properties Adam before his
fall an excellent Philosopher.
and natures. But Adam before his fall, was an excellent Divine, an excellent
Lawyer, and an excellent Philosopher. Man has lost all holiness of body and
soul.


Man has also utterly lost all sanctity, justice, and purity, both of body and
of soul, by means of that filthy plague or leprosy, which has invaded and
infected all our substance: so that Job cried out not without cause, Who can
make him clean, that is borne of unclean. And saint Job. 14. Reg. 3.
Paul, All men have sinned: And there remains but now in him a certain
carnal appetition of justice, coming from the law of nature and precepts of
manners. This is only an external discipline or honesty of life, which is very
weak and faint, as we al by experience are forced to confess: For now the
malice of What instice y^ Ethnicks have.
our nature does wonderfully prevail, and hinders good diuices and
endeavors: Wherefore in all places of scripture where we find justice
attributed unto the Gentiles: We must understand thereby external justice, or
the justice of the flesh. Man has lost that fre faculty Man's power and
faculty in spiritual things lost. 1. Cor. ^.
and power of his strength and members in these things, which are spiritual
and appertain to the true worshipping of God. And besides that, his powers or
faculty either to desire, or to deteste things carnal and earthly, is
wonderfully impaired, vexed, and troubled, yea and oftentimes perverse. As
Medea rightly said,

Video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor. Medaea.


He has yet left unto him some understanding Man has yet left some
understanding in worldly things.
in worldly things subject to reason. For if man were without this also, he
should then differ nothing at al from brute beasts: and without this no
discipline, no judgment, nor no punishment could be exercised amongst the
Infidels. And hereof comes that distinction between things that work
woluntarily and naturally: and in like manner betvveene things wrought
reasonably and brutishly.

In that therefore man sometime co^sulteth All man's understanding in worldly
things is a portion of gods image yet remayuing.
and determines happily in civil and external things, it is a portion of the
image of God: although most commonly cernal affections, and leude perturbations
of the mind, do carry reason and will, quite out of the right way. But yet those
powers of man, how feeble or faint soever they be, whether they be of the
mind, of the will, of the heart, or of any other member of man, if they be
good affections, they are certain remnauntes of Gods image.

Man has also almost lost that notable Man's power and dominia oncr living
creatures much impaired.
wisdom, and absolute authority of rule and dominion over living creatures:
For albeit there remains in him unto this day some power over them, yet the
same is joined with great peril and grief, not vvanting tyranny and
cruelty. For the horse will not obey man without bytte and bridle: neither
will the Ox dravve the Plough without he be yoked. The sheep will not
yield wool and milk, unless she be bound: Birds are taken with policy
and cunning: And fishes with the hook, net, and other instruments. As for
Tygres, Lions, Bears, Woolfes, Panthers, and such like, they are not only
not obedient, but extreme adversaries to mankind.

Now if any man ask why God made vvilde beasts so disobedient and hurtful
to man? It is to be answered, that this is commen to pass, That disobedient
children might be corrected. For man well deserved such a scourge after his
transgression: And therefore by means of sin, our servants are armed against
us, and wild beasts suffered to torment and afflict us: for so the scripture
says: I will send amongst Eze. 5.
you famine and wild beasts: When man was in the state of innocence, they
were all tame and obedient unto him: A duble commodity.
And now though they rebel, yet by Gods mercy, few do perish by them:
And if any miscarie, there arises thereof a double commodity: First an example
of gods severity, as in the Samaritanes, who were killed of Lions. In the 2.
Reg. 17. 1. Reg. 13. 2. Reg. 2.
children that for scorning at Elizeus, were destroyed of Bears, and in the
disobedient prophet, who perished with the Lion. Secondly gods majesty herein,
shows it self mightily, in that he is able to cause the wild and cruel
beasts to revenge his cause against disobedient persons. And finally herein we
may also consider gods great goodness tovvarde us, in secluding and shutting
them up out of men's society, into deserts and wildernesses, appoynting them
the night to walk in, and to seek their pray, whiles morning when man goes
about his business, they all avoid his sight and presence, and lie hid in their
dens with trembling and fear.

Man has also lost eternal felicity and Man has lost eternal felicity*
and blessedness.
blessedness, and has only left unto him in steed thereof, this worldly
and earthly life: which is short, miserable, and painful, and is subject to
dangerous death every moment. For cruel death Death the possessor of all men,
and the cause thereof.
seasoneth upon all men that are borne of corrupt parents, as soon as they are
fashioned in their mothers womb, because they are infected with sin: And
therefore all the days of their life, death is (as it were) man's hangman and
torme^tor. First the imbecility of man's substance The sting^ of death.
and strength, is the bitte of Satan: Then the shortness of man's life, the
perils and dangers in the same, the cruel diseases, the untimely, soden, and
unnatural deaths, and the resolution of our bodies into dust and ashes, do
evidently express his force and malice against mankind. Which things I
willingly note, to admonish men deeply to consider their miserable and
wretched estate. For man is not only a bubble of water, during but a short
time, and suddenly vanishing away: but he is a thing much more miserable, whereby
it is most apparent, that man is not now any longer the excellent image of God,
but the bondslaue of the devil: then the which there can be nothing more
lamentable or miserable.

But the use of that which we have uttered The use of this doctrine.
already touching the remnantes of Gods image in man, is to put us in
remembrance of those great things which we have lost by sin, and those
remnants are much like the rubble of a fair and beautiful city destroyed,
And such as they be they ought not to be contemned: being as it were notes and
remembraunces that god will in eternal life renew and restore his image to
man, according to his holy word. Provided always that by means of this
doctrine no power at all be ascribed to man in spiritual matters before
regeneration, and not over much neither in carnal and earthly things. For both
these excesses are culpable. Let us therefore bewail this great loss of ours;
and again let us not forget to give thanks, that it has pleased him to leave
in us some print of his image: and chiefly let us rejoice that by Christ we
are regenerate and reconciled to God in this life, and that his Image shall be
perfectly restored unto us in the life to come.

And before I conclude this part, Errors contrary to this doctrine.
I think it not amiss to admonish my Reader of certain detestable and
gross Errors, quite contrary to this doctrine. First certain Athistes and
Epicures hold, that there is nothing corrupt in man, after his first creation
and condition: which opynion the Manichees do also maintain. And this Error
seems too spring of mere Ignorance of man's creation and fall. The
Pelagians and certain Scholemen dreamed man's nature to be sincere and
incorrupt after his Nativity, even as Adam was before his fall. But that
furor is directly against the word of God: Behold I am conceived Psalm. 51.
in iniquity. And again, The Romans 8.
sense of the flesh is Enimitie against the spirit. And some also now a
days write that there is some power in man Synergistae
before regeneration, even in spiritual things: and that man is a cooperator
or worker with God, and that it is in man's power to take, to follow, to assent
(albeit faintly) with God in spiritual things: which is mere contrary to the
holy scripture: for the Apostle says: The natural 1. Cor. 2.
man perceives not things which be of Gods spirit, for they are folishnesse
unto him, speaking of man not regenerate.

Finally this extremity is to be reprehended, that there is no portion at all
of gods image left in man. And that there is left unto man no knowledge of God
at al, and that he has no principles of arts or accions: but that he is much
like a clean sheet of paper ot table, into the which with education and
study, he may write things. But saint Paul says: That the work of the
law is written in Romans 2.
the Gentiles hearts. And even by the law of nature those that be not yet
regenerate, have some knowledge, albeit obscure, that there is a God, and that
he is a just God. Albeit they understand nothing of his essence, and of his
perfect will, contained in the law and gospel.

The fourth part of the Anatomy of the renouation, or regeneration of the old
Man.
OVT OF WHAT EXCELlent dignity and honor, man was deposed and cast, by
means of his transgression, and utterly drowned in a deep sea of all evil,
it has been already briefly and plainly declared: It now remains that we
have some due consideration of Gods great mercy, power, Gods mighty mercy.
and goodness in the renouation, and regeneration of the old manne. For after
the fall of Adam, God could not do any thing either more mightily or
mercifully, then to send his only begotten son to take our nature upon
him, to wash us from our sins with his precious blood, and to redeem and
deliver us from Satan. For this inestimable benefit, let us continually upon
our knees give most hearty and earnest thanks unto our God ever and ever.

And although this great work of Ethnickes (...) at (...) of regeneration.
God, with many other things spiritual, seem ridiculous to the carnal man,
and human sense: and profane Nations account it but a devise of phanaticall
persons, yet all those that are under the Insigne of Christ, ought tha^kfully
to acknowledge, and highly to esteem this wholesome work and benefit of God:
This doctrine issues out of the places of Repentance, of Justification, and of
Baptism. For Regeneration conioyneth and lynketh all these things together.

Regeneration signifies not in this place The signification of the word
regeneration.
to return corporally into our mothe^rs womb, and to be borne again, as
Nicodemus supposed, but a spiritual renewing: and the similitude is taken from
the corporal nativity. For as man is conceived and borne of his natural
mother in sin: even so in this spiritual nativity, by the efficacy of gods
word and sacraments, external instruments, he is regenerate and spiritually
made clean from sin, that is to say, he receives remission of sins, he is
made the son of God, the temple of the holy ghost, and an heir of eternal
life, albeit the spots of Original Ioh. 1. and. 3 Tit. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 2.
sin do yet remain in this body of his. And under this general word
Regeneration, man's conversion unto God, his justification, and the effects
thereof, are comprehended and contained.

Regeneration of Christians in Gods The definition of regeneration.
invisible accion, plainly expressed by his holy word and sacraments annexed
unto the same: whereby our merciful God does spiritually form and fashion of
a carnal man, a new, just, and holy manne, ingraffing him into his kingdom,
removing from him his sins committed, his wrath and indignation, and
imparteth unto him his justice and grace: delivers him also from the power
and kingdom of the Devil, and gives him the holy ghost, the earnest pledge
of eternal life: and fynallye kindles in him new strength to begin newnes of
life, acceptable and pleasant unto God in this world. The grounds this
definition are the words of the holy scripture: Go teach all nations, baptising
the^ Math. 28. ^ar. 16. John. 3. Tit. 3.
in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost: and he that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. This Renouation, as I said before,
is a matter of the greatest moment, and an especial sign of Gods love and
mercy toward man. For when godless man put upon him the image of the devil,
and was thereby more then oppressed with many miseries, and had cast away al
hope of relief: the loving Lord used a wonderful temperature of justice and
mercy, and ministered medicines to man, his son even then being a Solliciter
and intercessor for us.

This son of the eternal father our The work of regeneration appointed from
the beginning.
Lord Jesus Christ, was from the beginning appointed to descend and take man's
nature upon him, and was subject to all human infirmities, sin excepted. He
appeared to destroy the works of the devil, to seek the lost grote, wherein
Gods image was stamped, to bring home the lost sheep to the fold of eternal
life, to the end that he might florishe for ever there with al heavenly
companies, being here regenerated, and there according to Gods image perfectly
renewed. For when man kind had received most grievous wounds, and was
bound in strong chains, not able to be broken by man's strength: this bruser
of the Serpents head, came and professed him self (when the fullness of time
should come) to be our tender and faithful Physician, to give his flesh for
the life of the world; and that he would suffer such punishements, that by
his stripes and wounds we should be healed: and that through death he should
be destroyed that had power of death, to wit, the devil, that crafty
serpent and cruel dragen, the enemy of man from the beginning.

This regeneration of mankind was ^eparatio^ of man by Jesus Christ.
then done by none other but by Jesus Christ, our Priest, and everlasting king:
who collecteth and preserves his church by the sound of his Gospel, wherein
is written the decree of our reco^ciliation: Which Gospel (he being the
eternal word of the eternal father) reueleth unto us: Shevving the
cheerful countenance of his father, and pouring the holy ghost into our
hearts, that with perfect love and heavenly joy, we might in obedience be united
to our God. Which property of his office, and special privileges, he has
made most manifest by his resurrection, and by the sending down of the holy
ghost upon the Apostles, that thereby we might the better consider the
inestimable price of that benefit. The son of God, together with the
Exhortations to repentance.
Prophets and Apostles, do exhort us to repentance, that we might be renewed and
clothed with that new image, and regenerate to a celestial wisdom and
justice. And to the end that we might know the deformity of the old Adam: and
be excited to seek gods image in Christ, who is the new and heavenly Adam, we
must use both the law and the Gospel. The Law (I say) that we stricken
with fear and dread in respect of our sins, might be enforced to seek after
the true and perfect Physician, who is Christ, who^ the Gospel affyrmeth to be
made unto us, wisdom, redemption, justice, and sanctification.

But we must also understand, that what kind of justice ^s restored in
regeneration.
not only that justice which was gotten by Christ's blood, is transferred unto
us through gods wonderful grace and mercy: but in this regeneration there is a
redeliuerie or restitution of certain powers or strengthes in man, out of the
which certain accions issue and flow. And yet this restitution is not so
perfect, as that we are able either to fulfill the Law, or to be accounted
just before God: but it is the fruit of Justice Imputative (as they call it)
albeit in some places and other respect it have the name of Justice: as, That I
Phil. 2.
may be found in him not having mine own justice, which is of the law, but
that which is of faith in Christ. I will therefore write somvvhat particularly
of the powers restored to the godly in regeneration, and afterward I will
speak of their accions and works.

And first of al man's mind has certain Of y^ mind renewed.
powers or habilities restored by the holy ghost, and a kind of light kindled
in things spiritual and divine. Be ye renewed Ephe. 4.
(says the Apostle) in the spirit of your minds. And, Renew the new man in
Colos. 3.
the knowledge of God. And again: We all 2. Cor. 3.
with face reveled, beholding the glory of the Lodre, are transformed into the
same image, from brightness to brightness, as it were by the spirit of the
Lord. There is then restored some power and ability unto man's mind, somewhat
to understand the divine and heavenly mysteries: and a certain light to
discern the doctrine of God, according to the rule of his word, from false
doctrine and heresy. For it has usually come to pass in all ages, that
Errors springing up, have been painted with goodly colors, whereby many
have been sedused and deceived.

But ignorance and blindness bred in Much ignorance and blindness yet
remaining in ma^s mind.
man naturally, is not altogether removed out of his mind: The reason thereof
is, because in this life man's restitution is not perfected, but attempted only:
and the disease of original sin remains after this spiritual
Regeneration. The old nature, or old man remains, albeit some mortification
be begone. For so the Apostle says: We know in part, we 1. Cor. 13.
prophecy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, that which is
imperfect shall be done away. And hereof it comes to pass, that ignorances
of God and spiritual things (not known unto us by nature) do oftentimes
exceedingly encomber and unquiet even the man regenerate: So that light and
darkness in man's mind, do contend and strive one with another, as the Apostle
most gravely teaches in these words: The Gal. 5.
flesh coueteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: these
are contrary one to another. And now and then the ignorance and darkness of
the mind does extinguish the small light kindled, either with gross
security, or curious philosophy, or carnal reason, as we know it came to
pass in Aaron, Solomon, and Hieroboam, who vvilfully shook of this divine
light: and gave them selves to the worshipping of Idols.

Let us not marvel therefore, that there is yet remaining such great
imbecilitie in those that be regenerate: neither yet because some excellent
men, accounted why excellent lights of Christ's Church ^o e^^^ ^ ^all.
lights of the Church, do often times err and fall very grossly, seeing the
cause thereof is so apparent: to vvitte, first the sickness of original sin
remaining yet in the posterity of Adam: and secondly, the craft, furor, and
power of the devil, who without gods especial and vvo^derfull grace is able
to do much against seely and vveake man.

As the mind has received certain Of the will renewed after regeneration.
seeds or nourishments of regeneration in this life by gods grace: even so
will is partaker of some power and ability to apprehende divine and
spiritual things, to covet after them, and assent unto them: which promptnes
and faculty it had not before regeneration, as the Apostle most excellently
vvriteth after this manner: It Phil. 2.
is God that works in us the will and the deed, according to his good will.
And elsewhere he freely confesses that he has Romans 7.
will in divine things, and as a spiritual man to be delighted with gods law.
But yet the will is not perfectly restored in this life. For the filth and
dregs of original sin (albeit they are forgiven by Christ) are yet
abiding in us, and can not wholly be rooted out of this our Nature: First
therefore let us consider the weakness of Will, even in those that be
regenerate, without Gods special and peculiar assistance, as we see daily in
the confessions, afflictions, and deaths The weakness of the godly in the hour
of death, and the cause thereof.
of the godly. Secondly, our will is by our own malice, and the subtlety of
Satan, both let, deformed, and ouercommen. Which imbecilitie and
weakness, so deeply and daungerously fastened unto us, the godly do both
taste and feel, and also bevvayle and lament: praying still with earnest
groaning, that they may be rid out of this thraldom, into bliss and peace
everlasting. The voice of the Apostle is worthy to be heard, which says:
Will is ready unto me, but I am not able Romans 7.
to do it. For I do not that good thing which I vvoulde do, but that
evil which I would not, that I do. If I do that which I vvoulde not, it is
not now I, but sin dwelling in me. And a little after: I see annother Law
in my members, resisting the law of my Mind, and leading me captive under
the law of sin, which is in my members. O unhappy man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? I give God thanks through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore in my mind I serve the law of God, but in
my flesh the law of sin. In the which words the Apostle affyrmeth, that
he had a good will stirred up by the holy ghost: But he adds that the old
Adam sticking in him, did always pluck him away to sin and wickedness. He
further shows the author of regeneration in this life, and the perfecter
thereof in the life to come: eue^ Jesus Christ our savior and redemer.

And yet God has with his spirit of strength and fortitude assisted many
thousands of his martyrs, in giving testimony The principal cause of the
patience and strength of martyrs ^n their ^assions.
to the truth with vvonderfull patience and boldness: which is the proper
and peculiar work of the holy ghost, who is thereof called a Comforter. And
that voice of the Apostle is most sweet and delectable: God is faithful, who
1. Cor. 10.
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able to bear: but in the
middle of your temptation he will provide that you shallbe able to bear it.
God is always present with his servants in their agonies, and does most
graciously and plentifully give them courage and strength in cruel torments,
that they become victors and conquerors.

In things external conjoined with The power of will regenerate in temporal
things.
virtue and honesty, man's will after regeneration is without all doubt more
pliable then it was before. For the man regenerate has the light of Gods word
shining in his mind, whereby he perceives and embraces more readily both
things divine and human. It is a great virtue in Scipio, that he conteyneth
him self from Endibilis: But it was without What men not regenerat chiefly
respect in their accions.
the light of the living god, his will was therefore vntovvarde in spiritual
things, he was an idolator, and in his accions only respected external
honesty, that he might not do any thing against comelynes. But in Joseph
refusing unlawful company with his masters Joseph his accions and the ground
thereof.
wife, there shines a more excellent and divine virtue. For he had the
knowledge of the living god, and a vvil regenerate, whereby he did more
commodiously A great^ diversity of man's will both in those that be regenerate
and not regenerate.
practice things external, he had the holy ghost his guide and leader, he
feared God, and was loath to deface his honor and glory, he assuredly believed
that God would be with him and comfort him in perilles and dangers.

There is also a great difference between those that be not regenerate in
things external, for one excels another in virtue, in discipline, and in
exercises. Moreover there is often times seen great imbecilitie in the godly,
who do horribly deforme themselves in external vices: the cause is the sin
yet remaining in their nature, which is no small or light evil: Whereunto the
diuill adds his poison and malice, especially against the godly. Whereby it
comes to pass that no man (Christ excepted) be he never so learned or
godly, is pure The spots in the godly
and clean from foul spots and offenses. And hereof come so many offenses
and faults of the best and most excellent men in the church of God in their
external accions, as Loath, who defiled Loath. David. Hely.
him self with drunkenness and incest: David with adultery and murder. Hely
with negligence in the education of his children, etc. So that many are choked,
and The thorns of this world.
oppressed with the thorns of this world, and very few rid them selves out
of the same. All godly men ought to acknowledge this their great infirmity,
and to pray continually, that God of his mercy would vouchsafe to govern our
paths and steps in this slippery way of the world, that either we may not
fall at all into foul offenses, or at the least that we may not be drowned,
and utterly perish in the same.

The newnes of ma^s heart regenerat, is al Of the heart of man regenerate.
so such, that some divine motions are lightened (and as it were) kyndled: So
there begins both a certain harmony of affections in the heart, and also a
certain consent of the mind, will, and heart. And so it conceyueth by the
aid of the holy ghost (and not of it self), some sparks and seeds of a
reverend and childish fear of god, a love of God and godly things, a
wonderful tollerancy and patience in afflictions, and a loathsome detestation
of sin and wickedness. It begins to restrain and bridle raging
affections, and embraces his ^auen Christian with love and charity. Albeit not
so perfectly as the law requires. Perfect nature only perfectly fulfilleth
y^ law.
Thou shall love the Lord thy god withal thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy
self. For the perfect and exact fulfilling of the law, belongs to perfect
and incorrupt nature.

There remains therefore in the hearts of men regenerate, not only a great
infirmity, Great infirmityes remain in man's heart after regeneration.
coldness, and dullness to all good motions: but the same motions are confounded
and tumbled together as it were with a certain whyrlewind. And most commonly
corrupt affections bear rule, and burst out with great shame and infamy, as
flames of lust, desire of reuengement, malice and hatred, either too much or
preposterous fear, or love of external and temporal things: And many in
these storms and tempests, are utterly The effects of raging affections.
cast out of Christ's ship: and other some with much ado aryue in the
haven in a boat all to rent and torn, as experience in all ages makes
manifest. The heart therefore is much like a roaring sea of furious affections,
subject to The heart is much like a troubled sea of raging affections.
diverse storms and tempests, which if it be not made calm and quiet with
the holy ghost: it will make greater shipwrackes in sin, then sailors do in
Scylla and Charibdis. The fountain and origin of these storms and tempests
is original sin (as I have often already repeated) so deeply rooted in our
nature: Which the foul feend with his craft, furor, and power over miserable
men, meruelously augmenteth and increases. And therefore David being
regenerate prays after this manner: Create in me, O God, a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit within me. He felt, no doubt, in him self these raging
fluddes of the heart, wherewithal he was tossed and almost oppressed diversely,
and with great danger, neither was he able to resist the same without the
aid and assistance of the holy ghost.

The man regenerate then by Gods Of the good accions and work of men regenerate.
grace, begins new obedience, internal and external, which is acceptable
to god through Jesus Christ, who says unto us: I am the vine, and you are the
branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, that man brings forth much
fruit, for without me ye are able to do nothing. When we are therefore
ingraffed in Christ by regeneration, and made good, we may do good works,
as the Apostle evidently declares: We are his vvorkmanshippe, created by
Christ Jesus in good works, which God The good works of man regenerate, are
un perfect in this life.
has prepared that we should walk in. But we must always remember that the
good works of men regenerate are not perfect in this life, according to the
declaration of the law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy self.
And therefore man regenerate has not remission of sins, and inheritance of
eternal life, by means of his own justice, which is imperfect, but only by
The comfort of men regenerate.
justice imputative, which is derived unto him by the justice of Christ: yet
the man regenerate has this solace and comfort, that his new obedience is
acceptable and pleasant unto God: Because he is reconciled to God by faith in
Christ, and all his works, accions, and obedience, springs of faith. And
moreover almighty God of his great and abundant mercy, does recompense and
crown this nevve obedience, both in this life and in the life to come.

This punnishment continues all Of the dominion of man regenerate over other
living creatures.
the days of man's life in this world, that the great dignity, authority,
and rule, which our parents had before the fall over other living creatures,
is not restored unto him again. The pleasure of God is that some signs of our
corruption and transgression should alvvayes be object unto our eyes: That we
might the rather thereby fear and obey his majesty. And yet we may also see
Gods blessing, in making many beasts not only tame, but also as it were
familiar and domestical servants unto us: and that more willingly and
prosperouslye they serve us, then they serve the wicked and ungodly. And in
like manner the fertility of the earth, is not Of the frut fulness of y^ earth.
perfectly restored in this life to man regenerate: and yet by the blessing of
god all living creatures are fed, and as the Psalmist says, There is no
scarsitie to those that Psalm. 3. 4.
fear him.

There yet remains also in the marriage The marriage of men regenerate.
of man regenerate, certain signs and admonitions of his transgression, as in
that children are borne with pain and peril of their parent, and are all by
nature the sons of wrath. And yet notwithstanding God is present with his
servants in their Ephe. 2.
marriages, and mitigateth the karkes and cares thereof, but also conserueth and
provides peace, and sends some Halcions days: And often times for one good
man's sake, he blesses whole regions and countries: as the examples of Joseph,
Danyell, and many others, do sufficiently declare. The godly also have this
prerogative, Joseph. Da^ell.
that because they be true and lively members of Christ's church: they only
may assure them selves, that they bring forth seeds and plants of the heavenly
Jerusalem, and are as it were Nurceries bringing forth (as Plato called Plato.
them) worshippers of the divine power and majesty

The tyranny and furor of the diuyll Of the tyranny of y^ Devil.
against men Regenerate, ceasseth not in this life, because sin remains
yet in our nature. And Gods will also is that the enemy of mankind should
be perfectly known, that both the great benefits of Christ, might more
clearly shine, and shevve them selves, and also that the excercyse of faith
and confession, might be more frequent and common amongst his faithful
servants, and loving children. For albeit the prince of this world be judged
already, and his power and weapons made dull and broken: yet he is not
altogether removed out of this world, and separated from the Saints: for
that shall not be absolved and finished before the last day.

And because mention has oftentimes been made of men regenerate, and not
regenerate, to ^^ende their differences may be more manifest, I vvil put down
certain Autithises, whereby the diversity Autitheses or certain differences
between man regenerate and not regenerate
between Alexander and David, Plato and Paul, and other such excellent
wightes, will more manifestly appear. The Ethnickes have only a carnal
nativity: The Regenerate are borne of God spiritually. The Ethnickes want the
true knowledge of God, they doubt of his essence and will: although they
otherwise excel in vvisdome, virtue, and good demerites: The Regenerate have a
sure, certain, and evident knowledge of God. The Ethnickes want all Justice
imputative: The Regenerate are beautified with Christ's justice, which he
has purchased with his blood. The Ethnickes have only the external
discipline of the second Table: The Regenerate have not only the works of
external discipline, but the internal works of the first Table. The
Ethnickes doing good works without Christ, are not able too persuade them
selves that their service pleases God: seeing that saint Paul says, What
soever is not of faith, is sin, and the works of the Ethnickes proceeds
not of faith: The Regenerate ground their good works upon faith in Christ,
and d^^ certaynely know, that albeit the same be imperfect in this life,
yet that through Christ they are acceptable and pleasant to God.

The Ethnickes do only follow the direction of their carnal Reason, and
have some little portion of the law of Nature: but they are altogether
ignoraunte of those things that be of God: The Regenerate have Gods
infallible word reveled by his son Christ. The Ethnickes can not call
upon God, nor offer acceptable patience in their miseries and calamities: The
Regenerate are able to call upon the living God, for they know that there is
a God, what he is, and that he is merciful unto them, through Christ, and
that he will give unto them blessings spiritual and temporal. In their
afflictions they know the fountain of grace, they know the perfect remedy
against sin, they know Gods promises, they refer the event of things
unto God, and submit them selves vvhollye to his good will and pleasure. The
Ethnickes can not have firm and stable peace in their consciences, when they
are in agonies and greefes, because they are ignorant of God, of the Mediator,
and of the word of promise: and therefore they are carried into most
abominable and stinking sands of despair: The Regenerate, being vexed with
calamities, with the law, and stynges of the Devil in their consciences: by
means of Christ, who is their mediator and savior: they have sure and
certain peace, they have the word of God, and the seals of the same, they
have the holy ghost, as an earnest penie or pledge of their salvation. The
Ethnickes after the Resurrection, because they believed not in Christ, shall be
in hell vvythe the rich glotton: For Christ says, They that beleene not
shall not have eternal life, but Gods wrath remains upon them: The
Regenerate perseuering in the true faith of Christ, shall be with God in joy
and dignity, having the fruition of Gods face and countenance, and the
svveete society of all the blessed company in heaven, as the word of God
promises.

The Ethnickes therefore being most renowned in vvorldly things, are much
inferior to the meanest man that is Regenerate.

But some man will happily say, if Why the virtues and noble acts of the
Gentiles are esteemed.
their virtues and noble acts, their inventions and explications of arts,
their fluent and svveete eloquence, be of no more value: why do men esteem
them so much? I answer, that they do it but in degrees and respects. And
for that these works are so excellent as man's Reason can attain unto: they
are so far soorth to be alovved, as they agree with the law of nature, or
true principles of things ingraffed in man naturally. Wherein we ought to
have also in remembrance, that the Ethnickes have received many things of the
Fathers of Gods Church, which they have through their carnal vvisdome
marueilously corrupted. Moreover, because Arts, eloquence, and other such
things are needful only to this carnal life, we use them only for the
same. And as concerning Divinity, that is to say, the knowledge of divine and
heavenly things, together with a true and perfect explication of good works,
and examples of virtues, which were never to be found in the Gentiles: we
derive (I say) and dravve all these things out of the holy scripture. And
the end why these The commodity of this doctrine.
diversities between Ethnickes and Christians are here recited by me, and
worthy to be noted of others, are first, that we do not ascribe over much
to the Ethnickes, for their external acts and deeds. Secondarily, that the
excelencie and dignity of man regenerate may be known. Thirdly, that we
might be moved to give god thanks for the same, and to pray unto him, that as
he has begone a good work in us, so he would continue and perfect the same,
unto the day of Jesus Christ.

I might seem to have spoken sufficiently Errors contrary to this true
doctrine.
of man regenerate: and so have I in deed, but that certain old and new
Errors in this matter are worthy the animaduersion, to the end that the godly
and zealous Reader being admonished, might the better bevvare and avoid the
same. The Papists error is contrary The Papists.
to the promise, which teaches us to doubt whether we be in the faith, or
not: which is a doctrine leading men into desperation.

The Saducees hold, that there is no Saduces.
Regeneration, nor life after this.

The Libertines also svvarue from this Libertines
doctrine, holding that Regeneration is nothing but a liberty to follow
sensual lusts and desires. Contrary unto that weighty sentence of Saint
Paul: Brethren, you are called into liberty, Gala. 5.
only let not your liberty be an occasion to the flesh.

The Gnostickes, Catharickes, and some Gnostics, Anabap. etc.
Anabaptists, are to be noted also, who dream, that men Regenerate, are
perfectly just in their nevvnesse of life in this vvoorlde. Which position is
directlye against the Scripture, and daily experience. For Christ does teach
us to pray: Forgive us our trespasses. Regeneration does not altogether take
away the disease of sin, but the imputation, that it be not laid to our
charge.

The fyfth part of the Anatomy, touching the estate of Man in his
glorification.
IF the faith and hope of men Regenerate, did extend no further then this
present life, they were of all other creatures most miserable. Their only and
chief comfort therefore is the certain and assured expectation of consummate
glory in the world to come. And although silence might seem more
conueniente, then a fevve bare words in so weighty a matter: yet to the end
that our hope may be the better comforted and strengthened, and the heavenly
joys being apparently set before our eyes, might be the more coueted and
desired on our parts, I will also say somewhat of this matter. For The End of
all things is at hand.
the time is even at hand, when as all these vvorldly things, of what moment
soever they seem to be, shall have their end: and the Regenerate perseuering
in a constant faith, shall possess joy and endless bliss. On the other side,
the wicked and ungodly persons, shall be cast down into everlasting pains
and torments. And this doctrine is settled upon these grounds or places of
scripture: Of the Gospel, of Justification, of the rewards of new obedience,
of the resurrection, and of eternal life.

The glorification of man in the life eternal, is Gods accion and work,
wherein he restores unto all believers after their resurrection his image
perfectly, that is to say, he will purify and cleanse whole man, as well in
body as in soul, from sin: And beautifying him with all integrity, wisdom,
and justice, will translate him into his kingdom, to be a fellow and companion
of the angels and blessed spirits throughout all eternity. For we learn by
Gods word, that when the godly are removed hence by corporal death, they lay
aside al their weights and burdens of sin (which now so grievously preasseth
them in this world, to the end that man should not be molested therewith
after his resurrection. For there is not only a dissolution of the body and
soul but the dregs and remnants of sin, are also swallowed up out of our
nature: In so much that this temporal death is an effectual remedy against
that puysant and mighty enemy, which so daily and violently assaulteth us in
this corruption and mortality. When our bodies therefore are laid in the grave
they rest in sure and certain hope of the glorious resurrection, neither are
they retained there to ignomie and shame, but Of the qualities and properties
or glorified bodies. Ex Pet. Mart. in 2. Re. 4.
that they may rise and spring up again with excellent properties and
qualities: Whereof P. Martyr that excellent light of our time has written
largely and learnedly, out of whom I will borrow so much as seems
convenient for this discourse.

The school me^ (says he) do call those properties, conditions, or
indumentes, neither can I mislyke those which they number, because I see that
they draw them out of the holy scripture. Albeit I think they have not
collected all, neither can any man do that, because we cannot see or perceive
exactly in this life the heavenly glory of the celestial company. But the
first quality or indument The first condition of glorified bodies is
unmortality.
accounted of them, is immortality. And in deed whersoeuer any mention is made
in the scripture of the life to come, the same is said to be eternal and
everlasting. The Apostle says: This mortal 1. Cor. 15.
must put on immortality, and this corruptible must put on incorruption. And
for that both rewards and punishments which shall be given, according to the
proportion of works, are eternal, the subject or nature which shall
sustain the same, must needs be also eternal. Moreover seeing Christ has
overcome sin and death, it must of necessity follow, that the life of holy
men shall be immortal. The Apostle also speaks after this manner: Christ
rising from the dead, dies not Romans 6.
any more, neither has death power over him any more: And again, Flesh and
blood shall 1. Cor. 15.
not possess the kingdom of God: Which words are not to be misconstrued of
the very nature and substance of flesh and blood: For those that shall rise to
glory, shall be clothed with them. But the Apostle means of corruption,
whereunto flesh and blood are subject in this life. And therefore it follows
there: And this corruption shall put on incorruption. etc.

Of this quality aryseth another, Glorified bodies need no sustentation of
corporal food.
which is that the glorified men shall not need meat, drink, or any
other corporal sustentation in the life to comme. Christ himself has
taught us, that they shall be like angels. For whereas mention is often times
made in the scripture of eating and drinking in heaven, as: I will Luke 22.
prepare for you, as my father has prepared for me, a kingdom, that ye may
eat and drink upon my table in my kingdom: This, and such like speeches
are nothing else but metaphors or translations, whereby the holy ghost
admonishes rude and simple men of the joys and pleasures of another life. In
the life immortal then, there shall be no need, neither of food, nor of
procreation of children: Which things serve only the use of this mortal life.
The reason of this is, because bodily substances are not then worn or
consumed, there shall be no need of reparation by meat and drink. And
because there shall be no mortality, marriage shall not be then needful by new
procreation, to preserve and continue natures and substances.

Shining brightness is also ascribed by Glorified bodies endued with shining
brightness. Phi. 3.
the school men to glorified bodies: whereof the Apostle speaks thus: Christ
shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious body. etc.
Some sign and token hereof was given by Christ in his transfiguration, when
his face did shine like the sun: and the Evangelist says: The Dan. 12. wise.
3. 4. 5.
just shall shine as the sun in the sight of God. Whereof the prophet Daniell
also makes mention. They ascribe also to glorified bodies nimblenes and
agility: For Glorified bodies endued with agility.
the body and all the members shall be subject to the soul. And hereof it is
written in the book of wisdom, of the saints: That they shall be like
sparks, wised. 4.
running amongst the stubble: And the Apostle, We that shall be found alive,
and the dead who shall be raised, shall be rapt to meet Christ in the air. The
body of Christ walking upon the water was endued with this agility, which
he lent also for a time to Peter to do the same. The force or efficacy of this
agility (as I said before) is, that the soul shall have absolute dominion
over the body: in so much that the weight and burden of the flesh shall not in
any wise hinder or let the operation thereof. And also for that this quality
apperteyneth to local motion, it makes Vbiquistae.
many men to meruell, why the Vbiquaries are content to guyse this property in
bodies glorified, and yet will not grant any place at all unto them, as
though there could be a motion from place to place, without any place at all.

The glorified bodies also are impassible, Glorified bodies impassible.
that is to say, they shall not be corrupt or diminished with any passions,
dolors, or diseases: according as the Apostle writes, It is sown in
corruption, it 1. Cor 15. Passions of two sor^^s.
rises again in incorruption. And for that I have said, that the glorified
bodies shall not be molested with passions, we must consider that passions are
of two sorts. For some are noisome and hurtefull to nature, afflicting and
consuming the body: as hunger, thirst, sickness, pain, and such like. From
these kinds of passions, the saints shall be delivered. Again, there are
some other passions, What kind of passions y^ glorified bodies shall have.
which rather help and perfect nature, then hurt the same: Such are the
notices of the senses. The eye is not hurt with beholding of fair colors, nor
the ear with sweet harmony and music: Nor yet is smelling hurt with good
odours. These and such like good passions shall not be wanting to our bodies
glorified, when we shall rest in our desired country. Glorified bodies thin
and subtle.


They add also subtilty to glorified bodies, which is not so to be taken as
though these bodies should be turned into spirits and become ayery, much like
the wind pearcing all things: But this subtilty is rather to be referred to
the exquisite and perfect power of the senses. Whereunto may also be added
affections, which shall not be gross and earthly, molesting the mind. In
this sense spoke the Apostle: It is sown a natural body, but it rises again
a spiritual body. A natural body, and a spiritual body. 1. Cor. 15.
In the which words he meant not that our bodies should be changed into
spirits: But that they should come as near the property of spirits as
possibly they might (in respect of their Notices, and affections) reteyning
still their corporal nature and substance. These notable properties are
collected by the school men out of Gods word: many Esa. 6. 4. 1. Cor. ^.
others there be omitted, for it is truly said, The eye has not seen, the
ear has not hard, those things which God has prepared for those that love
him.

It is not unmeet to be observed in this place, that neither the holy
scriptures, Against vbiquitie.
nor ancient Fathers, nor Scholasticall writers, have in any place ascribed
either to the bodies of Saints glorified, or to Christ's body vbiquitie, to
be in no place, or in every place. It is, and that not without cause wondered
at, that some writers of our time do so obstinatly maintain that opinion
without any good ground at all. And it is to be noted* that many of the
Scholemen: and amongst others Thomas Aquinas, in consideration that the bodies
of blessed men shall come most near unto celestial qualities: He infers
upon the same, that their habitation shall be above all elements in the
supreme and high heaven.

They dispute also of the age of men in Of what age bo^ies shall be in ye
resurrection.
their resurrection, and their opinion is, that the same shall be fresh,
strong, and lusty: enforcing that of the Apostle to the proving thereof: until
we grow in the unity of faith, into the knowledge of the son Ephe. 4.
of God, into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the fullness of
Christ. But by their patience the words of the Apostle tend to no such end:
For he speaks not there of the reformation of bodies, but of the renouatio of
minds, as the words going before, do most evidently declare. And yet I agree
with them in the perfection of glorified bodies: but in some other sort. For
when god first created man, he made him no infant, no decrepit, de^^med or
imperfect person. And seeing the resurrection is a certain new kind of
reformation, it must needs be like and correspondent unto the first: As
therefore all was very good, that is to say, perfect in their kinds, which
god created: so shall men's bodies in the resurrection in their kinds be
absolute and perfect.

And these are the properties which the school men attribute to the bodies of
saints in the resurrection: Now if any man will be inquisitiue of the
qualities and conditions in the bodies of wicked me^, when they shall arise to
condemnation: Let him understand that they also shall have immortality. But as
for those other The qualities of wicked men's bodies in the resurrection.
ornaments of glorified bodies, they shall have none at all: but rather shall be
disfigured with the contrary deformities. For they shall have no brightness nor
light, but as Christ has taught, shall be cast into utter darkness. Neither
shall they be impassible, for they shall be afflicted with dolor and pain
without any intermission. There shall be weeping and gnashing of t^^th. Their
worm shall not dye, and their fire shall not go out. They shall have no
nimblenes nor agilitie, for being bound hand and foot, they shall be cast into
helfire. They shall want such subtilty and pureness in affections, as I spoke of
before, because they shall weep and wayle, and be vexed with gross affections,
and vehement desires: as we may see by the Euangelical narration of Lazarus and
the rich man. But in all these things that have bin spoken hertofore in this
matter, this is always to be had in memory, that notwitha^ding these varieties
of qualities, yet the selfsame substance of our bodies shall not be altered. For
the selfsame flesh and body that we bear and carry about with us now, shall
be raised up again at the last day. Hitherto Peter Martyr.

The glorification of blessed men (over and besides those things which I have
spoken of the body) consists in these things following. First in justice
imputative in Justice imp^tatiue.
christ: whereby those shall please god everlastingly, that are justified by
faith, and translated into the heavenly Jerusalem. So the prophet Daniel
calls that Justice which is gotten by the death of Christ, sempiternall. For
this justice which is so dearly bought by the son of God, is not only a
merit for the which eternal life is given unto men: but it is also their
everlasting possession, and the very wedding Math. 22.
garment, wherewith men being clothed, may boldly sit down at the banquet
of their Lord.

It consists also in notable and excellent wisdom, far passing that which
ever any mundaine creature was endued withal. It has also annexed unto it,
sanctity, purity, and a restitution of all powers, as well of the body, as of
the soul. These glorified natures shall have a notable preeminence over all
mundaine creatures, which shall be in the new world, as some suppose,
according to the good will and pleasure of almighty God. For the Apostle
Saint Peter says: We 2. Pet. ^. Esai. 65.
look for a new heaven and a new earth, according too his promise, wherein
Justice dwells. But touching the manner or order of these things, we ^ught
to refer them to Gods will and pleasure. He him self knows best how he
will do them: and we of the sequeles and consequences, shall know the works
of god, which I the rather add because some may happily wonder at this doctrine.

This immutation or restitution of man being thus co^plet and finished, and the
image of god being perfectly restored unto man, Translation into the kingdom
of heaven.
he shall at the last be translated into real possession of the heavenly
kingdom, which he had by faith and hope only in this life, as Christ has
promised, that himself will give sentence in this form: Come ye blessed
children of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. Mortal me^ therefore shall be removed, not into any
earthly, but into an heavenly Jerusalem, according to the words of christ
spoken to the thief: This day thou shall be Luke. 23.
with me in paradise. Now in the possession of this kingdom the godly shall have
endless joy, wherwithal they shall be crowned in steed of misery, affliction, and
persecution which they suffered for Christ's sake in this mortal life: which do
so far excel Romans 8.
those miseries, that there can be no just comparison between the^: which the
same 2. Tim. 4. 1. Pet. 1. and* 5.
Apostle calls the crown of Justice: and S. Peter a crown of glory which
never fades away. For first the Saints shall see god, and shall come to
perfection in knowledge: We see now in a glass, and in a dark spech, 1. Cor.
13.
but then we shall see face to face. And what thing can there be more pleasant
or acceptable, the^ to common personally with our Redeemer, and to hear him
discoursing heavenly things: where is in deed the best Scholehouse, and
notablest University of all sapience and vvisdome. We shall have society and
familiarity with the Angels, Archangels, and al other heavenly powers: the^
with the Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles: and with all those that from the
beginning of the world, have been soldiers under the banner of Jesus Christ.
For as al damned persons shall be tormented with the devil and his angels, in
that lake that burns with fire and brimstone: So shall the godly enjoy endless
felicity in that most flourishing kingdom, with the good and just angels
eternally: whereunto Perfect ^bedience in men glorified.
shall be adjoined a vvilling obedience and service of god, with all our hearts,
with all our minds, with all our wills, and with all our strength. Then the
which obedience toward god our creator, redeemer and savior, there cannot be
any thing more pleasant and delectable. There shall be no delight in carnal
pleasure, in propagation of children, in marriages* in worldly regimentes. All
which things shall cease: but we shall be busied about things far more
excellent, which we see in a glymmis and a far of in this life, but shall
know them perfectly in the life to come. And after al these things shall
follow a blessed life, and that without ending, wherein shall be no dolor,
sickness, or misery: nor yet shall death have any power there, according to
the promise of our fauiour Christ, He that believes in John. 3.
me shall have eternal life.

This their glorificatio^ will be more apparent The torments of hell.
unto us now and, then also, if we on th^ther side consider the woe and misery
which damned persons shall abide eternally: for unto the great joys of the
godly, there are correspondent so many torments of the ungodly. And first,
those miserable men shall want the sight or vision of God: the want of which is
called of late Divines, P^na damni, pain The pain of loss.
of loss: Which is so grievous a thing by the opinion of Chrysostom, and S.
Augustine, that it were better to be in hell enjoying that vision, then to be
in any place without it. Unto the which pain of loss, there is added
intolerable torments of fire and brimstone: and many other infinite agonies and
vexations, which the Divines call Penam sensus, the pain of Pain of sense.
sense, or feling. The which two pains are never without despe^ate houling,
weeping, and gnashing of teeth. What should I here speak of the sun dry and
diverse kinds of torments, vvherwithall damned persons vex one another in hell:
which are so vgglie and horrible that we tremble and quake, when we do but once
think upon them: and are so much more grenous, because all relief and end
thereof, are utterly dispayred and distrusted. And the same are not a little
augmented, when damned men shall cast up their eyes into heaven, and behold
those Sap^. ^. 4,
whom they had in this world in derision: now on the contrary part to
rest in peace, and to reign in all glory, honor, and blessedness.

There are two questions usually demanded ^f y^ eq^^litie or inequality of
^oyes in ^ternall life.
touching the state of glorificatio^: first, whether the glory of the Elect be
common to all, without any difference of men's accions or vocations in this
present life: or whether there be any diversity at all. Secondly, whether in
the state of glorification, men shall know such as were their acquaintance and
friends in this life. Of the which two questions, albeit not impartinent to
this discourse, I will write nothing at this time: both because the discussing
of these questions (in my judgment) breed rather pleasure then profit: and
also because the same are handled Rog. Allaeus ex Pe. Mart. in 1. Cor. 14. The
sickemans salve
learnedly in our English tongue, by two of our country men, M. Allie, and M.
Beacon, (albeit one of them borrowed his tractation of this matter almost
verbatim out of P. Martyr) unto the^ therefore I remitte the Reader desitous to
know further of this matter. I think it rather Drigans and the Ch^lias^^s
error touching y^ salvation of all men.
expedient to admonish my reader in this part, of the heresy of the
Chiliastes, who supposed, that both al me^ and devils should be saved at the
last day. Of the which opinion was Origin: who also held that the benefit
of Christ should extend it self as largely as the offense of Adam. But there
is plain and evident mention made in the holy scripture of the pains of
damned men. Their worm shall never dye. Nether is it expressed in the
scripture that Christ's binefite should be exte^ded as ample as the fall of
Ada^. And albeit some mainteining that proposition to help themselves, do
affirm that Christ's benefit extends it self to so many in number, in
respect that by his means al men are partakers of the resurrection: unto this
it may be inferred, that as the resurrection is a benefit to the godly, so is
it a punishment to the ungodly. For the resurrection of the wicked is unto the^
partly an execution of gods severity and wrath. And if the lord pronounced of
Judas, that it had bin better for him never to have bin borne: why may not It
were better for y^ wicked never to rise a gain.
the same be spoken of the wicked, It were better for them not to rise again.
Moreover albeit they seem to have found some refuge in respect of the
resurrection, because Christ's benefit is spread to as many in number as Adams
transgression, what would they answer, if they should be urged with an argument
of Adams offense, and Christ's justice: Will they say that all have bin so
justified in Christ, as they have sinned in Adam? Surely to this they can not
ananswere. For not so many by much shall be justified by Christ, as shall be
damned in Adam. And this is the mind of P. Martyr Pe. Mar. in. 1. Cor. 15.
in this matter: and the Apostle him self seems to restrain Christ's
benefits, to those that have received the abundance of grace, and gift of
righteousness. For if by the Romans 5.
sin of one, death reigned by the means of one: much more they which
receive abundaunce of grace, and the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life, by the means of one, jesus Christ.

And albeit I yield willingly to the former The state of man glorified,
excels y^ first state of man after his creation.
opinion touching the extending of Christ's benefits to the fewer number: yet
it is to be added, that the effects of the benefits and gifts of christ are
more ample and notable to that number, which are partakers of the same in the
state of glorification. The dignity of the image of god after his creation,
was no doubt notable and excellent, and did brightly show forth the love of
the creator toward the creature: but that image of god which shall be restored
after the resurrection, to al those that believe in Christ, shall be much more
excellent. For we shall be colored and cleansed with the precious blood of
Christ. And this restitution shall be perpetual and unchangeable, whereas in the
first state of man it was changeable, and endured for a short time. And as the
heavenly life with Christ does far excel the earthly life with Adam befere
his fall: even so no doubt the image of god perfectly restored by Christ in
glorification, shall much excel the first donatio^: but because the curious
sifting of these matters pass the compass of man's capacity, and small is the
smacke that we have of these things, vvhiles our fowls are clogged with
earthly vessels: let us beseech Christ to hasten his coming, that we may take
possession of that heavenly heritage, where we shall behold all those things,
even with these eyes of ours, and enjoy the same in our bodies and souls.

This excellent restitution of the faithful, Glorification is properly the
work and gift of Christ.
may not be ascribed to their own works (albeit god in his mercy promises to
reward and crown the same) but only to the mercy of God in his son Christ.
For as the resurrection from the dead, is neither the work of man, nor of
angels, but of god alone: even so al those things which apperteine to man's
eternal glorification, proceed only of the power and goodness of god, in
exhibiting his son to finish this work. As the Apostle says, We are
reconciled Romans 5.
to god by the death of his son. Again, Receiving abundance of grace and
justice: they shall reign in life by one man, Jesus Christ. And also, He rose
again for our justification. And Romans 4.
hereof it comes to pass that our savior Christ is often times in the
scripture called our life; I am the way, the truth, and the life. Joh. 14. 10
^heworke of redemp^ion is only Christ's.
And, I came that they might have life. Even so is the donation of eternal
life ascribed unto him: And the reason is, because he is our Mediator and
Redemer. For albeit the Joh. 14.
father and the son are one, yet will the father be known in his son only:
and it is the son only that demeriteth and sends the holy ghost into the
hearts of believers. Jo. 16. 7^.
The words of Athanasius are worthy the observation in this matter: It
Athanasius.
was requisite that the son should assume man's nature, that by means of the
essential Image of god, man being the create image, might be restored. Whereof
Origin also writes excellently: Origines.
Man brought the malign image through sin, therefore Christ came in the
likeness of man, to reform us according to his image.

Now that we all may be partakers of this glorification, it behooves us to
begin new obedience in this life, which is acceptable to god, through Christ:
and as the Apostle does exhort us: Let us put on the Ephe. 4.
new man, which after God is formed in righteousness and holiness of truth. Let
us alvvayes have in remembrance, that this life of ours is nothing else but a
pilgrimage, through the which we must travel into eternal life. Let us
forget those things that are behind our backs, and desire those things that
are before our faces: Let us ame to the mark, even to the garland of eternal
life, through Jesus Christ: Let us be certe^ly persuaded (as the truth is in
deed) that there can be no greater plague, then to be separate from God by
sin: and in place of eternal joy, to abide eternal misery, and for sweet
life, to receive bitter death. Let the consideration of Gods image imparted
unto mankind, move us to have alvvayes in remembrance gods great love tovvarde
us, and our duty to him again: Whereof S. August. libe. de s^lut. doc. cap. 3.
Augustine writes excellently after this manner: Understand (O man) by thy
honor in thy first estate, how much thou are bound to thy creator: which
digniti^ he ad^aunced thee unto, that thou should so much the more love him as
he The effect and fruit which should spring by the consideration of these
thing^^.
has pref^rred thee in honor before all mundaine creatures. For by the
counsel of the holy trinity, thou wast not only excellently created: but
created after the similitude and image of the creator, which was not collated
to any other creature but to man only. By this and such like consideratio^s, it
shall come to pass, by the aid of Gods grace, that we shall defy and tread
down earthly things, and covet celestial and heavenly things: We shall say with
the Apostle, I desire to be losed, and to be with Christ: Phi. 1.
So shall we dye blessedly, and rest from all labors: R^u. 14. Phi. 3.
so shall we arise again to immortality, and our bodies shall be conformed
unto the body of christ. And so we shall have perfect felicity, being joined
to god the perfect goodness, in perfect love: and the image of God, after the
which we be first created, shall be more perfectly absolved in us. In the which
Image there shall shine perfect justice, perfect holiness, perfect liberty,
perfect wisdom, perfect clearnes and glory, whereof the Prophet speaks,
saying: I shall be satisfied, when I shall awake according to thy similitude.
Whereunto Solomon also alludeth, saying, The eye is not satisfied with seeing,
neither is the Ecclsi. 1.
ear filled with hearing. In which sentence Godly men are satisfied only in
the fruition of heavenly things.
the Wiseman signifies, that nothing can suffice man, before he come to god,
and rest in him. For there is in man such a desire of divine things, that
nothing can sufficiently content him, but that which is the chiefest: which
when he obteineth, then he rests in the same as in the chief felicity. And
therefore his perfect estate must needs be in eternal blessedness which we begin
here in this life, and absolve perfectly in the life to come: vvherof Prosper
speaks: The life to come, is believed to be blessed sempiternally, and
sempiternally blessed where there is perfect love, and no fear. The state of
this blessedness was offered to S. John in a vision: He saw the Reu. 21.
holy city Jerusalem prepared like a spouse for her husband Christ: in the
which there was neither mourning, neither clamor, nor death: but joy, peace,
quietness, and everlasting life. Whose walls A certain description of the joys
of heaven out of ye holy scripture
were of precious stone, And the city was pure gold like unto clear glass:
and the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of
precious stones. The twelve gates were twelve pearls, every gate was of one
pearl, and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were shining glass.
And I saw no temple therein, for the Lord god almighty, and the Lamb, are
the temple of it. And the City had no need of the sun, neither of the
moon, to lighten it, for the glory of God, and the lamb is the light of it.
And the nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the
kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor unto it. And the gates of it
shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no night. And they shall
bring the glory and honor of the gentiles unto it. And there shall in no wise
enter into it any unclean thing, neither what soever works abomination, or
makes lies: but they only which are written in the lambs book of life. The
image of true felicity which we covet and desire, is after a sort represented
unto us in this desc^iption: which albeit it does not, nor can not lively and
perfectly express the same: yet it is proposed both to stir us up to an
earnest desire thereof, and to kindle in us an ardent love of piety and all
other heavenly virtues: until we have run out our race in this life, and do
come unto the goal or garland of promised felicity, which is so
incomprehensible to all human speech, pen, and cogitation, that the
Apostle in the declaration thereof, finds in him self some defecte and
want: and therefore repeteth out of the Prophet, The eye has not seen, the
ear Esa. 64. 1. Cor. 2.
has not heard, neither has the heart of man conceived those Joys, which
God has prepared for those that love him.

FINIS.

