THE FIRST PART OF THE DISQVISITION OF TRVTH, CONCERNING POLITICAL AFFAIRS.

HANDLED In two several Sections.

The first whereof (by way of certain questions probleme-wise propounded and
answered) consists of fourteen Chapters.

Written by Henry Wright.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKHS. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR JOHN JOLLES, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON. AND To the Right Worshipful the rest of the Aldermen his Brethren, etc.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
ALthough I very well know, that no man (almost) in handling any politic
discourse, could ever satisfy the expectation of such as were skillful, or
unskillful in the exercising, acting, and managing of such affairs: the one,
because they could not understand: the other, for that they were (most what)
too curious, never regarding any thing more, then the use thereof for serving
the time present: yet for the great respect I have ever borne to the Honorable
City of London (wherein I have had the most part of my living and abiding,)
and (in particular) to your Honor, and Worships the worthy governors thereof
(whom I know to be judicious, yet free from curiosity) I have adventured to
propound to the world my private conceits touching that subject. May it please
your Honor and Worships therefore (till better grow) to accept these first
fruits of my barren-braine, and by your favorable approving of them, to
protect and defend them against the snarlings of blacke-mouth'd Momists, who
are ever more ready to carpe at other men's writings, then to amend them, or to
suffer any of their own once to view the light. The matter I borrowed (as you
may perceive) out of the best and most approved Authors and Historiographers:
the form, frame and disposition of the work is mine own, which (such as it
is) together with my best services, I commend to your Honor and Worships, and
your selves to the grace of God, and so rest,

By your Honor, and Worships ever ready to be commanded, Henry Wright.

SECT. 1. CHAP. 4. Of a Kingdom: How it may be got, how kept, how it may be
increased, how made lasting and durable; and lastly, how it may be lost, or
ouer-throwne, by hatred, contempt, etc. SECT. 1. CHAP. 5. Of Council,
Counselors, and the choosing of them: Of running middle courses. The great
good which redoundeth to a Prince being well-aduised, and how he may discern
good counsel from bad advice. SECT. 1. CHAP. 6. Of Example: the use and abuse
thereof in a Commonwealth. SECT. 1. CHAP. 7. Of wits, manners, and dispositions
of diverse Countries, Nations, and Cities, as well free as servile. SECT. 1.
CHAP. 8. Of benefits, and when to be bestowed: of ingratitude, and how a friend
may be purchased, that a man may trust to. SECT. 1. CHAP. 9. Of estimation and
credit: of authority public and private: of Severity, strictness of
government, Constancy, Piety and Providence. SECT. 1. CHAP. 10. Of glory and
renown, the desire thereof, profitable to the Commonwealth. Of power and
greatness, and the acquiring thereof. Of ambition and unlawful desire of
reigning. Of eminent places, and their being free (for the most part) from
practices of treasons, etc. SECT. 1. CHAP. 11 Of Studies, dispositions, etc.
and whence the diversity thereof may proceed. Of learning, etc. how necessary
for a Prince. Of intelligence, and the use and benefit thereof. SECT. 1. CHAP.
12. Of peace, and the conditions thereof. Of the state and affairs of Princes.
Of Embassages, Ambassadors, etc. SECT. 1. CHAP. 13. Of discord and faction,
whereof they take their beginnings, and of the nourishing, or not nourishing of
them in a commonwealth. SECT. 1. CHAP. 14. Of Sedition, mutiny, and defection
of the greatest part of the people in a State, and of standing N^wtrall, or
part-taking.
The chief Authors whom I have followed in compiling of this work,
Alphabetically set down.
A
AVgustine. Aristotle. Amianus. Attius. Aulus Politicus. Aristophanes.
B
The Bible. Petrus Bembus.
C
Quintus Curtius. Philippus Cominaeus. Capitolinus. Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Cladianus. Philippus Camerarius.
D
Dant an Italian Poet. Dio Cassius. Diodorus Siculus. Demosthenes.
E
Euripides.
F
Valerius Flaccus.
G
Franciscus Guicardinus. Aulus Gellius.
H
Horatius. Herodotus.
I
Iuuenall. Josephus.
L
Lactantius. Lucretius. Lucanus. Titus Liuius.
M
Machiavell. Valerius Maximus.
O
Ouidius.
P
Plaro. Plutarchus. Phauorinus, Philosophus. Polybius. Plautus. Plinius.
Pindarus. Pacuvius.
Q
Quintilianus.
R
Henricus Ranzovius.
S
Salustius. Stobaeus, Seneca, Suetonius,
T
Tholozanus, Thucidides, Cornelius Tacitus,
V
Velleius, Vegetius,
X
Xenophon,
Z
Zimera Problem.
THE FIRST PART OF THE DISQVISITION OF TRVTH, Concerning Political Affairs.
SECT. I. CAP. I.
Of Religion, and the force thereof: whereupon, and how it comes to pass
that there be such, and so many, diversities, and differences, of Opinions,
concerning the same.

1
It may be demanded wherefore the wisest Licurgus. Solon. Epaminondas, Numa,
Xenophon.
Lawgiuers did ever conclusionally determine, that the care of Religion, and
all holy things should belong unto the Prince?

WAs it because they thought it fit, that that which was Diogenes apud Stobaeum.
best, and most worthy to be had in honor, should be honored of the best,
and him who bare the chiefest rule in the Monarchy, or State? Or was it rather,
because they wisely considered, that Xenophon Paedia Cyri. l. 8.
if their Subjects feared God, they would be the more loath to do any thing
which might redound to the hurt of one another, or attempt any thing against
the Prince? Or was it not for these causes alone, but rather likewise, Arist.
Rhet. ad Alex.
for the augmenting and enlarging of their Empire and Dominions, as though the
Divine Powers were more prone, propitious, and favorable, toward those that
serve them, then unto any others? Or to conclude, was it for the general good
of a Commonwealth, as a certain Lactantius de ira Cap. 12^.
Divine plainly protested, who held that Religion, and the Fear of God, were
the surest bands for conseruing of Humane Society?

2
It may further be demanded, how far a Prince ought to take care of matters
concerning Religion?

Ought he (as some do think) to take care for the examination of the truth or
falsehood of that Religion which he professes, and in all Ecclesiastical
matters to take upon him to be chief Judge and Determiner of them, according
to his own municipall Laws? Or ought he rather (as others imagine) to be a
defender only of that Religion which formerly has been received, or
afterward is propounded or obtruded unto him?

The opinion of all Princes and States not subject to the Pope.
This latter may be thought an unjust limitation, that any Prince, or State,
should be so curbed: and as touching the former, The opinion of the Church of
Rome and her adh^rents.
others think that a Prince has no free power, or authority, to constitute or
determine Ecclesiastical business, but that by bare permission only, he may
have a mere inspection into them: Which monstrous Opinion, in a Treatise
(almost ready to come forth) I have resuted: Evidently proving that the Church,
being a part of the State, it cannot be without apparent danger to the same,
to admit of foreign Jurisdiction in managing matters Ecclesiastical, but
that such affairs ought always to be ordered by those who bear the
Soueraignety, or some other, by their appointment, within the same State.

3
It may be further demanded, wherefore the Liu. lib. 7. hist. Romans
Romans always confessed and acknowledged that they were more obliged and
indebted to Numa then to Romulus.

THis question (Right Honorable) out of the Romans own History is thus
resolved: Affirming that Romulus (though founder of their City) left little or
nothing unto them, but their names to be called Romans: But Numa (being the
chief bringer in of Religion) perpetuated the same, and seemed to give unto
them their very essence and being, and (as it were) to cause the prosperous
success of their State. For Romulus (says the History) brought in the form
of a Common wealth, which was likely not to be durable, but might end with
himself: But his Successor Numa, upon the bringing in the continual practice
and exercise of Religion, did in such wise form and frame the Commonwealth,
that though himself should shortly die, yet there was left an evident mean
and way to make it durable for many ages.

4
To the same purpose it may be demanded, wherefore the Liu. lib. 10. Hist. Romans
Romans did make more account of Religion then all other Nations?

Was it because they plainly saw, that the settling Religion in the State, was
the firmest prop they could rely upon, for the upholding, conseruing, and
perpetuating of their Commonwealth, and that it would serve most fitly for the
bringing in of Military Discipline, and Arms, to which they were most
addicted, and without which they judged their State could not stand? Or was it
rather, for that they under this pretense (as those who knew how to (make use
of Religion) did practice it ore fortunately, and with better success then
others, to retain and keep those which were good in their allegiance and
obedience, and to curb and restrain those who were ill disposed from
committing evil, or persisting and continuing in their lewd courses: as
likewise to Liu. lib. 3. Circa legem Terentillam.
pacify the seditious, Liu. lib. 3. circa creationem tribulorum plebis
consulari dignitate.
reconcile such Subjects as were justly offended and grieved, with the Rulers
and the government, Liu. lib. 5.
retain their Military Discipline, and keep their Soldiers in good order,
Liu. lib. 10.
get credit and authority to their Commanders: enterprise wars, and to bring
them to a happy end?

5
Again, it may be demanded to the same purpose, wherefore the Romans, even
in their greatest streights and difficulties did rather use the pretext and
color of religion, to expedite and help themselves, then any other means
whatsoever.

WAs it because Francise. Guicciardin.
they were persuaded that the Common People did rather judge by the shadows
then the substances of things? Or was it not for that cause alone, but rather
for that they found by experience, that men are more thoroughly moved, and
think themselves faster tied upon an Liu. lib. 3.
oath taken (which has his dependancie upon Religion) then by any Laws or
Statutes whatsoever?

6
It may further be demanded wherefore in former times men (generally) were
more religious then they are in these days?

WAs it because that in those elder times there was not that contempt of
Religion, and neglect of God and his service, as is now in these modern days?
Or was it rather, because in those more happy times, it was held altogether
unlawful for any man to make what construction he list of an oath when he had
taken it, and thereout to frame rules of living to himself, according to his
own liking; but to fashion his life and manners rather to such laws as were
given, and imposed upon him to observe?

7
It may finally be demanded, wherefore (seeing there is but one truth) there
are at this day so many and sundry opinions about Religion, even among
Christians themselves.

IS it because the Clergy themselves in diverse points disagree, being
distracted into factions, and writing and disputing one against another; which
the rude and ignorant multitude once seeing, do thereby take upon them to
dispute of Divinity, to establish their fond and foolish opinions in matters
of Religion, which in no wise belonged unto them to meddle withal? Or may it
be, for that sometime young Scholars, either in years, learning or discretion
taking upon them to preach, teach, or write, do propound false or unsound
Doctrine to the people: whose corrupt opinions once set abroach (as though it
were a shame for them to change them upon more mature deliberation into better)
do continually bestirre themselves, and employ their wits, rather to confirm,
then amend their errors? Or is this the reason rather, for that the followers
of any Sect whatsoever, study to tread in their first Teachers steps, and
observe such courses and customs as formerly have been prescribed unto them?

SECT. I. CHAP. II.
Of the best form of a Commonwealth.

1
It may be demanded, wherefore according to many men's opinions, the Monarchy,
or sole rule of one, ought to be preferred before other forms of government?

IS it because that Cic. de legibus lib. 3. Justinius H^storicus lib. 1 in
initio.
Monarchy is the most ancient kind of government, seeing that the name of
Monarchy and Empire was first in the world? Or is it because this kind of
government best agrees to Salust in Epistolis.
nature, as is to be seen by all, or the most of all other creatures, in whom
this image and shadow of one to rule over the rest may plainly appear? Or is
it because it is most agreeable to Tacit. 1. Annal
reason, that the body of an Empire being but one, should likewise be swayed by
the discretion of one sole Ruler? Or is this rather the reason, because that
neither in a Tacit. 4. Annal
popular estate, where many govern, nor in an Aristocracie, where a few sway
the scepter, there can be possible any long concord and agreement among them?
Or is it because that both in Tacit. 1. Annal Liu. lib. 5.
Democracies and Aristocracies it has bin ever observed, (...) ever great
store of good wits, which may be fitted and accomodated to all times and
occasions, better then other forms of government? Or might this rather be
their reason, because they observed that this form of government was not so
subject to Arist. Polit. 5.
alteration, or to grow into tyranny? For to speak as they would have the
thing to be, The opinion of Machiauel, lib. 1. Disputat. Cap. 5.
though these few of the Clarissimi who sway the government, be naturally
ambitious; notwithstanding when they see and consider that all the authority
is in their own hands, and by reason thereof that they surpass and excel the
rest of their people, they content themselves (for the most part) with this
prerogative, and so raise no tumults, or stir up any troubles whereby the
Commonwealth might be vexed or disquieted for their ambitious humors.

And thus (Right Honorable) you see how that as every one most fancied and
affected this, or that kind of government: so they yielded reasons for the
maintaining of their opinions? Wherein (in my conceit) they have mist the
Cushion, and upon good grounds (as I hope) I may argue against them all. And
thus for Argument sake I reason against their Monarchy.

Every Monarch is either tied to rule, according to the laws of the kingdom
he possesses, or he is not; If he be not bound, then all men will confess
with me, that that Monarchy may easily degenerate, and grow into tyranny. But
if the Monarch be tied to observe laws, nothing lets (notwithstanding) but
that form of Commonwealth may not be durable, especially when the kingdom
comes by succession. Dantes Poeta Ital^^.
For very seldom falls it out, that to a wise and godly Father, a Son of
that stamp, and endowed with like virtues, should succeed. Now, whenas by the
perverse, careless, or bad carriage of the Monarch toward his people, the
manners of his subjects are once corrupted, it must of necessity follow, that
either the laws are of small force, or none at all. And so farewell to that
form of government.

Against their Democracie, I this auerre, or (rather) finally determine, That
if any good Councels or Decrees come from the people, they proceed from them
rather by mere chance, and accidentally, then for any prime or principal
intention of the Councellers. For the people being driven by some extreme
necessity, to run such and such courses, or put in practice those or these
counsels, or being furthered by some memorable accident falling out in the
nicke (as we say) may oftentimes decree things well and wisely, otherwise it is
impossible for them so to do? For they know not (for the most part) what they
would have, they ask what they know not, and when they have obtained what they
asked, by and by they spurn, kick at it, and despise it: so that the proverb
in them, and of them, is true, and ever will be verified; The people is a
beast of many heads, wavering and envious. So that I may very safely conclude,
that this form of government is worst of all.

Against the State Aristocraticall, I this affirm, that experience has made
it manifest to the world, that those, who for a while have justly and uprightly
governed the Commonwealth, not long after have abused their power and
authority to the gathering of riches, and getting possessions of lands into
their hands, insomuch that they have grown ambitious, earnestly thirsting
after private revenge, and the fulfilling of their own filthy lusts and
appetites, as appeared plainly in the Aristocracie of the Romans, when after
they grew weary to be governed by Consuls, and had set up the Decemvirate, in
the beginning of the second year of their government, they were enforced to
change that state into a Democracie, because the Decemviri ruled so
villanously. Again, it is recorded by antiquity, that the sons of virtuous
parents, who were, and did succeed in diverse gouernements, became extreme
insolent, common letchers, and spend-thrifts of those patrimonies which their
careful parents had left unto them: Upon which grounds I conclude, That the
Aristocraticall government cannot stand long firm, and stable, much less to
be permanent and durable.

4
These things then being, as I have said, and considering that every form of
government is so subject to change and alteration, it were welworth the labor
to make a true Disquisition of this nice point, to wit, what form of
government were fittest for every Kingdom and Country, whereby the welfare
thereof might be procured and continued.

TO determine this question (Right Honorable) were a very hard task to be
undertaken and performed of any man, yet because I have taken upon to discourse
of this subject, I will in brief show your Lordship my opinion therein.

And first, I am verily persuaded, that this, or that form of government,
whether already established, or to be brought in, and established, in any
Kingdom or Country, does chiefly depend upon the nature and disposition of
that Kingdom or Country, into which it has been already, or is to be brought:
For it would be a very hard matter to bring a free form of government into
that Country, who have been used to live under a Monarch, as contrariwise, to
reduce that people, to live under the obedience and command of one absolute
Ruler, who have used to live free of themselves, and to be governed by their
own Laws. The Eastern Countries not enduring to brook the Aristocraticall
or Democraticall State, were ever devoted to live under one sole Monarch. On
the other side, no form of government would please the Athenians and
Heluetians (whom at this day we call Switzers) but a Democracy: None the
Lacedaemonians but an Aristocracy. The Syracusians affected a tyranicall form
of government: Neither could any of these people ever be persuaded to forsake
that form of government which they had once chosen: Nay, which is more, they
did with such deadly and implacable hatred, prosecute all those who erected, or
set up any other kinds of Policies to be governed, and to govern by, that
wheresoever, and whenever, they became Conquerours, they altered and
abrogated, that form of Government, and brought in their own form.

Secondly, I utterly deny all right forms of Commonwealths, as the Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, to be absolute and perfect: much less do I hold
that any goodness can be in a Tyranie, Oligarchy, or Ochlocracy; For these
last related, by reason of the multitude of evils which accompany them, are of,
and in themselves always evil, the Magistrates never regarding the
common-good but their own ends: The former likewise, although in themselves
they are good (for that in all of them, the chief good of the Commonwealth,
or State, either is, or ought to be sought) yet accidentally, they many times
become evil; as well for that they last not long, as that they so easily
degenerate.

To conclude therefore, I hold that form of Commonwealth to be best, which
is compounded of the temper of all these, or at leastwise is so mixed of a
Monarchy and Aristocracy, that one (indeed) for the Majesty of the State should
be the chief Commander, but his power should be governed, and his Councels
ordered by the decrees and wisdom of the Senate: For by this means, the
Prince should retain his splendour and dignity, the Senate their power and
authority, and the people their lawful liberty.

SECT. I. CHAP. III.
Of the Prince, Court, and Courtiers, etc.

1
It may be demanded why private men, can never well and rightly judge of the
affairs of Princes?

IS it because they exactly Guicchardine.
know not the matters of State, the ends of Princes, or how far this, or that
business, effected, or neglected, does concern them? Or may this rather be
the reason that Idem.
forasmuch as the counsels, purposes, and designs of Princes, differ so far
from the drifts and courses of private men, it is impossible that the
selfsame proiects should be available to them both? For it (most what) so
falls out, that although matters of State, determinations of businesses, and
the commodities or discommodities which may be expected to arise thereof,
should be known as well to private men, as to Princes themselves, their
applications, censures, and judgments, notwithstanding touching the premises,
would be diverse, as their first ends and intentions were, which they had
propounded to themselves.

2
In the next place it may be demanded, wherefore, as we commonly read in
Histories, as out of Tacitus and others, that that man, whose aid and help a
Prince has made use of bring him to the Crown, within a while after is
neither liked nor loved of that Prince, but either is fed with the smoke of
innovation, or made shorter by the head?

IS it because that some Princes being naturally suspicious, do esteem the
faith of those to be fickle to them, which they have proved to have been to
the damage of others? Or is not that the reason, but this rather, that the very
sight of them whose help they have used to their rising, grows idious unto
them, for that it seems to vp-braide them with the baseness of their former
mean fortunes? Or may it not be so neither, but for that it is Philipus
Cominaeus.
grievous unto some Princes to remember that they owe any thing, or that they
are any ways beholding to their Subjects?

3
It may further be demanded, how that Prince, who has bereaved another of his
Kingdom, might behave himself to enjoy his new-got Empire with safety?

SShall he effect this, if he This was the error of Seruius Tullius King of
the Romans, who^ Tarquinius Superbus slew.
affect him whom he has so spoiled, with new favors and benefits,
endeavoring thereby to reconcile him, and bind him fast unto him? But it is to
be feared, that old injuries will hardly be forgotten, by collating and
bestowing of new benefits upon the wronged, especially if the greatness of
the injuries, exceed the rate of the benefits, as it falls out commonly in
the case of Kingdoms. Or shall he bring this about the rather, if he This was
the practice of Selimus, the Turkish Emperor, who being but a younger brother,
poisoned Bajazet his father, made away Corcut and Acomat his two brethren, etc.
So dealt Rich. the 3. with his two nephews the sons of Edward the 4. with
the Duke of Buckingham likewise, and others.
murder, and kill, all those whom he imagines to stand in his way, or whom
he stands in doubt of, least in time they may become his enemies? But if he
take these courses, he must needs fall into some great mischief; for he shall
ingulfe himself in the vast Ocean of the peoples hatred, and thereby weaken
his own power against the time he should have most occasion to use it.

4
It may further be demanded, why it so much imports Princes, and great men,
to be cautelous that they do not injury, or reproach any man?

IS it for that he who is wronged of those who are in Philipus Cominaeus.
eminent place, and authority, perceiving himself to be daily and hourly
shot at, and noted for the same, grieueth the more thereat, and so sets up his
rest to take a sharp revenge? Or ought they to be cautelous for this cause
likewise, Cominaeus.
least if the wronged having formerly retained unto them, or made any
dependency upon them, should upon any trust committed unto him, pay them home,
in neglecting, or utterly overthrowing their chiefest businesses?

5
It may further be demanded, why it greatly imports a Prince, to be
Virtuous, Honorable of his word, just, and of good Example among all men, as
well Foreigners, as Domestiques?

IS it for that he may be thought unfit Xenophon in Paedia Cyri.
to govern, who is not better every way then those who are to be governed? Or
is it not for that cause only, but for that Sen. 1. de Clementia.
his good name and fame likewise at home, and abroad is greatly blemished and
stained, if the course of his life and dealings be not current? Or ought he
to be such an one for the better stablishing of his Kingdom also? Sen. Thiest.
For where there is no shame, care of doing of Justice, Sanctity, Piety, and
keeping of promise, thatkingdom must needs be unstable, and the State
tottering.

6
It may be the same purpose further demanded, why a Prince ought to be just, to
make special reckoning of the administration thereof equally to his Subjects,
ey, to do justice upon himself, if he desire to be held for a good Prince?

IS it for that Plato in Polit.
a Lawless Principallity, and loose government is yrksome to every one
(especially of the better sort) so that they do not delight, or have any desire
to live under it? Or is it for that the constant and strict observation, and
administration of Justice, does stablish and strengthen a Kingdom, as the Cic.
Parad.
Orator well perceived, who said that Justice and Equity were the true
conseruators of Commonwealths and Cities? Or is it not only for that justice
does stablish a Kingdom, but for that it does truly make a kingdom to be a
Kingdom, giving unto it his very essence and being, whereby it is, that which
it is? For take away Justice, and what are Kingdoms but great Robberies? as
well said the August. de Civil. Dei lib. 4.
learned Divine.

8
It may further be demanded, why many Princes are very fearful, suspicious,
and jealous of their estates?

IS it because that Attius.
Kingdoms are commonly subject to treacheries? Or is this rather the reason,
for that the Sen. Oedip.
nature of most Princes is prone to fear, and be jealous of their Estates? as
well said the Poet, Sen. in Agam.
Kingdoms and Marriages brook no riuals.

9
It may further be demanded, wherefore all credit, countenance, honors, and
authority in Court, are for the most part slippery, and not to be trusted unto?

Happens it thus by reason of the Fates uncertainty (as it pleases the
Tacit. 3. Annalium.
Historian to set down) who auerreth, that Court-fauours, even by decree of
the destinies, are not always lasting? Or might this rather be the reason, for
that Tacit. 17. Annalium.
Courtiers credites are (commonly) vpheld by others, and not by their own
strengths? Or not so neither, but for that these things thus fall out through
the fault of the Princes, their Masters, whom they serve, whose wills and
pleasures as they are Salust. Iugurth.
vehement for the time, so they are very changeable, and oftentimes contrary to
themselves?

10
Seeing that the Sen. in Hippolito.
Court is so slippery a place, that a man shall hardly get fast footing: It may
fitly be demanded, by what Compass a Courtier should sail, that he may be
without all danger of shipwreck, whereby either his life may be hazarded, his
goods diminished, or his honor blemished?

SHall he attain unto those ends, if he show himself dutiful, obsequious,
and respective of his Prince, as it pleased the Tacit. 1. Annal.
Historian to affirm? For by how much the servant in the judgment of his
Master, shall be held more desirous and ready to please him, then another
shall; by so much the more he shall be advanced to honors and riches? Or may
he compass his desires the better, if he be The saying of Constantine the
Great.
serviceable likewise, and not like the moathes, and caterpillars of the Court?
Or may he rather further his intents, if he be bold spirited also? For
shamefastness is an ill seruitour in a Princes Palace, as well said the Sen.
in Hippol.
Poet. Or shall he be cautelous likewise, taking heed that whatsoever he well
does or performs, he do it as Velleius. 11.
though he seemed not to do it, and without boasting or bragging? Or (to avoid
envy) shall he learn to Tacit. 16. Annal.
dissemble, cloak, and obscure his own virtues, and proper gifts? Or shall
he, being any ways advanced by his Princes favors, like the Moon, Tacit in
Agric
acknowledge (oftentimes) that he has received all the light of his glory, and
grace of his rising, from that Sun his master? Or shall he strive and
endeavor to become very Sen. 11. de ira.
patient, and Sen. Hippolit.
extreme wary likewise? He must be very patient, that he may bear injuries
the better, and not fly out, or run into passion upon every cross he shall
meet withal, or such distastes as shall be given him. He must be cautelous,
least he be taken in the traps of his fained friends, or secret, or open
professed enemies.

11
It may further be demanded, why it is better to live with, and serve a prudent
and wise Prince, then a foolish?

IS it because that a Philip. Cominaeus. lib. 4.
foolish Prince being (for the most part) very suspicious, thinks that every
of his servants goes about to deceive him, which to an Honest mind must
needs be a great errosiue? Or is it for that a Idem ibidem.
foolish Prince not understanding his own affairs, cannot make difference of
good service from bad, whereupon it comes to pass, that his love is turned
into hatred, and his hatred into love in a moment? Or is it not for these
reasons only, but for this likewise, that Phil. Com. lib. 4.
those servants which live under a wise Prince, have more means affoorded them
to retain their masters favor, if they once have had it, or to recover it if
they have lost it, then it is possible they can have, who live under an Idiot,
or foolish Prince? For no man almost deals in any thing with the Prince
himself, but with his This was well seen in the Duke of little Britain, who
used only Peter Landoys.
servants, whom he changes as often as he puts on a clean shirt.

12
To the same purpose it may further be demanded wherefore (notwithstanding)
many Courtiers have rather chosen to live in the Courts of some great Prince,
though a fool, then in the Palace of a less potent Prince, though never so
wise.

IS it because that Lucas de Penna.
it is true liberty (as some suppose) to live under the command of a potent
Prince? Or is it rather, as others affirm, for that Egisippus cum alijs, vt
refert Guic.
the seruitors services are graced and beautified by the greatness and
super-eminent dignity of their masters?

13
Seeing that none are borne Artists it may be demanded, what manner of Courtier
is to be deemed and esteemed to be the better Crafts-maister in managing
affairs of State?

IS he the man who is Guicchard.
furnished with the knowledge of diverse tongues, well seen in Histories of the
laws of his own and other Countries, that is religious, has a quick wit, a
ripe judgment, a fluent tongue, a grave style, and is an excellent penman? Or
is he rather to be so accounted, who is Guic. and Tacit 3. Annal.
smooth-tongued; gorgeously apparrelled, a great feast-maker, an artificial
cosouner, a deep dissembler, a whoore-maister, talebearer, flatterer, a
priuy-whisperer, and one that is given to all kind of villainy?

14
It may further be demanded, what might be the best means whereby Princes may
free themselves, from being abused by flattery?

MAy they effect this if they beware and take heed that they Tholoz. de Repub.
lib. 22. cap. 8
grow not into contempt with their people? Or shall they bring their purpose
better about, if they sit often in counsel, and touching those things which
they propound to be consulted upon, do show themselves Plut. Apotheg.
patient in hearing the truth, that their people may understand that they will
not be offended, if they freely speak their minds, and confidently deliver
that which is true? Or may this likewise further their intents, if upon the
Machiauel his doctrine in his Prince. Cap. 23.
perceiving and finding out of some or other, who for some sinister respects
(though toward themselves) have held their peace, or forborne to speak the
truth, they do either show themselves to be greatly offended with them, or
severely punish them?

SECT. I. CHAP. IIII.
Of a Kingdom: How it may be got, how kept, how it may be increased, how it
may be made lasting or durable: And lastly, how it may be lost, or
ouer-throwne by hatred, contempt, etc.

1
It may be demanded, by what ways and means any Principality may be gotten,
or conquered.

IS it to be achieved by Quintus Curtius. lib. 6.
foreign Arms, as it happened to Alexander, when he had ouer-throwne Darius
at Arbella? For after that victory, he never used in the full conquest of Asia,
or other kingdoms, any other but foreign forces, for the most part. Or is it
rather to be gotten by an homebred Army, seconded by the virtue and the
manhood of the Leaders, and Captains, as it fell to the lot of Xenophon.
Cyrus, Romulus, and Theseus? Or may it be attained by foreign force also,
seconded by Fortunes favors, as it happened to Francis Sfortia, and Borgia
Caesar? Or may it be gotten by the putting in practice of some notorious and
desperate design, as it happened to Agathocles? Or may it be compassed by the
favor of the Citizens, as Nabides got his dominion?

2
In the next place it may be demanded, how any Principality being once gotten,
may be safely kept.

MAy this be effected if the Prince prove industrious, and accomodate himself
to make and take advantage of such accidents and occasions as time will
continually afford him, and in all other things to imitate and follow the
steps of his Ancestors? Or may it be effected, if he never give any offense to
those, whose help he used in getting his dominion, but satisfy them according
to their desires and hopes (if it be possible) as they have conceived of their
own worths? Or may he this way rather attain thereunto, if finding treason
intended against him, he should most severely punish it, for terror to the
rest? Or may it this way be effected, if upon the obtaining of his dominion, he
The barbarous and inhumane practice of the Turks at every change of Prince.
destroy all the blood Royal, issues and allies, of the former Prince, and
then observe the Country customs without changing their laws? Or may this
rather be effected, if he that has once gotten the sovereignty, remove his
seat thither, and make his continual residence in his new dominion? Or may
this yet rather be effected, if the Prince send Colonies into his newgotten
kingdom, or maintain garrisons both of horse and foot, in the frontier
towns? Or may he better bring this to pass, if (after conquest made) dealing
courteously with them, he retire himself, and accept of an annual pension,
in the name of a tribute, leaving only some small company behind him, rather
to nourish and increase his subjects good opinion of him, then for any other
end or purpose? or may he effect this the better, if he altogether should
change their laws and customs, and translate them to other remote places in
the same kingdom, then those which before they inhabited? or may this rather
be the way to purchase the favor and good opinion of the Senators, or commons,
having them always addicted to his fortunes, taking upon him valiantly and
courageously to defend those of his party, against the other faction? or were
not this the better course, to stand upon his own guard, having an army ever
in a readiness to chasten his subjects if they should rebel? Or finally, what
if the This did Craesus among the Lidians, as Polib. reports.
Conqueror should dispoyle the conquered of their weapons, and other means of
defense or offense?

3
It may further be demanded, how a new got Kingdom may be enlarged?

SHall this be attained unto, if the This was the practice of the Romans in
sending their Pretors.
Conqueror show himself mild and gentle to his new subjects, thereby to
allure the hearts of the neighbor borderers, to take a liking of his manner of
government? Or may it rather be effected, if This fell out in the Macedunian
Monarchy.
a great many of wise and warlike Princes do still succeed one another in the
selfsame government? Or may this be better done, if the conqueror have a
great care that Military discipline be always used within his territories? Or
should he rather go this way to work, to This and such like practices were the
Romans.
demolish the walls of the neighbor Cities, and cause the inhabitants to
remove their dwellings into his territories? Or shall he friendly inuit all
strangers to come into his dominions, giving them letters of safe conduct, and
securing them of their dwelling safely under his protection? Or shall he
combine with diverse neighboring Cities, joining themselves with them as
associats, so as the name of the Empire and government, as likewise the
authority of leuying of war, may ever remain with him, and be proper unto
him? Or shall he make those whom he has conquered to Thus dealt the Spartans,
Venetians and Florentius with them whom they conquered.
become vassals and slaves unto him? Or might this be effected, if certain
Cities making The practice of the Switzers at this day.
league among themselves, that they will all be governed, and with equal
dignities, and respect, should draw in other Cities to affect that kind of
government, and so to join in the same league and amity with them?

4
It may further be demanded, which might be the best way to make a state
durable and lasting?

SHall this be brought to pass, if by laws it be provided for, under pain
Capital, that All these things were foreseen by Lycurgus, the Laced. emonian
Lawgiver.
no man should affect the Government? Or may it better be effected, if the
Prince being strong of himself, shall yet give testimony to his neighbor
Princes, that he is not ambitious, nor seeks by leuying of Arms, to enlarge
his Dominions to any of their detriments? Or shall he do it yet the better,
if by idleness, and vain pleasures he suffer not the minds of his subjects
to be corrupted, or that they should grow too much effeminate?

5
Considering that Kingdoms are strengthened as well by awful Arms, as bright
shining Virtue, it may be demanded, by what kind of force a Kingdom may best
be preserved, and made durable.

SHall it be made firm and stable by having an Army ever in a readiness,
rather to offend then defend, according to the counsel of the Emperor
Seuerus; which he gave to his sons, Sic habetur apud Dionem in vita eius.
Agree among your selves, enrich the Soldier, and contemn all others? Or
shall this be the better way to make it stable, if the Prince So did the
Florentines to keep Pisa and Francis Sforeia to conserve Millaine, but not to
much purpose.
build many Forts, Towers, Citadels, Sconces, etc. within his Territories?

6
Seeing that hatred once conceived against a Prince by his subjects, is the
next way to bereave him of his Crown, it may be demanded, how the Prince may
run into such hatred, and what means he might best use to avoid it?

MAy he run into this hatred by his own Match. de Repub. lib. 2.
boundless ambition, seeking to bring into bondage, and the great desires of
his Citizens to continue free? Or may he come hated of his Subjects, by
reason of Match. de Repub. lib. 3. cap. 6.
the injuries he has offered them, either in seeking their lives, touching
their honors, or preying upon them for their riches? Or rather may it this way
come to pass that he be hated, for that he has Cic. Phillip. 2.
given cause to the Subjects to fear him, least he do them a mischief? For,
to fear, desire of revenge is a perpetual companion. And this proverb is
most true, whom a man fears, him he hates; whom he hates, he would gladly
be rid of? Or may this be the reason he runs into such hatred, for that
he is Tholoz. de Repub. lib. 22.
vicious; as cruel, covetous, sacriligious, etc.

7
It may be further demanded, how the inflicting of severe punishments upon
offenders, may be freed from hatred?

SHall the Prince free himself therefrom, if he be Sen. de Clem.
slow to punish delinquents, and thereby give testimony to the world, that his
intent is rather to heal, and bind up a soar, then to launch and make it
bleed by the arm of Justice? Or shall he this way free himself, if he never
punish, but Sen. de Clem.
when the safety of the Common wealth calls upon him so to do, or at least
his Subjects be so persuaded? Or shall he this way rather be freed, if he
Cic. 2. de Offic.
never exact to take punishment of delinquents in an angry mood? Or may he
this way avoid his Subjects hatred, if he Sen. 1. de Clem.
show no^ any signs of rejoicing, when he inflicteth punishment upon
offenders, as though he thirsted after blood, or were delighted with the
shedding of it? Or rather may this be his way, that when many have offended,
he do not Tacit. Agric.
now and then call them to account, as he lists, holding them in a
perpetual fear, but take his advantage against all, and punish all forthwith?
Or rather by this way may he be freed therefrom, by not devising any new kind
of punishments, but inflicting those which have been in use, according to old
and ancient custom of the Country? Or may he this way likewise free himself,
if he be very sparing in punishing of delinquents, and when he does it, he
might be thought to command it to be inflicted against his will, but never to
be a spectator thereof? Or finally, may he thus free himself therefrom, if
to please his subjects, he divert the force of his fury another way, Tacit.
13. Annal.
causing such as have been his counselors, and perswaders to wrong the
Commonwealth, to taste the cup of his choler, by inflicting severe punishments
upon them, or delivering them into the peoples hands to be tormented?

8
It may further be demanded how a Prince may free himself of that hatred which
he has purchased, by vexing his Subjects with Impositions, Taxes, Tallages,
etc. which are commonly grievous to them to bear?

MAy this be done if the Prince persuade the people Tacit. 13. Annal.
that if they will live in peace and out of danger, that it is altogether
necessary they endure such impositions, which if they should not, it were
impossible for them to live in safety, or the State to be durable? For Tacit.
4. hist.
peace is not purchased but by Arms, nor Arms maintained but by Soldiers
well paid, nor can the Soldier be paid without leuying of Subsidies? Or shall
the Prince free himself, if he command the gatherers of such Impositions,
that they Idem. Ibid.
neither by force, nor fraud, exact more of the Subject, then anciently has
been accustomed to be paid? Or shall he rather this way avoid their hatred,
if sparingly, as just occasion inforceth him, he impend and lay out such
treasure, as has been levied by Subsidies, that his Subjects may see and
perceive, that he is but a Steward, for the good of the Commonwealth, and no
riotous spender, or exhauster of the treasure so gathered: or that he has any
desire to convert any of it, to his own use, or ends? Or shall he thus rather
free himself, by taking of a course, that Plin. Paneg.
just and uniform contribution be made according to every man's ability, never
by favor sparing one man, that the burden may lie the heavier upon another
man's shoulders?

9
It may further be demanded, how, and by what means, a great and potent
Subject, may avoid and shun, the hatred of his Prince?

MAy this be effected, if this great Noble man make himself first odious to
the people? Or shall he better effect it, if he show himself very dutiful
and obsequious to his Prince, praising all his good deeds, and sayings, and
craftily dissembling whatsoever is bad in him? Or shall he attain thereunto,
if he This was the practice of Antipater, one of Alexanders Captains, as Q.
Curt. reports.
never project to make himself great, strengthen himself with friends, or
seek to be master of greater riches, then is convenient for his estate? Or
if fortune have east all these things upon him, that he acknowledge
continually, that he has received, gained, and gotten them, by the grace and
favor of his Prince, whose they are, whenever he shall please to make use of
them? Or shall he this way avoid his Princes displeasure, if he have a
special care to This was the practice of Ioab, David's General.
attempt or do nothing, without consulting with, or obtaining the consent of
his Prince, though otherwise he were assured that he could prevail in his
attempts, and that it would turn to the good of his Country? Or shall he this
way shun it, if being for a certain time made Deputy, Lieutenant General, or
raised and euected to any other special place and dignity, he The praictse of
Antipater and Lucius Lucullus.
forthwith at the end, and expiration of his time resign his office to his
Princes hands, and in no wise seem to be desirous that it be prolonged, or
continued unto him, least he should seem to be sick of the swelling humors
of Ambition? Or may he this way avoid it, if having won, and proving victor
in diverse battles, he impute the glory of his Conquests to the good fortune of
his Prince, desiring that the victorious Army may now be led by some other,
whom the Prince shall think good of, and retiring, put himself into his
Princes protection, carrying himself in a moderate fashion, as free from pride
and ambition? By this only means a great General, though suspected and
feared of his Prince, may so mollify and lenifie his mind, that he shall
have no cause to think ill of him, but shall make to himself great and
apparent reasons to reward him for his good services.

10
It may further be demanded, why every Kingdom is so fickle and unstable?

IS it because that every Sen. Oedip. Idem. etiam Ep. xcij.
Principality is the object of Fortune, who can never be daunted, but
challenges the like privilege against Empires, as Emperors. Or may this be
the reason rather, because it is exposed to such, and so many hatreds, as the
Tragical Senec. Theb.
Poet sung, The Maker of the world coupled these two together; Hatred and a
Kingdom. Or may this be the cause, for that it is subject to so many Attius.
treasons, treacheries, etc. for there be very many in a Kingdom which be
naught and unfaithful, few good?

11
To the same purpose it may be demanded, why among the Grecians and Romans,
Senec. Theb.
a Kingdom was so hateful for the most part?

DId this come to pass by reason of the Idem Agam.
manners, and crooked dispositions of their Princes, who being (for the most
part) licentiously given, thought it was a great pledge of their Kingdom, and
badge of their Royalty, that it was lawful for them to do that which no body
else might? Or being selfe-wild, or proud, Idem in Hippolito.
accounted it no less dishonor unto them, to be drawn to yield to any thing
(though never so just) against their wills, then to be vanquished in battle? Or
is not the fault so much in the dispositions and wills of kings, as in the harsh
Solust. ad Caesarem.
natures of the Subjects, being stubborn, refractary, and hardly won to
yield due obedience? For no man willingly, would draw in another man's yoke.

12
Seeing that authority is as it were the Cicero pro Cluent.
spirit by which every Commonwealth is governed, being flatly opposed to
contempt, which may be called the Arist. 5. Posit.
bane and destruction of all Kingdoms, it may be demanded, how a Prince may
behave himself, that he neither fall into contempt amongst his own Subjects,
or foreign States?

SHall he effect this, if the Tacit. 11. hist.
fashion of his government prove not too remiss, and gentle, whereby he may
be thought to be negligent in ordering affairs of State? Or shall he perform
it the rather, if he Idem Ibidem.
show no leuity in the form of his government, but constantly govern,
according to the Laws and Decrees of the Commonwealth? Or shall he effect this
likewise, if he show himself firm in his purposes, constant in his promises,
and that he has no Idem Ibidem.
notable touch of mutability in his disposition? Or shall he bring this to
pass, if (curiously) pondering things past, expending, and well weighing
things present, and prouidently foreseeing things to come, he do timously
consult, and determine, to bestow honors on Idem Ibidem.
such men, as for their worth have deserved; not upon every fawning and
obsequious favorite, or such as can purchase them with money? Or may he do
this the better, if Fortune prove a mother unto him, and not a step-dame? Or
shall he finally effect this likewise, if he first Tacit. 15. Annal.
repress his own lusts, and inordinate affections, giving thereby his
Subjects examples to follow him in the like, and causing Foreigners to admire
him therefore?

13
It may be further demanded how an Empire, or Kingdom may be finally lost?

Comes it thus to pass, by a kind of a Tholoz. lib. 22 de repub.
fatal necessity, when this or that State has come

a Counselor to a Prince to be skillful of the customs of other nations, and
to be a stranger in his own Commonwealth: or shall he compass this the
better if he make choice of Salust. Catil.
grave and ancient men, as also of such as have Idem in frag.
been tossed and tried with the variety of Fortune, having thereby learned to
carry themselves both in weal and woe? Or lastly, shall the Prince never admit
of any for his Councillors, but such as Plin. Paneg.
generally are accounted wise and virtuous? For particular men may deceive and
be deceived, but no one man can deceive all men, neither has any man been
deceived of all men.

2
Again it may further be demanded, how a Prince may behave himself in his
Consultations, that he may grow wise thereby, and so be accounted?

SHall he effect this, if having wise Councillors to advise him, he apt and
accomodate himself to follow their directions, and what they have maturely
deliberated and concluded upon, he forth with put in practice and execution?
Or shall he better effect this, if sitting in Council himself, he propound,
and hear them with patience and discretion debate the matter, and Capitolinus
de Marco Antonio.
never seem to be angry, or strive to master and ouerrule their opinions,
though they determine clean contrary to his own humors, mind and desire?
Or shall he rather bring this to pass, if being able to Vigetius lib. 3.
contain himself, and keep close his own Councels and intentions, he do
(indeed) propound what ought to be done to all, or the most of his Counsel
to consider of; but what he will do, to communicate it with very few, or
rather none, but advise only with himself? Or shall he rather perform this,
if he grant free liberty of speech, neither do too much affect those Quint.
Curt. lib. 8.
soft and silken words of the Court, which his flatterers will be ready to claw
him withal; knowing that they will please his humors? Or finally shall he
effect this, if with indifferency, and all alike equality, he hear every man's
opinion, never Thucid. lib 3.
rewarding any councelling well, least for the hope of gain, they might upon
sinister respects (at any time) decline from the right, nor Quint. Curt. lib. 3.
punish any (though they should counsel ill (so they do it not of
maliciousness) for so he shall ever want Councillors, if it be dangerous to
give counsel?

3
It may further be demanded, why it is so exceeding available to a Prince, to
have his counsels and determinations kept secret?

IS it because that if they were Guicchardine
known, they might be prevented and hindered? Or is it for this respect
rather, because his honor and estimation both at home and abroad, is thereby
much increased and augmented? Or not so much for the former reasons neither,
but for that if his determinations were once known, Idem.
many men pricked forward with envy, would detract from his wisdom, blaming
him that he put not his intentions sooner in execution, though he could not
(happily) find fit opportunity serving thereunto?

4
It may further be demanded, what course a Prince might best take, that he
might not err in his Consultations?

SHall he perform this, if he fully understand the Tholoz. lib. 24.
nature of the business, which is to be deliberated upon? Or shall he do it
the better, if understanding the matter, whereof to consult, he Guicchardine
constantly determine with himself rather to respect (cautelously) the
extremes, and final ends of businesses, then to regard middle courses, much
less to run them? Or shall he also effect this, if he observe and mark how
Idem.
wisely and prudently his adversary (if any he have) behaueth himself in
those things, which concern his honor, profit or safety? Or shall he rather
accommodate and apply his counsels to the nature, manners and condition of his
adversary, and by that means learn out and expiscate what might be likely
that he will attempt against him? Or shall he compass these things the
better, if in all his counsels and deliberations concerning the Commonwealth,
he rather propound to himself how the honor, dignity and splendour thereof may
be augmented, then what profit might thereby redound unto it?

5
It may further be demanded, what is chiefly required of Senators, that they
may give wholesome counsel.

MAy they effect this, if they be Plin. Panet.
men fearing God, making his plain and even laws the strict and straight rule
of their consulations? For seeing it is Tholoz. lib. ^4.
God alone, which sustaineth and vpholdeth Commonwealths, it were very fit
that he should be made the chief head, and director of the counsels thereof.
Or may they do it the better, if standing for the Tacit^^. Hist.
liberty of themselves, and the Commonwealth, they do stoutly and
courageously, not faintly and fearfully pronounce and deliver their minds and
opinions, least they might rather be thought to run with the Fortune of the
Prince, then with him, or the good of the Commonwealth? Or may they also
effect this, if they show themselves Tacit. 3. Hist.
modest, and of a quiet disposition? Or may they likewise effect it the better,
if they can Quint. Curt. lib. 4.
keep their own counsels? For it is very certain that no great matter can be
looked for at his hands, who will vent what he should hold in? Or finally, may
this better be performed, if choice be made of such Counselors which have
Tholoz. lib. 24. de repub.
no particular interest in those things which are to be consulted upon? For no
man in his own cause, can speak, think, or judge uprightly, because every
man therein will be partial.

6
Considering that middle courses (for the most part) prove unfortunate, it may
be demanded why notwithstanding the running of a middle course being propounded
by some one or other in public deliberations, it is (most what) embraced,
followed, and put in execution?

Comes it to pass through the ill Fran. Guich.
disposition and worse affection of some addicted to faction and opposition,
who perceiving that their own conceits cannot pass current, had rather give
way to, and allow of that which is worse, not extreme (least he should seem
to oppose) but different in a less distance, that thereby they may seem to
have (in part) assented?

Or is it not for this reason alone, but for that likewise the other aduisers,
Idem.
least they should displease some prime-man, who has propounded a middle
course of proceedings, will likewise run along with him, and approve of his
devise? Or rather is this the reason why such middle courses are by some no
sooner propounded then approved, because (for the most part) provident and
wary, especially ancient and aged Statists, do approve of that course which
they imagine to be least violent and dangerous, and incline to the mean, as
being the sweeter and more passable without noise or Nuissance.

7
Seeing that the close minds, wills and ends of Councillors be strange, diverse,
and for sinister respects, privately kept to themselves, for (oftentimes) upon
pounding of matters to be consulted upon, This was the practice of Torlton
Archbishop of Canterbury, against Edward the second, by whose advice his son
was sent into France, who joining with his mother and Mortimer, became the head
and Captain of the Rebels against his own father.
one thing is spoken, another thought and meant, whereby the minds and
opinions (only) of others may be discovered; it may here be demanded, how a
Prince may judge whether his Councillors advise him well or no?

SHall he know this by the Match. in Prin.
disposition of the Councellor? For he that more respects himself then his
Prince, and in the carriage of any matter regards his own private more then
the good of the Commonwealth, as long as he bears this mind, he can never
prove a faithful Counselor, nor one whom the Prince or State may trust or
rely upon. Or shall he understand this by the Tholoz. lib. 24.
frequent use and experience he has had of his Councillors in the like
businesses falling out ill, or well? Or shall he rather come to the knowledge
hereof by making an Idem ibidem.
exact: search and disposition how matters are carried and disposed of within
his own territories? Or shall he rather come to this knowledge by the frequent
reading of Histories? or by the apprehending or comprehending of these two
Principles, What is Profitable, What is Honest. Which two indeed are the bounds
and grounds of truth, and of that worthy wisdom and judgment which ought to
be in a Senator.

SECT. I. CHAP. VI.
Of Example, the use and abuse thereof in a Commonwealth.

1
It may be demanded, why subjects (for the most part) Claudian.
frame and conform themselves to the fashion of their Princes?

IS it for that both the Plin. Paneg.
eyes of the mind, and the body, (for the most part) look upwards, and stand
(as it were) at gaze at greatness and eminency, tending and bending the whole
man to dance as they pipe? Or is it because Tacit. 3. Annal
Examples urge and enforce more then Laws can do, seeing it is the nature of
man, rather to be led of his own accord; then to be compelled? Or is it rather
for that Quintilian decl. 4.
Example in Princes is a kind of secret law? For it fares and falls out thus
(for the most part) with their acts, that what they do, they even seem to
command it.

^
Again it may be demanded, why in reforming of a Commonwealth, the producing
of examples of the most famous and illustrious men, for virtue in the same do
very much avail?

IS it because that such men being compelled by no Laws, yet of their own
accord, and freewill, acting, exercising, and exhibiting, singular and rare
examples of virtue, do excite and stir up such as be good, to follow them,
and those which are bad, they do either make them a shamed, or discourage them
from going on in their lewdness? Or is it rather for this, that when by long
process of time, there has been no examplary punishment inflicted upon
offenders, men grow regardlesse of Laws, and the number of delinquents so
increase, that the Magistrate is afraid to punish them? Then one Manlius
Torquatus to punish his own son; or a Quintus Fabius to be accused and
condemned for joining battle with the enemy, without the Dictators leave; and
such examples, do much bridle and repress other men's insolences.

3
It may further be demanded, why he that judges by examples is commonly
deceived?

IS it for that Franciso. Guicch.
all the selfsame reasons and circumstances in the like actions, do seldom,
or never concur, and meet again? Or is it because the Idem.
like actions are not always governed with the like wisdom and discretion?
Or may this be the reason rather, because Idem.
Fortune at all times, plays not her part alike, but now and then fails her
favorites?

SECT. I. CHAP. VII.
Of Wits, Manners, and Dispositions: of diverse Cities, Countries, and Nations,
as well free as servile.

1
It may be demanded what kind of wits, may be termed the best wits.

MAy such be counted for the best, which are Guicch.
more stirring, sharp, and acute, fiery and subtle, then ordinary? But these
noble and excellent wits (for the most part) do prove very cross, and are
oftentimes the cause of much disquietnesse, turmoile, and trouble to him who is
endued therewith. Or may those rather be taken for the best, which though Idem.
more blunt, yet are more certain and lasting, and (for the most part) are
more fortunate then the other.

2
It may further be demanded, why in one and the selfsame City, there may be
found many distinct families, whose manners and conditions are particular to
themselves; as we read amongst the Romans, that the Manlij were ever stern
and severe, the Publicolae courteous and gentle, the Appij proud and ambitious,
etc.

Comes this to pass, by reason of the diversity of their temperatures? But
that (as it may be thought) might be changed and altered, by the variety of
Marriages. Or may this rather be the cause, for that every Family has a
peculiar manner of bringing up their children? for this commonly holds true,
Match. Disput. de Repub. lib. 3. cap. 46.
whatsoever manners and opinions, are instilled into the minds of youth in
their infancy, they will hardly or never be removed, but continue with them
even to their old age.

3
It may be further demanded, why Liu. in his books affirms this of the
Frenchmen.
diverse Nations, at the first assault, or onset given, seem to be
magnanimious, and very fierce and forward to the battle, but within a while
after do grow very fearful, and turn Cowards?

MAy the cause consist in any peculiar affect in their natures? But it is
possible that Match. disput. Cap. 36.
nature from day to day, may be corrected and amended? Or might this rather
be the reason, that such Nations being Idem Ibidem.
without order or exercise of Military Discipline, are not enabled with such
ordinary manhood, as may establish their hearts and minds, making them to
conceive an assured hope of victory, and therefore if they be not vanquishers
in the first assault, they straight ways quit the field? And this (under
correction) I take to be the true reason of their fearfulness and running
away.

4
It may further be demanded, wherefore diverse men (even lewd persons) having
many times occasions offered them, to commit some memorable and notable
villainy, notwithstanding (for the most part) they dare not attempt it, or put
it in practice, and execution?

IS it for that they are afraid least they should Match. disp. lib. ^. cap. 27.
incur the note of infamy? But the greatness of the thing, might (happily)
cover the badnesse of the fact, and likewise protect the party from danger. Or
do they abstain from perpetrating and committing such horrtble villainy, by
reason of their Idem Ibidem.
own inbred goodness, or nice touch of their conscience? But such godly and
holy motions do never enter into the hearts of such lewd lossels. Or may this
rather be the reason, for that by nature, it is not affoorded to the most men,
to be Idem Ibidem.
absolutely evil, or perfectly good?

5
It may further be demanded, why there should be such, and so great
difficulty, in changing or amending old customs, though most men (convicted
secretly in their consciences by evident truth) should confess they were
altogether unprofitable, and dangerous to the Commonwealth to continue them?

MAy this be the reason, for that although some good Citizens, or Patriots,
foreseeing the danger, do persuade the change thereof, yet they should not be
able fully to turn the peoples minds, by reason of others oppositions? Or may
this rather be the cause, for that most men stand so affected, and
affectionated, to their ancient course of living, that they would not
willingly depart therefrom? Or may this be the reason of the difficulty of
amending evil customs, for that there is ever a want of proportionable means
agreeable to the Laws, to bring that business about, so that they must be
driven to fly to new courses altogether, which seldom prove fortunate? Or may
this rather be the reason, for that if some few, or any one man, should go
about to change the form of government, it should be necessary for him,
first by force to invade the State, and then to seize the liberties thereof
into his hands, which might be thought not to be the part of a good man, and
therefore he will rather desist from his purpose, then do his Citizens so
much good? Or may this be a further reason, for that the most men are
persuaded, that there can scarcely be that man found, who having once brought a
State under subjection, by ill means, would afterward use that power and
authority which he had so ill gotten, to the benefit and good of the people?

SECT. I. CHAP. VIII.
Of Benefits, and when to be bestowed: Of Ingratitude, and how a friend may
be purchased that a man may trust unto.

1
It may be demanded when Benefits are to be bestowed upon a man?

ARE they to be collated upon him Match. d^sp. lib. primo, cap. 23.
just at that time, when the bestower of them is compelled so to do, as
needing the present help of such a man, or for some private end to himself
best known? But this manner of giving should seem to be very extrauagant, and
distastefull, to the receiver, as thinking that they were collated upon him by
reason of the parties necessity, which once served, he would never confer
more upon him. Or are they not so to be collated upon any man, but Idem Ibidem.
timously rather, before he which may have need of them, shall have occasion
to use them, or the Collator thereof the person?

2
It may further be demanded, wherefore they who have As Charond as amongst the
AEginensians, The mistocles amongst the Athenians; Camillus, Scipio, etc. among
the Romans, were imprisoned, banished, or put to death.
best deserved of a Commonwealth are (oftentimes) worst recompensed and
requited?

IS this the reason, for that Pindarus.
there is nothing less lasting then the very name of a Benefit? Or is this
rather the cause, for that it is This was proper to the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians.
appropriate and peculiar to certain Commonwealths, so to envy those which
excel in virtue and goodness, as they themselves being not able to follow and
imitate them therein, seek to spoil them of their government and Empire? Or
may this rather be the reason, that some Philip. Comin.
standing too much upon their own merits, have borne themselves too proudly
against tje State, or their own society? Or might this likewise be the cause,
for that those, who either by their rare exploits, or cunning ambition, creep
into the favor of the people at home, and hunt after renown and admiration
abroad, may seem to dim the glory of their Princes, who greatly desire to be
accounted well-deseruing of their own people, as those to whom it more
properly belongs, and therefore they must needs oppose such, and grow in
distaste of them? Or is it for that all men generally by their own corrupt
nature, are less prone, prompt, and ready to requite a good turn, then to
revenge an injury? Or may this rather be the reason for that the Prince, or
Upon this very conceit the Venetians put to death Lauderanus, because he
pacified a commotion by his own authority; as Petrus Bem bus reports in his
Venetian History.
State, grows into suspicion of such kind of men, least they should affect
innovation, or seek to tyrannise?

3
It may further be demanded, why kindnesses, and good will, are oftentimes
requited with ingratitude, and unthankfulness?

IS it because that he which neither can, nor has any desire to remunerate
him, to whom he is so much indebted, will either forget them, or persuade
himself, and the world, that no such kindnesses were offered unto him, or
received by him? Or may this be the reason, that those men, who have been (as
it were) driven, and by fatal necessity compelled to receive kindness of
other men, should afterward grow ashamed of it, that they should be thought
to have had need of such means?

4
Seeing that no man can deny, but that the use of friends is such, and so
great, that many times a man may be driven to rely his whole estate
thereupon; It may be demanded, how a man may be ascertained, that he has
purchased a true friend?

SHall he give confidence to him, whom he has Guicchardine.
bound by grace and benefits? Or shall he trust him, who has any ways need
of his help? Or shall he rather repose his confidence in him who is bound
Pindarus.
unto him, by having equal profit and share in any business, which they
shall jointly attempt and obtain?

SECT. I. CHAP. IX.
Of Estimation and Credit, of Authority, public and private, Severity,
strictness of Government, Constancy, Piety, and Providence.

1
Seeing Authority is the prop of kingdoms, and that it is of the most men
confessed, that the majesty of an Empire consists in the splendour, grace, and
defense thereof: it may be demanded, how a Prince might beget such a reverent
opinion of himself amongst his subjects, and foreigners likewise, whereby he
might become both admired and feared?

SHall he effect this, if he institute such a form of government, which is
Cicero pro milone.
severe, constant, and strict, bearing an hard over those whom he rules? Or
shall he attain thereunto the better, if having Match. Prin. and Tholoz.
homebred strength and forces, he continually keep them about him, and have
them in a readiness? Or if he be destitute of such forces, do straight ways
take a course to provide them elsewhere? Or shall he compass this the rather,
if he excel other Princes in the Claudian. 3.
integrity and soundness of his manners, fashions, and good conditions? Or
shall he yet the better effect this, if he delight still So Ferdinand King of
Spain, and Henry the 5. King of England, grew famous.
to be in action, and grow famous for well performing of what he undertakes?
Or shall he likewise obtain his purpose, if in cases of difference betwixt
Princes, he Match. Prin. Cap. 21.
cut off all respects of Newtrality, and declare himself for one of them? Or
shall he this way come to his ends, if he give this testimony to the world,
that he is a lover of virtue, honoring all excellent men, of what sort and
Art soever? Or finally, shall he this way compass his desires, if he give
encouragement and hope to his subjects whom he governs, that they shall live
quietly under his protection, and peaceably go about their affairs and
businesses, in what kind soever they shall traffic or deal?

2
It may further be demanded, wherefore it concerns a Prince so deeply to be
highly esteemed both at home and abroad?

IS it for that Fran. Guicch.
estimation and authority once lost (which may easily be done) can hardly or
never be recovered again? Or is it for that Idem.
estimation and authority in martial affairs, is of so great consequence,
that the effecting of any business of import, does wholly seem to depend
thereupon? Or may it be for this reason rather, that it shall be much more
difficult for him whose credit and estimation begins to decay to defend
himself and his estate from the least dangers, then for him who keeps up his
estimation, and has it imprinted in the hearts of his subjects or soldiers,
to effect great matters, though his means be weaker? Or may it be for this
reason likewise, for that it sometimes imports a Prince to set his authority
upon the tentors, and stretch it beyond his ability for the effecting and
performing of some great enterprise? Now a Prince shall never bring this to
pass, unless his subjects and soldiers be persuaded, that his power,
authority, and estimation, is greater then (indeed) it is; but if they be
thereof once persuaded, he shall have that done readily, freely, and of their
own accords, which otherwise he should never have had granted, much less
extorted from them against their wills.

3
It may further be demanded, how a Prince may compass it to be feared of his
subjects, and withal get himself great reputation thereby?

SHall he do this, if he use them Fran. Guich.
rigorously, and oftentimes inflict severe punishments upon them? For they will
easily be brought to stand in fear of him, whom they know both can and will
correct them, and bring them into order, especially if they perceive him by his
natural inclination, to be thereunto addicted. Or shall he finally effect
this the rather, if he never use a stronger Guicchardine.
medicine, then the nature of the disease, or strength of his sick subjects
are able to bear?

4
It may further be demanded, how a subject may gain himself reputation with
the common people?

SHall he do this, if he be Match. disp. cap. 34.
descended of noble Ancestors, who have approved themselves brave and
excellent men in the carriage of themselves, and managing of great actions? Or
shall he do this the rather, if he betake himself to a wise and well settled
course of life, conuersing with none (as near as he can) but with excellent
men, and such are virtuous? Or shall he yet effect this the better, if in his
younger years he shall perform any thing, either publicly or privately,
which in it self is memorable, and withal is honest? Or shall he attain
thereunto likewise, if being trusted with the Match. Prin. cap. 21.
managing of public affairs of his Country, he discharge himself well
thereof, having rather an eye that his actions may redound to the good of the
commonwealth, then to his own or other men's private, how near or dear
soever they may be unto him, or himself to himself?

6
It may further be demanded, wherefore the Romans thought it necessary, that
their Generals of the field managing Arms amongst foreign Nations, should
have free liberty to dispose of those affairs according to their own best
liking.

WAs it for that the Match. disp. lib. 2. Cap. 33.
Senate did well understand, that if they commanded their Generals should
attempt nothing without their directions, advice and priuities, it would be the
next way to make them loose, idle, and less circumspect in exercising their
charge and office? Or was this rather the reason, for that they were persuaded,
Idem Ibidem.
that the fortune of the wars were doubtful, and that sometimes sudden
accidents might fall out, which might very much either advance and further
their designs, or greatly hurt them; which occasions (as they rightly deemed)
he only could take, understand, and make advantage of, who should be present
when they were offered?

6
It may further be demanded, how the Authority and estimation of a Prince may
be made famous, if he should carry a strict hand over his subjects, in ruling
and governing them?

SHould he compass his ends, if he alone should Tacit. 2. Annal. Liu. etiam
lib. 9.
retain and keep all the maine offices and businesses of the crown in his
own hands, so that all men should be enforced to look upon, and unto him, as
of whom only they were to expect all things which might do them good? Or
shall he yet compass his designs, if he never prorogue, or continue any too
long in an office, (especially in military affairs) least his substitute
growing too proud, should work any thing which might turn to his prejudice?

7
It may further be demanded, why this or that Prince his government is counted
sharp and severe; when the rule of others is thought to be very gentle and
easy.

MAy this be the reason, for that Match. disp. lib 3. cap. 22.
some austere man coming to the government, does wish, and has (as it were)
a longing desire to have all men like himself? Or may this rather be the
reason, for that such a man coming to sway the state, is commonly a valiant
man, and therefore commanding great and difficult enterprises to be undertaken
by his subjects, uses sometimes severity, whereby those things may be put in
execution, according as they were commanded them?

8
It may further be demanded, wherefore it should be needful that that
government should be strict and severe, which should beget authority and
estimation to a Prince?

MAy this be the reason, for that Ienitie (for the most part) causes
contempt, and that in any corruption of manners it is necessary the Salust.
Lepid.
subject do stand in awe, or be made to stand in awe of his Prince? Or may
this rather be the cause, for that Cicero pro Milone.
clemency and remissness opens the maine gappe to offending, when men are
persuaded that they shall escape unpunished? For Sen. 1 de Clem.
who will fear him who always keeps his sword fast locked in the feabbard,
or for a little Cic. 1. in Catil.
idleness suffers the edge of his authority to be blunted? Or may this
rather be the reason, for that the common people are every way better ordered,
being compelled to do their duties, and by keeping them in fear, then if all
the clemency, courteous entreaty, and demeanor of the Prince should be
affoorded them?

9
It may further be demanded, why the constant keeping of one manner and form
of government, must needs much avail to make a Prince much esteemed?

MAy this be the reason, for that (as all Tholoz.
innovation in a State is dangerous) the Prince shall be put in fault, and
greatly blamed, if upon changing any thing in the government, it should not
well succeed and prosper? Or may this rather be the reason, for that Thucid.
lib. 6.
experience has taught us, that those States and Commonwealths are best
governed, which affect the least alteration of old customs and manners, though
they be not all of the best?

10
It may further be demanded, why a godly and Religious Prince is held in great
honor and estimation with the people?

IS it for that Tacit. 2. Annal
Piety and Godliness even of it self is venerable, making Princes to seem
like Gods among their people? Or may this rather be the reason, for that the
people are persuaded that the Liuy in his first book makes mention, that Numa
Pompilius conferred mightily with the Nymph Egeria etc.
Prince will not attempt or go about any enterprises, but such wherein he
shall be seconded by the help of Heaven?

SECT. I. CHAP. X.
Of Glory and Renown, the desire thereof profitable to the Commonwealth: Of
Power and Greatness, and the acquiring thereof. Of Ambition and unlawful
desire of reigning: Of eminent Cities, and their being free, for the most
part, from practices of Treasons, Rebellions, Insurrections, Mutiny, etc.

1
It may be demanded, what might be the reason, that the vehement desire and
thirst after glory and renown, has always been praiseworthy, and held
profitable for the Commonwealth, whereas the least desire of reigning, in any
great Subject, has been condemned on all hands, and ever thought to be
dangerous and hurtful to the State?

IS it because Fran. Guicch.
the hunting after honor and renown, eleuateth and raises a man's thoughts,
and exciteth to noble and generous actions? Whereas contrary wise the
ambitious, and boundless desire of ruling, provoke a man to propound to
himself dangerous courses, and to run them though it be to his own undoing?
Or may it be for this reason likewise, for that he which is of an Idem.
ambitious and turbulent spirit, regards neither right or wrong, of
Sovereign or Subject, but upon the least conceit to compass his unlawful
desires, engages himself in factions, brawles, and quarrels, filling all men's
hearts with fear, and disturbing the quiet of the State so far, that as much
as in him lies, he will rather hazard the safety of it, then desist from his
barbarous enterprise? Whereas he who is only desirous of honor and renown,
neither fears dangers, nor attempteth or allows of any lewd courses,
whereby he, or his, might be branded with the note of infamy, or digrace?

2
It may further be demanded, how Liuy lib. 2. Potency is the highway to gain
authority.
potency and greatness may be acquired, whereby the authority of a Prince may
be made more illustrious and resplendant?

IS it to be purchased with money, to whom Arist. Rhet. II. cap. 16. and
horat. Sermon. 11.
all things do stoop? Or is it to be acquired by Arms rather? for this is an
infallible rule, that large Empire and Dominion, is not gotten, kept, or
maintained by Tacit. 15. Annal.
idleness, but by the use and exercise of Arms, and Millitary Discipline? Or
is it not gotten by these means alone, but by Tacit. 11. Annal.
firm counsel, and wary circumspection also? Or may it be attained unto, by
making Arist. Rhet. ad Alex Cap. Vltim.
firm leagues, and sure peace with foreign Princes? Or to conclude, may it
be gotten by the Quint. Curt. lib. 8.
benefit of fortune, who (most what) does maruailously favor and advance some
special sorts of men?

3
It may further be demanded, what might be the reason that those men who are
ambitious, and have an itching desire to be invested with the government of
States, if they once be euected to some eminent place in the Commonwealth, So
it fared with John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and Thomas Woodstocke Duke of
Gloucester, protectors of Rich. the 2. And with Rich. the 3. protector of Edw.
the 5. etc.
they are never contented, but strive and endeavor to rise higher and higher,
and if once they can surprise the State, they will rather die, then come
afterward to lead a private life?

Comes it thus to pass, for that all Match. disp. lib. 1. cap. 37.
men even by nature, are apt and prone to desire great matters, though they be
not so fitted and accommodated in themselves, to obtain and keep them? Now
where the desire is more then the ability to get, the mind can never be at
quiet, or contented with those things which already it does enjoy. Or is it for
that Guicchardinus.
Ambition of it self blinds the eyes of men, persuading them that their
merits and deserts are greater then (indeed) they be, and thereupon they
affect and attempt strange matters, and run headstrong courses to their own
destructions oftentimes? Or may this be the reason, for that he who once has
had his temples circled with a Crown, can never after brook a private life,
because Kings and Kingdoms, are ever to be thought and believed to exceed
proportion?

4
It may further be demanded, what man may rightly be censured and deemed to be
ambitious?

IS he so to be deemed and taken, who under Aul. Pol.
pretense of amplyfying and enlarging the dignity Royal; will seek to
dominere over others, and rule all things according to his own lusts? without
cause or reason, changing the ancient Officers (though never so honest) at his
will and pleasure, and suffecting others into their places, whom he well
knows to be of his own faction, and (when time shall serve) will favor his
party? Or may he likewise be thought ambitious who with great Tholoz. lib. 22
gifts, large promises, and all kind and friendly Offices, seeks to
conciliate and get the favor and good will of the people, whereby he may be
one step higher to his rising?

5
It may further be demanded, why all the Arts, cunning and practices, by which
ambitious men study to climb to the height of greatness, are kept so secret,
that they hardly or never burst out, or come to be known, till they have
obtained what they sought for?

Comes it so to pass, for that Match. disp. lib. prim. Cap. 46.
men do not by and by (and as it were upon the sudden) but by degrees grow
ambitious; whose progresses being not observed (except of some few) they may
more easily deceive and blind men's eyes? Or may this rather be the reason, for
that the ambitious do always Idem. Ibidem.
use some honest pretext whereby they may compass their designs, as though
all their actions did tend and bend to these ends, least the Commonwealth
(forsooth) or themselves should be wronged, when the truth is, that they strive
to get the garland, that thereby they may both oppress others, and the weal
Public?

6
It may further be demanded, how, and by what safe means it may be provided
for, that a man shall not grow too ambitious and insolent in a State, or if he
should, how his insolency may be repressed, and nipt in the head, whilst it is
yet in the bud?

MAy this be effected, if there should never way be given, or means
affoorded, to create or erect any such office, or eminent dignity in the
Commonwealth, out of the which the State might have cause to fear, least in
process of time, Tyranny might take her first rising, and beginning
therefrom? Or may it rather thus be compassed, if the State take heed, and
with wary circumspection provide, Aristophanes in Ranis.
that they never foster, cherish, orbring up, any Lions Whelpe, much less the
Lion himself, within their Territo ries? Or may it thus likewise be done, if
such worms, and Tholoz. lib. 22.
moaths, which breed of too much moisture, and are wont to consume those things
whereof they had their beginnings, be choked or shaken off, before they come
to any great bigness, or turn the whole Substance of that they feed upon,
into their own? Or may it thus likewise be brought to pass, if heed be
taken, that if by the heat of the bosom of the Commonwealth, there be
hatched and nourished any dangerous serpent, it be The error of the Athenians
and Florentiues, that they would not do after this Counsel.
timously exposed to the cold (which is the only way to kill it) yet never
suffer it to hiss other where in a place more commodious, least by sucking out
the poison thereof, there might follow a deeper stinging? Or may this also be
effected, if heed be taken that the The practice of Rich. the 2. against the
Duke of Hereford, and Tho. Mowbray Duke of Norfolk: For the King feared Heref.
least (having the love of the people) he should have vanquished Mowbray, and so
he banished them both, and least also it might have fallen out that the Duke
of Heref. should have gotten the victory, and so have graced himself.
ambitious be never permitted to engage himself in any public business,
especially never employed in Martial affairs, least by the well managing
thereof, he draw unto himself credit and estimation with the Common People,
which he abusing, might afterward turn to the hurt and damage of the Weal
Public? Or may it be brought to pass by this menes also, if diverse of his
Tholoz. lib. 22.
own rank and quality do bandy with him, and of set purpose oppose his
proceedings, the munition, and all other warlike furniture, being (in the mean
time) under the command of the Prince, or Commonwealth? Or may this finally be
effected, if Match. dis^. lib. 1. cap. 52.
hinderance be given to his ambitious designs, by the same ways, means, and
instruments, which he himself used to climb to the top of his desires?

7
It may lastly be demanded, wherefore the more eminent Cities (as in particular
it may truly be instanced in, and of, this Honor able City of So Ia cke
Straw his rebellion begun in Kent, in the time of Rich. the 2. who was flame by
the Right Honorable William Walworth, in Smith-field, whereby the City for
that honorable service had the Dagger added to their Arms. So Jack Cade his
conspiracy and rebellion in Henry the 6. his days, came from Kent likewise. So
Kets conspiracy came from Norfolk in the time of Edw. the 6. So the rebellion
in the North, was moved against Q Elizabeth of Famous memory by impious Pius
Quintus B. of Rome. So the powder treason was plotted and contrived in our
Sovereign Lord King James his
London) are generally free from plotting, practicing, or contriuing any
treasons, rebellions, insurrections, mutinies, etc. against the Prince, or
State: when other more remote parts of the Kingdom, are, and ever have been
more subject to put in practice such hellish proiects?

IS it for that in the more famous and eminent Cities (where the Magistrates
are commonly more careful and watchful then other where) the plotters of
treasons and rebellions, cannot so conveniently conueene and come to together,
to consult about their villainies, without being noted, observed, and espied, as
they may do under any colorable pretext, in the Countries near adjoining, or
other remote parts from such Cities? Or is it not for this cause alone, but for
that in such eminent Cities (and in particular within this City of London) the
word of God is more plentifully Preached, whereby the Citizens are better
instructed in their duties to God and their Prince, then commonly they are in
all the Country besides? Or may this be a further reason for the said City
of London in particular, for that as well the chief Magistrate thereof, as
other worthy time, by diverse Gentlemen in several Countries. But in all these
there was never a Citizen in any of them.
Citizens therein, are nearer to the Court, and by reason of their eminent
places, and prime Offices which they bear, and daily do execute for the
Prince, and in his name, to the good of Town and Country, have (ever) more
dependence of their Prince, then in other places further distant therefrom,
the other subjects can have: whereby it comes to pass that they never desire
innouations, nor engage themselves and their estates by plotting of treasons,
raising rebellions, etc. but content themselves with their own conditions,
studying to love, and to be beloved of their Prince, which things are not so
well performed by particulars, in places further distant therefrom, as has
been showed? Or, to conclude, may this likewise be the reason, for that the
said City of London, being the Chamber of the Prince, wherein he ever
presumes that he may be most safe, the Citizens even out of their love and
loyalty to their Prince, have ever thought foul scorn that themselves should
be found untrue, or disloyal; or that themselves, or their City should be
branded with the hateful name of Traitors, or having treason, rebellion, or
treachery, batched in it?

SECT. I. CHAP. XI.
Of Studies, dispositions, and whence the diversity thereof may proceed: Of
Learning likewise, knowledge of tongues and Histories, how necessary and
available they are in general, but especially for a Prince, that thereby he
may more clearly see, and exactly judge of his own affairs. Of Intelligence,
and the use and benefit thereof.

1
It may be demanded, whence the varieties of studies and diversity of
dispositions of men might proceed?

Does this diversity happen by Fran. Guicch.
reason of the variety of times and places? Or not so neither, but by the
mutabilitie of the unstable multitude rather, of whom this Proverb is truly
verified, So many men, so many minds? Or falls it out thus the rather, by
reason of the Tholozanus.
difference of years, and unlikeness of manners of the inhabitants of one and
the selfsame kingdom, the desires and ends of the Nobles, Senators, and
people, being clean contrary one to the other?

2
It may further be demanded, wherefore wise men have in all ages greatly
endeavored to persuade all men to get learning and knowledge before any other
thing?

WAs it because they plainly saw and perceived, that it was the best means
Sen. Epist. 98.
to purge and purify the minds of men, whereby they might be apted to
receive and retain virtuous precepts? Or might this be the reason, for that
they well knew, that the embracing of good letters was Quintilian, lib. 12.
the highway to wisdom, by which the policy of a State is most advanced?

3
It may further be demanded, wherefore the knowledge and skill of languages is
necessary and profitable for all men, but especially for a Prince and privy
Counselor?

MAy this be the reason, for that all men are commonly well pleased to Guicch.
understand, and to be understood of those with whom they shall chance to have
any dealing? Or may this be the cause, for that a man being skillful in the
tongues, can Cominaeus.
better explain himself and his own meaning, and shall much better be
understood, then if he should deal by an Interpretor? Or may this likewise be
a maine reason, for that many times it falls out, that a privy Councellor is
to take notice of some serious businesses, which mightily import the State to
know, and be secret in, which things can never be related, and transacted so
well, nor to such good purpose, if for want of knowledge of the tongues, the
Councellor or Relator must of necessity use the help of some third person? Or
may the knowledge of tongues be thought so available to a Prince or
Statesman, for the entertaining and giving audience to Ambassadors, hearing of
their messages, be they hostile or friendly, and giving them their dispatches,
answers, and dismissions?

4
It may further be demanded, wherefore wise men have held the knowledge of
Histories to be the readiest way whereby a man may become wise, calling Tacit.
4. Annal. Cic. de Orator. Diodorus Siculus. Cominaeus.
History the life and soul of memory, the light of truth, director of man's
life, etc?

IS it because that by reading of Histories, a man shall truly find Diod.
Sicul. 1. Bibliorum.
Virtue, to have her due praise, and honor given her, as contrariwise to Vice,
her due shame and reproof? Or may this be the reason, for that Plutarchus. in
Timol^onte.
History is auialeable to instruct any private man (of what degree soever) how
to flame his life, and carry himself with commendation in the eye of the
world, when, as in a glass, he shall see how to beautify and compose it,
according to the pattern of other men's virtues? Or may this be a further
reason, for that thereby a man may Liuy lib.
become a Statesman, and know how to manage public affairs, drawing his
rules and directions out of old Antiquities, and times passed, as out of a
Storehouse, and making application thereof to the time present?

5
It may further be demanded, what may be the chief use, benefit and end of
Intelligence?

MAy it be beneficial to a Prince or State, because he may thereby Fran.
Guicch. Aul. Pol.
distinctly know the condition and state of all Countries, the power and
strength of their Princes and Governors, the wisdom and skilfulnesse of their
Senators, in managing the affairs of State, and the originals and continuance
of their families, with many other particulars necessary to be known to a
Prince or State, who either has, or may have dealing with other Nations? Or
may this rather be the chief use and end of Intelligence, that a Prince or
wise Statesman may thereby better Polib. lib. 1. Pacuvius and Guich.
discover the secret frauds, and cunning practices of his fair tongued, and
smooth-faced friends (but indeed his crafty and subtle adversaries) as
likewise the machinations, drifts, and intents of his open enemies, whereby he
may better be enabled to explicate and wind himself out of dangers, or
frustrate their intentions, by crossing and counter-mining of them?

SECT. I. CHAP. XII.
Of peace, and the conditions thereof: Of the State, and affairs of Princes:
Of Embassages, Ambassadors, and who are fittest to undertake such charge: what
Arguments are most perswasiue, and of the great use of Eloqence in a Statesman
or Ambassador.

1
It may be demanded, why wisemen have always thought peace to be expedient
for both parties, as well for the victor, as those who have been conquered?

MIGHT it be for this reason, for that they supposed it Senec. Here. Fur.
impossible for the world to continue, if it should be vexed with continual
wars? Or might this rather be the reason, for that they truly judged that the
Idem Ibidem,
conquered must of necessity, accept of what peace and conditions soever the
Victor shall grant them? And that they thought it likewise to be a Liu. lib.
30.
comely and graceful thing to the conqueror, to afford them peace upon
reasonable terms, that all men might take notice, that he knew how to begin,
and engage himself in a just war, and was able likewise to make an end
thereof? Or might not this be the only reason, but for that they thought it
Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
profitable likewise, and safe for the Conqueror to lay down his Arms,
considering that if he should still prosecute the wars, he should reap
nothing but wearisomenesse by continuing and protracting of them, and if he
should make too much have, and as it were enforce an end of them, he might
run himself into many and Henr. Ransov. de re Bellica.
needless dangers, even to the hazard of his own estate, which otherwise he
might easily have avoided? For Fortune will sometimes play the Jade, and the
event of wars is uncertain?

2
It may further be demanded, how a safe and firm peace, may be distinguished
and known from that which is unsure and not to be trusted unto?

MAy this be known, if the peace be Liu. lib. 25.
honest, as putting an end to the wars, by giving and accepting of tolerable
conditions? Or may it this may be known likewise, if it be Tacit. 4. Hist.
simple, plain, and without false colors or glosses, ambuiguity of words, or
equivocations, and not subject to what constructions the peace-breaker may
wrest or draw them?

3
It may further be demanded, why that Prince who came to his Kingdom by some
of the Nobility, or Senate, shall more hardly keep it, then another, who
obtained the Crown by the suffrages and assistance of the people?

IS it because that Match. Prin. cap. 9.
those of the Nobility think themselves to be little inferior, or rather
equal with the Prince, whereupon he cannot sway the Scepter as him lists,
but must be glad in the most things to be ruled by them? Or may this rather
be the reason, for that it will be thought the Prince will So fared it with
the Duke of Buckingham, in the time of Richard the 3. with Charles the 8. and
Lewis the 12. Kings of France, in the loss of Millane, etc. as reports Match.
Prin. Cap. 9.
never be able sufficiently to satisfy those Nobles, without the hurt and
wronging of others, which when he cannot, those very men, by whose aid and
assistance he got the Crown, will be the first who will pull him down
again? Or may this be the reason, for that Idem Ibidem.
if the Commons should make head against the Prince, he could never be
secured of his safety, or retayning of his Kingdom, because they would
oppress him with multitude, the Nobility being but a handful to them?

4
It may further be demanded, wherefore it so much imports a Prince to manage
his Martial affairs in his own person, if he ever look to grow famous by
his conquests?

IS it because it Quint. Curt. Match. Prin. So Alexander the Great, Ferdinand
King of Spain, and Hen. the 5. King of Eng. became famous.
so much increases and augmenteth his estimation, and credit with foreign
Princes abroad, and breeds and begets him love and authority among his
own people at home? Or may this be the reason, for that by this means, all
Match. disput. lib. 1. cap. 30.
wrangling occasions, and heart-burnings are cut off, whereby a Prince
sometimes proves ungrateful to men, even of the best deserts? For when
Princes present, and behave themselves bravely in the field, all the honor and
glory thereof (as it pertains) so it redoundeth unto them: whereas otherwise
if they were absent, and committed the managing of those affairs to their
Generals, they straight ways imagine, that if their forces should prevail,
the glory of the day should rest with the General, who led the Army, and that
themselves can never challenge any part of the victory, gotten, unless they
extinguish the merits of the General, or himself, and by that means prove
unjust and ungrateful to their servants.

5
It may further be demanded, how a Courtier may come to be much employed in
his Princes affairs?

MAy he effect this, if he Guicch.
should wait diligently, and be always in the eye of the Prince? Or may he
compass this the rather, if once employed he manage that affair well? For by
this means, he shall both gain himself reputation, and be thought fit and
able to deal in any business, and be sure (almost) never to be out of action,
by reason of the dependencies which other businesses have upon those, wherein
he formerly has been employed.

6
Considering that by well or ill managing and handling of the affairs of
Princes, in negotiating for them with foreign Princes, either great good, or
great hurt may accrue to the Prince and State, it may be demanded what manner
of men a Prince might chiefly employ for Ambassadors to foreign Princes?

SHall he use such as are Comineus.
skillful to pick and gleane something out of other men's employments, and
appropriate it to themselves, if there be hope that their credit and
estimation, may grow greater by it? Or shall not a Prince trust to such to
negotiate for him, but to those rather, who are faithful, careful, meek, and
gentle, and have been long practiced and experienced in managing such affairs?

7
It may further be demanded, with what tools an Ambassador shall soonest
persuade a foreign Prince, and draw him to favor, and further his masters
designs?

SHall he assail him with Tholoz.
firm arguments and sound reasons? But he that is nice, and has a special
opinion of his own wisdom, will presently distaste that or any thing that is
solid. Or shall he rather set upon him with Fran. Guicch. Cominaeus. Match.
Prin.
representations of colors, Popularities, and circumstances? And (to speak as
the truth is) these are of no less (if they be not of more) force, then firm
and sound reasons: For circumstances, colors, representations, and such like
stuff, are of such power and efficacy, that they can give life to true and
sound reasons, pervert the judgment, if it be not stable and well grounded,
and quickly lead into error.

8
It may further be demanded, why eloquence is so necessary for a Counselor,
or an Ambassador?

IS it because that daily amost it falls out, that a Prince has occasion to
send some one or other of his Council to foreign States, either to persuade;
to accuse, or defend; to gratulate, or condole, etc. Now it is both requisite,
and necessary, and commodious for a Prince to be furnished with men so
qualified, with eloquence, utterance, etc. as that they may with credit to him
and his Court, well discharge the place, and person they sustain; And it
should be a great shame, disaduantageous, and dishonorable to the Prince, if
for want of such gifts, in any whom he should send on such errands, it should
fall out otherwise. Or may it rather be for this cause; for that in Quintilian.
pacifying such as are seditious in the State, and compounding the quarrels and
differences of such as are factious, there is no better mean to accord them,
then to use an eloquent and plausible speech unto them?

SECT. I. CHAP. XIII.
Of Discord and Faction, whereof they take their beginnings, and of the
nourishing, or not nourishing of them in a Commonwealth.

1
It may be demanded from whence discords and factions have their beginnings?

DO they arise of such Tholoz. de Repub. lib. 22.
motions as are suddenly suggested to the people, so that there cannot be
time given them to think or consider what matter they go about? Or do they
take their beginnings rather of Idem Ibidem.
the private or open hatred of Familiers? Or may they proceed rather from the
root of Senec. Epist. 74
pride and ambition, whilst every man strives to proceed, and go before
another, and is always detracting from him he likes not? Or may they have
their beginnings from idleness and looseness of living, which oftentimes are
wont to minister occasions of civil (or rather uncivil) brawles and
contentions? Or may they arise of the Tholoz. de Re pub. lib. 22.
different minds and dispositions of the people, from the designs and
intentions of the Nobility? Or not so much from thence neither, but of the
wavering mutability of the unconstant multitude also? their years being so
diverse, and their manners so unlike: For it is impossible, that where there is
such and so great diversity of years, and disparity of manners, that the
multitude or Commons altogether, should equally well like of, affect, and
comport the present State, but contrariwise disagree, grow factious, and
contentious.

2
It may further be demanded, whether it may be beneficial to a Prince or
State to nourish factions, or no?

IT were too hard a task for me (Right Honorable) to take upon me
difinitiuely to determine this question: for I am not ignorant that amongst
diverse men, and those of the wisest sort, this doubt has been canuased, and
greatly controuerted; yet seeing that I am entered into it, I thought it not fit
altogether to pass it over in silence, without showing your Honor my private
opinion therein, which that I may do the better, I will rip up the Arguments on
both sides. That factions (therefore) should be nourished of a Prince or
State, many things may induce and persuade thereunto, but especially these two,
Honor and Profit. For that Prince Match. Prin. cap. 20.
must needs be honored and feared, who always has an enemy at his own
devotion, and never resisting his designs and enterprises: For he that can
conquer when he list, is not only admired, but much feared likewise, both at
home and abroad. For all men with one voice will give it out, that he got the
victory by his own valor and prowess: Which so reported and believed, there
is no doubt but that he shall be much renowned therefore, though he achieved
it otherwise; namely, by being seconded with a potent faction, joining with him
against their own Prince, or otherwise. Again, that the chiefest and most
potent Cities of a Kingdom, should be brought under the Princes subjection, it
were not only conducible and necessary, but also profitable, both to him and
the commonwealth. Now to effect this, a Prince must either use force or
policy. If he say to compass his designs by force, he must of necessity
offer many injuries to the people, which the more openly they are done, the
more they do provoke them to mislike the Prince: For that which the Law has
made Mine, and Thine, if it should be snatched away from the Subject, it would
be grievously taken, and held for no better then an intolerable piece of
injustice. But when the Match. dis. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Cities of themselves are become factious, and the Citizens do waste and
co^nsume themselves by quarrels and factions, the fault shall never be laid on
the Prince, but on the factious, and yet by this means the Prince in effect,
shall obtain what he desired. For the Cities hereby growing weak, and
wearied with continual garboiles, will willingly put themselves into the
Princes protection, and yield themselves subject to his will. Further, for a
Prince to divert the current of the wars, or any hostile invasions, from his
own doors, it is very necessary, behouefull and convenient: Now it is not
incredible, that ever he shall have any better way, or mean to bring this to
pass, then by Herod. lib. 4. Xenoph. de Pedia Cyri. lib. 3.
nourishing factions, and dissentions in his enemies Country; for many have
put this in practice heretofore, and greatly thriuen thereby: Moreover diverse
of the wisest sort, have thought it very aduantageous to the Prince, that the
Tacit. Agric.
Subjects should never come altogether, to consult, or agree altogether, upon
any thing which might tend to their common or particular safeties. To conclude,
Tholoz. de Repub. lib. 23.
that a great Prince, or Monarch, may become more wary of his enemy, and better
conserve his own estate, it has been thought fit, by some of the wisest
heads that ever have been, that such a Prince should never be without an
enemy, or be a great nourisher of factions in a foreign Land: Which course,
if Rome had taken, and not destroyed Carthage, they should have had their brave
spirited youth better trained up, practiced, and made ready in feats of Arms,
which might have steeded the Commonwealth for offense or defense thereof;
Grave and mature counsel should have flourished in the Senate, the Citizens
should not have wasted themselves with civil wars, and so the Empire should
have been more durable and lasting. The reasons of those who hold it
unprofitable, and every way disaduantageous to a Prince, to nourish factions,
are as follow. It is Match. lib. 3. dis. cap. 37.
impossible, say they, by reason of an inbred inconstancy in the nature of men,
that those factions, which at this, or that present, depend upon a Prince,
should always, and after one and the selfsame manner, be so affected
toward him, for that men being wavering, do greatly desire sometimes this
Prince, sometimes that Prince, to be their chief Patron. Again, Idem Ibidem.
the nourshing of factions, by a Prince in a foreign Land, is oftentimes the
cause, that by little and little, discords and civil garboyles are brought
into his own Country, which will scarcely be thought to be convenient.
Further, a great inconvenience, or rather an apparent loss might happen to a
Prince, who should nourish factions within his own Dominions; For Idem Prin.
cap. 20.
upon any sudden invasion, such Cities of his, which should happen to be rent
asunder by factions, must of necessity be all lost: For the Tholoz. lib. de
Repub. 23.
weaker part would rather submit, and apply it self to a stranger, then yield
to the adverse faction in any thing. Moreover this course of governing, by
nourishing of factions, must needs Match. Prin. cap. 20.
argue the weakness, and imbecility of the Prince, both in power and
judgment: For if he were strong and prudent, he would never endure that his
Country should be torn in pieces by factions and contentions. To conclude,
seeing that every faction consists of few or many, both of these must needs
be hurtful to the Commonwealth: This latter for that Liu. lib. 34.
they trusting to their own strength, would presently take Arms, and turn
the quiet of the State into garboiles: The former likewise, though perhaps
somewhat more secretly and slowly, would no less vex and molest the
Commonwealth, by reason that Arist. 5. Polit. cap. 4.
factions of the Nobility are wont to draw unto themselves all, or the greatest
part of the Commons, to take part with such or such of them, as they most
affect. These things thus standing, they conclude, that factions are rather to
be extinguished and quenched, then nourished. For mine own part (Right
Honorable) though I will determine nothing of this matter, yet thus I think
thereof. That Factions, to the singular benefit of the Prince, and
Commonwealth, may be nourished in a foreign government: and though it were
not so convenient (perhaps) they should be set on foot, and maintained at
home, yet at no hand are they to be neglected, especially in the time of peace.
For seeing that there is no Commonwealth, which does not breed and bring
forth, yea foster and cherish some envy and contention: these contentions may
prove healthful to the State of a Commonwealth, as Agues are sometime
beneficial to the state of a man's body: And it is certain that the Roman
Commonwealth, was never in better health and safety, then when the Tribunes of
the People, and the Patricians were at variance: and the Lacedaemonian State
never in better state, then when their Ephori, and their Kings could not agree.
For by this curbing of one another, the public Offices of a Commonwealth
were better discharged, both at home and abroad.

SECT. I. CHAP. XIIII.
Of Sedition, Mutiny, and defection, of the greatest part of the people in a
State, and of standing Newtrall, or part taking.

1
It may be demanded whence sedition and mutining, in, or, against a State
takes his beginning?

MAY it arise and spring out of the bitter Tholoz. Aristotle 5. Pol. Cap. 3.
root of oppression, as when men apprehending the remedy of present evils and
dangers, to be the evils and dangers themselves, do upon a sudden break
out, and so take Arms? Or may it proceed Idem Ibidem.
of fear as the Philosopher well conceited? For fear may move and incite men,
to be seditious, fearing or expecting punishments to be inflicted upon them,
for the wrongs they have done, and by this means running out, they think (or
at least are willing) to prevent them before they can be put in execution. Or
may this proceed of too much indulgency, clemency, and remissness of the
government, together with the superfluity and abundance of all things, it
being rather the nature of the people to Liuy lib. 2.
grow to be Wantons then Warriors? Or may it come rather of Salust. Sugurth.
penury, and scarcity of things necessary? Or may it happen through the Liu.
lib. 38.
pride and ambition of evil Governors and Councillors? Or may it rather
arise of taking up too much money at Use, with the which the Commons being (as
it were) eaten up, and their states consumed, they grow desperate thereupon,
and so take Arms, thinking Tacit. 1. Hist.
themselves most safe when they run the most uncertain courses? for worse
then they are, they think they cannot be.

2
It may further be demanded, whether, when once sedition grows hot, and
comes to Heads, it were better to stand Newtrall, then to fall to
part-taking?

TOuching this Question (Right Honorable) unless that Solon.
great Athenian Lawgiver, had decreed and established by Law, that upon any
sedition arising in that State, Sic refert A. Gaellius. in Noct. Attic. lib. 2.
cap. 12.
he that would not take part with one side, should be banished the City, and
loose all that ever he possessed; I should scarce have thought it worth the
looking into: but after so wise a man had determined it, and for that I
perceived others, who thought themselves as wise, as the said Law giver, did
stiffely stand against his opinion, and upon good grounds (as they suppose)
produced arguments to the contrary, I thought it worthy my labor likewise, to
put down the reasons on both sides, and in conclusion to enterpone mine own
private opinion touching the premises. Those therefore who stand on Solons
side, and allow and stand for part-taking do thus argue: A. Gaellius noct.
Attic. lib. 2. cap. 12.
If the good men, which be in the City or Commonwealth, perceiving the
Seditious to be madded with fury, and to grow to an head, should apply
themselves to either part, there is no doubt, but that they might be a means
to reduce them to unity; persuading first with their own side, how ill
beseeming a thing it is, for Citizen to strive with, or take Arms against
Citizen, and what destruction of them and theirs may ensue, if they suffer
themselves still to be led with passion, and by that means mollifying their
own friends minds, they may (happily) get leave likewise to deal with the
other side, in those or such like terms, and so persuade both parties to lay
down their weapons. Again, Phauorinus Philosophus.
those which take part with neither side, if the differences of the factious
should once be compounded, should smart for it, being hated on both sides,
deemed as public enemies, and such as solaced themselves, and rejoiced to see
them at those odds, and therefore are justly exposed to the prey, and injuries
of either party. Further, it were very dangerous when the City or
Commonwealth is divided into faction, not to take part with the one or the
other side, least a Josephus de bello Iudaico.
third faction should spring out of the others, as has sometimes been read to
have fallen out in the Jews Commonwealth. But those which stand for newtrality,
think otherwise, and thus they reason Tacit. Annal.
Civil Arms of themselves, can neither be provided, taken up, or managed by
any good or lawful means, and the issue and end of them commonly proves
naught. For the Leaders and Captains of the seditious, under the pretense of
seeking the good of the Common wealth, do every one seek to promote his own
ambitious humors, and so draw the people to follow their fancies, which no
good Patriote ought to do. Again, it argues great folly in any, who shall take
either part, and join with the seditious: for by that means they Salust. in
bello Iug^rthino.
strengthen and encourage them, increase their malice toward their
Contrymen, and fellow-Citizens of the adverse party, and become partakers
of their rebellions, madness, and folly. Touching mine own private opinion
herein, I think (right Honorable) that newtrality is regularly to be avoided
in either Prince or Courtier, except in some maine case, where a man by making
show to be newtrall, may more handsomely compouud and contriue his own
business, and better promote, and sooner come to his own ends.

FINIS.

