THE PREFACE To the right well-beloved Christian Reader.
ALL that bear the name of Christians, and seem Man was created apt for eternal
glory.
to have any Religion at al* do agree in these three general points. First
that God creating Genesis 1. v. 26. 1. Tim. 2. v. 4. Math. 7. v. 13. 14.
man to his own image and liknes, a reasonable creature, thereby made him apt
to participate eternal glory. Secondly, that notwithstanding man's creation More
are damned then saved.
in so perfect estate, the greater part of mankind falls into eternal
perdition. Because (as our Savior testifies) Broad is the gate, and large is
the way that leads to perdition, and many there be that enter by it. And
narrow is the gate, and strait is the way, that leads to life, and few there
are that find it. And thirdly True Religion is the only way to salvation.
that true faith and Religion, is the only way to Heb. 11. v. 6.
life everlasting. For without faith, it is impossible to please god.

2 But the maine controversy is, whether the Roman Al Christendom generally
professing one Religion, Luther preached new doctrine.
Religion, commonly called Catholic, or rather some other, be the right way
to salvation? Which question one Martin Luther, about an hundred 1517. See Art.
41.
years ago, raised amongst Christians. For when he first began to preach his
new doctrine, there was no public pretense of any other Religion in the
Christian world, but of that only which the Bishop of Rome believed and
professed. Neither was Which was never approved in England.
Luthers doctrine at any time approved in England, nor elsewhere, save only in a
small part of Germ any. And amongst many others, King Henry the 8. confuted him
in a learned book. For which, his great 1522.
zeal, he received of Pope Leo the Tenth, the renowned title (which his
successors still enjoy) to be called, Defender of the faith. But shortly after,
when The first breach in England was King Henry lus making him self head of the
Church.
the same King Henry could not obtain the Popes consent to put his wife Queen
Catherin from him, and to marry an other, he, with advise of certain of his
own subjects, Cranmer, Cromwell, and some others, abandoning the Popes
authority, made him self supreme 1533.
head of the Church of England, and Ireland, in all spiritual causes, mantayning
still in most other After which, came in Zuinglianisme in the time of King
Edward.
points, the Roman Religion. Yet after his death, the Gouerners of his young
son, King Edward the Sixth, brought in the doctrine of Zuinglius; denying 1548.
the Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament (which Luther acknowledged) and
diverse other new opinions, with a new form of public prayer. And withal,
they laid also the Primacie of the Church, upon the King a child, scarce ten
years of age. Al which 1553.
Queen Mary restored Catholic Religion. Q. Elizabeth ab^ogated it again.
Queen Marie reforming, restored the Catholic Religion. And shortly again,
Queen Elizabeth reassuming 1559.
to her self, the spiritual supremacy (which noe others in the world grant to
Laymen, much less to children, or women) abrogated the Catholic Rites: and
in place thereof, renewed the form of common prayer, which is now in practice,
much like to the former, but not in all points the same, which was in King
Edwardes time.

3 This being done by force and power of the Queen, All the Bishops, and ^a^y
others remaining Catholic, M. Iuel challenged to try true Religion, not only
by the holy (...), but also by the ancient Fathers.
Act. of Par. An. 1. Eliz.
and of such as consented thereto in Parliament: all the Bishops of the Realm,
expressly disclaming from it, not only all the same Bishops, but also many
others, as well of the Clergy, as Laity, both in word and fact, pers^uering in
the Catholic faith: one M. John Iuel, preaching at S. Paul's Cross in
London, with strange audacitie, challenged al Roman Catholics in the world,
to try with him, by way of learning, the truth of Religion, now called into
controversy: solemnly promising, that if any of his adversaries, should
produce, any one sentence, or any one word, either of holy Scripture, or of
authentical Council, or Ancient Father, within the first six hundred years
of Christ, giving evident testimony, for any one of sundry Articles of the
Roman Religion, there by him recited, that then he would recant his denial
thereof, and subscribe to the Roman doctrine.

4 Hereupon diverse learned Catholics with great He was so confuted by Docter
Harding, and others, that his fellows say: his challenge was too large.
speed, some in brefer, some in larger Treatises, especially Doctor Thomas
Harding, in an ample work clearly proved the same Articles, by abundance of
such irrefragable testimonies of holy Script. approved Councels, and ancient
Fathers, as the chalenger had demanded: And therefore required him, according
to his so public promise, for his own souls health and others by him
deluded, to recant his errors, and to submit himself to the Catholic Church.
But he Persisting wilful (though, many of his folowers, by The Lord Copley;
Doctor Richard Steuens; M. William Reynolds. And others innumerable.
Gods grace, upon this occasion, became firm Catholics) replied against
Doctor Harding, and the rest, using such poor shifts, fri^olous euasions, and
false sleightes, that his own accomplices, namely Doctor Laurence Humfrey, in
his Book, de praxi Romanae Curiae, plainly confessed, that his Challenge was
inco^siderate, over large, and could not be mantayned. And therefore our
adversaries ever since, generally Generally our adversaries refuse al other
trial, but by the holy Scriptures only.
refuse to try this cause by any other authorities, then by the only holy
Scriptures. Neither will they submit them selves, to the Explications of the
ancient Fathers, nor yet stand to the expositions of their fellow Protestants,
further then every ones own spirit likes. For when they are pressed with any
such, either they appeal to some other of their own Doctors, on whom they
more rely, or if them selves profess to be learned, and be urged with the
Doctrine of others, they will not stick to say, that whosoever do teach
otherwise then them selves, whether they be ancient, or late writers, do
mistake the holy Scriptures. Yea, if they be further charged, that either they,
or those others do err, because they avouch contrary doctrine, they say
plainly, that al doctrine which is contrary to theirs, is contrary to the holy
Scriptures. And the^ forsooth, do they most friuolously The true question is
who best understand the holy Script.
pretend, that we must believe, the divine Scriptures, before al humane
judgments: as though any Christian ever doubted thereof, whereas the true
question is, not between the divine Scriptures, and men's writings, but which
men do best understand and expound the holy Scriptures? And in very deed,
this is Protestants rely only, Catholics principally upon holy Scriptures.
the proper difference betwixt our adversaries and us, touching this point,
that they by the holy Scriptures only, we by the same principally, profess to
be instructed.

5 Rightly then observing wherein the question consists; We agree to try
Religion with our adversaries, by the holy Scriptures, only.
whosoever willearne the true sense of holy Scriptures, and thereby know the
true Religion, must resolve whether he will understand them as the ancient
Fathers did whom al later Catholic Doctors do follow; or as some new Doctors
expound them. And then which new Doctors he will prefer, Protestants, or
Puritanes, or what others. Or else, (which is an other new way) without binding
him self to one sort or other, he will be his own chooser, following which
sense him self shall judge best. To which newest manner of understanding gods
word, because many in these days, are so addicted, that they will not yield to
any other, we condescend to join this issue with them, to try the true
Religion, by the only written word of god, as each man's own judgment, by the
grace which god will give him, shall be able to discuss and understand it.

6 And this we do, as willing to use al possible means Hoping that our
endeavor will be profitable to many; being necessary for the deceived; and
expedient for the more manifestation of truth.
to satisfy al: trusting, that as our endeavor seems necessary for those
which will admit none other kind of trial, and for their better information,
which think that we prefer any other authority before the holy Scriptures:
so it may be also profitable to many, as being expedient for the more
manifestation of truth (which can never be too much known) and must needs be
well accepted of our adversaries, who so continually provoke us to this only
trial; bearing the world in hand, that therein they have great advantage
against us. Here therefore, beloved adversaries, to the more honor of god, and
benefit of souls, and particularly, that you and we may be the sooner
accorded, to our mutual comforth, and for the necessary reduction unto truth,
of whosoever are presently in error, we do agree to encounter you, not only
principally, as we have continually done, but also with the only short and
sharp weapon of the sacred Textes We require reasonable conditions.
of gods word, written in the holy Bible of the old and new Testament. Always
presupposing, that reasonable conditions may be observed on both parties,
without prejudice to either of both. First to be still remembered, that we do not
exclude, but abstract from other proofs. And therefore if our adversaries will
use others against us, they must admit the like against them selves.


7 As first of al, it is still to be remembered, that albeit we thus condescend
to encounter you, by only holy Scriptures; yet we do not thereby grant your
exclusion of other proofs to be just or lawful. For we do hold it certain,
that al Christian Doctrine, can not be expressly, and withal immediately proved
by holy Scriptures only; and that other proofs are both necessary, and
authentical, as we do undertake (in due Article 3. 41. 42.
places of this work) to prove, by the express written word of God. But we are
content to abstract from them, with this prouiso for your good, that if your
selves, upon trial of this proposed combat, shall find it necessary to use
other means, for proof of some doctrine which you hold, and can not show
immediately by the holy Scriptures; or, if at least you shall think it needeful
to repair to the ancient Expositors, for better understanding the true sense
of holy Scriptures; we will be no less ready, to return thereunto with you,
then we are in the mean time content for your sakes to abstain from them. And
therefore we will in this case agree, that you may if you can, either produce
approved Traditions, Definitions of authentical Councels, Popes Decrees,
Uniform consent of the ancient Fathers and Doctors, General practice of the
visible known Church, or any other substantial proof, and that you may
allege the clear judgment of Ecclesiastical Interpreters, of any holy
Scripture against us; so that you will allow us to use the same means, that
each of us may indifferently defend our selves, and assault the others, with
the same kinds of defensive, and offensive, armor and weapons.

8 In the mean while, so long as you will needs try 2. Whiles our adversaries
will admit noe other proof but only holy Scriptures; they must also be
limited there unto.
this cause by the only holy Scriptures, we must require this second condition,
that seeing we refrain for your contentment, from other proofs; you must also
be bound and limited to the same. For otherwise, it is unreasonable, and over
partial dealing, that whatsoever you find in any authentical Council, Popes
decree, ancient Father, or Catholic Doctor, which may seem to make for you,
or against us; should by and by, be taken for a wounding blow given to us, and
neither the same, when it is rightly explaned, nor the like, must touch you at
al. Whiles therefore you debar us from al other kinds of proof, you must
also contain your selves within the same listes of holy Scriptures only.

9 Nevertheless, the third condition may be, if you 3. That it may in this
combat suffice to either party to prove the thing it self, though the word be
not expressed in the holy Scriptures.
please (for it will be as needeful to you as to us) that it may suffice in some
special points of Christian Doctrine, to prove the things them selves which
we believe, by necessary conclusions deduced from the holy Scriptures, though
the very words or terms be not there expressed: as the words Trinity, and
Person, in the sense wherein we use them, in professing our belief of three
divine persons in god. Also the consubstantialitie of the same persons. The
perpetual Virginity of the most B. Virgin Marie, the Mother of God. The name
of Sacrament. And the like. 4. That the more obscure textes may be explicated
by the more cleate.


10 The Fourth condition may likewise be, whereto we suppose you will also
accord, that producing particular textes, for proof of particular points,
searching the proper and usual signification of the sacred words, weying the
circumstances of persons, times, and places, with the occasion, intention, and
drift of the Author: we may so reguard gods holy word, conferring text with
text, that we admit that to be the true doctrine, which shall be proved by the
more evident words or sentences. For that in all reasonable pleas, especially
in religious causes, the more clear textes, ought to illustrate the more
obscure.

In case also that any words or passages, may seem clear to one party, and
obscure to the other, then does reason dictate, to reasonable persons, to the
lovers of truth, and studious of concord, that the more Or the fewer, by the
more in number, considering that al are true.
places in number, being, or seming, of like perspicuity, of obscurity, may
justly prevail to expl^ate the fewer: Still considering, that al and every
parcel of holy Scripture, is absolutely true, whether we understand it or no;
al being indicted by the holy Ghost, the Spirit of truth.

11 Behold these are the conditions, which seem both The holy Bible is set
forth in English, and this book is also written, that it may appear which
Religion is best grounded in holy Scriptures.
reasonable and requisite in this kind of trial, undertaken for their
contentment, that desire to be informed, who amongst diverse pretenders of true
Religion, are best grounded in the holy Scriptures. For whose sakes also, and
for this very purpose, the whole sacred Bible faithfully translated into
english, is lately set forth, with annotations, gathered especially out of the
commentaries, and other writings of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church.

And now this work is compiled more particularly, of the divine textes;
agreeable indeed, to the same holy Fathers sense and belief: but so
connecting many concordant places, pertaining to the same points of doctrine,
though not all that might be brought (for that would be too immense) yet so much
as may abundantly suffice, as well for decision of the chiefest controversies, of
these times, as also for confirmation of most other principal articles, and
divine mist^ries of faith and Religion. The Sum of al Christian doctrine is
here proved, because many points of controversy depend upon other Articles.


12 Our reasons, why in this manner, we prove the whole Catholic doctrine, not
only in matters at this time in controversy, but also in such others as have
been in former ages, or may be in future, drawn into question, are especially
these three. First because there is such connection amongst many parts of
faith and Religion, that diverse which are or have been, called into
controversy, can not be sully declared, without presupposed knowledge of other
grounds, whereon they depend. For example, it behooves al men, first to
believe, that God is one in substance, and three in persons, before they can be
well instructed, that according to the Catholic faith, all the three divine
persons, are consubstantial, and coeternal. Likewise except we first confess,
that God is omnipotent, it will be hard or impossible to believe miracles. So we
must believe that there is a Church, else we can not know what proprieties,
privileges, and power it haith. And so in many other controversies, it
avails much, to see the proofs of that which is confessed, because by the
same oftentimes, that which is denied, may either wholly, or in some part be
proved, and explaned.

13 Secondly we consider, that as we are presently Secondly because new errors
are still devised.
encombred with the controversies raised by Luther, Zninglius, Cranmer, Calvin,
Knox, Cartwright, and daily by new, and newer sectaries: so we may hereafter
(we know not how soon) be put to prove, any other part of Christian Religion,
not as yet denied. And therefore it shall be good, to see some grounds in the
holy Scriptures, of all the principal points of our faith.

14 Thirdly by this general proof, of al Christian Thirdly to show that old
heresies had as great pretense of holy Scripture, as any new doctrine now
haith.
doctrine, the diligent Reader may see, that many other greatest mysteries,
which our present adversaries acknowledge to be true and certain, are as hard
to be proved by express canonical Scripture, as any of those which they deny.
Yea I dare avouch, that the holy Scriptures, do more clearly show, in plain
terms, the chiefest points of the Roman doctrine, denied by Protestants and
Puritanes, then any express words do declare, the true Catholic belief
against the Arians, Eunomians, Nouatians, Pelagians, and the like. As therefore
diverse ancient Fathers and Doctors, have, not only confuted the adversaries
of truth, living in their own time, and passed before them, but likewise have
taught, and explicated the residue of Christian Religion: so we, according to
our smalest talent, by gods gracious help, intend to make this summarie
proof of Catholic Religion, and that by the only written word of God, as a
most firm and sacred Anchor of Christian Doctrine, against al impugners
thereof, which refusing other Proofs, yet acknowledge the eminent authority of
the holy Scriptures.

15 For better ordering the whole work, we divide We follow the method of
Catechismus ad Parachos. Dividing the whole work into four parts, and every
part into special Articles.
it into four parts, and every part, into many particular Articles: after
the method of the most authentical Catechism, directed to al Pastors of the
Christian world, by the special ordinance of the late holy Council of Trent.

In the first part, are contained many special Articles of faith, which are
breefly comprised in the Apostles Creed. In the second are proved, and
explicated, the seven holy Sacraments; with the dread Sacrifice of the
Catholic Church, instituted by Christ. In the third are declared, the ten
Commandments of God. And in the fourth part is showed, the necessity and
efficacy of prayer, especially of our Lords prayer, called the Pater noster.
And also of prayers public and private.

16 And so to end this Preface as I began, I heartely Two very necessary
considerations.
wish al you that desire to be more confirmed in the way of salvation: and
again I beseech you for gods more glory, and your own souls health, well to
ponder these two points. First, that our immortal Al of mankind must either
be saved, or damned eternally.
Math. 25. v. 32. Romans 14. v. 10.
souls, after our temporal death, and our bodies also, at the general
Resurrection, must either be eternally glorified with all the blessed Angels and
other Saints in unspeakable joys in the kingdom of heaven: or else eternally
damned with the devils, and all the reprobate in utter darkness, and
inexplicable ^orments. Secondly, that as the way to this intolerable The
entrance,
everlasting misery, is large, the gate is Math. 7. v. 13. 14. Luc. 13. v. 23.
24.
progress, and arriual to eternal life, is only by true Religion.
wide, and many do enter into it: and the way to eternal felicity, is
narrow, the gate is strait, and few do ^inde it: Even so, the entrance into
the right way is by true faith and Religion: the progress therein, is by such
means as true Religion teaches us; and the arriual unto eternal life, is by
perseuering to the end in that due service of god, which true religion Which of
a^ treasures, is most precious.
requires. This true religion, is the hidden Math 13. v. 44. 45. Is. 64. v. 4.
1. Cor. 2. v, 9. Math. 10. v. 37. Luc. 14. v. 33. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 18. Prou. 5. v.
9. Romans 8. v. 17.
treasure which, when you find, you will be glad. This is the precious
Margarite to be desired of al me^. This will bring us to those celestial joys,
which neither mortal eye haith seen, nor ear haith heard, nor heart of man
can conceive. For true Religion therefore, we must principally employ our
selves, our most diligent studies, our best labors, and all that we have. And
ever be ready in preparation of mind, rather to lose temporal goods, lands,
liberty, and life, then to leau^ the right way of eternal life. That being
made to the image of god, we be not injurious to our Maker, nor cruel to our
own souls: But begin, proceed, and persevere, to serve God rightly. So shall we
be heirs of God, and felow-heyres of Christ in his Kingdom which haith none
end* To him be al glory for ever. Amen.

Yours ever in Christ our Lord, Th. W.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
ARTICLES Of Faith comprised in the Apostles Creed, and commonly divided into
twelve, are in particular more in number. We purpose here to declare these
following, as most principal, To which the rest may be reduced.
Faith is necessary to salvation. Article 1. Credo.
Man's wit, nor reach of natural reason, can not attain faith: Neither is
man's testimony sufficient to assure it, but Gods word only. Article. 2. Gods
word is partly written in the holy Scriptures: partly known and kept by
Tradition. Article. 3. Some holy Scriptures are hard, and require authentical
Interpretation. Article. 4. True miracles are an assured proof of faith, or of
other truth, for the which they are wrought. Ar. 5. God is one, and there can
not be any other God. Article. 6. In Deum.
In God is Trinity of Persons, the Farher, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Article. 7. Partem.
God is omnipotent. Article. 8. Omnipotentem.
God knows al things. Article. 9. God is absolute goodness, and al his
actions are good. Article. 10. Angels, the first creatures, are (the most part)
in glory.Crea Many are damned. Article. 11. torem Caeli.
Holy Angels by their ministry and prayers, protect and help men. Devils
seek men's ruin. Article. 12 Man at first received original Justice, which he
lost by transgressing Gods commandment: And thereby infected al his progeny
with original sin. Art. 13. Et terrae.
Man's understanding and free will, are weakened by sin, but not lost. Article.
14. After the fall of man, God promised a Redemer: who was also foreshewed by
many figures, and by all the Prophets. Article. 15. Et in Iesum.
Our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, is Christ our Redemer. Article. 16. Christum.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, is God, the Second Person of the B. Trinity. Article.
17. Filium eius. Vnicum.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, is truly man. Article. 18 Dominum. Nostrum.
Christ our Lord, from the instant of his incarnation, had fulness of grace,
knowledge, and power. Article. 19. Qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto.
Christ our Lord, took al man's infirmities, not opposite to perfection.
Article. 20. Natns.
The B. Virgin Marie, is the Mother of God, and most excellent of al created
persons. Article, 21. Ex Maria Virgin.
Christ our Savior, after thirty years private life, preached his Gospel,
confirming it diverse ways. Article. 22. Christ our Redemer, suffered many
grievous torments, death on the Cross, and was buried. Art. 23. Passus sub
Pontio Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus, et sepultus.
The glorious soul of our B. Savior, parting from his body, descended into
hell. Article. 24. Descendit ad inferos.
Our Savior Jesus Christ, rose from death the third day. Article. 25. Tertia
die resurrexit a mortuis.
Christ our Lord, appeared often after his Resurrection. And ordained diverse
things perteyning to his Church. Article. 26. Christ our Lord ascended into
heaven, sits on the right hand of God. Article. 27. Ascendit ad caelos Sedet
ad dexteram Dei Pat. omn.
Christ our Lord Will come in Majesty, and judge the world. Article. 28. Inde
vent. est ludic. viuos et mortuos.
God the holy Ghost (with the Father and the Son) inspireth and sanctifies
the Church, and the members thereof. Article. 29. Credo in Spiritum Sanctum.
The universal Church, consists of holy Angels, with other Saints in
heaven; and the faithful in earth: Of al which, Christ, as man, is head. Art.
30. Eccesiam.
The Militant Church conteyneth two general members, the Clergy, and Laity,
under one visible head. Article. 31. As well the Clergy, as laity, conteyne
particular bodies, with several heads: al subordinate, in one whole body, to
one supreme visible head. Art. 32. The true Church of Christ, is known by
special marks: The first of which, is Unity. Art. 33. In the old Testament,
there was ever one supreme visible head of the Church. Article. 34. Christ our
Savior, ordained Saint Peter, chief of the Apostles, and visible head of the
militant Church. Article. 35. Christ our Savior also ordained a continual
Sucsession of S. Peter's Supremacy, to the end of this world. Article. 36. The
true Church of Christ, is holy. Art. 37. Sanctam.
The true Church, is Catholic. Article. 38. Catholicam.
The true Church is Apostolic. Article. 39. The true Church is perpetual,
from the beginning of the world, to the end. Article. 40, The true Church of
God, ever has been, and will be visible. Article. 41. The Church can not err
in doctrine of faith nor of manners. Article. 42. In the whole Church is
Communion of Sacrifice, Sacraments, Prayers, and other good works. Article.
43. Sanctorum comunionem.
Souls in Purgatory, do participate of the Communion of Saints, receiving
relief, by the holy Sacrifice, and other suffrages. Article. 44. No Infidels
do participate of the Communion of Saints. Neither is it lawful to
communicate with them in practice of Religion. Article. 45. Excommunicate
persons, are excluded from the Church, and Communion of Saints. Art. 46.
Whosoever fall into mortal sin, lose the participation of good works, until
they be truly penitent. Article. 47. In the Catholic Church, is Remission of
sins, and Justification by grace. Article. 48. Remissionem peccatorum.
Al mankind shall rise from death, at the day of generalIudgement. Article. 49.
Carnis resurrectionem.
The blessed shall enjoy eternal glory according to their merits Article. 50.
Vitam eternal
The wicked shall be in everlasting pain, for their finnes. Article. 51. It was
foreshewed, and there have been, are, and will be, heresies against the true
faith. Article. 52. Amen.
Antichrist the head of al heritikes, is to come nere the end of this world.
Article. 53.
The Printer to the benign Reader.
It may please you to be advertised, that because the holy Scriptures, are
very much cited in this Book, I have thought it better, with consent of the
Auctor, not to print them in a distinct Character, as the more ordinary manner
is, but rather to include them within two squadro^s [ ] And to use most
commonly but one sort of letters in the whole work. Only interposing a
cursiue letter, in some special words, or sentences, as more particular
occasion may require.

AN ANCHOR OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. WHEREIN THE MOST PRINCIPAL POINTS OF
CATHOLIQVE RELIGION are proved by the only written word of God Divided into
four parts. THE FIRST PART CONCERNING FAITH.
THE FIRST ARTICLE. Faith is necessary to salvation.
AS in all other Arts and sciences; so most especially in Christian doctrine,
certain principles Principles of Christian doctrine presupposed.
are presupposed, and must be admitted as an assured, true, and firm ground
work, whereon the rest is founded and built. And the very first principle is,
by consent of al men, which use discourse of That there is a God.
reason, that there is a God, who created heaven and earth, and al things
therein contained. An other Genesis 1. Psalm. 145. v. 6.
principle is, that God made Angels, and men, capable Angels and men were
ordained for eternal glory.
of eternal glory; and al other creatures, as well for the greater ornament of
the whole world, as also (most part of them) to serve the use of men. The third
principle is, that God has already establishedal As some are glorified, and
some damned already; so al shall come to the one, or the o*
the good Angels that rightly used the excellent gifts, which he gave them, in
eternal glory, and damned the proud wicked spirits which rebelled against
him, to eternal pains. And has likewise already (...) of (...) ^odes.
glorified many holy souls, and damned others, and so does daily either
reward, or punish souls departing from their bodies, that in the end of this
world, every one of mankind, shall either possess eternal Mat. 16. v. 27. Apo^.
22. v. 12. Heb. 11. v. 6.
heavenly glory, or eternal hellish pain, both in souls and bodies, according
to their diverse and final deserts.

2. These three principles S. Paul breefely compriseth in few words saying [He
that comes to God must believe that he is; and is a rewarder to them that seek
him] A clear doctrine; First, that there is a God; Secondly, that he rewards
some; Thirdly* that he rewards not al, but them that seek him; and
consequently condemns those which seek him not. Whereby the Apostle proves,
that to please God, and to receive his reward of eternal life, faith is
absolutely necessary, because (as he affirmed immediately before) [Without faith,
it is impossible to The necessity of faith is proved by ho^^e Scriptures.
Ibidem*
please God] Which principles, albeit al well instructed Christians, will
presently acknowledge: yet for our more confirmation and consolation therein,
and further satisfaction to such as do not perhaps so expressly conceive the
necessity of faith, before al other meritorious works: we shall more amply
declare the same by many evident testimonies of holy Scriptures, beginning with
those which the Apostle alleges in the same Chapter.

3 Where he first desctibeth faith thus: [Faith is The definition of faith.
Heb. 11. v. 1.
the substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not
appearing] The word substance here signifying the ground or fundation
supporting other things, shows, that as a house, temple, castle, or other
edifice, can not be made nor stand, without a groundwork: so without faith
there can not be any justification or salvation, nor true hope of eternal life,
which is the reward of them that rightly seek God, and which al faithful just
person^ hope to receive. So the Apostle proceeding to demonst^ate by examples,
the use and necessity of this ^. 2.
Theological virtue of faith, not only teaches that [by faith we understand
(which without it, the wisest Philosophers could never understand) that the ^.
3. Genesis 1. ^. 1. 3. etc. Heb. 11. v. 4. etc.
worlds were framed by the word of God: that of Examples of faith in the old
Testament.
invisible things visible things might be made] but also that faith is the
ground of al perfect good works. Abel.
For [by faith (says he) Abel offered a greater host to God then Cain, by
which he obtained testimony that he was just, God giving testimony to his
giftes] which Moses records by these terms, [Our Lord had respect to Abel
and to his gifts, but Genesis 4. v. 4. 5.
to Cain and to his gifts, he had not respect] The cause of difference was, by
the Apostles doctrine, for that Cain wanted such faith as Abel had. [By faith
Genesis 5. v. 22.
Enoch.
Enoch was translated, that he should not see death. For before his translation
(says the Apostle) he had testimony, that he had pleased God. But without
faith, it is impossible to please God] or as Moses relates the same thing.
[Enoch walked with God] So does the holy Ghost by divine Scriptures, connect
these principles together, teaching, that without faith, none can offer
grateful gifts to God, none can walk with God, none can please God, none can
rightly seek God, none can receive the reward of eternal glory. To the very
same effect he cites more examples saying, [By faith, Noe having received Genesis
6. v. 14.
No^.
answer concerning those things which as yet were not seen, framed the Arc
for the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and was
instituted heir of Justice which is by faith. By faith Abraham obeyed to go
forth, not knowing Genesis 12. v. 14.
Abraham.
whither he went. By faith, he aboade in the land of promise as in a strange
land, dwelling in cotages Chapter 15. v. 6.
with Isaac and Jacob, the Coheires of the same promise. Chapter 22. v. 3.
By faith, Abraham offered Isaac when he was tempted, and his only begotten did
he offer, who had received the promises (to whom it was said, that in Isaac,
shall seed be called to thee) accompting, that God is able to raise up, even
from the dead.] And more to this purpose does the Apostle add, (who though he
be very brief, yet we will be more brief in so clear a matter) [By faith,
Sara, Isaac, Sara: Isaac: Jacob: Joseph: Moses. etc.
Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and his parents; also Rahab, Barac, Gedeon, Iophte,
Samson, Daniel, Samuel, and the other Prophets, did, and suffered marvelous
Heb. 11. v. 33. etc.
great things, wrought justice, were needy, in distress, afflicted, of whom
the world was not worthy.

4 But as al these were approved by the testimony of faith: so others were
reproved and rejected for want of faith. Which defect the Royal Prophet David
taxes in the multitude of the Jews when they were Lack of faith is damnable
especially in those that once believed.
Psalm. 77. v. 19 21. 22.
in the desert [They tempted God in their hearts, they said: Can God prepare a
table in the desert? Therefore (says he) our Lord heard, and made delay; and
fire was kindled in Jacob, and wrath ascended upon Israel. Because they believed
not in God, nor Proved by the Prophets.
hoped in his salvation. They believed not his marvelous works. And their days
failed in vanity, and David.
v. 32. 33. Nu. 1. v. 46. Chapter 26. v. 65.
their years in hast] for being above six hundred thousand men able to bear
arms, when they parted from Egypt, they were kept in the desert the space of
forty years, where al dyed, except only two (Iosue and Caleb) in punishment
for their sins, which especially proceeded of incredulity. Some failing at
one time, some at an other, upon diverse occasions, but never al together, for
some were still faithful and just, as the same Prophet David signifies saying
of some:

[They believed Gods words, and they sang his praise] Ps. 105.
And again; [They did not believe his word, and they v. 12. v. 25.
murmured in their Tabernacles.] Likewise Isaias Isaias.
the Prophet testifies the necessity of faith, and actual belief, for
receiving particular benefits at Gods hands, saying to the King and people of
Judah, in distressed state, when they feared to be oppressed, by the Kings of
Israel and Syria [If you will not believe, Isa 7. v. 9.
you shall not be permanent.] And in general, forshewing the scarsitie of
beleuers among the Jews when Christ's Gospel should be preached, saying, [Who
has believed our hearing?] because many of Is. 53. v. 1. Mat. 13. v. 15.
them would hear, and few believe [for the heart of this people (says our
Savior) is waxed gross, and with their ears, they have heavily heard.] Of al
Micheas
such, God by the mouth of his Prophet Micheas, says [I will do vengeance in
fury, and in indignation Mich. 5. v. 14.
among all the nations, that have not heard] which do not with heart hear and
believe. Likewise says Abacuc
the Prophet Abacuc [Behold he that is incredulous, Abac. 2. v. 4.
his soul shall not be right in him self, but the just shall live in his faith.]
Which last words, S. Paul alleging, S. Paul expounds the Prophets words in
two senses.
expounds two ways in three of his Epistles. For to the Romans, and
Galatians, he proves by these Words, that not works, how good soever they
seem, done by Jew, or Gentil, without faith, can justify; but that faith is
necessary, else there can not be spiritual life, and that therefore [by faith
Romans 1. v. 17. Gal. 3. v. 11.
the just liueth] because without faith, every one is spiritually dead; and by
faith, such as the Prophets and Apostles teach to be requisite, the just man
lives. And writing to the Hebrews, to comforth them in their afflictions, he
exhorts them to persevere constant, congratulating with them, their great
progress in Christian Religion, [for you both had Heb. 10. v 34. 35. 36.
compassion (says he) on them that were in bonds, and the spoil of your own
goods, you took with joy, knowing that you have, a better, and a permanent
substance: do not therefore leese your confidence which has a great
remuneration; for patience is necessary for you, that doing the will of God,
you may receive the promise. For yet a little, and a very little while, he that
is to come, will come, and will not slack.] Then concluding, says [and my just
lives of faith.] Thus the great Apostle in the former 37.
two places alleges the Prophets doctrine touching the necessity of faith,
as it is the substance or ground of things hoped for, and in this last place,
as it is the argument (or credible assurance) of things not appearing.

5 But the testimonies of the new Testament do The same necessity of faith
proved by the new Testam.
also abound, showing the necessity of faith, as well for obtaining particular
benefits, by way of extraordinary miracles; as for justification, and eternal
salvation. According to which distinction, we shall first recite examples of
such faith, as at least had the former effect, though most commonly, when our
B. First concerning particular benefits.
Savior cured by miracle, corporal infirmities, he also by the same divine
power, remitted the sins of the parties cured; and so their souls were
justified: And if they perseuered in justice, were also eternally saved.
Touching which last effect he expressly admonished one, that had been lame
thirty eight years, saying unto him: [Behold thou art made Examples of faith
required in miracles.
Joan. 5. v. 14.
whole, sin no more, lest some worse thing chance to thee] but for the
present miraculous curing, faith of the patient was specially required. So when
he heard a leper say unto him: [Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean
(whereby the man professed Math. 8. v. 2. 3. Luc. 5. v. 12. 13.
his faith of Christ's power) he streching forth his hand touched him, saying:
I will: (and withal added his operative word, saying) Be thou clean. And
forthwith his leprosy was made clean.] Likewise our Savior much commending
the Centurions faith, said unto him [As thou have believed, be it done to thee.]
On the other side, he gently rebuked the Mat. 8. v. 13.
weak faith of his Disciples, distressed in a tempest on the sea saying, [Why
are ye fearful, o ye of little faith?] Again, he both remitted the sins, and
cured v. 26. Luc. 8. v. 25. Mvt. 9. v. 2.
the body, of one sick of the Palsy, in regard, not only of the sick man's
own faith, but also of others that brought him in his bed. For [seing their
faith (so declared by fact,) he said to the sick of the palsy, have a good
heart son, thy sins are forgeuen thee] And to answer calumniators, that
judged him to blaspheme; our Savior said, [that you may know v. 6. Mat. 2. v.
10. Luc. 5. v. 20.
that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, (then said he to
the sick of the palsy) Arise, take up thy bed, and go into thy house.] The
like comforth and help he gave to the woman trubled with an issue of blood,
that with great faith touched the hemme of his garmenr saying to her; [Haue a
good heart daughter, thy faith has made thee safe.] Of the Archisinagogue,
whose daughter he raised Math. 9. v. 22. Luc. 8. v. 48. Mar. 5. v. 36. Mat. 9.
v. 28. ^9. Mar. 9. v. 23.
from death, he required no more for this purpose, but that he should believe he
could do it, and put away al fear and doubt, saying to him; [Feare not, only
believe.] And to two blind men he said, [Doe you believe that I can do this
unto you? According to your faith be it done to you.] The same to an other that
sought help to his son, our Lord said, [If thou can believe, al things are
possible to him that believes.] To the woman of Chanaan, more instantly
perseuering in her suite for her da^ghter, and not ceasing for any repulse, he
said, [O woman great is thy Mat. 15. v. 28.
faith, be it done to thee as thou wilt]. To that leper, more gratful then his
neene fellows, who returned and gave thanks, he denounced a better sentence
then the others deserved, [Thy faith has made thee Luc. 17. v. 19. Chapter 18. v.
42. Act. 14. v. 8. 9.
safe.] Also to an other restoared to sight, he said, [Thy faith has made thee
whole.] So also S. Paul being requested to cure a lame man, [seing that he had
faith for to be saved, he said with a loud voice: Stand upright on thy feet.
And he leaped up and walked.] In these and the like benefits, faith was only,
or chiefly required.

6. And that true and entire faith, is most necessary True faith is especially
required in the visible head of the Church.
to the supreme Judge in all doubts of faith and Religion, our Savior, in his
very last document before his Passion teaches by his fact and word, when he
declared that [he had prayed his heavenly Father, that Luc. 22. v. 32.
Peter's faith should not fail, and that he, (and consequently his successors)
should confirm his brethren,] whereof we shall say more in the proper Article
Art. 36.
pertaining to S. Peter's Successor, in the Apostolic Sea.

7 Here we shall add more textes of holy Scripture which prove the necessity
of true Christian faith to Faith necessatie to justification.
Justification. To this end S. John Baptist was sent, to give testimony of
Christ, [that al might believe in Joan. 1. v. 7. 12.
him] because [he gives power to be made the sons of God, (not to al, but)
to those that believe in his name.] Our Lord also him self beginning to preach,
said [The kingdom of God is at hand: be penitent, Mar. 1. v. 15.
and believe the Gospel.] And when the pharesees carped him for permitting the
d^uout penitent Marie Magdalen to touch him, and for saying, thy sins are
forgeuen thee,] he finally said to her, [thy faith Luc. 7. v. 48.
has made thee safe,] that al might know faith to be necessary to salvation:
still inculcating the same doctrine, [that every one that believes in him,
perish Io. 3. v. 16.
not, but may, (doing that which by his grace lies in the^) have life
everlasting,] Contrariwise, [he v. 18. v. 36.
that does not believe, is already judged. For he that is (and so persisteth)
incredulous to the Son (of God) shall not see life, but the wrath of God
remains upon him.] For this cause most especially, our Lord Together with
temporal benefits Christ joined spiritual good.
wrought so many great Miracles (though he wrought them also to the particular
benefit of many, that the faithful might receive, both temporal and spiritual
good. For so he turned water into wine, whereby not only the want of wine was
supplied, but also [he manifested his glory, and his Disciples believed Joan.
2. v. 11. Io. 4. v. 53.
in him.] He cured a Lords son by his only word, [and the man believed, and
his whole house.] To an other that was borne blind, he gave sight, who for
speaking well of CHRIST, was cast forth of the Sinagogue by the Pharisees. But
thereupon being further instructed, more expressly [beleued in the Son Io. 9.
v. 35. 38.
of God and falling down, adored him,] our Savior still admonishing the same
wilful blind Pharisees. [If I do not the works of my Father, belene me not;
Io. 10. v. 37. 38.
but if I do, and if you will not believe me, believe the works.] Again, though
our Lord wept for Lazarus his death, yet he was glad thereof [for his Disciples
Io. 11. v. 15.
sake that they might beleue] when they should see him raised from death. And
therefore he also added prayer, with thanks to his heavenly Father [And v. 42.
that I did (says he) for the people that stand about, that they may believe
that thou have sent me.] For this purpose finally he appeared often after his
own Resurrection, so checking some for not believing sooner, Luc. 24. v. 25.
that he not only well accepted of them that saw him and believed, but also more
especially pronounced them [blessed that have not seen and have believed.] Io.
20. v. 29. v. 30.
To this end also that al men might believe, Christ did more miracles, and many
other things that a^e not written.
And here the holy Evangelist testifies, that [our Lord Jesus also did many
signs in the sight of his Disciples, which are not written in this booke] And
that [many other things there are which Jesus Chapter 21. v. 25.
did. And these are written (says the same Evangelist, that you may believe
that Jesus is Christ the Chapter 20. v. 31.
Son of God, and that believing, you may have life in his name. Al conformable
to our B. Sauioures perpetual doctrine, and last instruction before he ascended
into heaven: when he again [exprobrated Mar. 16. v. 14. 15.
his Disciples (former) incredulity and hardness of heart, because they did not
believe them that had seen him risen again.] And so concludes, giving
commission to his Apostles to preach the Gospel in all the world. And generally
demonstrating to al men, [He that believes, v. 16.
and is baptized, shall be saved,: but he that believes not, shall be condemned.]
Lo, both belief and Sacrament are required to salvation: but want of faith
(for then al Sacraments and other works are unprofitable) is sufficient cause
of damnation. Which clear sense so distinctly expressed in the sacred How
faith is required in Baptism.
text, iustisieth the practice of the Church; which continually before Baptism
(consequently before al other Sacraments) requires faith, either actual, as in all that have use of reason, or else the confession of others for them, as in
Infantes. So after S. Peter's Mat. 19. v. 14. Act. 2. v. 41. Chapter 4. v. 4. Act.
8. v. 12.
first sermon, [they that received his word, were baptized] After these, others
in like sort. And when certain had heard and [beleued Philip (the Deacou)
euangelizing of the kingdom of God, and of the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized men and women.] The self same disposition and preparation, the same
holy Deacon required in the Eunuch, the treasurer of the Queen of the
Ethiopians, requesting to be baptized. Unto whom he faid, [If thou beleuest
with all thy heart, thou may be baptized.] And so it was done. S. Peter
likewise taught Cornelius, Act. 8. v. 37. Act. 10. v. 43.
the Centurion, the same thing, that by the testimony of all the Prophets, [al
receive remission of sins, by Jesus Christ his name which believe in him.] So
the Gailor, and his family, at Philippi, were taught by S. Paul and Silas,
first to believe in our Act. 16. v. 31. 33.
Lord Jesus, and then were baptized incontinent.]

8 I would be breefer, but I may not omit to recite something of S. Paul's
Epistles, and the residue of the new Testament, that al may see, how abundantly
holy Scriptures teach the absolute necessiitie of faith, and how some harder
places are illustrated and expounded by others. Al indeed confirming each
other. S. S. Paul teaches very often, that faith is necessary: but never,
that only faith does justify.
Paul especially in^^steth upon this point, highly praising the Romans, and
giving thanks to God in their behalf; [because (says he) your faith is
renowned in Romans 1. v. 8. v. 16.
the whole world.] And to confirm them therein, affirms, that [the Gospel is
the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes; to the Jew, and to
the Greek. For the justice of God is revealed, by faith, into faith, as it is
written; And the just v. 17.
lives by faith.] For faith in general, produces faith in particular
Articles, by his grace, as [a fountain of Io. 4. v. 14. Romans 3. v. 22. v. 27.
water springing up unto life everlasting.] And [the justice of God, by faith
of Jesus Christ, unto al, and upon al, that believe in him.] without which noe
works avail to justification. For all such [boasting Faith without precede^t
works, but not without subsequent works justifies. And so not faith only.
Iac. 2. v. 24.
is excluded, not by the law of deeds, but by the law of faith. For we account
a man (says the Apostle) v. 28.
to be justified by faith, without the works of the Law] that is, without
Circumcision, or other works Gal. 2. v. 16 21. Gal. 5. v. 6. Gal. 6. v. 15.
of the Law of Moses, or of nature, or what works soever without faith. [For
in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails ought, nor prepuce, but a new
creature] So if Abraham (or any other) did works which were morally good,
before he believed, he was not thereby justified: but [Abraham believed God and it
was reputed him to justice.] So that by Romans 4. v. 3. Gal. 3. v. 6. Iac. 2. v.
22.
faith preceding his works he had life: for faith did work with his works:
and [by the works (following) the faith was consummate.] Therefore [the Gentiles
which pursued not after justice, have (by To. 9. v. 30. 31. 32.
Christ's grace) apprehended justice; but the justice that is of faith. But
Israel in pursuing the Law of justice, is not come to the Law of justice. Why
so? Because not of faith, but as it were of workes] to wit, without faith in
Christ. [Because of incredulity, Romans 11. v. 20.
they (the Jews) were broken from the olive tree (that is, from the Churh) but
thou by faith do Special imagination of any man, that him self shall be
saved, is not faith, but a vanie fantasy.
stand] not any man's private framed fantasy, that him self is just, or shall
infallibly be saved, but [by Romans 16. v. 26. 1. Cor. 13. v. 13.
obedience of faith, known in all Gentiles.] Nor by faith alone, for the same
Apostle says, [Now there remain Faith, Hope, Charity, these three] al
necessary to justification and salvation. Again to show the inualiditie of
Moses Law, he teaches that [the Gal. 3. v. 24.
Law was our Pedagogue in Christ, that we may be justified by faith: But when
the faith came, now we are not under a pedagogue, not the Children Gal. 4. v.
24. 31
of the bondwoman (Agar, signifying the old Testament) but of the free-woman]
Sara, signifying the new Testament.

9 And this faith being received, is noe less necessary Faith is also
necessary to perseverance in justice.
to be kept, as the same Apostle often admonishes the Colossians, and all the
faithful, that [they Colos. 1. v. 22. 23.
may be presented, holy, and immaculate and blameles before Christ, if yet ye
continue (says he) in the faith, grounded, and stable, and immovable from the
hope of the Gospel.] And in a^ other Epistle. aduertis^ng that [we 1. These. 3.
v. 3. 5. 10. 2. These. 1. v. 3. 11. Chapter 2. v. 12. 1. Tim. 2. v. 15. Chapter 4. v. 6.
be made pertakers of Christ, yet so, if we keep the beginning of this
substance firm unto the end] exhorts to proceed to perfection, [not again
laying the fundaion of penance from dead works, (for such were the very best
works before faith) and of faith toward God: but to approach with a true heart
in fullness of faith, seek a Country, not terrestrial, but a heavenly. 10 And
whereas the other four Apostles, which Other Apostles teach the same necessity
of faith together with other good works.
2. Tim. 1. v. 13. 14. Heb 3. v. 14. Chapter 6. v. 1. 12. Chapter 10. v. 21. Chapter 11. v.
14. 16. Iac. 1. v. 2. 3. Chapter 2. v. 18. 20. 22. 26. 1. Pet. 2. v. 7. 8.
write Epistles, do more especially teach the necessity of good works, as
likewise S. Paul very abundantly, yet they first require faith, even as S.
Paul. and all the Evangelists do. And therefore S. James encoraging us [to
esteem it al joy, when we shall fall into diue^s tentations] or persecutions:
yeldeth this reason, [knowing (says he) that the probation of your faith,
works patience:] where he presupposes faith most necessary, and the
probation thereof, passing profitable. Yea he proves the necessity of good
works, that faith may be showed; that it [may not be idle (says he) but
consummate; that it may be living, not dead.] S. Peter also teaches both the
necessity and profit of faith, [to you that believe, is honor; but to them that
believe not, the stone, which the builders rejected, is made into the head of
the corner, and a stone of offense, and a rock of scandal, to them that
stumble at the word, neither Chapter 4. v. 17.
do believe.] Again he says, [the time is, that judgment begin at the house
of God. And if first of us (says he) what shall be the end of them that believe
not the Gospel of God:] that is to say; If best Christians must pass through
many tribulations, here called judgment, then such as believe not at al, shall
be judged and punished without end. He again warns all the faithful, not to
follow private interpretation of Scripture, for [there shall be lying 2. Pet. 1.
v. 20. Chapter 2. v. 1. Iud. v. 3. 4.
Masters, which shall bring in sects of perdition.] The very same S. Jude
advises al, [to contend for the faith once delivered,] adding, that even then
in his time, [there were certain men secretly entered in, which (says he) were
long ago prescribed into this indgement, impious, transferring the grace of
our God, into riotousnes, and denying the only Dominator, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.] For that in effect the denying of any point of faith, is denying
Christ, who is truth it self.

11 To conclude, therefore this first Article with S. John: He as well in his
Epistles, as in the Apocalypse, S. John both in his Epistles and Apocalipse
testifies the same doctrine.
cries unto us, that [this is Gods commandment, 1. Io. ^. v. 10. Chapter 3. v. 23.
that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one an other.]
Writing to the seven Churches, and in them, to the whole Church milita^t,
praises them which admit not the doctrine of heretics, but [tried them,
which say them selves to be Apostles and are not, and found them liars.] And
Apoc. 2. v. 2. 13.
especially such, as [dwelling where the seat of Satan is, hold Christ's name,
and deny not his faith] but [such as had the name that they lived, and were
dead, he threatened to punish severely.] And [the Apoc. 3. v. 1. 16. Chapter 14. v.
12.
lukewarm, the Holy Spirit vomiteth out of his mouth.] Elsewhere he adds,
that [in trial and tribulatio^s, is the patience of Saints, which keep the
commandementes of God, and the faith of Jesus.] For [he that shall overcome,
shall possess al glorious things, and I will be his God (says God almighty)
Chap. 21. v. 7. 8.
and he shall be my Son. But to the fearful, and incredulous, their part shall
be in the poole, burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.]

12 I doubt not but some small part of these holy An aduertisment, with a
request to our adversaries.
Scriptures, might have suffised to prove, and manifestly to show, not only the
absolute necessity of the true Christian faith, but also that it is first of
al required; as without which, noe wotkes do justify, nor bring any to
salvation. But I have collected thus much (omitting also much) to give more
abundant satisfaction, ^ouching this first ground of al Religion: because our
adversaries, often in their writings, and much more in pulpittes, and frequent
discourses, untruly charge Catholics, to build their Religion upon their own
good works, and to ascribe little to faith: whereas indeed, we do assuredly
believe, and plainly profess, that as faith is dead without good works, so al
works are dead without true faith. Wherefore we pray al Protestants and
Puritanes, in this point especially, to join right hands with us, that true
faith is necessary to salvation, and that there is but one true Religion, for
the reclaming of al careless miscreantes, and sensles wordlinges, who frame to
them selves a new paradoxical fancy, that men may be saved in any Religion:
which you know is a most gross error; and that they which are indifferent to
any Religion, have in deed noe Religion, and so walking in the broad high way
of perdition, draw over nere to desperate Atheism.

Man's wit, or reach of natural reason, can not attain Faith. Neither is man's
testimony sufficient to assure it, but Gods word only. ARTICLE. 2.
BY the later part of the description of Faith, Matters of faith are not
naturally demo^strable; but by Gods word made c^edible.
where the Apostle says. It [is the Argument Heb. 11. v. 1.
of things not appearing:] he teaches, that it is not a sensible
demonstration, but a credible assertion, neither of things evident, but of
things not appearing to our senses, nor to natural reason, or understanding,
and so is above nature: whereupon Faith is not contrary to nature: but about
nature.
al matters of faith are called supernatural, yet not contrary to nature, or
reason. For as Art does perfect nature, and not destroy it: so divine Grace,
excelling both nature and art, by faith which surmounteth the use of sense, and
discourse of reason, supplieth their imperfections; because they are defective,
and sometimes do err. For example. It seems to our eyes, that the Moon is
as great as the As reason is above sense, so faitth is above reason.
Sun, and greater then any other planet, or Star, but reason considering
the difference of their distance from the earth, judges otherwise. We ca^ not
bynatural And the light of glory is above faith.
reason conceive, that man's body dead and turned into dust, or other matter,
shall rise again to life: but faith teaches us, that it shall rise, by the
omnipotent power of God, [to whom al things are possible.] Math. 1^ v. 26.
And therefore points of faith, are not always proved and demonstrated, in
such sort as may convince the repugnant understanding to yield assent thereto,
but are proposed as revealed by God almighty, as being in him possible, in
them selves convenient, and by his revealing who is truth it self, made
credible.

2. So the Royal Prophet testifies, speaking unto Al points of faith are made
credible by Gods proposing them.
God in the person of al his faithful servants. [Thy testimonies are made
credible exceedingly.] Psalm. 92. v. 5.
Yea al points of faith, are so merely and only credible, and not
demonstrable, that when they become clear, and evident to sense or natural
reason, they are not then properly matter of faith, but of knowledge. And this
is the reason why our B. Savior, Christ had not faith but in Place thereof
konwledge.
knowing perfectly from the first instant of his incarnation, al things past,
present, and to come, had not this virtue of faith, but in place thereof, had
knowledge of al divine mysteries, which to us are points of faith. Likewise
Angels and other Saints, have Neither Angels and other Saints in heaven,
have faith but knowledge.
not faith, because they now evidently know, by light of glory, the things
which they believed before by light of faith, as S, Paul instructs us saying.
[When that shall come that is perfect, that shall be 1. Cor. 13. v. 10. 12.
made void that is in part. We see now by a glass in a dark sort, but then
face to face. In an other place he also says, that [we walk by faith, and 2.
Cor. 5. v. 7.
not by sight.]

3 The reason whereof, the wise man yeldeth saying That (whiles we are in this
life) [The body Sap. 9. v. 15.
that is corrupted, burdeneth the soul, and the earthly habitation, presses
down the understanding that thinks many things. And we do hardly
conjecture Man can not attain faith by natural wit.
the things that are in the earth; and the things that are in sight, we find
with labor: But the ib.
things that are in the heavens, who shall search out? And thy sense (says he
turning his speech to God) 17.
who shall know, unless thou give wisdom, and send thy holy Spirit from on
high? And so the paths 18.
of them that are on the earth, may be corrected, and men learn the things
that please thee.] By which sacred doctrine, we are instructed, that in this
life, we can neither know divine mysteries by discourse of reason, but only by
faith; neither can we believe Faith is the gift of God.
them, until our understanding be elevated by Gods grace, above natural
capacity. And therefore faith can not be ascribed to man's natural wit, nor
humane reason, but to Gods illumination, infusing the Theological virtue of
faith into the soul. Neither It is rather given to the sincere of heart, then
to the worldly wise.
does God ordinarily choose, the wise of this world, but the plain and simple
without guile. Cain doubtless Genesis 4. v. 8.
was not inferior to Abel in humane wit, but being covetous of temporal
riches, kept his better fruits to his own use, offering the worse to God; and
circumuenting his brother, drew him forth into the field, and there slew him.
And afterward [going v. 16.
forth from the face of our Lord] albeit [he dwelt as a fugitive on the earth]
yet he so prospered in the Exampless thereof in the Scriptures.
world, that [he built a City, and called it by the v. 17.
name of his son Enoch.] Those of his race are noted also to be worldly wise.
[Iabel, was the inuentor v. 20. 21. 22.
of Tents. Iubal, of singing (or playing) on harp and Organes. Tubalcain of
working in brass and Iron] 26.
But [Enos the son of Seth, began to invoke the name of our Lord] in
public and solemn manner, assembling many together, as is most probable.
Forsome such visible distiction there was between those which were called [The
sons of God, and Genesis 6. v. 2. Genesis 11. v. 4.
others called the sons, or daughters of men.] Nemrod and his accomplices, had
wit enough, like worldly politiques, to devise and conspire, to build the
Tower of Babel: but H^ber, and his family, believing gods promise, that [he
would no more destroy al Genesis 9. v. 11.
flesh by waters] was free from their crime and punishment. Not the learned
Egiptia^s, the sutle Assiria^s, the wise Grecians, the puisa^t Romans; no not
the renowned Philosophers, Pithagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,: Genesis 12. v.
22. 28.
but [Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,] and their particular progeny, especially the
children of the same Jacob, were illuminated with true faith, and confirmed
therein. This is it, whereof S. Paul admonished the Corinthians, according to the
Prophets doctrine: Testimonies of holy Scriptures.
[For it is written (says he) I will destroy the wisdom 1. Cor. 1. v. 19. Isa.
33. v. 18.
of the wise, and the prudence of the prudent I will reject. Where is the wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world? Has not God made the
wisdom of this world foolish?] For the same cause he also avouches, that his
speech and [preaching 1. Cor. 2. v. 4.
was not in the persuasible words of humane wisdom, but in showing of spirit
and power.] And why? [that your faith (says he) might not be in v. 5.
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.] Gods grace being the principal
means of believing: the lawful preaching, and diligent hearing of Gods wo^d,
is the secondarie means.


4 It is true also, that man's industry is required. For [faith is by hearing.]
Therefore men must employ Romans 10. v. 17.
their diligence, lending their ears to hear. And for this purpose, God
provided that there were ever some that did preach his word [diuersly, and
diverse H^b. 1. v. 1.
ways in times past, God speaking to the Fathers in the Prophets: last of al
in these days, haith spoken to us in his Son.] And his Son, our Lord and
Savior, still speaks by his Apostles, and other preachers, to whom he said.
[As my Father has sentme; Joan. 20. v. 21.
I also do^ send you.

5 Yet here we must add one other necessary documen^, Faith is grounded in
Gods word only, not in any man's words.
that as only Gods grace, does dispose the souls of men to hear willingly,
and illuminateth the understanding to conceive that which is proposed: so only
Gods word does assure us of the truth, in all points of faith. Because al men
(speaking of humane Every man may be deceived or may deceive, but not God.
certitude) may in spiritual things be deceived, or being maliciously
disposed, may deceive. But god who neither can be deceived, nor can deceive;
does by his word infallibly awarant our faith, more assuredly then we do, or
can know any thing, by our experimental senses, or natural reason, or humane
Proved by testimonies of holy Scriptures.
report. In consideration whereof, S. Paul says; [God is true, and every man
is a liar] Yea in consideration Romans 3. v. 4.
of the general insufficiency, of man, our Savior Christ, God and man, who is
truth it self, and And by our Saviors procedinges.
can not lie, yet to give men more satisfaction, challenged no more credit (as he
is man) but as his doctrine is warranted by God. [For of my self (says he)
Joan. 12. v. 49.
I have not spoken, but my Father that sent me, he gave me commandment what I
should say, and what I should speak.] For God the Father, together with the
Holy Ghost, gave him testimony sensibly, in the sight and hearing of men,
when he was baptized by S. John Baptist: where S. John [saw the Spirit of Mat.
3. v. 16. 17.
God descending as a dove, and coming upon him. And behold a voice from heaven
saying: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.] Again in his
Transfiguration. [A bright cloud ouershadowed Mat. 17. v. 5.
them, and lo^ a voice out of the cloud saying, This is my well-beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased, hear him.] By which warrant, our Savior
conformably, sending his Apostles, and other Disciples, said to them in like
clear words, [He that hears you, hears me.] So therefore, Luc. 10. v. 16.
Christ as man, spoke no other thing, but as God the B. Trinity gave him
commandment. And so the Prophets, Apostles, and al true preachers, [draw Is.
12. v. 5. 2. Pet. 1. v. 21.
waters in joy, out of the Saviors fountains.] So [the holy men of God,
spoke inspired by the holy Ghost] Yea Balam, (though his intention was
perverse, desiring to have pleasured Balac, was forced to speak true and good
things of the Israelites, and for his excuse to Balac, uttered also this truth
that [God is not as man, that he may lie, nor as the Nu. 23. v. 19. Ps. 88. v.
35.
son of man, that he may be chauged.] David recites Gods speech saying. [The
words that proceed from my mouth, I will not make frustrate. Once I have sworn
in my holy, I will not lie to David. His seed shall continue for ever.] Our
Savior says. [The words that I have spoken unto you, be spirit Io. 6. v. 43.
Mat. 24. v. 35.
and life. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass.]

6 Whether therefore God speak by his Son, by his Prophets, by his Apostles,
or by other men rightly sent, his word is true, certain, and infallible, and
so the people of Israel securely [beleued our Lord, Exo. 14. v. 31. 1. These. 2.
v. 12.
and Moses his servant.] So the Thessalonians, and other good Christians,
[receiued the word of the Apostles, not as the word of men, but (as it is
indeed) the word of God.] Al which show this fundamental doctrine, that faith
is grounded in the word of God. Now the next point is to know, which is the
word of God.

Gods word is partly written in the holy Bible, partly known and kept by
Tradition. ARTICLE 3.
HEre our Adversaries dissent from us: not Protestants not only deny many
traditions: but also some parts of the Bible, which Catholics hold to be
authentical.
only denying Traditions to be the word of God, but also refusing the Books of
Tobie, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, The first and second of Machabies, and
parts of Hester, and Daniel. Some also deny the Prophecy of Baruch, with
Ieremies Epistle. And Lutheranes resist diverse Epistles of the new Testament;
al which, the Catholic Roman Church holds as Canonical Scriptures, no
less then the others, which both we and they receive for the undoubted word of
God. For proof of the Authentical authority of these parts called into
controversy, I remitte you to the Catholic Edition of the English Bible, and
to the Auctors there cited.

2 But the Controversy of Traditions, may not be omitted in this place,
because not only some other points of Christian Faith, namely that our usual
Creed, is authentical doctrine, but also the assurance which we have of the
whole sacred bible, depends especially upon Tradition. For except we admit
the testimony of our Ancesters, and predecessors, who say, that they received
this book, of their elders, as the written word of God, and that it has been
so delivered and received, from one age, to an other, from the times when the
several parts thereof were written, we should not have more certainty of any
part of the holy Bible, then of the Gospels, which are said to be written by S.
Peter, S. Thomas, S. Bartlemew, and Nicodemus. But by Tradition and judgment of
the Church, we assuredly know, what Books are the written word of God: which
otherwise the Scripture it self decideth not. Neither Which is no more
inconvenient then that Christ was made known by S. John Baptist and the
Apostles.
do we therefore say, that the Church makes any book to be the word of God,
but that the Church declares it so to be. And this is noe more inconvenient,
then that Christ himself, was declared by S. John Baptist, and by the Apostles,
to be our Redemer. For even as Christ did not depend upon S. John, nor upon the
Apostles, but they wholly depended upon him; yet he took testimony of them,
and they declared him to be the Messiah sent of God: so the holy Scriprures in
them selves, depend not upon the Church, yet are made known to us, to be Io.
1. v. 7. 32. 3^ Luc. 24. v. 48. Act. 1. v 8. 21. 22.
the written word of God, by the testimony of the Church. And that the Church
did so testify, we know by Tradition. Yea Protestants also, upon the same
special ground, accept of the far greater part of the holy Bible. And it
were very absurd, that leaving the common spirit of the Church, the private
spirits of particular men should Judge, which books are the word of God, and
which are not: for so the contention were endless* as appears by Luthers
rejecting of S. James his Epistle, and some other parts of the new Testament;
which Calvin coming after him, and generally Engilsh Protestants, acknowledge
to be the true word of God. By which, and other like examples, al men may see,
how necessary the auctorite of Ecclesiastical Tradition is, for decision of
this principal point, to know which Books are divine Scriptures.

3 It is moreover to be observed, that as the will and word of God, was a long
time known to the faithful people by only preaching and Tradition, without
writing: so after that God gave also a written Law, Traditions did not cease
when Gods law begane to be written. There was no Scriptute for the space of
2400. years. And 1000. years more, before the last part of the old Testament
was written.
Traditions did not cease, but remained still in force, retayning their former
authority. For all was not written, as we shall here show, by testimony of the
written word. First then it is clear, the space of above two thousand, four
hundred years, from the creation of this world, and beginning of the Church,
there was noe Canonical Scripture at al: til Moses writ the five first
Books, called Pentatheucon; and as it is very probable, translated the Book
of Job, into Hebrew, written not long before in the Arabike tougue. And in the
last prophecy of the old Testament which is Malachias, (for I will not give
instance of other Books called into controversy) was written about the year
of the world, three thousand, and five hundred: to wit, after the relaxatio^
of Gods people, from their captivity in Babylon. In so much, that if the
means of knowing true Religion, be limited within the precinctes of holy
Scriptures, it was passing long without this means, and yet longer before it
was complete.

4 Likewise there passed some years, after the beginning of the Church of
Christ, by preaching, and propagation of the Gospel in diverse nations, before
Neither was the new Testament written presently after Christ's Ascension.
any part of the new Testament was written. For S. Matthew writ the first
part, about the eight year after our Saviors Ascension: And the last part was
written by S. John the Evangelist, nere three score years after the first.
This manifest truth conuinceth you of error that say: Al doubts in Religion,
must be immediately tried, and finally decided, by only Scriptures. For needs
you must first confess, that Before there were Scriptures, doubts were
decided by the Church.
before the holy Scriptures were written, there was some other sufficient
means of trial, and decisio^ of doubtful cases. Secondly, you must tell us,
when that former means seized, and this other of only Scriptures came in
place. Whether so sone as any holy Scriptures were extant, or not until some
great part, half, or more, or al, were delivered to the Church. If you say that
before al was written, the rest suffised for this purpose: then that which was
written after, was needles: so the later Prophets in the old Testament, and S.
John's Gospel, with the Apocalipse, are superfluous, or not necessary. If you
say, that holy Scriptures alone, did not suffice til al were written, then you
must grant, that all the time, between the first, and last writing of holy
Scriptures, (which was above a thousand years in the old Testament, and about
threescore years in the new Testament) some other means was also necessary
together, with so much of them as was then written, to declare and determine
questions rising in the Church of God.

5 But after that al were written and published which Some Scriptures are now
wanting which were sometime extant.
now we have, you will say: They are the only trial of Christian truths, and
are sufficient without help of Traditions, or of interpretations, either of
ancient Fathers, or the Church present. But that you may also see your weakness
in this evasion, we demand of you, what supply you have of such Scriptures as
were once written, and are long since perished. For there were some other
parts of holy Scripture, which are not now in our Bible, as appears in the
third Book of Kings, where it is written, that [Salomon 3. Reg. 4. v. 32.
spoke three thousand Parables, and his songs were a thousand and five. And he
disputed of trees, from the Cedar that is in Libanus, unto the Hissope which
comes out of the wall: And he discoursed of beasts, and fowls, and creeping
worms, and fishes.] And by S. Paul's Epistle to the Col^ssians, where he
signifies, that he [written an Epistle to the Laodicians] Coloss. 4. v. 16.
which is not now extant.

6 More particularly we require you to prove this assertion of youres by
express holy Scripture, That al necessary points of Christian Faith and
Religion, may be immediately proved by only Scriptures. And that none other
authority is to be admitted. Let us see therefore by what holy Scriptures, you
mantaine The Scriptures which Protestants allege for their opinion do not
prove it. The first place.
this your position. I will recite some textes for you, the very fittest you
have, as I dare boldly presume. I know you use for this purpose, to alledg the
word of God written by Moses in the fou^^h Chapter of D^uterenomie saying you
sh^l not add to the word Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2.
that I speak to you, neither shall you take away from it: keep the
commandment of the Lord your God which I command you.] The most plain and
literal sense of this precept is, that we must not by addition, nor by
subtraction, alter or change Gods word or commandment, neither must we call
that Gods word or commandment, which is not his word nor commandment. But
deduction of one truth from an other, is not here, nor elsewhere forbid. And
whatsoever is deduced of the holy Scripture by the Church inspired and
assisted by the holy Ghost, is Gods word, in that is the word of the holy
Ghost.

7 An other like place is, in the twelft Chapter of The second place.
the same book [what I command thee, that only Chapter 12. v. 32.
do to our Lord: neither add any thing, nor diminish.] This is an admonition
concerning Hosts to be offered in Sacrifices: commanding, that al those
things should be offered, which are prescribed by the Law, and prohibiting
other kinds of things. Neither was the ordinance of King David, contrary to
these precepts, that [there was equal portion of him that went down, into
battle and of him that abode at the baggage: for this was done from that day,
and ever 1. Reg. 30. v. 24. 25. Joan. 10. v. 22. 23. Mat. 15. v. 3. 4. 9.
after, it was decreed and ordained as a Law in Israel.] Neither was the
institution of a new Feast, in the Dedication of an Altar, contrary to Gods
Law, but was very agreeable thereto, which Feast christ honored and kept, as is
clear in the Gospel, whereas otherwise our Savior sharply reprehended and
condemned the frivolous Traditions observed by the Jews, and pretended by them
as Traditions of the Ancientes: and he likewise condemned the commandementes of
men, which were contrary to Gods commandments.

8 Also our Savior willed the Jews, to [search The third placce.
the Scriptures (that is, not only to read superficially, Joan. 5. v. 59.
but aso to search the sense dep^ly) for (says he) you thinkin them to have
life everlasting, and the same are they that give testimony of me] but he does
not say, the same only, for besides the Scriptures, he alleged also the
testimony of S. John Baptist, v. 33. 36. 37.
likewise his own works, and the voice of his Father, none of al which was as
yet written. And afterward he sent his Apostles to be [witnesses of Luc. 24.
v. 48. Act. 1. v. 8. 2. Tim. 3. v. 15.
him in Jerusalem, and in all Iewrie, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of the
earth.

9 S. Paul also wills his scholar S. Timothy, The fourth place.
to learn true doctrine in the holy Scriptures [because (says he) from thine
infancy, thou have known the holy Scriptures, which can instruct thee to
salvation, by the faith, that is in Christ Jesus.] Then further showing the
utility, and use thereof, he says [All (or every) Scripture, inspired of God,
is v. 16. 17.
profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in justice, that the
man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work.] In all which
passage, it is clear, that holy Scriptures are proposed, not as the only,
but as one special means, to learn Faith, and other virtues, whereby to be
perfect and instructed to every good work. But in no wise does the Apostle
detract from his other instructions, which v. 14.
he gave immediately before saying, [continue thou in those things which thou
have learned, and are committed to thee, knowing of whom thou have learned.

10 Finally S. John in the end of the Apocalypse, gives The fifth place.
this threatening charge, [I testify to every Apoc. 22. v. 18. 19.
one, hearing the words of the Prophecy of this book; If any man shall add
to these things, God shall add upon him the plagues written in this book. And
if any man shall diminish of the words of the Book of this Prophecy: God
shall take away his part out of the Book of life, and out of the holy City,
and of these things that be written in this Book.] Which curse falls upon
those, whosoever by adding, or diminishing, corrupts this prophecy. And no
doubt, the same plague and punishment pertains also to who^soeuer corrupts
any part of holy Scriptures: but makes nothing at al against true
expositions, nor against Traditions, agreeable to holy Scriptures, nor against
writing more holy Scriptures after this Book. For the same S. John him self,
writ his Gospel, after this Prophecy of the Apocalypse: and concludes the
same Gospel thus. [But there are many other things also that Jesus did, which
if they were written, in particular, neither the world it self I think, were
able to contain those Books, that should be written.] Thus much concerning
those holy Srriptures, which Protestants commonly produce against the
authority, and use of Traditions.

11 Now let us further see some examples, and other The necessity of
Traditions proved by express Scriptures. And first by examples.
testimonies of the written word of God for Traditions, which the Church
calls the unwritten word. Genesis 1.
It is clear in the beginning of Genesis, that God having created the world,
according to Moses his relation, Chapter 2. v. 2. 3.
in six days, [he rested the seventh day, from The Sabbath day instituted.
al work that he had done, and he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it.]
Whereupon Gods people observed the seventh day, resting from servile work,
whereof it was called the Sabbath, which in English, signifies Rest; and the
same continued by Tradition, for there were as yet no Scriptures (as is
already noted, til the written Law was given. And in the written Law it was
continued and confirmed by Exo. 20. v. 8. 9. 10. 11. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 12. 13. 14. 15.
special form of words, as a thing well known, and so is confirmed by these
terms to the people. [Remember that thou sanctify the Sabbath day. (In
Deutronomie) Observe the day of the Sabbath.] Also the manner of keeping it holy,
is largely described, and the reason of it alleged, from the first
institution. And scarce any other Precept, is so often inculcated in all the old
Testament, as this of keeping the Sabbath, that is, the seventh day of the
week, holy, and vacant from work. Nevertheless this seventh and Sabbath
day, is now a work day, as the other five days of the week ordinarily are.
And both the old Traditions of Patriarchs, and the old precept of Moses Law,
are abrogated, without any express holy Scripture, for the omission thereof.
Yet are al Christians well warranted herein, by Apostolical Tradition, to work
on Saturday, which is the Sabbath day.

12 And by the very same Tradition, the Sunday, Sunday called our Lords day,
kept holy day, by Ayostolical Tradition.
called the Dominical and our Lords day, is made holy Mat. 28. v. 1. Mar. 16.
v. 2. Luc. 24. v. 1. Joan. 20. v. 1. 1. Cor. 16. v. 2. Act. 20. v. 7.
Day. Because on this day (called by all the Evangelists, the First of the
Sabbath) our Lord rose from death. And it began first to be kept holy day in
the Apostles time. For S. Paul calls it, [the first of the Sabbath] in which
Christians assembled together. And so does S. Luke call it [the first of the
Sabbath] when they were assembled to break bread (that is to minister the
blessed Sacrament.) And shortly after, being already a holy day, it was
called, our Lords day. But the Jews keep the seventh and Sabbath day still, as
is to be seen at Rome, Venice, Amsterdam, Frankford, and whersoeuer they dwell.
And Protestants receive and observe in their manner, both these Tradations,
as well in working on Saturday, which is the Sabbath and seventh day, as in
abstayning from work on Sunday, which is not the last but the first day of the
week, now called our Lords day. And that there was a day so called, before all the Apostles were parted from this world, appears by S. John, making mention
thereof, in the beginning of Apoc. 1. v. 10.
the Apocalypse, but no express mention is there, nor elsewhere in all the holy
Scriptures, that Saturday is now a day of work, nor that Sunday was made the
holy day, both which we know and observe by Apostolical Tradition.

13 A third example we have, in the observation What things were reputed
clean and unclean, was known by tradition.
of things reputed [Cleane, and unclean.] God Genesis 7. v. 2. 3.
commanded Noe to receive into the Arc [of al beasts that are clean, seven
and seven, male and female, but of the beasts that are unclean, two and two,
male and female] either by Tradition, as it might be revealed to his Ancesters,
or else by particular instructions, Noe knew this difference of clean and
unclean beasts, and from Noe to Moses, the same was known by Tradition.
Afterward by the written Law, it was largely expressed; Especially in the
Leuit. 11. v. 2. etc.
Book of Leuiticus, with many other Ceremonial Precepts, which were of vigor
and force til our Lords Passion and death. And some of them were continued
after his Ascension and coming of the Holy Ghost, the space of some years,
and that by express Decree of the Apostles gathered in a solemn Council:
where they definitiuely determined, that Christians should keep a certain
Ceremonial precept Act. 15. v. 28.
of the old Law, in these words. [It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and
to us, to lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary things, that
you abstain from things immolated to Idols, v. 29.
and blood, and that which is strangled, and fornication.] This prohibition of
eating blood and strangled Astinence from eating blood of beasts sometime
commanded, is now abrogated by Tradition.
meats, (as puddinges, and rapets,) which were also forbid long before the
written Law, in the days Genesis 9. v. 4.
of Noe, and renewed by the Apostles, as necessary under the same tenure of
words, with Idolatry and fornication (which two, always were, and are,
grievous sins,) is since so euacuated, that now these meats are lawfully
eaten in due times, as other things are: And that by custom and Tradition of
the Church, else we should be bound to abstain from them still.

14 A fourth example is, concerning the time, when the Sacrament of
Circumcision, ceased to be lawful: Circumcision first observed, and afterward
omitted by Tradition.
Genesis 17. v. 10. Leuit. 1^ v. 3. Joan. 7. v. 22. Mat. 7. v. 8.
which was first instituted in the time of Abraham, continued, and confirmed by
the written Law: [Not that it is of Moses (says our Savior) but of the
Fathers] whereof S. Stephen making mention, in his Apologetical Sermon, calls
it [the Testament of Circumcision, which God gave to Abraham.] For although
Christians, whether they were borne Jews, or Gentiles, were not bound to
observe it, as we see by the Apostolical Decree even now recited; yet it
remained lawful if any would use it. And so S. Paul knowing, and mantaining it,
not to be necessary, nor in some persons cases and conueuient, avouches that
[Titus, whereas he was a Gentile, was not compelled Gal. 2. v. 11. Act. 16. v. 3.
to be Circumcised,] nevertheless [he Circumcised Timothee because of the
Jews that were in those places; for they al knew, that his father was a
Gentile;] and returning after this to Jerusalem, where it was reported that [he
taught those Jews, Act. 21. v. 21.
that were among the Gentiles, to depart from Moses, saying, that they ought
not to circumcise their children, nor walk according to the custom.] v. 22.
26.
To purge him self of this suspicion, and [that al should know, that the
things which they heard of him were false, and that him self also walked
keeping the Law: he taking certain men unto him that had a Number. 6. v. 13.
Vow, was purified with them (according to the Law of the Nazarites) and entered
into the Temple; showing the accomplishment of the days of the Purification,
The vow of Nazaretus, made and accomplished by S. Paul, is now changed.
v. 14.
until an Oblation was offered (particular Sacrifice of Holocaust, and sin,
and a pacifique Host) for every one of them.] Thus did S. Paul teach, both by
practice and word, that circumcision, and other points of the old Law, were
neither hurtful if they were observed, nor of them selves necessary to be
observed. [As God has called every one 1. Cor. 7. v. 18.
(says he) so let him walk, and as in all Churches I teach. Is any man called
being circumcised? Let him not procure prepuce. Is any man called in prepuce?
let him not be circumcised] But when, and by what authority this indifferency
ceased, and that circumcision, and other obseruances of the old Law became to
be utterly unlawful and damnable, as now they are, and have been many hundred
years, is not expressed in any part of holy Scriptures. All that we know
herein, is by only Tradition, practice and judgment of the Church. Many other
examples occur The Jews being bound by their Law not to mix their Tribes by
marriage, yet the Tribe of Leui was exempted by Tradition,
in the Law of Moses, as the precept of marriages Nu. 36. v. 7. Luc. 1. v. 36.
Heb. 9. v. 19. 20. 21. 22.
within the same Tribes, written in the Book of Numeri. Yet Levites married
with the Tribe of Judah, as appears in S. Lukes Gospel. The Ceremonies recited
by S. Paul in the ninth Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews, are not al
expressed by Moses in the written Law.

15 There be also diverse other examples in Christian They observed some
Ceremonies not written.
doctrine, yea even in those things, which our adversaries acknowledge to be
matters of faith, and important points of Religion, which are not expressed
Other examples in the new Testament. Baptisne and Eucarist Sacraments.
in the holy Scripture. Baptism, and the Eucharist, are nowhere called
Sacraments, in all the holy Bible. Neither the Rites or manner of
administrating them. In what manner those three thousand were baptized, whom S.
Peter converted in his first sermon, Act. 2. v. 41.
is not set down. It is particularly related, R^^es in administration of them.
that Philip the Deacon, and the Eunuch, (a certain Queens three surer;) went
out of the Chariot, into the water, and there Philip baptized the Eunuch. Act.
8. v. 38.
Christ our Lord commanded his Apostles to baptize, but the Rites how it is to
be done, are no where expressed in holy Scripture. Our Lord instituted the
Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. v. 20. 21.
B. Sacrament of his Body and Blood, and administered the same late in the
evening after supper, wherein he and his Apostles had eaten the Paschal Lamb;
And bade his Apostles [Doe this etc.] The Christians at Corinth, coming
together to eat our Lords Supper, [euerie one took his own supper before]
which was then lawful, so they had done it at home in their houses, but the
Apostle reprehended the richer sort, for eating in the Church, with confusion
of the poor; concluding his admonition, that [when he should come] to Corinth,
[he would dispose] some things, which he did not then write.

16 Moreover English Protestants, acknowledge Other sacred actions acknowledged
by Protestants. Confirmation, Confession, Ordination, Marriage, with their set
form.
Confirmation after Baptism, Confession of sins in general, when people
assemble together to common prayer; And in particular, for the sick. Also the
ordayning of men to especial spiritual functions, and the public celebrating
of marriages, with the set forms of administrating all the same, to be holy
religious actions, not wholly expressed in the written word of God, but partly
gathered of the words of holy Scriptures, and the rest they pretend to be
agreeable thereto. By which man^r of proof, so approved by them, we prove the
same four sacred actions, being rightly administered: and also Extreme Unction,
(whereof they have no resemblance at al) to be indeed perfect Sacraments, some
of them greater then Baptism; and al as properly, and certainly Sacraments,
as it is. Whereas also Protestants have a A set form of Funerals, Feasts,
Fastes, Canticles, Quicunque vult, Te Deum.
formal service for burials, and keep certain Feasts not only of our Lord,
but also of S. Michael, and of Christ's Apostles, with some fastes; and read in
their public service, the Creed of S. Athanasius, and Canticle of S. Ambrose
and S. Augustine: we do by as good warrant of holy Scriptures, prove prayer
for souls departed: Prayer to our B. Lady, and other Saints: Al Fastes and
abstinence decreed by the Church: The reading of Saints lives, and other
writings of holy Fathers, and Prayers of Angels, and other Saints in
glory, to be very profitable and necessary for supply of our weakness,
daily infirmities, and defectes.

15 Now because we undertake, by holy Scriptures to prove al Christian
Doctrine, more clearly, and certainly, then our adversaries can prove their
own doctrine and practice, which indeed neither they, nor we can do in some
points immediately, but must recurre unto approved Traditions: As well for their
help herein, as our own, (for we al profess to rely principally upon holy
Scripture) it remains, for complement of this Article, that we set before
your eyes, certain clear places, which expreslie remitte us for further
instruction, to the testimonies, Holy Scriptures do expressly remitte us to
Traditions. For knowledge of the sacred History.
customs, and Traditions, of former times, and of our Predecessors, who
testisie the judgment of the Church in their times. The Royal Prophet, reciting
some times in his Psalms, Gods works written in former Histories, adds also
some things, which he knew by Tradition. So he signifi thin his Preface of an
Historical Psalm saying. [How great things Ps. 77. v. 3. 4. 5. 6. v. 47.
have we heard, and have known them, and our Fathers have told us; they were
not hid from their children, in an other generation; telling the praises of
our Lord, and his powers, and his marvelous works which he has done.] And so
him self tells there some things, which were not written before: But still
exhorting the people, as well to hear, as to read, [how great things our Lord
commanded out Fathers, to make the same known to their children, that an other
generation may know: the children that shall be borne, shall ^i^e up, and shall
tell their children.

18 Concerning Precepts of good life, King Solomon For precepts of manners.
admonishes thus [Transgresse not the ancient Prou. 2. v. 28. Iere 6. v. 16.
bonds which thy Fathers have put.] Yea, [Thus says our Lord, stand ye upon
the ways, and see, and ask of the old paths which is the good way, and walk
ye in it, and you shall find refreshing for your souls.

19 Our Savior aduertiseth his Disciples, that he Diverse Divine Mysteries
revealed to the Apostles.
omitted to teach them many things necessary to be known, which they should
learn of the Holy Ghost. [Yet many things (says he) I have to say Joan.
16. v. 12. 13. ^^ Chapter 21. v. 25.
to you, but you can not bear them now: But when the Spirit of truth comes,
he shall teach you al truth] S. Paul, as well in his preaching, as writing, often
Which are not al written.
inculcated, the point of Apostolical Precepts and Decrees [He walked through
Syria, and Cilicia, confirming Act. 15. v. 41. Chapter 16. v. 4.
the Churches: commanding them to keep the Precepts of the Apostles and the
Ancients.] Also of Precepts not written, commending the Romans, [Thankes be to
God (says he) that whereas Romans 6. v. 17.
you were the setuants of sin, but have obeyed from the heart unto that form
of Doctrine, into the which you have been delivered.] which was a particular
instruction in Religion, agreed upon and observed by the Apostes in
cathechizing the people, called the [Rule of Faith] where he further admonished
them, The Rule of Faith, a certain form of Christian doctrine.
Romans 12. v. 6.
having di^ers gifts of Grace, to keep unity, namely those that had the gift
of Prophecy, that is of interpreting, to use it [according to the Rule of
faith] And to the very same he remitted the Philippians, Philip. 3. v. 16. 17
exhorting them [to continue in the same Rule, where unto they were come.] And
lest they might be seduced by falls. Prophers, he once more urged them, [Be
folowers of me Brethren, and observe them that walk so, as you have our
form,] as well in life, as in doctrine. The Corinthians, as his own proper
spiritual children, he besought to be folowers of him self, [and therefore
(says he) have I sent to you Timothee, 1. Cor. 4. v. 17.
who is my dearest Son, and faithful in our Lord; who will put you in mind of
my ways, that are in Christ Jesus, as every where in every Church I teach.]
Again praying them [Be ye followers of 1. Cor. 11. v. 1. 2.
me, as I also of Christ,] praising them, for that in all things, they were
mindful of him, and as he had delivered unto them, they kept his Precepts:]
decideth the controuersei by many reasons. Finally by Custom of Churches is a
special rule.
this [But if any man seem to be contentious, we v. 16.
have noe such custom, nor the Churches of God.] And after his reprehension of
abuses; some things he ordeyneth, and for some things, he remitteth them to
that which he would ordain saying, [For the v. 34. Gal. 1. v. 14.
rest, I will dispose when I come.] To the Galatians he declares, that [he had
been more abundantly an emulator of the Traditions of his Fathers,] not of
frivolous or wicked Traditions, which our Savior condemned in the Scribes and
Pharisees, when they calumniated his Disciples: for S. Paul never followed such
Traditions, as were contrary to Gods commandment,] but of the Traditions
(says he) of Act. 24. v. 14. Chapter 26. v. 5.
my Fathers] agreeable to that he said [according to the most sure sect of our
Religion, which they call heresy, I lived a Pharisee.] Such religious
Traditions of the old Testament, S. Paul observed in Iudaisme. And being
converted to Christ, and made an Apostle, though he learned the Gospel
immediately of Christ him self, and not of the other Apostl^s S. Paul found it
necessary for him self to confer with other Apostles by word of mouth.
yet he conferred with them [lest perhaps, he should run, or had run in
vain,] and kept and Gal. 2. v. 2.
taught the same form and rule of faith as they did, both he and they teaching
much more, and often more effectually by words present, then by writing
absent. And therefore thanking God, and rejoicing for the conversion of the
Thessalonians, he writes thus unto them. [For what thanksgeuing can we 1.
These. 3. v. 9. 10.
render unto God for you in all joy wherewith we rejoice for you before our God?
night and day more abundantly praying, that we may see your face, and may
accomplish those things that want of your faith.] In the mean time desired
and besought them [as they had received, how to walk, and did walk, Chapter 4. v.
1. 2.
so to abund more. For you know what precepts I Precepts written, and not
written, were to be observed.
have given to you by our Lord Jesus.] Yet more expressly he exacteth, the
observation of such Traditions, as he had delivered them, writing again to the
same people thus: [Therfore brethren, stand^, 2. These. 2. v. 15.
and hold the Traditions which you have learned, whether it be by word, or by
our Epistle.] And in reguard that some false brethren, walking inordinatly,
endeavored to seduce others [We d^^ounce unto Chapter 3. v. 6.
you brethren (says he) in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves, from every brother walking inordinatly, and not
according to the Tradition which they have received of us.] The self same in
other terms, no less significant the^ Tradition, he commends to S. Timothy
saying, Tradition is called Depositum.
O Timothy, keep the Depositum, avoiding the profane 1. Tim. 6. v. 20.
novelties of voices, and oppositions of falsely called knowledge. Have the form
of sound words, 2. Tim. 1. v. 13. 14.
which thou have heard of me, in faith, and in the love in Christ Jesus. Keep
the good Depositum, by the And, good depositum.
Holy Ghost which dwells in us. So al Prophets, 2. Pet. 1. v. 21.
al Apostles, innumerable ^ holy men of God, spoke inspired with the Holy
Ghost. ^ Many of them also writ, inspired with the same Holy Ghost. Some
did both. And S. John was some time commanded by Gods word is partly written,
partly not written.
the Holy Ghost saying: [That which thou see, Apoc. 1. v. 11.
write in a Book.] And an other time, [Signe the things which the seven
Thunders have spoken, and Chapter 10. v. 4.
write them not.

Some holy Scriptures are hard: and require authentical Interpretation.
ARTICLE. 4.
TO search the particular causes, why God Though we know not the particular
cause, yet we see some Scriptures are hard.
would have some holy Scriptures to be more obscure, we do not presume, but
leave the same with many other hidden Mysteries to his divine wisdom,
contenting our selves with that general reason, which we find more clearly
revealed. Our B. Savior rendered thanks to his heavenly Mat. 11. v. 25. 26.
Father, for that [he has hid some things from the wise and prudent, and has
revealed them to little ones: yea Father (says he) for so has it well pleased
Not only lerning, but also humility of spirit, is required to understand high
Mysteries, and the true sense of holy Scriptures.
thee]: Hereby instructing us to seek no further why this is done, but to know
in general, that highest points of faith and religion, are hid from proud
spirits which think themselves to be most wise and prudent, and are made
known (so much as is requisite) to the humble which acknowledge their own
insufficiency, and so become such [litle ones] as our Savior Mat. 18. v. 3.
requires, though otherwise they be learned. For so the holy, ancient, and
most learned Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, found many places of holy
Scriptures over hand for them to interpret. And that nothing is more certain,
then that the right, and assured true sense of some places is uncertain, til
the Church which has the spirit of truth declares it.

2 Their hardness is proved two ways: by experience, Experience teaches that
some Scriptures are hard. Examples, of the general
if any will diligently consider the letter as it is written, and by testimony
of holy Scripture it self. For example. The very first words of Genesis: [In
Genesis 1. v. 2.
the beginning God created heaven and earth] contain a doctrine very
necessary for us to know; that heaven and earth, had a beginning when they
were Job. 38. v. 4. 5.
created of nothing, before which time, there was no creature at al, there was
no time at al, a thing above man's natural capacity to conceive: Aristotle
could not conceive it, and so erred, teaching that the world is eternal, as well
in respect of that is past, as of that which is to come. And this consists in
the depth of Heb. 11. v. 3.
the Mystery, revealed by God, recorded by Moses, and believed by faith. Here
is also an higher Mystery The B. Trinity insinuated.
insinuated, of the B. Trinity, three divine persons. The word, Created,
appropriated to God the Father: Beginning, to God the Son: and the Spirit of
God, to the Holy Ghost, alone God. An other difficulty follows by and by in
the letter, how we shall understand, in what subject or substance, was the
Light, How there was light before the fourth day.
which was created the first day, until the fourth day, Chapter 1. v. 3. v. 14.
in which the Sun, and Moon, and all the Stars, were created? If we say
with some interpreters, that the accident remained without subject, the thing
is hard, yet may be true in this thing, and in some other Mystery, is most
true, by the omnipotency of God. If we say with other Expositors, that the
Sun, with the other Planets and Stars, and consequently all the first kinds
of creatures, were created in one moment, or instant, then the text is h^^d to
be understood, which relates the creation of distinct things, as in Other
dificulties in the text.
six distinct days. It is likewise a great question, how there be [waters
above the firmament.] But v. 7.
let us pass over the rest of this first Chapter, wherein are diverse other
difficulties. It is also hard to resolve, Genesis 2. v. 8. Genesis 3. v. 1. 4. 13.
14. 15.
where the terrestrial Paradise is. It will be hard for a Protestant to show by
express Scripture, that the Serpent that tempted and seduced Eve, was the
devil For in all that passage, the devil is not expressly named. The devil has
no corporal members, no breast to go upon, no sensible head to be (...),
neither does the devil eat earth, accoding as the letter sounds. The first
place of the whole Bible, that explaneth this History of the devil, is in the
Book of wisdom, which Protestants deny to be Canonical Scripture: where it
is said [God created man Sap. 2. v. 23. 24. An. mu^di. 3800.
incorruptible, and to the Image of his own likeness he made him, but by the
envy of the diuil, death entered into the world.] Before this Book of wisdom
was written, this most certain truth was known, only by Tradition, that by
the Serpent, is understood the devil, and seeing there is nothing in holy
Scripture but that is of importance: we will not omit an other difficulty in
the next Chapter, what Genesis 4. v. 23.
stripling young man was he whom Lamech slew, together with old Cain.

3 But to our Adversaries, those espcially may seem Al those places, may well
seem hard to Protestants, which seem to affirm that which they deny.
hard places, by which we prove things that they deny: As that Enoch and Elias
are yet living in their bodies, which we prove by Moses saying that [Enoch
Genesis 5. v. 24.
walked with God, and was seen no more, because God took him] affirming of the
other neene first Patriarchs, that they dyed. S. Paul says, [Enoch was Heb.
11. v. 5.
translated that he should not see death: And he was not found, because God
translated him.] Other Scriptures say the like of Elias, that [he ascended by a
4. Reg. 2. v. 11. Mal. 4. v. 5.
whirlewinde in a fyrie Chariot, into heaven.] And [Behold I will, send you
Elias the Prophet, before the day of our Lord come, great and dredful.] Of this
sort, there be innumerable places, which would lead us into long digressions,
and therefore I return to my present purpose.

4 It is not easy to explicate that, which was said Other difficulties of
matters, not now in controversy.
to Noe [Man his days, shall be an hundred and twenty Genesis 6. v. 3. v. 4. 15.
years.] There be diverse difficulties also concerning [the Giantes which were
upon the earth in those days.] And concerning the Arc, and the bigness thereof.
In the Genealogy of the Patriarchs, after the flood. For Moses says,
[Arpharad begat Genesis 11. v. 12. Luc. 3. v. 36. Genesis 26. v. 34. Chapter 28. v. 9.
Chapter 36. v. 2. 3.
Sale.] And S. Luke says: Sale was the Son of Cainan, and [Cainan was of
Arphaxad.] The names of Esaus wives, are different in the 26. Chapter of
Genesis: and in the 28. and 36. only we are certain, that al is true, but how
it is true, we are not certain. Jacobs Prophecy, in most parts of it, is
hard to be understood. It is certain also that [the heart of Pharao, was
indurate] but it is hard to explicate the textes where our Lord said, [I Genesis
49. Exodus 4. v. 21. Chapter 7. v. 3. 13. 22. Chapter 8. v. 19. 32. Item. Chapter 8. v. 15.
32. Chapter 9. v. 7. 35. Chapter 13. v. 15. Ex. 25. v. 8. 9. 10. etc. Leuit. 1. v. 2.
3. etc. 1. Cor. 10. Colos. 1. v. 17. Heb. 8. v. 5. Chapter 10. v. 8. Number. 1. Chapter 2.
Chapter 3. v. 39. Joan. 5. v. 46. Luc.
will indurate his heart.] For it is a blasphemous heresy to say, that God is
the auctor of sin, or makes man to sin. Yet it is clear, that obduration
of heart, is a very great sin. Likewise how the Tabernacle, and things
pertaining thereto, rese^bled the Church of Christ whereof they were figures: How
the external Sacrifices, with other Ceremonies of the old law, (besides other
spiritual profits) did signify and resemble greater Mysteries in the Law of
Grace, as the Apostle testifies that they did; is not easy to be declared in
particular. The numbers of persons, and mansions, described in the Book of
Numeri, are, besides the difficulties, in the literal sense, very mistical and
profound. The Prophesies also concerning Christ, are very hidden to the
judgment of men, especially in the Books of Moses, and yet our Savior says
expressly, that [Moyses had writter of him] And [interpreted from Moses and all the prophets, the things concerning him self]. Otherwise who would have
thought, there had been so much in the Books of Moses, of Christ, as there
is? Yea who would not have thought, that the promise of which Moses speaks,
saying to the people, when they desired a Successor after him [A Prophet of thy
Nation, and of thy brethren, like unto me, will our 24. v. 27. 44. Deuteronomy. 18. v.
15.
Lord thy God raise up to thee, him thou shall heare] had been meant, only of
Iosue, or at furthest, of Iosue, and other like Succ^ssors after him? as
indeed it is the first and immediate literal sense; but it is most principally
spoken, of our B. Redemer and Savior, as both him self insinuates in the
words now recited: and S. Peter most clearly expounds it saying: Act. 3. v.
22.
[Moyses indeed said, that a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you,
of your brethren, as my self, him you shall hear, according to al things
whatsoever he shall speak to you.] These few particular examples, only of the
Books of Moses, omitting many others, may suffice to show the hardness of some
holy Scriptures, which need to be explicated by other places more clear.

5 If we shall speak more generally, then must we It is no small dificultie to
reconcile places, which may some contrary.
say, that no Book in the whole Bible, scarce any Chapters, are without
special difficulties, even the Legal and Historical Books, which are
ordinarily more easy, then the others, yet have some intricate hardness to be
reconciled, in seming contradictions: Namely the Books of Kings, and
Paralipopenon. For the better soluing of doubts occurring the^in, See Annot.
1. Par. 1.
we have observed t^nne general rules, which may help, but not fully suffice
for this purpose. The Sapiential and Prophetical Books, especially some parts
of them do manifestly appear to be hard.


6 The Sapiential Books, as well of the old, as new Testament, require
illuminating wisdom, to all that shall read them: much more to such as shall
expound them. Among the rest, the Canticle of Canticles, and S. Paul's Epistle
to the Romans, seem to be most profound. But the prophetical Books for the
greatest part, especially some Psalms, the Lam^tations Psalm. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc.
67. 118.
of Jeremy, the three first Chapters, and neene last of Ezechiel; almost all the Apocalipse, seem in this point, of deep mistical sense, to excede the
rest: The proof whereof, I remitte to the testimony of all that have made, or
will make, trial by experience.

7 Nevertheless, take also here surer testimonies of Some Scriptures do
expressly witness that some other Scriptures are hard.
the holy Scripture it self. King Salomo^ exhorting al to wisdom (wherein is
comprised the whole frame of al virtuous, and religious perfection) shows
that parables are profitable for the atteining of wisdom, but not without
interpretation, and therefore says: [He that will learn wisdom, shall
understand a Parable; Prou. 1. v. 6. Chapter 10. v. 1.
and interpretation, the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.] for so
he calls al Parables, Pa^ables are dark sayings.
dark sayings, to wit, his whole Book of Proverbs and Parables: which
kinds of speech, is also inserted in many other parts of holy Scripture,
especially by our Savior him self in his Gospel, professing that he spoke so
of purpose, [Because (says Mat. 13. v. 11.
he to his Disciples) to you it is given to know the Mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven (according unto that which Solomon adds in the same place, [The
wise man hearing, will be wiser) but to them Pro. 1. v. 5. 13. Isa. 6. v. 9.
(that were evil disposed) it is not given; therefore in Parables I speak to
them, because, seeing, they see not, and hearing, they hear not, neither do
they vnderstand] Some Parables our Savior expounded, leaving the rest to his
Apostles interpretation, as to men of understanding, to take instruction
thereby, and ^o teach others. And when sometimes they understood him not, he
fatherly rebuked them saying, [Are Math. 15. v. 16.
you also as yet without understanding?] As if he should say. It is less to be
merueled at, if the people understand not. Nay it were to meruel at, if any
man by his own wit, could understand Parables Ordinarily me^, otherwise
prudent and indicious, do not understand Scriptures
or Prophecies. And therefore the Queens treasurer of Ethiopia, being demanded
whether he understood Isaias Prophecy, which he diligently read, answered,
[And how can I, unless some man show Act. 8. v. 31.
me?] This same Prophet Isaias seemed to writ more without an Interpreter.
plainly then most other Prophets did: yet he says, [his Prophecy was to the
people, as a sealed Book.] Isa. 29. v. 11. v. 12.
or else was to them, as [to men that can not read. And the vision of al (says
he) shall be unto you, as the words of a Book sealed, which when they shall
give to him that knows letters, they shall say, read this: and he shall
answer, I can not, for it is sealed. And the book shall be given to one that
knows not letters, and it shall be said to him, read, and he shall answer, I
know not letters.] Scribes and Pharisees could read Isaias and other Prophets,
but to them, the Books were sealed that the sense was not understood by them,
so that they could not find Christ therein. The vulgar people could not read,
much less understand without Interpreters, whereby neither the learned nor
unlearned, reap profit, by the holy Scriptures, until the key of
understanding, which is the holy Spirit of truth, promised and sent to the
Apostles, does open this holy Book.

8 The Apostles are they, who first had Commission The Apostles and their
successors are the proper, and necessary Interpreters of the holy Scriptures.
[to teach al Nations:] And their Successors have still Mat. 28. v. 29. Joan.
14. v. 16. Mat. 28. v. 20.
the same Commission. For our Savior provided, when he promised [to send the
Holy Ghost to be with them for ever.] And also signified, that him self, by
the same Holy Ghost, will be with them [euen al days, to the end of the
world.] In like sort the Prophet Ezechiel, preached and writ, and was not
understood, for his Prohhesie seemed to be as hard as Some prophecies as hard,
as Parables. yea Prophecies are purposly shut up, til the time of performing
them,
Parables: Whereupon he said; [O Lord God, they Ezech. 20. v. 49. Dan. 12. v. 4.
9. 13.
say of me; does not this man speak by Parables?] Daniel testifies that to
him it was said, [shutte up the words and seal the Book, even to the time
appointed; very many shall pass over, and there shall be manifest knowledge:]
So hard are most Prophesies to be understood, til they be sulfilled: Even our
Saviors prediction of his own death, which he signified to his Apostles, that
[al things should be consummate Luc. 18. v. 31. 32. 33. 34.
which were written by the Prophets of the Son of man. For he shall be
delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and scourged, and spitte upon,
and after they have scourged him, they will kill him, and the third day he shall
rise again. Yet they understood none of these things, and this word was hid
from them.] But after his Resurrection, he not only put them in mind what he
had said before: but also then [He opened their understanding, that they Luc.
24. v. 45.
might understand the Scriptures.] Finally, that some other holy Scriptures
besides Prophesies, and Parables, do also contain things hard to be
understood: S. Peter witnessith, that [in the Epistles S. Peter's express
testimony of this matter.
2. Pet. 3. v. 16.
of S. paul are certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
unstable, deprave, as also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own
perdition.] What then do we say, that holy Scriptures are insufficient? No,
God forbid; for they are most s^ffi, cient, and do co^teine, either expressly,
or implicitly, al doctrine necessary to salvation, yea incomparably and by
infinite degrees, more sufficiently, then any other written work or Book
conteyneth, what Art or Science soever. This still we say, and withal, Act. 8.
v. 31.
that it requires interpretation, and sometimes the living voice of an
authentical Interpreter.

True miracles are an assured proof of Faith: or other truth, for which they
are done. ARTICLE. 5.
HItherto we have proved by holy Scriptures, Article 1.
that Faith is necessary to salvation, that it 2.
is the special gift of God, and is grounded 3.
in his word: either written, or delivered without 4.
writing: and that the written word sometimes requires interpretation. Now we
are to speak of an other Miracles are an infallible proof of truth.
ground of faith more extraordinary, which is of miracles. For God Creator and
Lord of al, so disposes of his works, that some succeed according to natural
causes, and efficacy which he gives to creatures; some according to
supernatural grace, which he also gives of more abundant favor. And of this
greater sort, some are by his goodness made ordinary, and so are become more
familiar to his servants, as the benefits of holy Sacrifice and Sacraments,
and other daily spiritual gifts: some are extraordinary, and therefore seem
more marvelous, as miracles, which are works also done above the ordinary
course, and natural power of al creatures, such as never Psalm. 71. v. 18.
were, neither can be wrought, but by God only, giving supernatural force and
efficacy, as pleases his divine goodness. And therefore true miracles, are an
infallible ground of assured truth, of whatsoever is confirmed by them, Because
God, who is truth it self, and can not lie, bears witness by his fact that the
thing is true which is so proved.

2 This manner of proof we find in holy Scriptures, to Miracles are most
necessary, when the external form of Religion is changed: and where it is to
be newly planted.
have be^e practiced by divine ordinance in diverse cases: and in two more
general. First when it pleased God according to his eternal will and decree, to
change the external form of his Law, as he did by Moses; and again by our B.
Savior Christ: He gave his messengers power to work miracles, in proof and
confirmation of their several missions, agreeable to their different functions.
Secondly in case, when any are sent to preach and plant Fairh and Religion in
an^e Country, or among any people, where it was not before, as now in the
East, and West Indies, and other remote parts: God gives power to his
preachers to work miracles, for the better conversion of such Infidels to
Christianity. More particular cases are, when it pleases God also in
Christian Countries, to show his grace of miraculous power, either for proof
of some special truth perteyning to faith, or of other thing in controversy;
or for the greater consolation of his servants, or confusion of adversaries.
But where Religion is once planted, well watered, and has taken firm root,
miracles are more rare, and not necessary for trial of truth in religious
causes, because al doubts of that kind, may be in such places sufficiently
solued, and decided by many other means, and amongst the rest, by diligent
surueying of ancient miracles, if any have been wrought in confirmation of such
points as are now called into question; or at least by that Church which was
approved and established by miracles, that is to say, by Gods own work, which
in it self is al one with his divine word; but to men, his miraculous work may
give more credibilitie, by how much it is to us more manifest.

3 Wherefore to come to our present purpose, concerning the two more general
cases, wherein miracles are most necessary, when the out ward form of Religion
is changed amongst the faithful, and when preachers are sent to convert
Infidels: we shall begin with Moses his mission, who being sent to deliver Gods
Moses was confirmed by a miracle that God did speak to him.
people from Egypt, was first him self confirmed by miracle, before he was
employed in that great Embassage. For when as yet he fed the sheep of Iethro
his Exodus 3. v. 2. 3.
fatherinlaw, [Our Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire, out of the midst
of a bush: and he saw that the bush was on fire and was not burnt:] Whereat he
admiring and going nearer to s^e the bush, Go^ bade him not to approach but
told him his will saying, [I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, v. 6.
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. I have seen the affliction of my
people in Egypt, and I have heard their cry, and I am descended to deliver
them out of the hands of the Egiptians: but come and I will send thee to
Pharao, that thou may bring forth my people the children of Israel out of
Egypt.] And after Gods declaration of his divine name, and of his purpose in
this behalf, as in the sacred text [Moyses answearing Chapter 4. v. 1.
said: they will not believe me, nor hear my voice, but they will say; Our Lord
has not appeared to thee.] Whereupon our Lord showed to him And received power
to work miracles, for proof of this mission.
two other miracles, turning a rod into a serpent: and making leprosy in his
hand, and gave him power to work the same before the people, and if need
required, a third in confirmation that our Lord had appeared to him, and that
he was indeed sent of God. Neither did God admit other excuses of
difficulties or impedimentes, but said: [Goe on, I will be in thy v. 11. 12. v.
16.
mouth, and I will teach thee what thou shall speak. This rod also (whereby
God had already wrought a miracle) take in thy hand, wherewith thou shall do
the signs.] And further our Lord said: [See that v. 21.
thou do all the wonders which I have put in thy hand before Pharao.] This so
strange and mighty power to work miracles, God gave to Moses, in place, as
it were, of Letters of credit, and of a seal to his Commission, as well to the
Children of Israel, as to the king and people of Egypt. Which, when he
performed in signs both great and evident: the Magicians using Chapter 7. v. 11.
22. Chapter 8. v. 7. v. 18. 19.
Magicians doing some prodigious things, could not work true miracles.
al their skill of enchantments by the devils power, wrought some false
prodigious signs, but failing in the third attempt, confessed plainly, and
[said to Pharao, Digitus Dei est hic. This is the finger of God.] And after
ten great plagues miraculously inflicted upon the Egyptians, for their
obduration and cruelty, whereof the last was [the death of all the first borne
Chapter 11. v. 5. 7.
of men and beasts in the Egiptians; the Israelites (being Chapter 12. v. 29. Chapter
14. v. 21. 22. 28. 31. Chapter 15.
still free f^o^ al) then passed by dry ground through the red sea; where King
Pharao and al his army following them, were drowned. Whereupon the people of
Israel more firmly [beleued our Lord and Moses his servant.] And so he and
they sang a solemn Canticle of praise and thankesgeuing to our Lord. And this
was the first part of Moses his Commission, wherein miracles were necessarily
required, and as effectually performed.

4. The other part of this great Commission, was to His chief office being to
receive and deliver Gods written Law, the same was also confirmed by miracles.
be the [Mediator between God and his people] in Deuteronomy. 5. v. 5.
that which God then intended to do unto them: which was to give them a
written Law. And this was so great an office, and withal so new and strange,
that it no less required confirmation by miracles, but rather more then the
former of their delivery from Egypt. For here they received Gods
Commandementes written in two Tables, with a multitude of other Precepts*
Ceremonial, and Judicial, the one sort perteyning to the explication and
particular instruction, how to put in practice those moral Precepts of the
first Tabl^, co^teyning their duties toward God: the other, for better
performing the precepts of the second Table, concerning their duties each one
toward others. And therefore to this purpose, that more respect might be in
the people toward God the geuer of this Law, and toward Moses by who^ Exo.
19. v. 5. 6. 8.
they received it, and that the people might be stirred up to mature
consideration, who were to give their consent and promise to keep the same Law,
as God in this mutual Covenant, promised his protection, assistance, and
re^uneration: extraordinary testimony was requisite of Gods part, which he
exhibited Exo. 19. v. 15. 16.
by great and unwonted miracles. For after their prescribed preparation, when ^
the third day was come, and the morning appeared, behold thunders began to be
heard, and lightninges to flash, and a very thick cloud to cover the mount,
and the noise of the trumpet sounded excedingly: and the people that was in the
camp feared. And all the mount Sinai smoked, for our Lord was descended upon it
in fire, and the smoke arose from it as out of a furnance, and all the mount was
terrible. And the sound of the Trumpet grew louder by little and little; and was
drawn out a length.] In this marvelous manner, our Lord beginning to deliver
Exo. 20. v. 1. etc. v. 18. 19.
his Law, [the people strooken with fear, said to Moses; Speak thou to us,
and we will hear. Let not our Lord speak to us; why shall we dye, and this
exceeding great fire devour us? For if we hear the voice of the Lord our God
any more, we shall dye. Approach thou rather and hear al things that Deuteronomy. 5.
v. 25.
the Lord our God shall say to thee, and thou shall speak to us, and we hearing
will do them.

5 When also Moses had received the whole Law, It was yet more confirmed by
other miracles, in punishing the transgressors.
and declared the same to the people, it was yet watered (as a new graffed
plant) with more miracles, as occasion required in confirmation thereof, and
namely in punishment of transgressors. For [Nadab and Abiu, I euit. 10. v. 1. 2.
Preistes, the Sons of Aaron, offering strange fire, which was not
commanded,] other [fyre coming forth from our Lord devoured the^, and they
died.] Again, N^. 16. v. 1. etc.
Core, Dathan, and Abiron, with two hundred fifty accomplices, rising against
Moses and Aaron* prete^ding that [al the people being holie] they should not
be lift up above the rest [Moyses said to them. In the morning our Lord will
make it known who perteine v. 5.
to him, and the holy he will join to him self.] And to the people (after
other admonition) he said: [In this (...) shall know that our Lord has sent me
v. 28.
to do a^ things that you see, and that I have not forged them of mine own
mind. If they dye the accustomed 29.
death of men, and if the plague wherewith others also are wont to be visited,
do visit them, our Lord did not send me: But if our Lord do a new 30.
thing, that the earth opening her mouth, swalow them down, and al things
that perteine to them, and they descend quick into hell: you shall know that 31.
they have blasphemed our Lord. Immediately therefore as he ceased to speak, the
earth brake in sunder under their feet, and opening her mouth, devoured them,
with their Tabernacles and al their substance: and they went down into hell
quick, covered with 32.
the ground, and perished out of the midst of the 33.
multitude.] Neither only the principal rebels thus suddenly perished: But [a
fire also coming forth from v. 35.
our Lord, slew the two hundred fifty men that offered the I^cense.] Nay yet
more transgressing, were likewise punished, and the same also miraculously. For
[al the multitude murmured the day following against v. 41.
Moses and Aaron saying: you have killed the people of our Lord. And when
there rose a sedition, v. 42.
and the tumult grew further, Moses and Aaron fleeing to the Tabernacle of the
Covenant, our Lord said to them: depart from the midst of this v. 45. v. 47.
49.
multitude, even now will I destroy them. And the burning fire did wast the
multitude: and there were strooken fonrtene thousand and seven hundred men,
beside them that had perished in the sedition of Core.] Whereto we may add a
more comfortable, but no Number. 17. v. 8.
less potent miracle, in Aarons Rod, flourishing and bringing forth fruit.

6. Many other miracles were also done in the same Other miracles in bestowing
benefits.
time of Moses, both for the peoples confirmation in faith, and fear of God;
and for their particular benefits. As [when bitter waters were made sweet;
Exo. 15. v. 25. Chapter 17. v 5. Nu. 20. v. 11.
and waters drawn out of rock^s. The continual provision of Manna for their
sustenance, all the forty years in the desert. Flesh also was given them to
Exo. 16. v. 15. et v. 12. Nu. 11. v. 18. Exo. 17. v. 11. Nu. 23. v. 8. 11.
Iosue. 3. v. 16. 17.
their fill. When Moses praying held up his hands, the people of Israel
prevailed in batel, but if he let them down a little, then A^elec (their
enemy) overcame. The evil purpose of Balac and Balam to have cursed them, was
turned into blessing.]

7. Again a new great miracle was wrought by Iosue Iosue his au^thoritie and
actions were also confirmed by miracles.
in the River of Jordan [the upper part standing and swelling up like to a
mountain, the lower part descending in to the sea, that the Preistes, with the
Arc, stood upon the dry ground in the midst of Jordan, whiles all the
people passed over through the dry chanel.] Likewise the victories atchiued by
Iosue Ios. 12. v. 24.
against many Kings; and conquest of the promised land, were al full of
miracles.

8 Some also in the times of the Judges, and of the Iudi^. 6. v. 21. 36. 39.
Diverse miracles were likewise wrought, in the times of the Judges, and Kings.
Kings, which are recorded in those Histories: Especially where more need
required, in the ten Tribes called the Kingdom of Israel; where they made a
notorious wicked schism, and many fell into Idolatry and infidelity. Eor
whose reduction to true faith and unity in Religion, God sent them Prophets,
which both by preaching and miracles, reclamed and confirmed many. Elias the
zealous Prophet among 3. Reg. 18. v. 23.
other his heroical Acts, him self alone challenged four hundred and fifty
Prophets of Baal, to try by Elias proved by a miracle that our Lord is the
only true God.
miracle, who is true God, [they laying an ox upon wood for Sacrifice without
fire, and he an other, he bade them invoke the names of their gods, and v.
24.
I will invoke (says he) the name of my Lord, and the God that shall hear by
fire, let the same be God.] which thing they attempting and not performing, [he
dressed his ox, and (that the work of God might be more conspicuous) powered
much water in a gutter which he made rownd about the Altar, and v. 36.
prayed saying: Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, show this day that
thou art the God of Israel, and I thy servant, and that according to thy
commandment I have done al these things. Hear me v. 37. 38.
Lord, hear me, that this people may learn, that thou art our Lord God, and
thou have converted their heart. And the fire of our Lordfel, and devoured the
holocaust, and the wood, and the stones, licking also the dust, and the water
that was in the water gutter. Which when all the people had seen, they fell on
39.
their face and said: Our Lord he is God, our Lord God permitted the devil to
try Jobs patience; but not to delude in trial of truth.
he is God.] Why could not the devil that procured Job. 1. v. 3. 16.
fire to consume Jobs seven thousand sheep, bring fire also to save the
credit of his own prophets, but that God permitted the one for manifestation
of Jobs patience, and not the other when it should have hindered the
manifestation of truth, and had been a witness of falsehood, Other miracles done
by this Many miracles wrought by Elias, Eliseus, and others.
Prophet: his hindering of rain three years, then 3. Reg 17. v. 1. Chapter 18. v.
41. Chapter 17. v. 6. 14. 19. Chapter 19. v. 8. 4. Reg. 1. v. 10. Chapter 2. ^ v. 8. v. 11.
Chapter 2. v. 14. etc. Dan. 3. v. 17. 23. 24. 91. Heb. 1. 2. and 10.
procuring it; His sustenance brought unto him by ravens; His multiplying of a
poor widows meal, and oil; The raising of her son from death; His fasting
from al meat and drink, forty days and nights together; His procuring
fire, which burnt two captains, and their hundred men; His dividing of the
river of Jordan, and passing through it in the dry chanel; And his own taking
away in a fyrie choriot. And many other miracles done by Elizeus, and diverse
other Prophets and holy men. Also the childrens delivery from fire in
Babylon; do al show the assured truth of those things for which they were
wrought. And these may suffice touching the old Testament, and the Law which
was given by Moses. It rests now to declare the same necessiti and use of
miracles in the Law of Grace.

9 How much Christ our Savior, the very Son Our Savior Christ wrought
innumerable
of God, excels Moses, and al other Prophets of God; S. Paul teaches
largely in his Epistle to the miracles, to prove his mission. And most
especially urged them amongst other proofs.
Hebrews, as also many other holy Scriptures. Yet [did not Christ (the
creator of the world) glorify Heb. 5. v. 5.
him self (as the same Apostle witnessith) but his Father that spoke to him.]
For so likewise him self had said in his Gospel, [If I do glorify my self, my
Joan. 8. v. 54.
glory is nothing. It is my Father that glorifieth me] Therefore as Moses
coming to deliver the Israelites from the servitude of Egypt, and to give them
a written Law, proved his Commission by sundry miracles: Act. 5. v. 31. 32.
Io. 8. v. 14. 18.
so Christ our Lord coming to deliver all that will obey him, from seruicude of
sin, and to give us his Law of Grace, besides his own testimony (which is
also most true) uses other proofs, as the testimony of Joan. 5. v. 33.
his Father; of S. John Baptist; of Moses and all the See Mat. 3. v. 17. Chapter
11. v. 21. Chapter 17. v. 5. Chapter 21. v. 26. Mar. 1. v. 7. Chapter 11. v. 31. Luc. 4. v.
18. Chapter 20. v. 5. Joan. 1. v. 32. Chapter 12. v. 28.
Prophets. But amongst al, most urges the incredulous Luc. 24. v. 27.
with his miracles. [I have a greater testimony (says he) then John. For the
works which the Joan. 5. v. 36. v. 46. 47.
Father has given me to perfect; the very works them selves which I do,
give testimony of me, that the Father has sent me.] Again he inculcateth the
same at other times saying: [I speak to you, and Io. 10. v. 25. 37. 38. Io.
14. v. 11.
you believe not: the works that I do in the name of my Father, they give
testimony of me. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not: But if I
do, and if you will not believe me, believe the works, that you may know and
believe, that the Father is in me, and (...) the Father.] Thus does our Savior
often signify, that he wrought his miracles principally for this cause, that
they might believe in him. Which S. Paul much urges to the Jews, that [they
Heb. 2. v. 4.
should not escape severe punishment, if they neglected so great salvation,
declared, not by Angels (as was the old Law) but by our Lord the only Son of
God, God withal restifying by signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and
distributious of the Holy Ghost, according to his will,] And particularly By
miracles he also proved his doctrine; name ly his power to forgive sin.
that he came to deliver men from sin, he shows in these express words
[that you may know that Mat. 9. v. 6. Mar. 2. v. 10.
the Son of man, has power in earth to forgive sins (then he said to the
sick of the palsy) arise, take up thy bed, and go into thy house.] And after
diverse other miracles recited, the Evangelist thus conioyneth them with his
preaching [He went about Mar. 2. v. 35.
all the Cities and Towns, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the
Gospel of the kingdom, and curing every disease, and enerie infirmity.] Also
to satisfy S. Iohnes Disciples (for S. John him self doubted not) our Savior
said to them, Mat. 11. v. 4. 5. Luc. 7. v. 22. 23.
[Goe and report to John what you have heard and seen; the blind see; the lame
walk; the lepers are made clean; the deaf hear; the dead rise again: to
the poor the Gospel is preached.] Against calu^niators he avouches [If I in
the Spirit (or finger) Mat. 12. v. 28. Luc. 11. v. 20.
of God, do cast out devils, then surely is the Kingdom of God come upon
you.] He shows more over, that by the special providence of God [a certain
man was borne blind; saying [that it was neither Joan. 9. v. 3.
for his sin, nor his parents sin, but that the works of God may be
manifested in him.] The self same he teaches of Lazarus his sickness and death;
[this sickness is not to death, but for the glory of Joan. 11. v. 4. 15.
God; that the Son of God may be glorified by it.] Lastly the very night of
his Passion, speaking to his eleven Apostles of the Jews obstinacy, he says:
[If I had not done among them works that Joan. 15. v. 24.
none other man has done; they should not have sin: but now both they have
seen (my works) and they do hate both me, and my Father.] After his
Resurrection, S. John testifies generally to the whole world, to what end
these signs are written, [that Joan. 20. v. 31.
you may believe (says he) that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing you may have life Neither Luther, nor Calvin, changing the form of
Religion: have wrought any miracles.
in his name.] And thus much touching the necessity of miracles, when the
outward form of Religion is changed, as it first was by Moses, and again by
our B. Savior Christ.

10 Now concerning the second general case wherein miracles are required; when
Christian Religion Miracles are likewise necessary where Christian faith is
first preached.
is propagated, by preaching to such people as have not received it: holy
Scriptures do testify, that God ever gives this power to his preachers, when
he sends them ^or this purpose, to prove thereby their mission, and that their
hearts may believe their doctrine. So our B. Savior sending his Apostles to
preach his Gospel in other places where him self had not yet been, [gaue them
power over unclean spirits, Mat. 10. v. 1. 7. 8. Mar. 3. v. 15. Chapter 6. v. 7.
13. Luc. 9. v. 1. 2. Luc. 10. v. 1. 9. 17. Joan. 12. v. 28.
that they should cast them out, and should cure al manner of disease, and al
manner of infirmity. Preach (says he,) that the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out devils.] After this
[our Lord designed also other s^auentie two Disciples, and he sent them two and
two before his face, into every City and place, whether him self would come.
And he said unto them, cure the sick, etc. And they returned with joy saying.
Lord, the devils also are subject unto us in thy name.] When our Lord also
[praied that his Fathers name might be glorified; a voice came from heaven;
Both I have glorified it, and again I will glorify it: Our Lord said to the
people that heard it; This v. 30. 32. 33.
voice came not for me but for your sake;] Signifiing, that after he should be
exalted by death on the Cross, this miraculous voice should have more effect,
because Gods name should then be more glorified, by the conversion of al
Nations. And therefore after his Resurrection, our Lord sent his Apostles [not
only to the Jews as before,] but [to preach Mat. 10. v. 5. 6.
penante, and remission of sins unto al Nations; beginning in Jerusalem, and
so into al Iewrie, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth. And they
Luc. 24. v. 47. Mar. 16. v. 20.
(after his Ascension, and coming of the holy Ghost) going forth, preached
every where; our Lord working withal, and confirming the word, with signs
folowing] says S. Mark.

11 Yet first of al our Lord by visible miracles, confirmed First the Apostles
with other faithful, were strengthened by the Holy Ghost coming upon the^ in
visible signs.
as well his Apostles, as the whole multitude Act. 1. v. 14. 15. Luc. 24. v. 49.
Act. 1. v. 8. Act. 2. v. 12.
of persons perseuering with one mind in prayer (almost an hundred and twenty)
according as he had promised, and they now expected [with power from high] the
virtue of the holy Ghost. For [when the days of Pentecost were accomplished,
they were al together in one place; and sodanly there was made a sound from
heaven, as of a vehement wind coming, and it filled the whole house where they
were sitting. And there appeared to them parted tongues, as it v. 3. 4.
were of fire, and it sat on every one of them, and they were al replenished
with the Holy Ghost, and they began to speak with diverse tongues, according
as the Holy Ghost gave them to speak, Magnalia v. 11.
Dei, the great works of God.] Here the Church of Christ, then so small a flock
of an hundred and twenty persons, as well by this visible miracle, as by S.
Peter's v. 14.
sermon, but principally by the invisible power of the Holy Ghost, instantly
so increased, that [there v. 41.
were added that day, about three thousand souls.] Thus [after the grane of
wheat] our Lord Jesus Christ Joan. 12. v. 24. Mat. 13. v. 32. Act. 2. v. 43.
[died] on the Cross; [The grane of mustard seede] his Kingdom the Church,
rose into a tree, our Lord confirming the word (as is said) with signs
following. For so S. Luke testifies, not only in general, that [manie wonders
and signs were done by the Apostles in Jerusalem,] but also recites many in
particular, almost in every Chapter throughout his whole Book of the Acts of
the Apostles, which is a breife History of the beginning of the Christian
Church.

12 But omitting here other points, we shall as Sundry miracles are recorded,
by which many were converted to Christ.
briefly as may be, only touch the miracles, as the particular motives, by
which multitudes believed in Christ. [Peter and John went up into the Temple
Act. 3. v. 1.
at the Ninth hour of prayer, and a certain man that was Lame from his mothers
womb was carried and laid at the gate of the Temple to ask alms. S. Peter in
stead of giving money which he had not, bade him [In the name of Jesus Christ
of Nazareth, arise and v. 6. 7. 8.
walk; And taking his right hand, he lifted him up, and forthwith his feet
and soles were made strong; And springing, he stood and walked, and went in
with them into the Temple, walking and leaping and praising God.] S. Peter also
preached, that this 12. Chapter 4. v. 4. v. 5. ad 21. 23. 29. 30. 31.
was done in the name of Christ. Many believed, and the number of beleuers, was
made five thousand.]

13 The high Priest, with the Ancients and Scribes, All the Apostles with
others, prayed for miracles, and obtained their request.
threatening the Apostles: and they with other faithful, [praying for constant
fortitude, and that God would extend his hand to cures, and signs, and
wonders, to be done by the name of his holy Son Jesus; The place was moved
whe^in they were gathered; and they were al replenished with the Holy Ghost.
And they spoke the word of God with confidence.] In which good progress,
whiles the Church did grow in number, and virtue, vice also crept in, as chafe
grows with good corn. A coople pretending perfection [Ananias with Saphira
his wife, defrauded the Chapter 5. v. 1. 2. 3. 5. 10. v. 12. 14.
community, and for their lying to the Holy Ghost, were stricken dead with S.
Peter's words of reprehensio^. And here again, the sacred Historiographer
says: [By the hands of the Apostles, were many signs and wonders done among
the people] adding also the effect [And the multitude of men and women that
believed in our Lord, was more increased.

14 In particular, he especially recites S. Peter's In particular S. Luke
recites many miracles wrought by S. Peter.
miracles, togetherwith the great faith of the people, who for their wonderful
estimation of his emine^t power, and virtue, did bring forth the sick into the
streets, and laid them in beds and couches, that when Peter v. 15.
came, his shadow at the least, might ouershadow any of them, and they al might
be delivered from their infirmities. And there ran together unto Jerusalem*
v. 16.
the multitude also of the Cities adjoining, bringing sick persons, and such
as were vexed of unclean spirits; who were al cured.] The enemies still 17. 18.
19. 20. 21.
raging, put the Apostles in the common prison [But an Angel of our Lord by
night, opening the gates of the prison, and leading them forth said: Go, and
standing speak in the Temple to the people, all the words of this life, who
having heard this, early in the morning, entered into the Temple and taught, and
aftermanie threatninges, that they should preach no more in the (...) Jesus:
Peter answearing and v. 28. 29.
the Apostles, said; God must be obeyed rather then men.

15 O^itting here the History of the institution of Act. 6. 7. 8.
seven Deacons, the Martyrdom of S. Stephen; the preaching also of S. Philip,
with singular good fruit, with special mention of sundry miracles: we come to
the miraculous conversion of Saul afterward Act. 9. v. 1.
In the mean time S. Paul was miraculously conuer^ed.
called Paul, and made an extraordinary Apostle, who as yet breathing forth
threatninges, and slaughter, against the Disciples of our Lord, as he drawing
to Damascus, ^ suddenly a light from heaven shined ^ou^d 3. 4. 5.
about him, and falling on the ground, he heard a voice saying to him: Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? who said. Who art thou Lord? And he; I am Jesus
whom thou do persecute. It is hard for thee to kick against the prick.] This
was S. Paul's miraculous conversion as you know. The fruit whereof, al
Christendom reapeth, and rejoices therein. Of miracles also wrought by him, we
shall se more by and by.

16 For thus much being said by the way of S. Many other miracles wrought by
S. Peter.
Paul's conversion; the sacred History reports more of S. Peter, who as yet
conuersing among the Jews, converting and confirming all that he could: Cb. 9.
so [came to the Saints (that is to the faithful) that v. 32. 33.
dwelled at Lidda; and he found there a certain man named Aeneas lying in his
bed, from eight years before, who had the palsy. And Peter said unto him,
Aeneas, our Lord Jesus Christ heal thee; arise and 34. 35.
make thy bed. And incontine^t he arose. And all that dwelt at Lidda and Sarona
saw him, and converted to our Lord.] Again in Ioppe, a certain woman named
Tabitha, full of good works and alms deeds v. 40.
died. And Peter being requested by the Disciples, came thither, and falling on
his knees prayed; and turning to the body he said; Tabitha arise. And she
opened her eyes, and seeing Peter, she sat up, and 41.
giving her his hand, he lifted her up. And when he had called the Saints,
and the widows, presented her alive; and it was made known throughout al 42.
Ioppe: and many believed in our Lord.

17 The propagation of the Church to the Gentiles, Conversion of Gentiles began
by miraculous visions.
began also by miraculous visions, and S. Peter's Ministry. For Cornelius a
Gentile, was warned Chapter 10. v. 1. etc.
in a vision by an Angel, to send into Ioppe for S. Peter; and S. Peter by
warrant of an other comfortable vision, repairing to him, and preaching Christ
unto v. 44. 45.
him, and other Gentiles, [as he was yet speaking, the Holy Ghost fell upon all that heard the word; and the faithful of the Jews that accompanied Peter, were
astonished, for that the grace of the Holy Ghost, 46.
was powered out upon the Gentiles also. For they heard them speaking with
tongues, and magnifying God] Whereupon they were al baptized. And by relating
Chapter 11. v. 5.
these two visions, with the effect thereof, by coming of the Holy Ghost upon
these Gentiles, as upon the Jews in the beginning; S. Peter gave full
satisfaction v. 15. v 3. v. 18.
to those Christian Jews in Jerusalem, which before disliked his dealing with
the Gentiles; [and they glorified God saying, God then to the Gentiles also has
given repentance unto life.

18 An other miracle perteyning to S. Peter, but not Chapter 12.
wrought by him, but upon him, by the prayers of the Church, for the common
good, is this. For when King Herod had killed S. James the greater; and
[apprehended and imprisoned S. Peter (within the feast of v. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Pasch) meaning after the feast to bring him forth to S. Peter miraculously
delivered out of prison.
the people: Prayer was made of the Church, without intermission unto God for
him. And the same night he should have been brought forth, Peter sleping
between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the kepers before the doare
keeping the prison, an Angel of our Lord (miraculously) delivered 7. 11. 19. 22.
23.
him out of Herodes hand, and from all the expectation of the people of the
Jews.] But Herod King Herod strooken by an Angel, died miserably.
not long after in Caesarea, puffed up with such pride that he refused not to
be honored as god, [was forthwith strooken by Gods Angel, and being consumed of
worms, gave up the Ghost.] And this miracle also, had great effect.

19 For after this persecuters death, S. Luke adds, 24.
that [the word of our Lord increased and multiplied] still inserting among
other things of his History, more miracles with their effects especially
wrought by S. Paul, who with Barnabas, being Many miracles wrought by S. Paul,
in the conue^sion of entiles.
Chapter 13.
[sent of the Holy Ghost, sailed into Cipres. And when they had walked
throughout the whole Island v. 4.
as far as Paphos, they found a Magician, a 6.
false Prophet, a Jew, with the Proconsul Sergius Paulus, a wise man. This
Proconsul, desiring to hear 7.
the word of God, and the Magician seking to auert 8.
him from the faith: S. Paul with a sharp reprehension, denou^ced unto him that
he should be blind, not 9.
seeing the Sun until a time. And forthwith there 11.
fell dimnes and darkness upon him, and going about, he sought some body that
would give him his hand. Then the Proconsul, when he had seen what was 12.
done, believed, merueling at the doctrine of our Lord. At Lystra was [a man
impotent of his feet, lame Chapter 14. v. 7. 8. 9.
from his mothers womb, that never had walked; upon whom S. Paul loking, and
seeing that he had faith to be saved (or healed) he said with a loud voice,
stand up right on thy feet; And he leaped and walked. Whereupon the heathen
people, and the priest 10
of Jupiter, would needs have offered sacrifice to Paul, and Barnabas, as to
Gods.] Contrariwise some obsti^ate 11.
[Iewes stoned S. Paul almost to death:] But 12.
the Disciples being ^dified by the miracle, rescued 18. 19. Chapter 15. v. 12.
him from that fury. After this at Jerusalem, the multitude Relation of Gods
works, does much edify good people.
gladly heard Barnabas and Paul, telling what great signs and wonders God had
done among the Gentiles by them,

20 By a vision showed to S. Paul, they were willed Chapter 16. v. 9.
to go into Macedonia, which they did, [being assured that God had called
them, to euangelize unto that people.] Amongst other fruit, S. Paul expelled 10.
a pythonical spirit out of a young woman, not 17.
suffering her to give testimony, that [they were the 18.
servants of the high God, which preach the way 19.
of saluatiou] whereof rose a tumult and persecution, S. [Paul and Silas were
beaten with rods, cast into 22. 23. 24.
prison, and put into the stocks; who praying, and praising God at midnight,
suddenly there was made an earthquake, so that the fundation of the prison 26.
was shaken, and forthwith all the doares of the prison were opened, and the
bands of al were loosed,] the Gailor was converted, and [baprized, with all his
33. 35. 39.
house incontinent.] the Magistrate sending sergeantes to deliver them, they
expostulated the contumelious injury done to them, and did not part til [the
Magistrates came and besought them, and brought them forth of the City.] In
Athens also S. Paul's preaching of Christ, had wonderful effect in the
co^uersio^ of renowned S. Dionise, and other most learned Philosophers, who at
first scornfully called him, [a Word s^wer, and preacher of new gods.] By
warrant Temporal interest is the most common cause of persecution.
of an other vision, S. Paul staieth at Corinth, a Chapter 17. v. 16. 17. 18. 19.
33.
year and six months, teaching among them the word of God. At Ephesus, by
S. Paul's imposition of hands upon twelve men newly baptized, the Holy Ghost
came upon them, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied. [There were also
brought Confirmation of the Baptized by imposition of the Apostles hands
Chapter 18. v. 9. 11. Chapter 19. v. 6. 7. 12. Chapter 20. v. 9. v. 10.
from (S. Paul) his body, napkins or handcarchefes upon the sick, and the
diseases departed from them, and the wicked spirits went out.] Whiles he
preached long in the night, a young man oppressed with heavy sleep, sitting in
a window, fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead; to whom, when
Paul was gone down, he lay upon him, and embracing him he said: Be not
troubled, for his soul is in him. And (after the sermon was ended) they
brought him v. 12.
alive, and were not a little comforted.

21 It may seem to some perhaps, that thus many, Gods singular providence in
ordening that S. Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, should preach in Rome the
head City of the Gentiles.
and so excellent miracles already recited, may abundantly suffice, to show,
both a necessity in some cases, and special fruit of these extraordinary
works of God: yet may we not for all that slightly pass over Gods singular
providence of his extraordinary Apostle (so particularly ordained for the
Gentiles) his going to Rome the head City of the Gentiles. In relating of
which mistical History, the Evangelist S. Luke exactly records both diverse
Divine visions, and other great miracles, with their admirable effects. For
not only S. Paul him self being at Ephesus, uttered this ordinance of God by
way of Prophecy saying: [after I shall have been at Jerusalem, I Chapter 19. v. 21.
Chapter 21. v. 10. 11.
S. Paul him self saw it by the spirit of prophecy
must see Rome also] But likewise being at Cesarea, [a Prophet coming from
Iewrie named Agabus, took Paul's girdle, and binding his own hands and
feet, he said: Thus says the Holy Ghost; The man whose An other Prophet
foretold the same.
girdle this is, so shall the Jews bind in Jerusalem; and shall deliver him into
the hands of the Gentiles] to wit, into the hands of the Romans, to whom
Jerusalem was then subject; Whereunto did meruelously v. 12. 13. 14. 17.
cooperate his own settled purpose, to go nevertheless to Jerusalem, his
friends most vehemently dissuading him from it. And being come to Jerusalem,
his enemies there [laying hands upon him, v. 30. 31.
drew him forth of the Temple. But as they sought to kill him, it was told the
Tribune of the band, that al Jerusalem is in confusion. Who forthwith, taking
32. 33. 34.
soldiers and Centurions, ran down to them; whereupon the Jews ceased from
striking him.] And the Tribune to appeaze them, apprehended him, and commanded
him to be bond with two chains, and to be led into the Castle, whither the
multitude of the people followed crying, away with him.] Yet coming 36.
Chapter 22. v. 1. etc.
to the stares, [he was permitted to speak.] And so he told them particularly
of his conversion. v. 19.
And lastly of [a voice in a vision, saying unto him; Make have and depart
quikly out of Jerusalem;] Again saying; [Goe, for into the Gentiles a far,
22. 23.
will I se^d thee.] Then they cried again: [Away with such an one from the
earth, for it is not meet he should live. In the open court, before Jews and
Chapter 23. v. 7
Gentiles, there arose such dissension between the Pharisees and Saducees, the
whole multitude being divided, that the Tribune fearing lest Paul should be
torn 10.
in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers, to take him out of the midst of
them, and to bring him again into the castle,] where the night following, our
11.
Lord standing by him said; [Be constant, for as thou have testified of me in
Jerusalem, so must thou testify God confirmed the same by an other vision.
12.
at Rome also. The next day, more then forty Jews 13.
conspiring, vowed, that they would neither eat nor drink, til they killed
Paul;] But God defeated 16.
their wicked purpose; For this conspiracy was discovered, 23.
and the Tribune sent away Paul at the third hour of the night, with a strong
convey toward 24.
Caesarea.

22 Whereupon the Jews (still persisting in their Chapter 24. v. 5.
malice) went thither, and afresh accused him before Felix the President, but
could not convince him of any crime. Neuerth less the President temporising
22.
differred them, and kept him prisoner two years, 27.
and so left him to a new President, Portius Festus; Before whom they accused
him again; but proving nothing, [Festus willing to pleasure the Jews, said
Chapter 25. v. 7. 8. 9. v 10.
to Paul; Will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things
before me? And Paul said, At Caesar's Judgment seat do I stand, where I ought
to be Judged. The Jews I have not hurt, as thou very well know. For if I
have hurt them, or done any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die; But
11.
if none of these things be, whereof these accuse me, noe man can give me to
them, I appeal to Caesar. S. Paul compelled by the Jews importunity against
him, appealed to Caesar.
Then Festus having conferred with the Counsel, answered; Have thou appealed
to Caesar? ^o Caesar shall 23. Chapter 26. v. 2. 32.
thou go.] Yet being brought before King Agrippa* he so fully satisfied them
al, that this King said to the President [this man might be released, if he had
not appealed to Caesar.] Being therefore sent Chapter 27. v. 1. 2. 6. 9. 14.
S. Pau^ and others with him, miraculously delivered in long and dangerous
tempests on the se^.
toward Rome, arriving at diverse places, [and sailing slowly, winter also
growing on] many great difficulties and dangers happened in this Journey:
Sometime tempestious winds drive them from their purpose. And [as the wind
carried them, so were they 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
mightily tossed, in peril of Islands and quick sands, forced to cast forth
their loading, even the taklinges of the ship. And neither Sun nor stars
appearing for many days, and no small storm being toward: al hope was taken
away of our saving (says S. Luke) In this distress [S. Paul (notwithstanding
v. 10. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25.
they had not followed his former counsel) exhorted al to be of good cheer, for
there shall be no loss (said he) of any soul among you, but of the ship. For
an Angel of the God whose I am, and whom An other vision.
I serve, stood by me this night saying: fear not Paul, thou must appear
before Caesar, and behold, God has given thee all that sail with thee. For the
which cause be of good cheer ye men; For I believe God that it shall so be as it
has been said to me. And we must come to a certain Island.] Again assuring
26. v. 34. 37. 40. 41.
them [that there shall not an hair of the head perish of any of you.] Then
sailing toward a shore, [falling into a place between two seas, they graueled
More dangers, but still God protecteth the for S. Paul's sake.
the ship; the forepart sticking fast, the hinder part was broken, by the
violence of the sea.] The soldiers gave counsel to kill the prisoners, lest
any 43.
swimming out, might run away. But [the Captain willing to save Paul,
forbade it to be done. And he commanded them that could swim, to cast out
them selves first, and escape, and go forth to land. And the rest, some they
carried on bordes, and 44.
some upon those things that were of the broken ship. And so it came to pass,
that all the souls escaped to land, being in all, two hundred, seauentie six.]
And the Island was called Mitilene, otherwise Melita, or Malta, where yet
happened more miracles,

23 For [whiles they made a fire, S. Paul laying some Other miracles wrought by
S. Paul ^^ Malta.
Chapter 28. v. 3.
sticks on the fire, a Viper issuing out of the heat, ^^^aded his hand, and
he shaking of the beast, into the fire, suffered no harm;] Whereupon the
people first supposed him to be a murderer; but expecting a while and seeing no
harm, changed in conceit, said he was a God. It chanced also, that a noble v.
6. v. 8.
man lay there vexed with fevers, and the bloody flixe; unto whom Paul
entered; and when he had prayed and imposed hands on him, he healed him: which
9. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
being done, al in the Island also that had infirmities, came, and were cured.
Then after three months abode, winter being ended, taking ship again, they
came by Syracusa, Rhegium, and Puteoli (near to Naples in Italy,) where
finding Christians, and staying with them seven days, the report of their
ariual running before them to Rome, other Christians came thence to meet them,
unto Apii forum, and to the place called the three Tauerns. And finally [coming
to Rome, Paul was permitted to remain to S. Paul finding Christians in Rome,
preached to them, and to others both Jews and Gentiles.
16.
him self with a soldier that kept him] which opportunity so provided of God,
he fructfully using, declared to the Jews the cause of his coming. And on a
day by them appointed, to hear his judgment, v. 22. 23.
he preached to them the Kingdom of God, by Jesus Christ, according to the Law
of Moses, and prediction of the Prophets, from morning until evening.] And
certain believed, certain believed not. 28.
But to the Gentiles being willing to hear, he preached full two years in his
hired lodging, to all that 30. 31.
came; teaching the things that concern our Lord Jesus Christ with all
confidence without prohibition.

24 This special note of S. Paul coming to Rome, Being most certain that
Romans received the true Christian Religion, it ca^ not be showed that ever
they lost it.
together with his, and S. Peter's, and others miracles, I could not omit in
this place; because here it is Item. Romans 1. v. 8.
evident by express holy Scripture (besides other places, and diverse other
assured proofs) that the Romans at first received and professed the true
sincere Christian faith and Religion, which can never be showed that they lost,
or changed at any time since. And this narration of S. Luke, may also serve,
as a strong bulwork of defense, against impugners of other true miracles done
afterward, as well by the same two chief Apostles, who lived and labored in
the same harvest, about fourtene years more after S. Paul's coming to Rome;
wherewith this History ceaceth, as by all the other Apostles then dispersed, and
working in all parts of the earth, though their particular acts be not written
in the holy Scriptures; and by all other Apostolical men and Saints of God,
both then and ever since, even at this present time, most necessarily and
frequently, the countries where people are first converted to Christ. And
Miracles wrought by other Saints, are no more impossible nor improbable then
these are in their own nature. And al alike possible to God. Psalm. 71. v. 8.
sometime also in Christian Countries as it pleases God, miracles are still
wrought and made manifest to innumerable eye witnesses: And so authentically
testified, that it is mere obstinate wilfulnes to deny or discredit them, or
the like heretofore written in the several lives of Saints; seeing these so
authentically recorded in the holy Scripture, are even as strange to sensual
men, as any others which they reject, or deride. Whereas also Gods providence
and promise, was not only for the Apostles time, but also for all times so much
as is necessary in eueric Country, Romans 15. v 19. 2. Cor. 12. v 12.
this grace of miracles haith been, and still is given. In so much, that it has
always been most truly said of some of the Church, that [by word and deeds
[in virtue of signs and wonders, in the virtue of the Holy Ghost, they have
preached, planted, Mar. 16. v. 20.
and wattered] the faith of Christ's Gospel [our Lord woorking withal, and
confirming the word with signs that followed.]

God is one, and there can not be any other God. ARTICLE 6.
HAning already showed in general, the principles Henceforth we are to speak
of special Articles in particular.
of Christian Doctrine: that faith is necessary to salvation; that it is the
gift of God; grounded in his word; either written in Canonical Scripture; or
delivered by Tradition, agreeable to the written word; and in some cases
confirmed by his miraculous works: Now we are to declare in particular, the
more especial points of Faith; that God is one in substance; three in persons;
that he is omnipotent; knows al things; is goodness it self, with other
attributes. Then the creation of al things, namely of Angels, and men; the
Redemption of Man; by Christ; God and man; Man's sanctification; in the
Catholic Church; and the last Judgment, according to every ones final
deserts, to eternal glory or pain.

2 Concerning therefore the first point, al Christians, Al Christians, Jews,
and Turks, acknowledge one God. Other Nations serve many false Gods.
yea also Jews and Turks, do acknowledge, that there is one only God, the
Creator, Conseruer, and Lord of al things. But most Heathen Nations do think
there be many Gods, and do severally serve diverse Idols for God: Though God
also among them, as S. Paul teaches [haith not left him self without
testimony, Act. 14. v. 16.
being beneficial from heaven, giving raines and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness.] And ever from the creation of the world Romans 1.
v. 20.
[his invisible things, his eternal power, and Divinity, are seen, being
understood by those things that are made.] Which natural knowledge, either of
Jews, Turks, Heritikes, or other infidels, makes And are inexcusable.
them [inexcusable, not glorifying God as they Romans 1. v. 20. 21.
know him] but does not avail them to justification without true faith. For it
is only the true Catholic faith, whereby we believe, not only that there is but
one God, but also that al other things whatsoever he reuealeth by his word,
are likewise most assuredly true, even for his only authority, abstracting
from al other reasons and persuasions, which may move us thereunto. For this
only is the true faith, the same which is in the whole Church; whereas otherwise
it were but our own private conceit, opinion, or persuasion.

3 Albeit therefore, we nothing at al doubt in this point: yet if not for more
confirmation, at least for more actual exercise of our faith, I shall recite
some Our faith in one God, is proved by holy Scriptures. And first by the
books of the Law.
holy Scriptures, which expressly testify and admonish us, that there is but
one only God. So does Moses instruct us, writing that [God (our Lord Genesis 1.
v. 1. 6. Ps. 145. v. 6. Deuteronomy. 10. v. 17. Genesis 14. v. 19. 22. Exo. 3. v. 14.
God) created heaven and earrh, the firmament, the waters, and al things that
are in them] visible and invisible, even the Idols, the false gods, whether
they be devils, or men, or other things, are according to their natures, the
creatures of God. Him Melchizedech calls [God the highest, which created
heaven and earth.] Of him Abraham says [I lift up my hand to my Lord God most
high, possessor of heaven and earth.] God him self says [ I am which am. Thus
shall thou say to the children of Israel; He which is, has sent me to you]
whereas al creatures, are those special things which they are made to be: some
are Angels, some are men, some are stars, some are elements, and so of the
rest; but [God is he which is] al in all, Immense, without limite. This is that
name which God revealed to Moses when he said [I am the Lord, that appeared
Exodus 6. v. 3.
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as God almighty, and my name ADONAI: I
did not show The name of God consisting of four letters (which the Jews do
not pronounce) signifies: He which is.
them.] When he gave his Commandments, he began thus. [I am the Lord thy God:
Thou shall Exo. 20. v. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 35. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 39. Ios. 2. v. 11.
Heb. 11. v. 31. Ios. 2^. v. 22. 34.
not have strange Gods before me;] which in the repetition of the Law, is more
clearly expressed [Our Lord he is God, and there is none other besides him.]
Again thus [Heare Israel; the Lord our God, is one Lord.] And in the summarie
conclusion of the same Law, it is thus explicated. [See ye that I am only and
there is none other God besides me.]

4 Rahab in Jericho, endued with true faith, professed one God before the
discouerers, whom Iosue By the Histoircal books.
sent saying to them [The Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in the
earth beneth.] The Tribes of Israel which dwelt in Galaad [called their Altar
which they built by the banks of Jordan; their [testimonie, that our Lord he
is God; the most mighty God our Lord.] King Solomon in the conclusion 3. Reg.
8. v. 59. 60.
of his devout prayer, in the first Dedication of the Temple [besought God to
direct him and al his people Israel, day by day; that all the peoples of the
earth may know, that our Lord he is God, and there is none other besides him.]
The Prophet Elias with 3. Reg. 18. v. 21.
great zeal, expostulated with the People of Israel, that would seem to
temporize between God and Baal, rather wishing them to serve God only, (because
there can be no more Gods but one) then to serve both him and God saving: [how
long halt you on two sides? if our Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal, follow
him.] Holy Tobias in captivity, Tob. 13. v. 3. 4.
exhorts his brethren, to give thanks to our Lord, and in the sight of the
Gentiles, to praise him [because he has therefore dispersed you among the
Gentiles, which know not him, that you may declare his marvelous works, and
make them know, that there is none other God omnipotent besides him.] Achior an
Ammonite, boldly reported to Holofernes, Judith. 5. v. 9.
that the [Israelites, (having long before departed from Mesopotamia where was
multitude of Gods) worshipped one God of heaven.]

5 The Royal Prophet estemeth it the greatest ignorance Psalm. 13. v. 1. Psalm.
17. v. 32. Psalm. 83. v. 10. Ps. 89. v. 2. Ps. 95. v. 5. 148. v. 13. 150. v. 6.
Isa. 40. v. 12.
By the Prophets.
that may be, to say [there is no God] and no less wickedness, to acknowledge
any other God but one. [For who (says he) is God, but our Lord? or who is
God, but our God?] And therefore to God he says [Thou only art God, from
everlasting even to everlasting thou art God; because all the gods of the
Gentiles are devils, our Lords name alone is exalted. Let every spirit praise
our Lord.] The same do al other Prophets very often urge against Idolaters.
Let one or two sentences serve for example of many. Isaias thus writes of the
incomparable Majesty of God. [who has measured the waters with his fist, and
pondered the heavens with a spa^ne? Who has poysed with three fingers, the
huge greatness of the earth, and weyed the mountains in weight, and the little
hills in balance? Who has helped v. 13. 14.
the spirit of our Lord, or who has been his counseler and showed to him? With
whom has he taken counsel, and who has instructed him, and taught him the
path of Justice, and taught him knowledge, and showed him the way of prudence?
To whom 18.
then have you made God like? Or what Image will you set to him? Has the
artificer cast a sculptile? or has the goldsmiths figured it with gold, or the
siluer-smith with plates of silver? And to whom 19. 25. 26.
have you likenedme, and made me equal, says the holy one? Lift up your eyes
on high and see, who haith created these things? He that brings out the host
of them in number; and calls them al by name. Thus says our Lord the King of
Israel; and Isa. 44. v. 6. Chapter 45. v. 5. 26. Baruc. 6. v. 2. 3. 4. 7. etc.
Joel. 2. v. 17.
the Redemer thereof; the Lord of Hosts: I am the first, and I the last, and
besides me there is no God. I the Lord, and there is none else; I the Lord, and
there is none other.] Jeremy in his Epistle to the Jews in the time of
captivity, forewarning them to avoid Idolatry, by many and great
absurdities, in forging and adoring false gods: shows how foolish and
senseless they are, that serve Idols or any Images for gods.

6 Moreover besides the zealous confessions, and By the confession of some
Ethniques.
diligent instructions of Gods true servants, also his professed enemies, and
notorious persecutors of his faithful people, have sometimes, either after
chastisment, or being convinced by the sensible evidence of Gods miraculous
works, acknowleged him to be the only true omnipotent God, subiecting them
selves, and commanding al under their obeisance, to fear and serve him, as the
only eternal God. So King Nabuchodonosor, after that he had been seven years
so frantic, that he imagined him self to be a brutish beast, and in all
respects lived as a beast, among beasts, naked, going on his hands and feet
as a four footed beast, gnawing the grass with his teeth, and eating it as an
ox, or a horse: being again restored to use of reason, and to his former
state of a King, he openly confessed God most just over al saying: [Now
therefore I Nabuchodonosor, praise Dan. 4. v. 34.
and magnify, and glorify the King of Heaven; because al his works are true,
and his ways iugements; and them that walk in pride, he can humble.] So also
King Darius, after he had condescended (wicked cou^selers importunely urging
him) to cast Daniel into the Lions den, and that Daniel by Gods power was
conserved without hurt, and delivered from the cruelty of his enemies. The^
did this King [write Dan. 6. v. 25. 26.
to al peoples, Tribes, and tongues dwelling in the whole earth. Peace be
multiplied unto you. By me a Decree is made, that in all mine Empire, and
Kingdom, they dread and fear the God of Daniel; for he is the living, and
eternal God for ever; and his Kingdom shall not be dissipated; and his power
even 27.
for ever. He is the deliverer, and Savior, doing signs and meruels in
heaven, and in earth, who has delivered Daniel out of the Lake of the Lions.]

7 In the new Testament, and time of grace, which The same faith is confirmed
in the new Testament.
perteyneth to al Nations in the world, this doctrine of one God is most
necessary, to extirpate the general error of many gods. And therefore the
Apostles, before al other points, most diligently preached this, and taught it
by word, rather then by writing. For preaching, not writing, is the more
ordinary means to convert Infidels. And this Article being once settled in the
hearts of the faithful, the Evangelists and other Apostles, had less occasion
to write thereof, then of other points of faith and manners, wherein Christians
oftener failed. Yet it is not only presupposed, but also expressly recorded by
them in some places. By this doctrine, our B. Savior By our Saviors answers.
confuted and confounded the devil; citing and confirming by fact and word, the
Law where it is written [The Lord thy God shall thou adore, and him Den. 6. v.
13. Mat. 4. v. 10. Mar. 12. v. 29. 32.
only shall thou serve.] The like our Lord answered to a Scribe which also
tempted him, seking a quarrel against his doctrine, repeating unto him these
words of the Law [Heare Israel, the Lord thy God is one God.] Which the
quareling Scribe hearing, could not but confess it to be true, that there is
one God, and there is none other besides him. By S. Paul, and other Apostles.


8 S. Paul-amongst the learned Gentiles at Athens, Act. 17. v. 23.
took fit occasion of their own judgment, to disprove the multitude of gods
whom they served. For that by their fact in dedicating an Altar to the unknown
God; they showed the imbecilitie of al their supposed known gods; and that
besides al them, there is some other most worthy to be served with an Altar,
and consequently with Sacrifice, which is the proper homage due to supreme
Dominion. Whereupon he preached to them, him whom they imagined, but knew not,
to wit, [the God that made the v. 24. 25.
world, and al things that are in it, he being Lord of heaven and earth etc.
gives life unto al, and breathing, and al things.] After this, writing to the
Corinthians (whom in the mean time he had converted to Christ) to show that it
is unlawful wittingly to eat meats that were offered to Idols: he teaches
that [an Idol is nothing in the world, 1. Cor. 8. v. 4.
(that is, haith no manner of divine power in it as Idolators imagine) and that
there is no God but one.] Again upon an other occasion, commending unity
amongst Christians, he proves the necessity thereof by this known and
confessed principle; because [there is one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one
Ephesians. 4. v. 5. 6. 1. Tim. 1. v. 17.
God and Father of al, which is over al, and by all, and in all us.] The same
Apostle also, by way of thankesgeuing and praises to God, calls him [the King
of the worlds, immortal, invisible, only God. Who only (of him self) has
Immortality, and inhabiteth 1. Tim. 6. v. 16.
light not accessible, whom no man has seen, yea neither can see: to whom be
honor and empire everlasting. Amen.] This is the God that said to S. John [I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and Apoc. 1. v. 8. Chapter 21. v. 6. Chapter 22. v.
13.
the end, the first and the last.] This is the only God, whom heritiques and
devils can not deny, as S, James notes, arguing the Solifideans [Thou
beleuest Confessed by the devils.
(says he to his adversary) that there is one God; thou do well; the devils
also believe and tremble] Iac. 2. v. 19.
So undoubted a truth it is, that Jews, Turks, Heritiques, and devils
confess it, and in their manner, very improperly, believe it.

9 Al which notwithstanding, if it were tolerable to stand upon the bare
letter, without conference of places, contentious spirits that would prove
plurality Some men are called gods.
of Gods, may find holy Scriptures which sound for their purpose, giving the
name of God, to creatures. For [God him self (our Lord God) said to Moses
called God.
Moses; Behold I have appointed thee the God of Exo. 7. v. 1.
Pharao, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet.] Also in the Judicial
precepts of Moses Law it is written. Judges, Princes, and Preistes, called
gods.
If a servant that may be made free, will of his own accord, remain bound [his
Lord shall present Exo. 21. v. 6.
him to the gods] that is to civil, and temporal Judges, that they may in a
certain prescribed manner, ratify the covenant, and he shall be his bondman
for ever. Likewise for trial of some kind of theft [the master Chapter 22. v. 8.
of the house (who had the custody of the thing that is stolen) shall be
brought to the gods (meaning to the Judges) and he shall swear that he did not
extend his hand upon his neighbors good.] Another Precept providing that due
reverence be observed to Judges and Princes: is expressed in these words.
[Thou shall not detract from the gods: and the Ibidem. v. 28. Act. 23. v. 5.
Ps. 49. v. 2. ps. 81. v. 1.
Prince of thy people, thou shall not curse] which S. Paul applies to the high
Priest. The Royal Prophet in his psale^s says: [The God of gods our Lord has
spoken. God stood in the assembly of gods, and in the midst he judges
gods.] Which can not be understood only of false gods, though he is also
God and judge of them, but of men in eminent authority, who represent God,
amongst whom God sits, and whom God will judge. For God him self says to
them in the same psalm. [I said; you are gods, and the sons of the
highest:] By all which places a wrangler v. 6.
may contend, that there be many gods.

10 But the true sense of them al, may be gathered This objection is answered,
by conference of other (...).
by the last cited, which our Savior alleges; making an Apology or defense
of his own speech. For having said; [I and the Father are one ( vnum: Joan. 5.
v. 18. Io. 10. v. 30. 31. 33. etc.
one thing, one in divine substance:) the Jews took up stones to stone him]
as a blasphemer, [because (say they) thou being a man, make thy self God.]
Whereupon our Lord, not further explicating the high mystery of his true
Godhead, to so unworthy audience, but ^quiuocating In this case, answered
them, Men in emine^t authority do not only participate of Gods power, but also
of his name.
[Is it not written in your Law, that; I said, you are Gods? If he called
them Gods to whom the word of God was made, and the Scripture can not be
broken: Ps. 81. v. 6.
whom the father haith sanctified and sent into the world, say you; that thou
blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God.] By which answer, our
Savior insinuates, that albeit God, signifiyng Sap. 14. v. 21.
the Divine nature and absolute Essense, is the inco^municable name that can
not be given to any creature: yet if he were not God, he might without
blasphemy be called the Son of God, or God, as some men by participatio^ are
called gods, to who^ Gods word is committed to teach others, and to who^
Gods authority is given to govern and judge others. [But such Gods shall
die as men (says the Ps. 81. v. 7.
psalmist) and (if they pervert Gods word or will) shall fall as one of the
Princes.] S. Paul also expounds al such speeches saying: [although there be,
1. Cor. 8. v. 5. 6.
that are called gods, either in heaven or in earth, (for there are many
Gods, and many Lords) yet to us there is one God the Father, of whom al
things, and we unto him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom al things, and we
by him.] So these holy Scriptures prove not plurality of Gods, against
other holy Scriptures, which clearly show, that there is but one God, and that
besides him, there is none other God, but show the excellent offices of Gods
Lieutenants in earth, with participation of his authority, The Scriptures
above cited, do indede prove the excellency of Gods chief Ministers.
and also of his name. And al holy Scriptures are most true, and being rightly
explaned, have a true sense, and [are profitable (as the same Apostle
avouches) 2. Tim. 3. v. 16. 17.
to teach, to argue, to correct, and to instruct in justice, that the man of
God may be perfect, instructed to every good work.

In God is Trinity of Persons, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
ARTICLE. 7.
IN the old Testament, the children of Israel were The Mystery of the B.
Trinity, must be believed, but can not be fully understood in this life.
commanded [to eat all the Paschal Lamb; the Exodus 12. v. 10.
head with the feet and entrals they must devour. Neither must there remai^e
any thing thereof until morning. If any thing were left (not eaten) it must be
burnt with fire.] In the new Testament Christ our Savior commanded his
Apostles [to teach al nations, Mat. 28. v. 19.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.] Where it is supposed that they must teach, and the people must learn
the high mystery, of three divine persons in one substance, which has this
sense, that in all points of Christian doctrine, which our natural reason can
not comprehend, we must by the fire of Gods grace inflaming our hearts
[captiuate our understanding 2. Cor. 10. v. 5.
unto the obedience of Christ, who so revealing, we must believe, that there is
one Person of the Father, an other of the Son, and an other of the Holy
Ghost: that every person is God, and yet but one God.

2 And the same may, though not demonstratiuely or plainly, yet notwithstanding
(as the Church speaks) credibly, in some sort, be declared. For God being
one, by understanding him self A brief declaration of three Duine persons in
one substance.
begets him self, and is begotten; who in respect he begets, is God the
Father, in repspect he is begotten is God the Son. Likewise this one God as
being both Father and Son, loves him self, and in respect he loves, he
produces him self, in respect he is loved him self is produced; and so from
the Father and from the Son, proceeds an other person God the Holy Ghost.
Thus we believe and confess three divine Persons, and one God. Again in
respect of producing and not proceeding, the Father from whom, both the Son
and the Holy Ghost, diversely proceed, is called the first Person. The Son
proceeding from the Father by generation, and together with the Father,
producing the Holy Ghost, is called the second Person. And the Holy Ghost no
way producing, but only proceeding, and that by production, not by generation,
is called the third Person. Yet must we not imagine, that this order in the
divine Persons, of first, second, and third, imports any thing at al,
firster, or later, greater or less; neither may we think, that ever God was
not the Father, or was not the Son, or was not the Holy Ghost. For as God in
his substance wherein he is one: even so in his notional relations wherein he is
three, is every way, and in all respects, eternal, immense, immutable,
omnipotent, one and the self same God, and all the divine persons coeternal, of
the same equal immensitie, immutabilitie, omnipotency, majesty, and
consubstantialitie. It must be humbly believed, not over curiously discussed.


3 Nevertheless for so much as in none other Article of our belife, can be
more grievous error, if any wilfully persist in false opinion, nor more
difficulty, how to think, and how to speak, then in this highest point of
the B. Trinity, it behooves us in stead of sutle discussing that which we know
excedeth our capacity, rather to rely upon the Churches faith, then upon our
own, or any other private conceit, and withal upon holy Scriptures, as the
same [piller of truth] understands and expounds 1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
them. For so albeit the word Trinity, is not extant in all the holy Bible,
neither the word Person, in this sense, to signify distinction of divine
persons: yet the mystery it self is sufficiently proved to satisfy an humble
Christian, but not so plainly as will convince an obstinate Jew, a wilful
pagane, or a wrangling Heritique, interpreting Gods word by his own private
spirit.

4 To begin therefore with the old Testament, this Plurality of Gods
signified by holy Scripture must needs be understood of persons.
holy Mystery is proved by the hebrew text of the very first words of holy
Scripture [In the beginning Genesis 1. v. 1. 2. Job. 12. v. 4. Chapter 36. v. 2. Dan
2. 28. Hab. 1. v. 11. Chapter 3. v. 3. 1. Cor. 8. v. 6. Colos. 1. v. 16. 18. Io. 8.
v. 25. Ps. 103. v. 30.
God created heaven and earth:] and in the next verse: [the Spirit of God moved
over the waters.] The word God, in hebrew Elohim, is of the plural number
(whereof the singular is Eloha,) and so signifies plurality, and must needs
be understood of persons, because God is only one in substance, the verb
bara, in english created, is of the singular number, and by use of holy
Scriptures is appropriated to the Father, of whom are al things, Likewise the
word beginning, is appropriated to the Son, because in him were created al
things in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible. [He the beginning, the
first borne.] And the words Spirit of God, are appropriated to the Holy
Ghost. As where the Prophet Daniel says. [Thou shall send forth thy Spirit,
and they shall be created.] So we have in the word Elohim, plurality, in other
words, particular mention of the three divine persons mistically insinuated. A
gain plurality of persons is signified, when God said, [Let us make man to
our own image and likenes] the Genesis 1. v. 26.
words us and our importing more persons, but image and liknes one in
substance. The same doctrine is gathered in other places: God appearing to
Abraham in form Genesis 18. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
of three men [Abraham saw three and adored] as appears by his words, but
one. For so he spoke as to one [Lord if I have found grace in thy sight go not
past thy servant:] and forthwith as to more, [wash ye your feet, and rest ye,
for therefore are ye come aside to your servant.] So also Moses writes in the
same place, both as of more, and as of one saying: v. 9. 13. 17. 33.
[When they had eaten, they said] a little after [he said, Our Lord said; and
our Lord departed, after Sometimes but two Persons signified.
that he had ceased to speak unto Abraham.] Genesis 19. v. 1. 24.
Two Persons also of the B. Trinity seem to be signified, as well by the two
Angels coming to Lot, in the shape of two men, as by Moses words writing,
that [our Lord rained brimstone and fire from our Lord.] But three persons are
more distinctly understood by the ordinary solemn blessing prescribed Number.
6. v. 24. 25. 26.
in these words [Our Lord bless thee, and keep thee: our Lord show his face
to thee, and have mercy upon thee: our Lord turn his countenance unto thee,
and Three effects appropriated to the three Divine persons.
give thee peace.] Where our Lord thrice recited, with the special desired
effects, may very aptly be appropriated, the first to the Father, the second
to the Son, and the third to the Holy Ghost. And by like special terms, Job
seems to distinguish the same divine persons, attributing to the Father
strength and power, to the Son, wisdom, and spirit to the Holy Job. 26. v.
12. 13.
Ghost saying thus of God: [In his strength suddenly the seas are gathered
together; and with his wisdom he stroke the proud man; his Spirit haith
adorned the heaven.

5 The Royal Prophet foresheweth the Church of Christ praying for Gods
mercy, blessing, and illumination, three graces appropriated to the three
divine persons; And concluding the psalm, thrice inuocateth Ps. 66. v. 1. 8.
Ps. 95. v. 1. 2.
God thrice inuocated in one brief prayer.
God the Blessed Trinity thus [God; our God bless us; God bless us.] In an
other psalm he inuiteth al Christians to render praise to the B. Trinity, for
the Incarnation of the Son of God saying: [Sing ye to our Lord a new song;
sing to our Lord the whole earth; sing ye to our Lord, and bless his name.] In
like manner prosecuting the same inuitation says: [Bring to our Lord ye
Families of Gentiles; v. 7. 8.
bring ye to our Lord glory, and honor; bring Not three Lords but one Lord.
to our Lord glory unto his name.] In both places, our Lord is thrice named,
to signify that euerieperson of the B, Trinity, is our Lord, but concludes
in one name: because there are not three Lords but one Lord. At an other time
he confesses the same Al works of God in creatures, are the works of all the
B. Trinity.
inestimable benefit of the incarnation, to be the work of the whole Trinity,
saying: [The right hand of Ps. 117. v. 16.
our Lord has wrought strength; the right hand of our Lord has exalted me;
the right hand of our Lord haith wrought strength] yet not three right hands,
but one right hand. The Prophet Isaias saw Isa. 6. v. 3.
and heard in a vision, that [the Angelical Seraphimes cried one to an other
and said, Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord God of H^stes] reciting thrice Holy,
to the three di^ine persons, al one God of Hosts.

6 In some places, distinct mention is made of Sometimes mention is made of one
Divine person, only of God the Father.
some one divine person, and not of the other. As in Daniels prophecy, the
Father alone seems to be described thus. Thrones were set, and the ancient
Dan. 7. v. 9.
of days sat; his vesture white as snow, and the hairs of his head, as
clean wolle, his Throne flames of fire.] He is called ancient of days, not
only because he is eternal, for so are also the Son and the Holy Ghost; but
rather because in order of distinguishing the persons, he is first, from whom
the other two persons Of God the Son.
proceed, and he from none. In an other part of the same prophecy, the Prophet
praying, seems to direct his prayer to the Son, saying: [Now therefore Dan.
9. v. 17.
hear, o our God, the petition of thy servant, and his prayers, and show thy
face upon thy sanctuary which is desert, for thine own sake] that is, for
thine own merits, which can only be understood of that divine person, which
is incarnate, who by his humanity merited for the Church. And so must that
necessarily be understood only of the Son of God which is written by Habacuc
the Prophet in his Canticle [God will come from the South, and the holy Hab. 3.
v. 3.
one from the mount Pharan;] a clear prediction of Christ's Nativity, who was
borne in Bethelem, situated southward from Jerusalem. As also it is the speech
of God the Son, written by the Prophet Zachary saying: [They shall look
toward me whom they Zach. 12. v. 10.
pearced] verified when some Jews were converted after they had crucified the
Son of God. Of the Holy Ghost, Nehemias makes mention as is very Of God
the Holy Ghost.
commonly understood, where amongst other benefits bestowed upon the children
of Israel, he recou^teth divine inspirations, saying to God: [Thou gaue^^ 2.
Esd. 9. v. 20. Ezech. 36. v. 26. 27. Zach. 7. v. 12.
them thy good Spirit, which should teach them.] By Ezechiel, God speaks thus
[I will put my Spirit in the midst of you.] And the Prophet Zachary speaking
of sinners which resist the Holy Ghost says: [They made their heart as the
Adamaut, lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord sent in
his Spirit by the hands of his former Prophets.] In which and the like places,
the Spirit of God, is distinguished from God, as one person from an other.

7 In the new Testament ^his mystery of three divine This highest Mystery is,
more expressly revealed in the new Testament.
persons in one substance, is more expressly revealed. As when our Savior was
baptized, all the three Mat. 3. v. 16. 17.
persons severally appeared, the Father, by a voice from heaven, testifying
that this is his Son which there appeared in humanity assumpted; and God the
Holy Ghost appeared descending as a dove. Again Mat. 17. v. 5.
the Father appeared by the like voice in our Saviors Transfiguration
testifying the same, that this is his Son in whom he is well pleased; the
Holy Ghost was represented in the bright cloud.] Moreover the Holy Ghost, as
proceeding from the Father, and from the Son, is signified by our Savior in
one place saying: [The Paraclite the Holy Ghost, whom the Ioa. 14. v. 26. Chapter
15. v. 26. Chapter 16. v. 7. 14.
Father will send in my name] In an other place [When the Paraclite comes whom
I will send you from the Father] and as he adds there [which proceeds from
the Father] so repeating afterward [I will send him to you] he adds also [he
shall receive of mine, and shall show to you.] But the most principal proof is
by the form of Christian baptism prescribed by our Savior to his Apostles in
these words [Going teach Mat. 28. v. 19.
al Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost] expressing the three persons, not in the names, but
singularly, in the name, because al three are one God. The next principal
proof is by the words of S. John the Apostle saying: [There be three which
give testimony 1. Ioa. 5. v. 7. Joan. 1. v. 14.
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost] by the Word, signifying
the Son, the eternal word of the Father [the word which is made flesh.]

8 That the Son is God equal and consubstantial Mat. 1. v. 20. Luc. 1. v. 35.
Io. 20. v. 22. Act. 28. v. 25.
Al three persons are equal, and consubstantial.
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, and that the Holy Ghost is also God,
equal and consubstantial with the Father and the Son; is further proved by
many holy Scriptures, where the Incarnation of Christ, the Remission of
sins, sanctification of souls, and other works proper to God, are ascribed
to the Soon, or to the Holy Ghost; and particularly S. Paul calls the Holy
Ghost [one Spirit, one Lord, Romans 15. v. 16. 1. Cor. 12. v. 4. 5. 6. 11.
one God, one and the same Spirit.]

9 Nevertheless, as the Jews reject all the proofs Heretical objections.
which Christians make out of the old Testament, and scorn to hear any thing
of the new: So Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, and their folowers, not only find
euasions against all that can be alleged of holy Scriptures, but also pretend
and urge other apparent texts to prove inequality in these three Persons, and
so contend that either there are three Gods, greater and less: or else that
neither the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, is God. Against the Son of God, they
allege his own words [the Father is greater then Io. 14. v. 28. Romans 8. v.
26. 27.
I.] Against the Holy Ghost, the words of S. Paul [the Spirit him self
requesteth for us, with gronings unspeakable. And he that searches the hearts,
knows what the Spirit desires.] whereupon they infer, Seeing the Father is
greater, the Son is not equal; and seeing the Holy Ghost requesteth, and
desires, he can not be God; for God neither wants any thing, nor desires,
but has al things.

10 Holy Church answeareth to the first, that our Answerr^.
Savior Christ according to his manhood, is inferior to his Father: according
to his Godhead, he is equal with the Father. To the second, that the Holy
Ghost is said to desire and request, in that he makes the faithful to desire
and request good things. For when they pray or speak that which is to Godd^s
Mat. 10. v. 20 Mat. 13. v. 11. Luc. 12. v. 12.
glory, it is [the Holy Ghost that speaks in them] by teaching and
inspiring them [what to pray, and what to speake] as the Evangelists report
our Saviors doctrine, appropriating the confession of truth and other good
works, to the (...) Holy Ghost: Who (...) Father, and the Son, is one God.
A general answer to al wra^glers.


11 But when any are contentious, opposing Scripture Romans 1^. v. 6.
against Scripture, admitting no sense thereof but their own; then must we hold
fast the Rule of faith and form of sound Doctrine, keep the good Depositum, 2.
Tim. 1. v. 13. 14.
believe and confess that faith wherein al nations are baptized [In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, one God; for of him, and
by him, and in him, are al things. To Romans 11. v. 36.
him be glory for ever. Amen.]

God is Omnipotent. ARTICLE 8.
THe natures of al creatures, are best known God being infinite, can not be
defined, nor fully described.
by their definitions, consisting of their essential parts, or by their
descriptions, which consist of some essential part, if any be known, and such
particular proprieties, or other accidents, fewer, or more, as agree to them
only, and to none other thing. And so names are given them answearable to their
natures; whereby one man understands an other, speaking of the same things.
But the nature of the Creator being infinite, can not be defined, nor by any
description, fully declared; nor comprehended by any creature. For neither can
his proprieties be sufficiently conceived, nor any name accommodated to him,
whereby like knowledge may be atteyned of him, as of his creatures, by reason of
the infinite difference between him and them. Only we know obscurely, certain
proprieties, and special names ascribed unto him, by which we conceive that one
thing there is which created al other things, of whom al have their being, and
on whom they al depend.

2 Such proprieties, as we in some sort conceive, Certain proprieties of God,
are gathered by considering his excellent perfection above al creatures.
are gathered out of the consideration, of his incomparable excellencies, above
al creatures. For whereas al creatures (that is to say, al things but one) had
a beginning, he alone had no beginning, but is eternal. Secondly al creatures
have their limited natures; he alone is immense, without any limitation.
Thirdly al creatures in their proper nature, are or sometime were mutable; he
only is altogether immutable. Fourthly al creatures have some power given them
more or less; he only has al power, and that of him self. Fifthly certain
creatures have some knowledge diversely, more and less; he alone has al
knowledge. Sixthly al creatures by their creation were good, some also by special
grace, were, and some are good; the Creator only is absolutely, and of him self
good, yea goodness it self. According to these, and the Names appropriated to
God.
like most excellent proprieties: special names are given to this only Creator
of al. Of which, the most proper name is that which him self showed to Moses
[HE WHICH IS.] For so he called Exo. 3. v. 14.
himself saying: [I am which am] and commanded Moses to tell the children of
Israel that [ He which is had sent him to them:] who is also called Ens
absolutum, or Ens entium. The absolute being; or the being of al things. But
his most usual name is God, which in many tongues, and namely in ours,
appears Exo. 33. v. 19. Luc. 18. v. 19.
to be derived of Good; because he is al Good, and that of himself; and
therefore is goodness it self: [For there is none other (absolutely) good but
only God.] Many other names are also expressed in holy Scriptures, whereof
learned holy men have S. Dionyse* S. Ierom. S. Theodoret. S. Damascen.
written whole works, entitled, de Diuinis nominibus; of Gods names. To the
which I remitte the learned in sacred tongues.

3. For our present purpose, it shall be more fit to No Accidents are in God,
but al in him is his Substance.
declare by holy Scriptures, the above mentioned proprieties; first of al
noting, lest any mistake, that the same and al other attributes ascribed to
God, as his Justice, Truth, Mercy, Benignity, Longanimitie, and (which
conteyneth al) his Charity, are not in God as qualities, and other accidents
are adhering to, and existing in substantive creatures. For God admits no
manner of mixture, nor accessarie thing, nothing in himself, but him self; for all that is in him, is his own substance. [God is Charitie] as S. John ^. Io.
4. v. 8. 16.
teaches us; and so God is omnipotency it self, wisdom Only God is
omnipotent.
it self, Goodness it self, Truth it self, and the rest. Concerning therefore the
omnipotency of God, which is peculiarly ascribed unto him, in all the three
Proved by many testimonies, and confessed by all of any consideration.
Credes, of the Apostles, of Nicene Council, and of S. Athanasius, very often
in holy Scriptures, and is so familiar with all Christians, to give to God the
title almighty, that here one place may supply for an hundred. His self
revealed this name to Abraham (when most men served many false gods) for
distinction sake saying: [I am the God almighty.] And Genesis 17. v. 1. Exo. 7.
v. 1. Ps. 81. v. 1. etc.
this title is so proper to him only, that albeit Moses was called the God of
Pharao, and others also called gods for participation of power: yet none is
called Almighty, but our Lord God only. And therefore Moses with the children
of Israel, in their Canticle of thankesgeuing, when they had passed the red
sea, sang this title to God [ Omnipotent, is his Exo. 15. v. 3.
name.]

4 Which same thing, is manifestly showed by his works. As by creating al
things of nothing, whereas Proved by his works.
no creature can create any least thing of nothing. For Ex nihilo nihil fit,
according to al natural power of creatures. And if God should communicate power
of creating to a creature, as some subtle Christian Philosophers suppose he may
(though the negative seems more reasonable) yet this also shows that God
only is omnipotent, for that without his gift, none has, no^ can have, this
imaginary power. Likewise Gods only omnipotency appears, by his
conseruing al things in their being; by changing them into what he pleases,
and by destroying what he will into nothing. Because neither any creature can
consist as it is, but by his power; nor be turned into an other thing, but by
him as the first efficient cause, or be annihilated or brought to mere nothing,
but by Gods power only. For all that nature can work, is to deprive things
of their forms, and so change them into other things, but to deprive them of
al forms, to bring them to nothing, yea or to that which is called, Materia
prima (which is next to nothing) is only in the power of God almighty. Again,
his omnipotency is proved, by restoaring things destroyed, to their former
natural state, to be the self same substance, and to have the same accidents
which they had before their destruction, which is best exemplified, in the
Resurrection of mankind after death. For God so raises and restoareth the
dead, that the self same person which formerly lived, and afterward died, is
again living. Not as in natural and artificial works, where sometimes of the
same matter (as of earth, wax, metal, or like substance) something is framed,
afterward defaced or unmade, and again repaired, which may seem to be the
same thing; but indeed is an other thing of the same special kind, not the
same indiuidual. But the same soul of man, by Gods omnipotent power, in the
resurrection, shall receive Job. 19. v. 27. Art. 49.
and inform, the self same body, bones, flesh, blood, sinews, veins,
skin, and al which it had before death. Whereof more in the Article of the
Resurrection. 5 Gods power also reaches over and besides al Gods power is
without limite
things that are, or have been, or shall be, even no things that never were,
or ever shall be: Because they can be. And so God can make innumerable worlds,
innumerable things, of incogitable perfection; because his infinite power, is
without limite, bounden only by his divine will. [He has done al Ps. 113. v.
11. Sap. 8. v. 1. Dan. 3. v. 17. 18.
things whatsoever he would: and disposed al things sweetly.] So believed the
three children captives in Babylon, when they answered King Nabuchodonosor
saying [Behold our Lord whom we worship, can save us from the furnace of
burning fire, and out of thy hands, o King, deliver us. But if he will not, be
it known to thee o King, that we worship not thy gods] So the Archangel Gabriel
avouched [There shall not Luc. 1. v. 37. Mat. 19. v. 24. 26.
be impossible with God any word.] So our blessed Savior teaches, that [for
a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, with men is impossible: but with
God, al things are possible.]

6 By this attribute of Gods omnipotent power, The belief of Gods
omnipotency stre^gthneth our faith in all other points of Religion.
so prouidently set down, in the beginning of our Creed; so clearly confirmed
by holy Scriptures; and so universally confessed by all Christians: we are
firmly strengthened in faith to believe whatsoever follows in all Christian
doctrine, how hard so^uer it otherwise seem, or impossible by nature, and by
the power of al creatures. By the same also we are no less encoraged It also
stre^tghneth our Hope.
and confirmed in the next Theological virtue of Hope, to pray with all
confidence, and humbly to crave with assurance on Gods part, that we shall
obtain in due time, al necessary good things, which we shall ask of his
bounty, who is al good, and almighty.

God knows al things. ARTICLE 9.
Whosoever can make, or frame any thing, Ps. 93. v. 9. 10. Ps. 135. v. 5. Ps.
138. v. 1. 2. Prou. 3. v. 19.
necessarily has a competent knowledge of the same thing: much more assuredly
Only God, who is wisdom it self increated, knows al things.
God the principal maker of al things, does perfectly know, not only al
things, which are, and have been, and shall be, but also which can be, though
actually, they never were nor shall be. This divine wisdom, Omniscience, and
universal knowledge, is an other attribute of God, and so is God him self called
the increated wisdom; so far excelling al created wisdom, whether it be
natural and humane, or the spiritual giftt of the Holy Ghost, as the Creator
surpasses his creatures. For all the wisdom and knowledge which either Angels or
men have, or can have, is the gift of God, and the perfectest that is in them,
is, as it were a sparcle, and (as holy Scripture calls it [a vapor Sap. 7.
v. ^9.
of the power of God, and a certain cincere emanation, of the glory of God
omnipotent] and so is a participation of widome increated, limited within
larger or straiter bonds, that no mere creature ca^ know al things. Examples
of Solomon and other.


2 [It is the glory of God, to conceal the word] Prou. 25. v. 2. Eccle. 8. v.
16. 17.
(says Solomon) signifying that al mysteries are not revealed. [There is a man
(says he meaning him self) that days and nights takes no sleep with his
eyes. And I understood, that man can find no reason of al those works of God,
which are done under the son: and the more he shall labor to seek, so much
the less he can find; yea, if the wise man shall say, that he knows, he is
not able to finde] that is if the wise supposes that he knows al things, or
any thing perfectly; even thereby it appears, that he knows not his own
imperfection. King David his Father, most humbly acknowledged, that Prophets
that kn^w many Mysteries, but not al.
God had revealed to him some Mysteries unknown Ps. 50. v. 8.
to others saying: [Hidden things of thy wisdom, thou have made manifest to
me] not al hidden things but some. Neither could he perfectly know them, but
in part as in a glass. [For in part we know, 1. Cor. 13. v. 9. 12. 4. Reg. 4.
v. 16.
(says S. Paul) and in part we prophecy.] The Prophet Elizeus knew and
foretold to the Sunamite woman, who had been long barren, that she should have
a son, but knew not when the same afterward dyed, til the mother was come
to him for comforth, and lay lamenting at his feet; for then he said [Her v.
27.
soul is in anguish, and our Lord has hid it from me, and has not told me.]
So all the Prophets knew more or less, as God revealed to them.

3 He only knows al, who made al, disposes al, Gods infinite knowledge
appears by his works.
and governs al. As we may partly know by his works, if we consider but the
works of nature, how admirable they are: for we easily conceive, that the
auctor of nature, excedeth al our admiration. If we then compare many things
together, to see how diversely they represent the* wisdom of him that made them
al, their manifold differences, with mutual correspondences and inexplicable
powers, proprieties, and al their qualities, show that there is none end of
Gods knowledge, truly called Omniscience. Or if Example in our selves.
we will also reflect into our selves (for Angels are tooto excellent, and are
placed above the celestial Spheres to us invisible) even man's person consisting
of spirit the invisible soul, and earthly body; we find a little world, a
small momentarie parcel of the great world, framed by the infinite wisdom of
God, made of nothing, by omnipotent power, ordained to eternal glory, and
everlasting felicity, by his absolute goodness. And here I omit the highest
consideration of the works of grace, as more properly perteyning to the next
attribute of Gods goodness, to be explicated in the next Article.

4 In the mean season, let us recite some few textes Proved by testimony of
holy Scriptures.
of many in holy Scripture, which testify Gods infinite wisdom, and
universal knowledge of al things; especially exemplifying in things hidden
from the natural knowledge of man; in things known to him before they come; and
in things conditional which might be, and are not in them selves, yet are in
Gods knowledge. Of the first sort of things unknown to man, God him self
gives instance in the number of stars, when he blessed Abraham, and promised
him the like innumerable progeny saying: [Looke up Genesis 15. v. 5.
to heaven and number the stars if thou can. And said to him: so shall thy
seed be.] This place imports, and experience must needs confess, that
as well the stars in the firmament, as the issue of Abraham, can not be
numbered: much less may we imagine that any man can know either of both in all
respects. But of Gods perfect knowledge of both these things proposed, the
Royal Prophet testifies, that [he numbreth the multitude of stars: and
gives Ps. 146. v. 4.
names to them al.] which shows, that he both exactly knows the number of
all the stars, and so perfectly their nature, that he gives to every one a
proper name according to their singular differences and proprieties. As for the
innumerable issue of Abraham, is not only most perfectly known to God every
way: but further it pleased him to be called peculiarly [the God of Abraham.
And of the seed of Ps. 46. v. 10. Ps. 104. v. 6. 8. 9.
Abraham he has been mindful for ever, of his Testament, of his word which he
commanded unto a thousand generations, which he disposed to Abraham] with most
great, marvelous, and continual benefits. [Because he was mindful of his holy
word, which v. 42.
he had uttered to Abraham his servant.] But what shall any think Gods
knowledge to be of all the Issue of Adam? [Our Lord has looked from heaven, he
has Ps. 32. v. 13. 14. 15. Ps. 43. v. 22. Ps. 93. v. 11.
seen all the children of men. From the prepared habitation, he has looked upon
all that inhabit the earth. Who made their hearts severally, who understands
al their works. For he knows the secrets of the heart. Our Lord knows the
cogitations of me^, that they be vain. The heart of a wicked man is perverse,
and (naturally to other men) unsearchable, who shall know it? I the Lord that
search the heart, and prove the reins. Great is God in counsel, and
incomprehensible Iere. 17. v. 9. 10.
in cogitation, whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the children of Adam.
Thus says our Lord; So have you spoken, o house of Israel, and the Iere. 32.
v. 19. Ezech. 11. v. 5. Prou. 15. v. 3. Genesis 1. 2. 3. etc. 4. Reg. 6. v. 9. 12.
17. Ezech. 8. v. 10. 11.
cogitations of your heart I know.] God also makes God imparteth knowledge of
some secret things to some persons.
some men, his servants, to see and know hidden things; so Moses saw things
past, the creation of the world, and other things succeding til his time, much
more perfectly then any could have related. [Elizeus the Prophet saw and
revealed to the King of Israel, the King of Siria his secret plottes and
purposes: Yea the Prophets servant saw, a spiritual army of invisible Angels,
as if they had been visible, and the mountain full of horses and of fiery
chariots round about Elizeus.] The Prophet [Ezechiel in a vision saw
abominable and secret Idolatries committed by seventy men, of the ancients of
the house of Israel] Such examples abound in the holy Scriptures. Paganes also
confess infinite knowledge to be in God. [King Artaxerxes, by public Edict,
admonished al Esth. 16. v. 1. 4.
his Dukes, Princes, and Peoples of his hundred twenty seven Provinces, which
obeyed his commandment, that they should fear the sentence of God who sees
al things.] Much more do the faithful know that [Great is our Lord, and great
is his strength, and Ps. 146. v. 5.
of his wisdom there is no number.]

5 Neither is Gods wisdom limited in respect of Al times are present to God.
time. For he being eternal, the things that with men are to come, are with
him present. As also the things which to us are past, are to God present and
permanent. For with him, there is no time nor mutation, but al eternity. Only
in this transitory world [there is a time for all business (says the wise King)
Eccle. 8. v. 6. 7.
and opportunity and much affliction to man, because he is ignorant of things
past, and things to come he can know by no messenger] In so much that amongst
other proofs, it is an especial sign of a true prophet, to foreshew hidden
things to come. And thereupon the Prophet Isaias, provoked the false prophets,
and their false gods saying: [Let them come Is. 41. v. 22.
and tell us, what things soever are to come; tell the former things what they
have been, and we will set our heart, and shall know the later ends of them, and
v. 23. Is. 44. v. 7.
t^l us the things that are to come. Show what things are to come herafter,
and we shall know that you are gods. The same kind of proof God him self
proposes, to show the vanity of false gods saying: [Who is like to me; let
him call and declare, and let him expound me the order since I appointed the
ancient people; the things to come, and that Ezech. 37. v. 4.
shall be hereafter, let them show unto them.] Well did the Prorhet Ezechiel
consider that only God knows what his divine goodness will bring to pass. When
not able to answer the thing that God demanded of him [whether the dry bones
which he saw, should live? he said: Lord God thou knowest] Whereupon God made
him to know that they should live, showing the same to him in vision.

6 And so from the beginning of this world, God God gave to diverse Patria^^^es
fore*
has bestowed the Spirit of prophecy, upon some particular persons, for the
benefit of the whole Knowledge of things* to come.
Church, imparting thereby the knowledge of sundry mysteries. Adam spoke many
times in figure of Genesis 2. v. 19. 23. Jude. v. 14. 15. Genesis 6. v. 5. 6.
things to come, which are since performed. [Enoch prophesied (as S. Jude
witnessith) of the general Iudgment] which is yet to come. To Noe the preacher
of Justice, God revealed the diluge, commanding and instructing him to make the
Arck, more replenished And inspired many Prophets.
with sacred mysteries, then with mortal creatures. After the slo^^, Noe
amongst other Prophecies in form of thankesgeuing. said; [Blessed be the Lord
Genesis 9. v. 26.
God of Sem: Chanaan be his seruant] which being a Prophecy, was fulfilled
according to the letter, when the children of Israel, of the prog^^ie of Sem,
conquered the land of Chanaan, and particularly most of the Chananites being
slain with the sword, [the Iosu. 9. v. 27.
Gabaonites (a people of the same generation of Chanaan) were glad to save
their lives, with condition that they and al their posterity, should serve in
the ministry of the people (of Israel) and of the Altar of our Lord, ^ewing
wood, and carrying water.] To Abraham likewise God revealed the destruction of
Sodom, with the other Cities near adjoined. [Can I (said our Lord) conceal
from Abraham, Genesis 18. v. 17. ^0.
Job. 24. v. 1. Chapter 28. v. 39. Isa. 44. v. 28. Chapter 45. v. 1. 2. Par. 36. v. 22.
1. Esd. 1. v. 1. 2. Esth. 11. v. 3. Sap. 4. v. 7. 11.
the things which I will do.] Many far greater mysteries, did God also
reveal to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other Patriarchs, and Prophets, whereof
we shall speak in other places more proper. Joseph also received the gift of
Prophecy, to see in sleep, things to come, and to interpret other men's
dreams. For that those dreams were revelations from God, is gathered by
Iosephes words saying to Pharao: [God has showed to Pharao the things which
Genesis 41. v 25. Dan. 2. Dan. 4. v. 5.
he will do.] So Daniel saw Gods will, and interpreted King Nabuchodonosors
dreams, read and interpreted obscure words written in the sight of King
Baltasser; by an invisible writer. Al which, and Chapter 19. v. 17. Dan. 13. v. 42.
Osee. 2. v. 10. Amos. 3. v. 6. Mich 3. v. 6. Nahum. 3. v. 5. Mat. 10. v. 26.
Chapter 11. v. 25. 27. Act. 2. v. 23. Romans 8. v. 30. Chapter 9. v. 11. etc. Chapter 11. v.
33. Ephesians. 1. v. 5. Heb. 4. v. 13. Apoc. 1. v. 1. 2. etc.
many the like, do declare, that as no man knows more of supernatural
things then God reue^leth: so God does absolutely know al things, as well to
come, as already past, being al to him present.

7 And that God also knows al things that can be, or conditionally should
be, in certain supposed cases which indeed shall not be; two or three places
may sufficiently show. Holy David being in distress 1. Reg. 23. v. 9. 10. 11.
12.
and just suspicion, how the people of Ce^la (where he was entered) would deal
with him, God also sees what should be conditionally, th^^g^ the effect follow
not.
consulted our Lord, by way of the high Priest, applying the Ephod, whether the
men of Ceila, would deliver him into the hands of Saul? [And our Lord said;
they will deliver thee.] Which answer was to be understood conditionally, if
he tar^ed there. But parting from thence he was not delivered to Saul. King
Ioas 4. Reg. 13. v. 18. 19.
being willed by Elizeus the Prophet, to strike the earth with a sauelin
[stroake it three times, and then stood still: the Prophet was angry with him
and said: If thou had stricken five, or six, or seven times, thou had
stricken Siria even to dest^ction; but now three times thou shall strike it] The
Prophet Jeremy said to King Se^ecias [Thus says the Lord of hosts, Iere. 48.
v. 17.
the God of Israel: If going forth, thou will go out to the Princes of the
King of Babylon, thy soul shall live, and this City shall not be burnt with
fire, and thou shall be saife, and thy house: But if thou will v. 18.
not go out to the Princes of the King of Babylon, this City shall be
delivered into the hands of the Chaldees, and they shall burn it with fire,
and thou shall not escape out of their hands.] The same Prophet uttered the
like conditional Prophecy, to the people which desired to flee into Egypt from
the danger of the Chaldees saying: [Thus says our Lord Iere. 42. v. 9. 10.
the God of Israel; If resting you will abide in this land, I will build you, and
not destroy you; I will plant you and not pluck you up; for now I am pacified
upon the evil that I have done to you. But if you shall v. 13.
say; we will not dwell in this land, neither will we hear the voice of the Lord
our God; saying No, 14.
not so, but we will go forward to the land of Egypt: If you shall set your face
to go into Egypt, and shall 15.
enter to inhabit there, the sword which you fear, 16.
shall there take you in the land of Egypt: and the famine for which you are
careful, shall cleue to you in Egypt, and there you shall dye.] S. Paul in like
sort affirmed conditionally, when certain shipmen meant for fear of drowning,
to flee out of the ship, [vnlesse these tarry in the ship, you can not be Act.
27. v. 31.
saved.]

8 In all which and the like, the assertion is as certainly true, and so kowne
to God, which happens not, the condition failing, as is the contrary, which
together with the condition, being performed, comes actually to pass: whereby
we learn, and may Gods fore knowledge does not necessitate any thing that is
voluntary or contingent.
clearly see that Gods prescience, and our inscience of al things, also to
come, and possible to come, and howsoever, does no way, nor in any case,
necessitate the thing that is to come, or not to come; but it remains free,
and in it self indifferent, depe^ding upon the proper causes, natural, or
supernatural: As harvest upon sowing, with other husbandry; Salvation, upon
faith and good works, with perseverance therein to the end; is in it self, and
to us uncertain, notwithstandig Gods most certain foreknowledge of the very
effect, which shall be. For still he sees al together the end and the means
whereby every thing comes to any end: whereof we may for explication Example
in man's knowledge.
sake propose example in our own knowledge; when we see a thing present we are
certain that so it is, and that the contrary cannot be true: yet it is not
our sight, nor knowledge, that makes it true which we see, but the truth of
the thing depends upon the proper cause thereof. And if we could as certainly
know future things, yet that knowledge should not make the things necessary,
but they are as their proper causes make them, according to their own nature,
either necessary, or voluntary, or contingent.

God is absolute goodness: and al his actions are good. ARTICLE. 10.
GOds infinite goodness, which is a^ other divine Gods goodness appears in his
creating al things good.
attribute, appears many ways: and is made manifest by all his works, if
they be rightly considered. For all creatures in their nature, and essense are
good. Even devils, and wicked men. There is nothing evil but sin, and that
indede is no creature, nor any way the work of God. For it is only a
deforming privation, or want of that rectitude, which ought to be in every
action, deprauing the same, and making it faulty, against reason which
requires that al things should be done rightly. So that sin is an enemy to
nature, the corrupter of creatures, odible to reason, contrary to all that is
right, just, and good. And therefore By punishing sin.
by punishing sin, Gods goodness is particularly declared; making it
manifest, that his goodness loves al creatures (in that they are his creatures)
and hatteh that evil which defaceth and deformeth them. Wherefore as we have
already seen in the former Art. 8. 9:
Articles, that Gods omnipotent power is showed In ordaining things to good
ends.
in creating al things, and his divine wisdom shyneth in disposing al: so his
goodness is no less revealed in ordaining all the same to particular good ends,
and most especially in designing Angels and Men to serve him in a higher
degrie, and so to be made participant of his own eternal glory: A benefit so
much surmou^ting their creation, as grace excels nature, and more singularly
abunding toward men, then Angels, in that al mankind sinning, yet his
goodness recalleth them by new grace, to repentance, through the infinite
merits of Christ our Redemer, reparing the losses of al those which resist not,
but accept thereof; with increase of more grace, and glory then other wise any
could have merited.

2 This immense and unspeakable goodness of Gods goodness is abundantly
testified in holy Scriptures.
God is most clear to al men of right understanding, and is testified every
where in the holy Scriptures. Most frequently in the Psalms, all the faithful
servants of God confessing their own pronnes to evil, and weakness to do
good, beseke his most bountiful goodness to power upon them abundance of grace
with remission of sins that they may rightly serve him, and duly render al
possible thanks and praises to his holy name. So the Royal Psalmist mindful
of his daily necessities prays thus [Atte^d Ps. 5. v. 3. 4.
o Lord to the voice of my prayer, my King, and my God. Because I will pray to
thee Lord in the morning, thou will hear my voice. In the morning I will stand
by thee: I will sing to our Lord, who Ps. 12. v. 6. Ps. 50. v. 3.
gives me good things, and I will sing to the name of our Lord most high. Have
mercy on me o God, according to thy great mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy commiserations, take away mine iniquity. I will expect thy
name, because it is good in the sight of thy Saints. I will confess to thy
Ps. 51. v. 11. Ps. 53. v. 8.
name, because it is good. Once has God spoken; these two things have I
heard, that power is gods, and mercy o Lord is to thee.] Sometimes in extases
or trance, admiring Gods unspeakable goodness, Ps. 61. v. 6. 12. 17. Ps. 72.
v. 1.
he cries out [How good is God to Israel, to them that are of right heart.] And
seeing how little able man is to render due thanks, and praises to God: al must
join in voice and Iubily, yea al creatures are invited to yield praises,
testifying that [Our Lord is pitiful, and merciful, long suffering, and very
merciful. Bless our Lord, al ye his Angels: Bless our Lord Ps. 102. v. 8. 20.
21. 22. Ps. 105. v. 1. Psalm. 106. v. 1. Ps. 117. v. 1. etc. Ps. 118. * Ps. 134.
v. 1. 3. Ps. 135. v. 1. etc. Ps. 144. v. v 10. Ps. 150. v. vlt.
al ye his hoastes; Bless our Lord al ye his works, i^ every place of his
Dominion, my soul bless thou our Lord. Confess ye (with thanks and praise)
to our Lord, because he is good: because his mercy is for ever. O Lord thou
art good, and in thy goodness, teach me thy iustifications. Praise ye our Lord,
because our Lord is good: sing to his name, because he is sweet. Our Lord is
sweet to al: and his commiserations are over al his works.] The seven last
psalms are wholly composed of Gods praises, for his infinite goodness,
excellency, mercy, benignity. [Let al thy works o Lord, confess Al
creatures are good, and al considered together are very good.
to thee: and let thy Saints bless thee] with heart, lubilie, voice,
instrument. [Let every spirit praise our Lord.] God has made al things good,
and therefore al must praise him, for his absolute goodness, whereof he has made
them participant. [For Genesis 1. v. 31.
God saw al things that he had made, and they were very good:] only sinners
persisting in sin, are excluded from praising God. To such God says: [Why
do thou declare my justices, and take my Ps. 49. v. 16.
Testament in thy mouth?]

3 And for this cause God often expostulated with God would have al sinners to
be converted and saved.
sinners for degenerating from that goodness wherewith he endued them, saving to
his peculiar people: [I planted thee an elect vineyard, al true seed.] Iere.
2. v. 21. v. 30.
That God also punishes offenders, it is for their amendment, But [manie will
not receive discipline.] Therefore God disclaming from being the cause, or
auctor of their sin and ruin, again expostulateth saying: [Why is the death
of a sinner my will, says Ezech. 18. v. 23. Chapter 22. v. 13.
our Lord God, and not that he convert from his ways and live?. etc Behold I
have wrong my hands upon thy covetousness which thou have done, and upon the
blood which has been shed in the midst of thee. Say to them, live I, says
our Lord God: I will not the death of the impious, but that the impious convert
from his way and live.] And so cries unto them [Conuert, convert ye from your
most Chapter 33. v. 11. Osee. 13. v. 9.
evil ways. And why will you dye, o house of Israel? Perdition is thine, o
Israel: only in me is thy help.]

4 Our B. Savior confirms all this goodness, as Christ and his Apostles
confirm the same.
perteyning, not to the Jews only, but to al mankind, for that God is Creator
of al. [Our Father in heaven Mat. 5. v. 45.
(says he) makes the Su^ne to rise upon the good and the badde; and rayneth
upon the just and the unjust. Rejoices with his Angels upon every lost Chapter
18. v. 14. Luc. 15. v. 10. Romans 12. v. 2. 1. Tim. 2. v. 4. 2. Pet. 3. v. 9.
sheep that is found again. Even so it is not the will of your Father which is
in heaven that one perish of these little ones.] Likewise S. Paul urges al
sinners saying: [Be reformed in the newnes of your mind, that you may prove,
what the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God is. God will (or of his
part would) have al men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Our Lord slackeneth not his promise, as some do esteem it, but he does
patiently for you, not willing that any perish, but that al return to
penance.] To conclude this point that gods goodness is absolute, and infinite,
and al his actions good: The two great Apostles, S. Peter, and S. Paul, show,
that even his delays, omissions, and expectations are good. [The longanimitie
2. Pet. 3. v. 15.
of our Lord, do you account saluation] says S. Peter, which S. Paul had also
written before [Dost thou contemn the riches of his goodness, Romans 2. v. 4. Chapter
12. v. 2. v. 3.
and patience, and Longanimitie, not knowing that the Benignity of God,
brings thee to penance?] Therefore wills al, to [be reformed in newnes of
mind, that you may prove, what the good and acceptable, and perfect will of God
is. For I say by the grace that is given to all that are among you, not to be
more wise, then behooves to be wise: but to be wise unto sobriety.

5 As for certain places of holy Scriptures, which No place of holy
Scripture is contrary to any other place. Therefore such as may seem contrary
must be explicated, and so reconciled.
may seem to contentious people; perhaps also unto weak minds, or scrupulous
persons, to sound, as if God were rigide, rigorous, or desireous to punish;
they are in true sense, conformable to other Scriptures (for all are most true)
importing no action of God concurring, nor cooperating to sin, but his
permission only: And that for the good of the same sinners if they will: As also
(and that always infallibly) for the good of all that love him, and rightly
love their own souls. As where it is written, Places alleged by Adversaries.
that God said to Moses [I will indurate Pharao Exo. 4. v. 21. Chapter 7. v. 3. Chapter
9. v. 12. 16. Chapter 11. v. 27. Romans 9. v. 17. 1. Reg. 2. v. 25.
his hart] And to Pharao him self (by the mouth of Moses) God says: [Therfore
have I set thee, that in thee I may show my might, and my name may be told in all the earth:] which S. Paul thus cites: To this very purpose have I raised
thee, that in thee I may show my power: and that my name may be renowned in the
whole earth.] It is written by the Prophet Samuel, that [Ophni and Phinees, the
sons of Heli the high Priest, heard not the voice of their Father, because
our Lord would kill them.] King David being egregiously calumniated, by wicked
Sime^, said: Our Lord has commanded 2. Reg. 16. v. 10. 11.
him ^o curse David; and who is he that dare say; why has he so done? Let him
alone, that he may curse according to the Precept of our Lord.] Concerning
David's sin, in nu^bring of the people: it is written [The fury of our Lord
added to be angry 2. Reg. 24. v. 1. 3. Reg. 22. v. 23. Ps. 104. v. 25. Isa.
63. v. 17.
against Israel and Judah.] Micheas a Prophet, said to King Achab: [Behould our
Lord has given the spirit of lying in the mouth of al thy prophets.] The Royal
Prophet says [God turned the hearts of the Egiptians, that they hated his
people, and to work guile toward his servants.] The Prophet Isaias praying
for the people, says to God [Why have thou made us err, o Lord, from thy
ways, have thou hardened our hearts that we feared not thee?] S. Paul in his
profou^d discourse of gods election, exemplifying in Jacob, and Esau, says:
that [whe^ they were not yet Romans 9. v. 11. 12. 13.
borne, nor had done any good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to
election, might stand, not of works, but of the caller, it was said to Rebecca
their mother, that the elder shall serve the younger: as it is written; Jacob I
loved, but Esau I hated.] These especial places, and Iudic. 9. v. 23. 3. Reg.
1^. v. 15. Chapter 22. v. 20. 2. Par. 25. v. 20. Chapter 35. v. 22. Judith. 9. v. 13.
Job. 1. v. 12. Chapter 2. v. 6. Ps. 103. v. 27. Iere. 35. v. 23. Amos. 4. v. 4.
Mat. 4. v. 12. Luc. 2. v. 34. Mat. 6. v. 12. Io. 12. v. 39. Act. 2. v. ^3. Romans
1. v. 24. Chapter 3. v. 5. Chapter 11. v. 8. 2. These. 2. v. 11. Apoc. 17. v. 17.
some others, make at Mal. 4. v. 2. 3.
first sight, apparent show, for Zuinglius, Calvin, and Beza, teaching that God
makes men transgressors: that he moves them, drives them on, and enforces
them to do that which is sin (as them selves speak) which is indeed to
commit sin, and by necessary consequence, they teach, that God should be
cause and auctor of sin.

6 A brief answer concerning the places alleged, which is more largely
explicated in the Catholic Edition of the English Bible.
But because most English Protestants, either deny this sequel, endeavoring to
excuse their foreign Masters, or else disclame from their doctrine: it shall
not be needful further to explicate the places which they allege for their
purpose, then is already done in the Catholic Edition of the English Bible,
especially upon the seventh Chapter of Exodus: and the ninth of S. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans: Considering withal, that the words of Zuinglius,
Calvin, and Beza saying, that God makes men transgressors, moves them,
drives them on, enforces them to do that which is sin: are no where to be
found in the holy Scriptures. Remember also that both God and men, are some
times said to do those things, which they only permit. And consider
likewise as well the places here cited, which testify Gods inexplicable
goodness; as also other holy Scriptures, which in express terms, not only
exclude al sin and iniquity from God: but also testify, that his divine will
is, that no sin should be committed. For it is not only said by Moses, that
[the Deuteronomy. 32, v. 4.
works of God are perfect, and al his ways judgments; God is faithful, and
without any iniquity, just and right] but also it is said by David speaking
to God, [thou art not a God that wilt iniquity.] S. Ps. 5. v. 5.
Paul does not only confute the imagination of such as should think God were
unjust or partial, in that he calls some to his mercy, and leaves others in
their sin, being al equally in the mass of damnation, lest any should so
misunderstand his discourse, he adds, demanding of him self [what then, is
there Romans 9. v. 14.
iniquity with God?] and thereto answeareth resolutly [God forbid] but he also
teaches, that God of his part, if men will them selves [wil have al men 1. Tim.
2. v. 4.
to be saved.] And S. Iam s not only presupposes that God is no way the cause,
nor has a will that any be overcome in tentation; but also teaches, Iaco. 1.
v. 13. 14.
that no man is tempted of God [for God is not a tempter of evils; and he
tempts no man. But every man is tempted of his own concupiscence,
abstracted and allured.] Our Savior says, that [the Mat. 13. v. 25. 39.
enemy which ouersoweth cockle upon the good seed, is the devil.] Gods goodness
is also declared in permitting sin.


7 In that God suffers sin to be committed, he is also good, because he
draws good of it, turns turns it to good. Holy Joseph the Patriarch with
this consideration, comforted his brethren, when it repented them, that they
had betrayed, and sold him. [Let it not some to you a hard case (says he) that
Genesis 45. v. 5.
you did sell me into these Countries; For God sent me before you into Egypt,
for your preservation.] Again after their Fathers death, [he said unto them:
Genesis 50. v. 19. 20.
Fear not: Can we resist the will of God? You thought evil against me, but God
turned that into good, that he might exalt me, as presently you see, and might
save many peoples.] This express distinction, that they thought evil, and God
turned their fact to good, shows, that sin is wholly of the sinner, and
that God has no part therein, but turns it to good. And so out of every
evil, draws good, by his omnipotent Power, infinite Wisdom, and absolute
Goodness. Though diverse divine Attributes be appropriated to the three divine
persons; yet al do agree to every one.


8 Which three divine attributes, I have rather explicated in this place, then
the others, because they are more often mentioned in Christian Doctrine, and
are commonly appropriated to the three divine persons: Power, to the Father,
Wisdom, to the Son, and Goodness, to the Holy Ghost. Albeit, as well these
three, as all the rest; Gods Eternity, Immensitie, Immutabilitie, Justice,
Truth, Mercy, and al virtues in God; being, not qualities, nor accidents, but
Gods proper substance (as was noted before) do equally agree to the whole
B. Trinity, and to Article. 8. nu. 2.
every person thereof. Now we are to speak of his creatures, and of the
means, whereby man may be saved, and eternally glorified.

Angels the first creatures which God made, are, the most part in eternal
glory. Many also are damned devils. ARTICLE. 11.
ALL the works of God are admirable; but a boue al others, Angels do excel in
natural Angels excel al other creatures in natural gifts.
gifts, and none but Angels and men, received supernatural grace: by right use
whereof, they were al ordained to enjoy eternal glory. It far exceeds
man's natural capacity, perfectly to know the nature of Angels, being pure
spiritual substances, void of al corporal mixture, and imperceptible to our
external senses. The nearest in likeness to them, are men's souls, in that
they also, are spiritual substances, endued with reason, and free will,
immortal, and capable of eternal felicity, or misery, as Angels first were.
But this is one great difference, (besides others) that souls have a natural
disposition, inclination, and desire, to their proper bodies, whereof they are
the essential forms. In so much, that neither the soul nor the body,
separated the one from the other, is perfect in their specifical nature,
neither of them is a man, being separated, but being actually united as matter
and form, do constitute a reasonable or rational person; whereas Angels are
naturally perfect, without al composition, for they are not, neither can be,
the forms of any body.

2 Of these excellent Spirits, certain Philosophers Heathen Philosophers have
diverse errors concerning Angels.
conceauing some thing, call them Intelligentias seperatas. Intelligences
separated from bodies, at least from earthly bodies. For most heathen
Philosophers by occasion of apparitions in visible shape, and suddenly vanishing
out of sight, erroniously supposed that they had aerial bodies. Such
Philosophers, had also other gross errors, that Angels are coeternal with God,
yea that they are gods, some greater, and some less. Plato calls them
Demones, not distinguishing between holy and wicked Angels; teaching to offer
Sacrifice to them, which no good Angels, but only devils, accepted.

3 Of this heathnish doctrine, it seems, Simon Magus, An old herisie; that
Angels should be mediators, and little gods.
and others drew their heresy, that Angels are our Mediators, not Christ; of
which, both heathnish and heretical doctrine, S. Paul warns Christians to
beware, saying: [let no man seduce you, willing Colos. 2. v. 18. 19.
(or self willed) in the humility and religion of Angels, not holding the
head] Christ our only Medidiator and Redemer. For those heritikes contemning
Christ, kept conuenticles, in the name of spirits, and Idols; and taught the
Col^ssians, to keep the old Law, and to honor Angels, as the geuers of the
same, and as less gods, prescribing sacrifices to be offered unto them,
calling such service, humility, that they might bring them to the great God.
So they mixed falsehood with truth. For the old Law Gal. 3. v. 19. Heb. 2. v. 2.
was indeed the Law of God, and was delivered by Angels to Moses, and by
Moses, to the people; and so not only Angels, but also Moses, was in a true
sense, called, the Arbiter, and Mediator, betwixt God, and the people. But
after that Christ our Lord was Deuteronomy. 5. v. 5.
crucified, dead, risen from death, and ascended into heaven; the old Law
ceased, and, the new Law came in place. And of the new Law, Christ is the
Mediator, being our only Redemer. And therefore the Apostle Colos. 1. v. 15. 16.
taught these deceived Colossians, that Christ is God, the creator of Angels;
the head of the Church, and that by him, we must go to God. And in other
places also proves, that Christ so far excels Angels, as the very Son
of God, is greater, then his best and most holi^ se^uan^es. And it is Gods
express commandment [Let all the Angels of God Ps. 96. v. 8. Heb. 1. v. 5. 6.
adore him.]

4 The same true faith teaches us, that God only, Angels, and time it self and
al creatures had a beginning.
is from al eternity, without beginning; that al other things, namely Angels,
were created by God, in time, or together with time (which is also a creature)
and had a beginning. But whether long or short time before man, and the rest of
this world, the holy Scriptures do not express, neither has the Church
hitherto declared; neither will we here discuss it further. Moses w^i^eth in
general thus [In the beginning Genesis 1 v. 1.
God created heaven and earth] then in particular de^cribeth, that he made
light and other several things; Lasly man, not there naming Angels: Of v. 3.
27.
whom neu^rthelesse, both he, and other sacred writers, do very often make
mention, as of principal Angels are innumerable.
creatures of God. And that they are innumerable, may be gathered in diverse
passages of holy Scriptures. When Jacob returning from Mesopotamia, saw the
Angels which met him; he called them [the Camps of God] because they were
many; and Genesis 32. v. 2. Ps. 67. v. 18.
doubtless they were a very small part of the whole host of heaven. The Royal
Psalmist calls them the [Chariot of God] insinuating their inexplicable
multitude, by the greatest usual number of thousands, saying: [The Chariot of
God, is ten thousand fold, thousands of them that rejoice.] Which the
Prophet Daniel also describes by the universal numbers of ten, and hundred,
and thousand, multiplied thus, [Thousandes of thousands, ministered to him, and
Dan. 7. v. 10.
ten thousand, hundred thousand, assisted him. giving us to understand, that
their number excedeth our capacity. Whereto agrees that of S. John in the
Apocailps: [I heard the voice of many Angels, Apoc. 5. v. 11.
round about the Throne, and of the living crearures, and of the Seniors: and
the number of them was thousands of thousands.] Likewise that discourse of
one of Iobes frend^s saying [Power, and terror is Job. 25. v. 2. 3.
with God, that makes coucord in his high ones.] And [Is there any number of
his soldiers?] meaning that they pass al numbers which we can express. Yea
as Divines do probably think, they exceed the number of al corporal
indiuidual living creatures. Angels are disstinguished into three Hierarchies:
and nine Orders.
5. But this is more certain, and proved by holy Scriptures, that they are
distinguished into certain Hierarchies or sacred subordinations, and into
special orders, according to these nine particular Titles, ascribed unto them
[Angels, Archangels, Powers, Angels. Archangels. Powers.
Potestates, Principalities, Dominations; Thron^s, Cherubims, and Scraphimes.]
The name Angel being common to al, is appropriated to the lowest Potestates. 2.
Principalities. Dominatio^s.
Order, because ordinarily those are sent, as messengers in particular affaues,
and to particular persons. Of which sort holy David says [God makes spirits
Ps. 103. v. 4. Genesis 16. v. 7. Chapter 19. v. 1. Chapter 22. v. 11. Tob. 3. v. 25. Luc.
1. v. 26. Iud. v. 9. 1. These. 4. v. 16. Romans 8. v. ^8. Ephesians. 1. v. 21.
his Angels] that is, his messengers. As to Abraham the Pathiarch; to Lot a
just man, to Agar in Thrones. 3. Cherubims. Seraphims.
her affliction; to holy Tobie and others. Thesecond Order called Archangels
are sent in greater affairs, perteyning to the whole Church, and concerning
more principal mysteries: As S. Gabriel (who was sent to the B. Virgin Marie to
declare Gods will, that the Son of God should be incarnate, the Redemer of
mankind) is universally said to be an Archangel. S. Michael is expressly called
an Archangel, by S. Jude the Apostle. And S. Paul says that our Lord will come
to judgment in the voice of an Archangel. The third Order is called Virtutes,
Powers; of which the same S. Paul makes mention together with Angels, and
Principalities, in his Epistle to the Romans; and the Ephesians. And in his
Epst^e to the Colossians names other four orders, Colos. 1. v. 16.
for example, to show that al were created by Christ* whether Thrones; or
Dominations; or Principalities; or Potestates. Of Cherubimes, is oftener Ex. 25.
v. 18. Nu^ 7. v. 89. Genesis 3. v. 34. 3. Reg. 6. v. 23. Is. 6. v. 1^ 6.
m^ntioned in the books of Moses. And of ^^e S^raphimes, is only mention in
the Prophec^e of Isaias, which make in all nine Orders.

6 An other principal point for us to observe is, The greater part of Angels
being established in eternal glory; co^tin ^ally praise God.
that al Angels being at their creation endued with grace, most of them using
it rightly, were confirmed therein, and established in eternal glory. Others,
and those also many, proudly auerting them selves from God, their Creator, and
Lord, are damned to everlasting torments. For as they have received diversely
according to their works; so shall men also finally be judged, and either
rewarded, or punished eternally. The B. Angels, have the fruition of God, and
perpetually praise him. As the holy psalmist signifies, who finding him self,
and al mortal men unable to render due thanks to God for his benefits;
imitateth these glorious Citizens of heaven, to assist men herein, saying:
[Blesse our Lord al ye his Angels; mighty in power, doing his word. Bless Ps.
102. v. 20. 21. Ps. 148. v. 1. 2.
our Lord al ye his hoastes: you his ministers, that do his will. Praise ye our
Lord from the hea^ens: praise ye him in the high places. Praise ye him al his
Angels: praise ye him al his hoastes.

7 Contrariwise. the wicked spirits [not standing Apostata Angels wicked
devils, continually blaspheme God, and are eternally damned.
in the truth, but striving [to ascend, and to be like Io. 8. v. 44. Is. 14. v.
12. Job. 4. v. 18.
the Highest] being cast into hell, do continually curse, and blasphe n^ God,
in their torments, which they suffer. For as it is written in the book of Job
that [God in his Angels found wickedness:] So S. Peter teaches that [G^^ spared
not A^gels sinning* but with the ropes of hell being dr^wne down into hell, 2.
Pet. 2. v. 4.
delivered them to be tormented, that they should be reserved unto Judgment.]
S. Jude also repeating Iud. v. 6.
the same fall and punishment of the devil, and his accomplices, faith, that [the
Angels which kept not their Principality, but forsook their own habitation,
God has reserved under darkness in eternal bonds, unto the judgment of the
great day] that is, the general day of Judgment; signisying, that then also
they shall eternally remain in the same [execrable judgment against them] as
S. Peter speaks: Yea 2. Pet. 2. v. 11.
Devils (at least some of them) shall suf^er greater torments then as yet they
do.
with increase of torment, as those devils feared who^ our Savior cast out of
men, and permitted to go into hogs, when they cried saying to him [art thou
Mat. 8. v. 29.
come hither to torment us before the time?]

Holy Angels by their ministry and prayers, protect and help men. D^^els
seek their ruin. ARTICLE. 12.
SO does our heavenly Fathers providence, govern The inferior world
participateth of the influence of the planetes, and other stars.
the universal world, that therein appears a most admirable correspondence, by
continual imparting, and receiving of benefits amongst his creatures; al
proceeding from his incomprehensible goodness, the Auctor, and first cause of all that is good. The lower elemental bodies, as^el of men, as of other things,
receive and enjoy, more or less, natural vigor, strength, and perfection, by
the influence of the celestical planets, and other s^arres, which is found to
be true, by diligent observations of learned men; is approved by experience,
and credited by all persons of better understanding. The same divine providence,
So may the souls of men receive benefit by the glorious spirits in heaven.
has also ordained, that men's souls may receive spiritual good by the
mediation of celestial spirits; and by their ministry, protection, and
prayers, prosper more in their daily affairs, corporal, and spiritual: Namely
by the help and assistance of B. Angels. A point of doctrine well known to the
ancient holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and other servants of God;
confirmed by frequent examples; believed by all Catholics, and clearly proved
by holy Scrptures, as well of the old, as new Testament.

2 For albeit certain works, as the creation of al things, the Incarnation
of Christ, the infusion of grace, Institution of Sacraments, and some others,
God imparteth many benefits by the ministry of Angels.
are immediately performed by God him self; Yet most other Benefits, both
natural, and supernatural, proceed from God, by secundarie causes. And amongst
the rest, it pleases his divine goodness, to impart many things, to men by
the administration of Angels. All the apparitions made unto Adam, Noe, Abraham,
and others, in the name of God; were accomplished in the persons of Angels sent
by him, and speaking as if God him self had spoken, and conuersed with men.
Which is certainly proved by the ans^ear made from God to Moses, when he so
fervently Exo. 33. v. 20. Iudic. 13. v. 22. Genesis 2. v. 16. 19. Genesis 3. v. 13.
Genesis 4. v. 6. Genesis 7. v. 16. Genesis 19. v. 24.
desired to see God [Thou can not see my face, for man shall not see me and
live.] Whereas therefore it is recorded, that God brought Eve, and other
creatures unto Adam, spoke to him, and also to Eve, to Cain, (and very like
also, to Abel, Seth, Enos, Enoch. though it be not expressed) and afterward,
to Noe, Abraham. Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and other Patriarchs, and Prophets: all the same was done by Angels. So doubtless an Angel by Gods ordinance [sh^tte the
door of the Arcke on the out side] when Noe with his family* and other living
creatures, were entered in. An Angel (representing God) rained fire and
brimstone, upon Sodom and Go^orha, and the like.

3 But to satisfy al doubts, we will recite some special Holy Scriptures
expe^ly witness that God imployeth Angels in the a^faires of men.
Scriptures, which make express mention of apparitions, protections,
ministeries, and prayers of Angels. When Adam had transgressed, and was cast
out of Paradise [God placed there Cherubimes with Genesis 3. v. 24. Genesis 19. v. 1.
13.
a flaming and burning sword, to keep the way of the tree of life] lest any
man should eat thereof. [Two Angels came to Sodom, and said to Lot; we will
destroy this place, for their cry is waxen loud before our Lord, who has
sent us to destroy them.] [An Angel of our Lord, finding Agar in the wilderness,
Genesis 16. v. 7. 9. Genesis 21. v. 17. 18.
bade her return to her mistresse] Again afterward called to her from
heaven saying [what do thou Agar? Fear not, for God has heard the voice of
the boy: Arise, take up the boy, and hold his hand, for into a great Nation will
I make him.] So the Angel promised; which he could not otherwise say, nor
perform, but as the minister of God. When Abraham was ready to kill and
sacrifice his Son Isaac [an Genesis 22. v. 11. 12.
Angel of our Lord from heaven cried saying; Abraham, Abraham; Stretch not
forth thy hand upon the boy, neither do thou any thing to him] and by and by,
added, as if God him self had spoken saying; [By mine own self have I sworn,
says our Lord: v. 16.
because thou have done this thing, and have not spared thine only begotten
son for my sake: I will v. 17
bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven.] After
this, Abraham sending his servant into M^sopotamia, and assuring him of good
success, said, [Our Lord God of heaven, shall send his Genesis 24. v. 7. 40.
Angel before thee, and with thee and will direct thy way, and thou shall take a
wife for my son, of mine own kindred, and of my Fathers house.] Jacob in
vision ^ saw Angels ascending, and descending by Genesis 28. v. 12.
a ladder, that reached from the earth to heaven.] And when he had served his
uncle Laban twenty years, and was to return to his Country [an Angel of God
appearing to him in sleep said: I am the God Genesis 31. v. 11. 13. Genesis 32. v.
1. 2.
^^ Bethel, where thou did anoint the stone, and did vow the vow unto
me.] And [in the way Angels met him, whom (because they were many) he called
Ma^^^^im, that is Camps.] And he prayed that his nephews, the sons of
Joseph, might Genesis 48. v. 18.
be blessed of one peculiar Angel, as him self was by him protected, saying:
[the Angel that delivers me from al evils; bless these children.] It was an
Angel that guided the Israelites, parting from Egypt, and remaining in the
desert, by a pillar of a cloud in the day, and in the night, by a pillar of
fire. For so Moses expressly signifies saying: [the Angel of Exo. 13. v. 21.
Exo. 14. v. 19. Gal. 3. v. 19.
God that went before the camp, removing him self, went behind them.] That the
Law was delivered by Angels, S. Paul affirms saying: [It was ord^ined by
Angels, in the hand of a mediator.]

4 Likewise, after that the Law was given, God The ministry of Angels
continued also after the law was received.
promised still the protection of an Angel, with admonition to the people, to
respect and obey him. [Behold (says God) I will send mine Angel, which Exo. 23.
v. 20. v. 21.
shall go before thee and keep thee in thy Journey, and bring thee into the
place that I have prepared; observe him, and hear his voice; neither do thou
think him one to be contemned, for he will not forg^ue when thou have sinned,
and my name is in him. But if thou will he are his voice, and do all that I
speak; I will be enemy v. 22.
to thine enemies, and will afflict them that a^^^ct thee. etc] An Angel also
appeared to Iosue in shape of Ios. 5. v. 14.
a warrier, who avouched him self to be ^a Prince of the host of our Lord.]
After Iosue his death, an Angel appearing to the people assembled together,
Iudic. 2. v. 14.
when they were afflicted, admonished them of their sins. Whereupon they
repented, and were delivered from their enemies. In like sort, falling often
to sin, and in affliction repenting: God raised up Judges, and warriers,
which delivered them from invasions. Amongst which, Gedeon was sent by an
Angel, Iudic. 6. v. 11. 12. 14. v. 37. v. 39. 40. Iudic. 13. v. 3. 4. 7.
confirming his mission to be from God, by two miracles [in a sleece of wolle,
which was moist with dew, when the ground where it lay, was dry; and again
was dry, when the ground was wette with dew.] To the Mother of Samson [an
Angel of our Lord appeared and said; thou art barren and without children, but
thou shall conceive and bear a sonne] warned her to abstain from wine, sicer,
and unclean things, [because the child should be a nazarite al his life.]
Appearing also to Manue her husband, confirmed v. 13. 4. Reg. 6. v. 16. 17.
the same. When [Elizeus was beset in the City of Dothan, with troops of men:
he not only saw, but also obtained by prayer, that his servant likewise did see
the mountain full of horses, and of sirie chariots round about] which were
Angels; by whose 4. Reg. 7. v. 6.
protection, he was delivered. Being also in Samaria when it was besieged, and
in extreme distress: he saw and prophesied, the fleeing away of their enemies,
v. 7.
which was wrought by [Angels terrifying the Assirian Camp, by a sound of
chariots, and horses, and of a very great army; whereupon they fled in the
darck, and left their tents, and their horses, and asses in the camp,
desireous to save their lives only.] When Jerusalem was distressed by
Sennacherib, King of the Assirians, after that the Prophet Isaias, and King
Ezechias had prayed, [an Angel of our 4. Reg. 19. v. 35. 2. Par. 32. v. 2^.
Isac. 33. v. 3. Is. 37. v. 36.
Lord came, and stroke, in the camp of the Assirians, an hundred eighty five
thousand.] What pro^it, and protection, Tobias, and his Son, and daughter in
law, received by the ministry of S. Raphael, the Angel of our Lord, is
written at large in the book of Tobias, from the third Chapter, to the twelft.
Holy Iudi^h also, was protected and guided, by an Angel of our Lord, in her
heroical, and admirable exploite, for the saiftie of her country. As I cite
not Tob. 3. v. 25. ad. cap. 12. v. 21. 21. Judith. 13. v. 20. Job. 9. v. 13.
Ps. 33. v. 8. Ps. 90. v. 11.
these books for want of others: so I would not here omit them, being also
Canonical. It seems by the It is probable that the celestral spheres are moved
by Angels. Ministry of Angels is often testified by the Propeths.
doctrine of holy Job, that Angels are the mouers of the celestial Spheres,
where he says: that [vnder God they stoop, that carry the world.]

5 The Royal Psalmist clearly says: [The Angel of our Lord shall put in him
self about them that fear (our Lord) and shall deliver them. Because he ha^th
given his Angels charge of thee, that they keep thee in all thy ways.] In
respect of Angels presence, Solomon advises al men, to govern well their
speech Eccle. 5. v. 5. Baruc. 6. v. 6.
saying: [Geue not thy mouth to make thy flesh to sin; neither say thou
before the Angel; there is no providence.] Jeremy the Prophet, in his Epistle
to the Jews, recites Gods admonition saying: [Mine Angel is with you: and
my self will ask account Dan. 3. v. 49. 50.
of your souls.] Daniel records, that [the Dan. 3. v. 49. 50.
Angel of our Lord descended with Azarias and his fellows into the furnace, and
he shook the flame of the fire out of the furnace, and made the midst of the
furnace, as a wind of dew blowing, and the fire touched the^ not at al, nor
pained them, nor did them any greuance] which was so clear, that King
Nabuchodonoser, having put three men into the furnace [saw also a fourth person
walking with them] v. 92. v. 95.
and confessed, that [God whom they served, had sent his Angel, and delivered
his servants that believed in Dan. 6. v. 22. Dan. 14. v. 30. 31. ^ach. 1. v. 11.
12.
him.] Daniel him self being cast into the Lions de^ne, and there protected,
says [My God has sent his Angel, and has shut up the mouths of the Lions,
and they have not hurt me.] An Angel also carried Habacuc, from Jury, into
Babylon, with meat for Daniel, when he was at an other time, six days in the
den of seven hungry Lions. And as the Prophet Zachary writes [an Angel
said (and prayed) i^ Z^ch. 3. v. 7.
these words. O Lord of hoastes, how long will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, with which thou have been angry.] God
also Angels assist the Prelates of the Church.
promised, that Angels shall assist the Prelates of the Church saying to them [I
will give thee walkers of them that now assist here].

Angels protectors of countries and kingdoms: And do pray for them.
6 That Angels have protection of Countries, appears by the relation of the
same Prophet Daniel, whose Angel said to him, that whiles he prayed for the
delivery of the Jews [the Prince (says he) of the Dan. 10. v. 13.
Kingdom of the Persians, resisted me one and twenty days. And behold
Michael, one of the chief princes, came to aid me:] And being strengthened v.
19. 20. 21.
and going forth, there appeared the Prince of the S. Michael the protector of
the Church in the old Testament: and also of the Christian Church.
Greeks coming. (And Gabriel the Angel said) [But yet I will tell thee, that
which is expressed in the Scripture of truth; and none is my helper in all
these, but Michael your Prince.] And again, foreshewing to Daniel the
persecutions of Antiochus, and of Antichrist, signifies plainly, that S.
Michael is the special protector of the Church, saying: [But in that Dan. 12.
v. 1.
time, shall rise up Michael the great Prince, who stands for the children of
thy people.] In part fulfilled, when Judas Machabeus, with a small army
visiblie encoraged, and invisibly assisted by the Angel that appeared, going
before them as [an horseman 2. Mac. 11. v. 6. 8.
in white clothing, with armor of gold, shaking a speare] so overthrew Lysias
with his army of fourscore thousand footmen, and a great band of horsemen,
that Lysias was forced to seek peace: and Antiochus v. 22. 27.
constrained to grant it, by his several letters presently sent, both to
Lysias and to the Jews them selves; with pretense of great good will toward
them. God still uses the ministry of Angels, in this time of grace.


7 In the new Testament also it is clear, that God uses the ministry of
Angels, and that we receive many gracious benefits, by the same ministry,
and mediation of the holy Angels. The Archangel [Gabriel, was sent from God
(to declare his Divine will) Luc. 1. v. 26. 28.
to the most B. Virgin] and taking her submissiue consent thereto, the Son of
God was incarnate and made Man, our Redemer. [An Angel signified to Mat. 1. v.
20.
Joseph her spouse, that she had conceived, not of man but of the Holy Ghost.]
An Angel declared the joyful birth of our B. Savior, to Shepheardes: and Luc.
2. v. 10. 14.
a multitude of Angels, praised God for the same saying: [Glorie in the highest
to God: and in earth peace to men of good will.] An Angel admonished Mat. 2. v.
13. 19. Mat. 4. v. 11.
Joseph, to slay with the Child, and his Mother into Egypt. An Angel recalled
them from thence. Angels ministered to our Savior in the desert. Our Savior
threatens the scandalizers of little ones, subnecting this reason, why such
should fear ^euenge, [Because their Angels in heaven, always see the face
Every one has a proper Angel Guardian.
Mat. 18. v. 10.
of his Father] which imports that Angels are Guardians, and protectors of
men. He also assirmeth, that [there shall be joy before the Angels of God, upon
Luc. 15. v. 10. Luc. 16. v. 22. Joan. 5. v. 5. Luc. 22. v. 43. Mat. 28. v. 5.
Io. 20. v. 12. 13. Act. 1. v. 10. Act. 5. v. 19. Act. 12. v. 7. 15.
one sinner that does penance] which could not be, except they knew when
sinners repent. [The soul of poor Lazarus was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom.] The Pond of Probatica [the water being stirred by an Angel] had virtue
to heal any corporal infirmity. [Our B. Savior vouchsai^ed to receive
comforth of an Angel, when he was in agony.] The night of his Passion [Angels
declared his Resurrection.] Angels appearing at his Ascension, [warned us to
expect his coming ^ to judge. An Angel delivered the Apostles out of prison,
when they were imprisoned: And particularly S. Peter, when Herodement to have
s^ine him. And when he repaired to his faithful friends, they hearing suddenly
of his being at the doare, thought it had been [ his Angel] so firmly they
believed, that he had an Angel his proper Guardian. An Angel signified to
Corne^us, Act. 10. v. 4.
that his prayers and alms deeds, were ascended into heaven. An Angel told S.
Paul [that he must appear before Caesar (at Rome) and that [God Act. 27. v.
23. 24. 1. Cor. 11. v. 10. Heb. 1. v. 14. Apoc. 1. v. 1. etc.
had given him the lives of al those that ^ailed with him.] S. Paul teaches
that [it is meet for women to be covered, in respect of Angels] which are
present in the Church. He affirms that [Angels are ministering Spirits, sent
to minister for them that shall receive the inheritance of salvation.] An Angel
[reueled to S. John, the high and hard misteries] written by him in the
Apocalypse. Finally, in the end of this world, an Archangel shall call al men to
Judgment, sounding his Trumpet. And then Angels as [the reapers (of Gods
corn) shall gather the good Mat. 13. v. 30. 39. 40. 44.
(as his wheat) into the barn (the glorious kingdom of heaven) And shall cast
the wicked into the furnace of fire.] In the mean time, Angels, and other
Saints in heaven, [do present before the La^be (Christ) the odoures (that is
the prayers) of the faithful 1. These. 4. v. 16. Apoc. 5. v. 8. 2. Pet. 2. v. 19.
in earth.]

8 Contrariwise, devils, of mere malice and envy, Devils do tempt men by
suggesting evil motions.
tempt men, and seek their ruin, to bring them by offending God, to be
bond-slaues to sin [For wherewith a man is overcome, of that he is the slave
also] says S. Peter. And our Lord said to certain reprobate Jews [you are of
your father the devil, and the Joan. 8. v. 44.
desires of your father you will do. He was a mankiller from the beginning]
that is, a destroier of spiritual life in man, when he overcame our first
Parents, Genesis 3. v. 4. 6. Joan. 13. v. 2.
tempting them to break Gods commandment. So also [the devil put into the
heart of Judas Iscariote, to betray Christ.] This inueterate adversary the
devil [as a roaring Lion, goes about, seeking whom he may devour.] It is most
true and confessed by all, that devils can, and do, suggest, by secret internal
motions, to men's hearts, al kinds of sin. And it is no less certain,
both in reason, and Catholic faith (though the devil have bewitched some not
to believe it) that holy Angels, can, and do, suggest good motions, to the
secret minds of men: not by corporal tongues, ears, nor eyes (for this is as
frivolous an imagination in respect of devils, as of holy Angels) but by other
means to us insensible, or at least inexplicable. And it is tooto absurd, to
It is very absurd to deny, that good Angels can s^ggest good (...).
deny that power and habilite, to be in the B. Angels; which can not b^ denied
to be in wicked devils. And how like in this respect, glorious souls are to
Part 4. Article 44. 45.
holy Angels, is to be showed in the Articles of praying to Saints.

Man at first received Original Justice, which he lost by transgressing Godd^s
C^mmandement, and infected al his Progeny, with Original sin. ARTICLE. 13.
AFter Angels, Man is the most principal creature, Man made to the image and
lik^tes of God.
whose body being formed of the sl^me of the earth, his soul was created
immediately by God; not produced of any thing preexisting. For as holy
Scripture says: [Our Lord breathed Genesis 2. v. 7.
into his face the spirit of life, and man became a living soul.] Not as the
soul or life of beasts, and plants, but a living soul for ever immortal;
endued with understanding* and free will; a rational creature [made to the Image
and likeness of God] capable of the vision of God, which is eternal glory. His
Body perfected with health, strength, beawtie, egilitie, and other excellent
qualities, with admirable disposition of parts, and members apt for all humane
functions. His soul was adorned further, not only with all natural knowledge,
but also with supernatural grace. And so man was placed in the Paradise of
pleasures, and had Dominion over all the earthly and corporal creatures of this
lower world. in diverse respects participant of the natures of al other
creatures. And therefore is aptly called Michrocosmos: A little world.
A little world within him self. Al which is testified, and proved by holy
Scriptures.

2 When God had made heaven and earth, and other Man's excellent knowledge in his
state of innocence.
particular creatures, behooful for man's use: then Genesis 1. v. 26.
he said [Let us make man to our Image and likeness; and let him have dominion
over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of thaire, and the beasts, and the
whole earth, and al creeping creature, that month upon the earth.] Such was
then man's natural Genesis 2. v. 19. 20.
knowledge, that when [our Lord brought unto him al beasts of the earth, and
fowls of the air, that he might see what to call them, he called them al by
their names; for as Adam called any living creature, the same is his name]
that is, the same is the Etimologie or brief description of their several
natures. And v. 21. v. 22.
when [God had cast a dead sleep upon Adam, and had taken one of his ribs,
and built (or framed) the same into a woman, and brought her to Adam] he v. 23.
said [this now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. she shall be called
woman, because she was taken out of man]: As the original tongue signifies
which in latin is interpreted virago, that is, virum agere, or virum
representare, to act or represent a man. He was more excellent in supernatural
grace.
Much greater, were his spiritual graces, original instice, pure innocence,
from al fault and sin; habits of al virtues, theological and moral, in that
perfect rectitude of mind, that his reason and will were readily subject to Gods
will; the inferior powers of his soul subject to reason; and also al el^mental
living creatures; even the terrible Lions, the cruel Tigers, the great
Elephantes, wildest birds, most hidden and huge fishes, were obedient to his
commandment.

3 In this so happy state, whiles man knew and enjoyed God gave man a
particular precept, for excereise of obedience. And so to merit more grace.
much good, and neither knew not felt any evil; God who is goodness it self,
for man's more good, for his exercise in virtue, that he might merit and
receive more grace, and perseuering therein should never have died, but have
been translated to eternal glory: gave him a particular precept, not to eat
of the fruit of a cettaine tree (upon this occasion afterward called the tree
of knowledge of good and cuil) with charge and fore-warning, that if he should
transgress this commandment [what day soever he Genesis 2. v. 17.
should cate of it, he should dye the death.]

4 But the serpent (the devil in form of a serpent) The devil deceived Eve, by
sutletie, and three egregious lies.
malicious against God, and ^nuious of man's good, suttly assaulting the
woman, said unto her: [why Genesis 3. v. 1.
has God commanded you that you should not eat of every tree in paradise?]
added also to his subtle and calumnious demand, three most pernicious lies:
that by eating of this fruit, they should not incur v. 4. v. 5.
death; that they should become as gods; and that God therefore forbade them
to eat thereof, l^st they should be as gods. Which she hearing, and not
suspecting the devils craft, no^ malice, and s^ing withal v. 16.
the tree, and fruit to be good [faire to the eyes, She allured Adam and so
they, and al mankind, l^st original iust^^e; incurred sin and death.
and delect^ble to behold, t^ be of the fr^^e theerof, v. 7
and did ^^^e, and gave to her husband, who did eat. An^ by and by, they were
ash^med, perceiving their own ^akednes ^ which before had no deformity. But
their disobe^^ence to God, al was changed, inn^^encie, with all virtues l^st;
nature corrupted; a^^ they made slaves to the devil, subject to sin and
death, with other losies perteyning to al mankind.

5 Al which holy David amongst other Prophets and Gods wonderful mercy in
redeming man, and recalling him to repentance.
godly persons, considering, and admiring the goodness of god, who after so
great benefits bestowed upon man, and his ingratitude in so transgressing; yet
recalled him to rep^ntance, and promised a Redemer to deliver him from
thraldom; cries thus unto God Ps. 8. v. 2.
our so merciful Savior [O Lord our Lord, how marvelous is thy name in the
whole earth?] Marvelous in very deed in all things, as well in heaven, as in
earth: but to mankind, above al, most bountiful, in first and last benefits,
who deserving nothing, rec^iuing much good, and rendering evil; is not for all
that utterly rejected, as he justly deserved, but eftsons ^. 5.
recalled to new grace, and to eternal glory [what is man (says the same
Royal Psalmist to our Lord God) that thou art mindful of him; or the son of
man that thou visitest him] then describing his first v. 6.
dignity and happy state, adds [thou have minished him a little less then
Angels: with glory and honor thou have crowned him, and have appointed him v.
7. v. 8.
over the work of thy hands. Thou have subjected al things under his feet:
al sheep and oxen; moreover v. 9.
also the beasts of the feelde. The birds of the air, and fishes of the sea,
that walk the paths of the sea.] In fine, because Gods love lasts to the
end, redeming and saving his servants perseuering in grace, concludes the
psalm as he began [O ^. 10.
Lord our Lord, how marvelous is thy name in the whole earth?]

6 The same Prophet in an other psalm affirms, That al mankind was infected
with sin by Ada^es fall, is (...) by ^olie Scriptures.
Ps. 13. v. 1.
that al are become abominable, there is not one that does good, ^o not ^^^.
And so bewailing man's doleful sta^e after sin, says in the name of al
mankind. ^ The soro^^^ of death ha^ ^ con passed ne: and torments of iniquiti^
have troubled me. The sorrows of hell have compassed me; the snares of death
have prevented me.] And exhorting penitents to sin no more; puts us in
mind, that lack of consideration, Ps. 17. v. 5. 6*
bro^ght our first parents to sin, who having reason and vnderstandiug, did
not use it in time of tentation [Man (says he) when he was in honor, Ps. 48.
v. 13. 21.
did not (actually) understand (was so negligent, and so allured with vain and
false imagination, as if he had been without understanding) he was compared to
beasts without understanding, and became like to them.] Signifying that not
actual understanding and considering, when present use thereof is requi^ed,
makes a man like to beasts, which indeed have no understanding.

7 Now that this great alteration of man's state, and Not God, but man him
self, by the devils tentation was the cause of sin, and death.
v
cause thereof, proceeded from him self, (yelding to tentation) and not of God:
Solomon breefly teaches after a large discourse of man's present infirmity,
in these few words [onlie this (says he) I have Eccle. ^. v. 30.
found, that God made man right, and he has entangled him self with infinite
questions.] Of al questions, that first was most hurtful to mankind, which was
propound^d by the devil [why God commanded abstinence from one tree?] wherewith
our first parents ought not to have entangled them selves. for that true
obedience performs whatsoever is commanded, without asking, or answearing,
but leaving to God the reason, why he has so commanded. Conformablie v^
to Solomon, the Auctors of the books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, speak of
the alteration of man's state, and of the cause thereof proceeding from him
self, by yelding to tentation, and not from God [For God created man
incorruptible (says the Sap. 2, v. 23. 24.
sacred text) and to the Image of his own likeness he made him. But by the
envy of the devil, death entered into the world] In the former verse showing,
that God made man according to his own Image, without corruption, that he
might have escaped death, if he had refrained from sin: in the next verse he
ascribes the cause of death to the devil, as first auctor of man's sin, by
which death entered upon man, who leaving Gods commandment, followed the
persuasion of the crafty envious serpent. And so this divine writer adds in
the last verse; [that they v. 25.
follow him (the devil) that are of his part] that is, those that embrace the
devils suggestion, and join party with him, are the folowers and the servants
of the devil. Which same doctrine, the other holy writer explicateth somewhat
more largely saying: [God Eccle. 15. v. 14. 15. 16.
from the beginning made man; and left him in the hand of his own counsel. He
added his commandments and precepts. If thou will keep the commandment, and
keep acceptable fidelity; for ever they shall preserve thee. He has set before
thee 17.
water and fire, to which thou will, stretch forth thine hand. Before man there
is life and death, good and 18.
Gods wisdom requires ma^s cooperation to merit. His power draws good of
evil. His Goodness hates sin
evil, what pleases him, shall be given him.] And the reason why God left man
in his free choice, is here ascribed to his divine wisdom, power, and goodness
[because the wisdom of God is much, and he v. 19.
is strong in might, seeing al men without intermission. The eyes of our Lord
are toward them that fear 20. 21.
him, and he knows all the work of man. He has commanded no man to do
impiously, and he has given no man space to sin. For he desires not a 22.
multitude of faithles and unprofitable children.] Again the same is
inculcated for better impression thereof in our minds. [God created man of the
earth, Eccle. 17. v 1. 2.
and after his own Image he made him. And again he turned him into it, and
conformable to him self, clothed him with strength.] For man at first received
original justice, and strength of grace, whereby he might if he would, have
resisted al tentations. He received also other power and dominion in the earth
as follows in the text. [God gave him a number of v. 3.
days, and time; and gave him power of those things that are upon the earth.
He put his fear over al flesh v. 4. 5.
and he had dominion of beasts, and fowls. He created of him an helpe^ like
to him self; he gave them counsel, and tongue, and eyes, and ears, and heart to
devise: and he filled them with the discipline of understanding. He created in
them the knowledge of 6.
the spirit, he filled their heart with understanding, and evil and good he
showed them. He set his eye upon 7.
their hearts, to show them the great things of his works; that they might
praise the name of sanctification; and glory in his marvelous works, 8.
that they might declare the glorious things of his works. He added
discipline unto them, (giving 9.
them a precept for exercise of their obedience, thereby to merit reward) and
made them inherit the Law of life. He made an everlasting Testament with them;
10.
and he showed them Justice, and his judgments.] Thus writes the wise man
concerning the first state and fall of mankind. In all his book teaching, and
exhorting al men, to serve God, and to contemn this world. [Who is proved
therein (says he) and Eccl. 31. v. 10.
perfect; shall have eternal glory.] In sum he defines who it is that shall
be so happy; to wit, [he that could transgress, and has not transgressed;
and do evils, and has not done.]

8 Wherein we may easily consider, not only the The merit and glory of the
just is by reason of their free choice, not to do evil when they could do it.
wisdom, power, and goodness of God; but also the everlasting joy of the B.
Saints to be herein declared, that those do merit and receive eternal
glory, which could transgress and did not, whereas if God had made man so,
that he could not transgress; there had not been this just cause of merit,
nor of reward. Yea albeit man by the abuse of this power, fell from God, and
from his first happy state: yet God turns this evil, both to his ownemore
glory, and to the greater good of al those, that will receive and rightly use
his new grace, then if Adam had not fallen.

9 For his sin had (as is reveled in holy Scripture) Adams sin had two
effects. One evil of the nature of sin. The other good, by the goodness of
God.
two far different effects, the one proper and connatural to his offense,
which was the infection of al his progeny, borne (by natural generation) with
original sin; the other effect, was also by occasion of this infection of al
mankind; but properly of the inexplicable goodness of God, ordeining for remedy
of this universal evil, the incarnation of our B. Savior Christ; by whose
superabunda^t grace, his faithful children are cleansed from al sins,
original, and actual; and made participant of greater grace, and consequently
of greater glory, then otherwise they should have been. Both which effects,
S. Paul The first effect: infection of al man with sin.
teaches: Especially in his Epistle to the Romans. Of the former writing
thus. [As by one man sin Romans 5. v. 13.
entered into this world, and by sin death: so unto al men death did pass, in
which al sinned.] Which he confirms answearing to an objection, that it might
seem, there was no such general sin in all men, seeing before the Law, it did
not so appear in all; therefore he says, [that also in that former time, v. 13.
even unto the Law, sin was in the world; but sin was not imputed (or did
not appear) when the Law was not. But death (which is the effect of sin) v.
14.
reigned from Adam unto Moses; even on them also, that sinned not, after the
similitude of the preuarication of Adam] to wit on those more just persons
also, that did not actually transgress as Adam had done, yet they died,
because they were originallie sinners. And so the Apostle concludes this first
point with an appendix that [Adam is a figure of him to come] signifying that
as by the sin of Adam we al dye; so by the grace of Christ, al his children
live. 10 Touching the other effect, he adds the great The other effect;
abundance of grace by Christ.
difference, saying: [But not as the offense, so also v. 15.
the gift. For if by the offense of one, many dyed: much more the grace of
God, and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus Christ, has abounded upon
many. [And not as by one sin, so also the gift; for judgment 16.
indeed is of one to condemnation: but grace is of many offenses to
justification. For if in the offense 17.
of one, death reigned by one: much more they that receive the abundance of
grace, and of the donation, and of Justice; shall reign in life, by one Jesus
Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one unto al 18.
men, to condemnation: so also by the justice of one, unto al men to
justification of life. For as by the disobedience 19.
of one man, many were made sinners: so also by the obedience of one, many
shall be made just.] Thus S. Paul in that place. By which doctrine of the
Apostle, is verified that which the Church so solemnly sings in the
festiuitie of our Redemption: O certe necessarium Adae peccatum, quod Christi
morte deletum est! O faelix culpa, quae talem et tantum meruit habere
Redemptorem. Whereto agree many other passages in the rest of S. Paul his
doctrine. And the same is breefly comprised, in that which S. John Baptist
denounced of Our Savior, saying: [Behold Joan. 1. v. 29.
the Lamb of God; behold him that takes away the sin of the world.] That
is, Principally Christ came to take away that general sin, which being actual
in Adam, is original in the whole world; and thereof called The sin of the
world. And the same is the general doctrine of S. John the Apostle and
Evangelist, saying: [If we walk in the light, as God 1. Joan. 1. v. 7.
also is in the light; we have society one toward an other, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from al sinne] first from Original, then
also from actual.

Man's understanding and Freewil, are weakened by sin, but not wholly lost.
ARTICLE. 14.
A Certain man (says our Savior in a Parable) Al mankind was spoiled of
grace, and wounded in natural faculties by Adams fall.
Luc. 10. v. 30. etc.
went down from Jerusalem into Jericho, and fell among thieves, who spoiled him,
and giving him wounds, went away, leaving him half dead.] Of no particular
man, can this parable be so properly expounded, as of al mankind in general,
cont^ined in Adam our first Parent: who being endued with all necessary gifts,
natural, and supernatural, going from Gods commandment, yielded to false
imagination of bettering his state, as it were descending from Jerusalem, the
vision of peace, to Jericho, signifying the moon (which is unconstant, and
mutable) fell among thieves, the devils, who spoiled and wounded him, and left
him half dead. For so Adam by sinning, and al men in him, were spoiled of
original Justice, and supernatural grace, and wounded in natural powers of
understanding, and f^eewil: not wholly deprived of al, but spoiled of the best
part, and wounded in the rest: spiritually dead, and subject, both to temporal
and eternal death: yet not actually dead in body, nor desperately in soul, but
s^miuiuo relicto, left half dead, and half alive, though left without help by
the Priest, and Leuite, the Sarifices, and other ministeries of the old Law;
yet releued by the merciful Samaritan, our Savior Christ, by him brought into
the Inn the Catholic Church; whereal spiritual wounds are curable, and
losses recouerable, by Gods grace strengthening, and inhabling man to
cooperate therewith, by faith and good works. For as it is impossible for any
man, without grace, either to do, or to think any good thing: 2. Cor. 3. v.
5. Phil. 4. v. 13.
so by grace, man's understanding is illuminated, and his will is inclined, to
believe, and to keep Gods Law. And as for the power of understanding, no
Protestants acknowledge that man was not wholly deprived of understanding. Yet
Manichees and Protestants deny freewil to remain in man.
man is altogether so sottish, but he supposes and confesses, that he has
the same in his soul, else he were a mere brute beast, not a man, if he had no
reason, nor understanding at al, actually, or potentially, as we speak in
scooles. But touching the other connatural power of freewil: some men have so
little reason left, that they deny it to be in man, since the sin and fall of
Adam. So fantastical were the Maniches, an old infamous sect of heretics. And
so sensles was Luther, the father of al Protestautes, that he could not brook,
the very name and word Liberum arbitrium, but changed it into the contrary
term seruum arbitrium. And so being moved to write against Freewil, entitled
his brutish work; De seruo arbitrio, of servile, or slavish will. For so much
therefore, as most Protestants hold with Luther in this doctrine: I shall here
recite such holy Scriptures, as most plainly show, that every man, whether
he be just, or wicked, if he have the use of reason, has also fredom of will to
consent, or not to consent, to those things, thoughts, words, and deeds,
which his understanding cenceiueth. For even as the conceit, is the proper act
of the understanding: so is consent the proper act of the will.

2 To begin therefore with the state of wicked men, That freewil remains in
sinners is proved by holy Scriptures.
more enormous sinners, whereof ther^may seem to be more doubt: it is clear,
that Cain having concei^ed malice and envy against his brother Abel; when he
was exceeding angry, and his countenance abated; [Our Lord said unto him; why
art thou angry? and Genesis 4. v. 5. 6. 7.
why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not receive again?
but if thou do il, shall not thy sin forthwith be present at the door? But
the lust thereof shall be under thee, and thou shall have dominion over it.]
Which last words, do so inuinciblie prove freewil to remain in a wicked
sinner (the lust of sin being under him, and he having dominion over it) that
our adversaries to avoid the force of so manifest conviction, have corrupted
the holy text in their English translations, making it to say Eulish Bibles.
An. 1579. 1603
thus. Unto thee his desire shall be subject: and thou shall rule over him.
Absurdly referring that to Abel (who is not at al named in Gods expostulation
with Cain) which is directly spoken of the lust or concupiscence of sin. As
if God had said, that the desire of Abel, should be subject to Cain; and Cain,
should have dominon over him. An other example is in the case of Pharao being
indurate in heart. In whom yet remained freewil, as plainly appears by Gods
admonition, which Moses declared unto him saying: [This says our Lord:
Dismiss my people Exo. 8. v. 20. 21.
to sacrifice unto me. And if thou will not dismiss them, behold I will send in
upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and upon thy houses, al
kind of flees] which conditional threatening of punishment, if pharao would not
dismiss the Israelites* shows that it was in his choice, whether he would
dismiss them or no. Neither could God have justly punished him, if it had not
been in his choice and power.

3 Gods couena^ts also made with his people, do That men have freewil is
proved by the couenantes made between God and his people.
prove the same liberty of will, to be in all men. For unless men have fee will,
to break, or not to break Gods precepts, the covenant were in vain, and
the precepts should not have been given in such form of words as they are,
with express terms of conditions, to be rewarded or punished, accordidg as
they would keep, or not keep, Gods commandment. As when Moses prared God to
remain, and go with the people, and [take away their sins and Exo. 34. v.
9. v. 10.
iniquities, and possess them: our Lord answered; I will make a covenant in
the sight of al] which being made by the peoples good liking, and free cons^nt,
that none afterward should plead ignorance, or pretend oblivion for excuse:
Moses repeateth it unto them, and left it written in these words. [Thou have
chosen our Lord this day to be thy God Deuteronomy. 26. v. 17. v. 18. v. 19.
and to walk in his ways, and keep his ceremonies, and precepts, and
judgments. And our Lord has chosen thee this day, that thou should be his
peculiar people: and he will make thee higher, then al nations which he created,
that thou may be a holy people of our Lord thy God:] But ever with this
condition [If after thou have heard these judgments, Deuteronomy. 7. v. 12. Deuteronomy. 11.
v. 16.
thou keep and do them: the Lord also thy God will keep the covenant unto thee,
and the mercy which he swear to thy Fathers.] And for that there can be no
doubt on Gods part: that the people should not fail; Moses again and again
warns them saying [Beware lest perhaps your heart be deceived, and you depart
from our Lord, and serve strange gods, and adore them.] Yea if they fall, they
have still, through grace which God will give them, power to return if they will,
and then God will agane rejoice upon them [Yet so (says he) if thou hear the
voice Deuteronomy. 30. v. 9. 10. v. 15.
of our Lord thy God, and keep his precepts. Consider that I have set before
thee this day, life and good; and contrariwise, death and evil.] v. 19.
I call for witnesses this day heaven and earth, that I have proposed to you,
life and death; blessing and cursing: Choose therefore life, that both thou
may live, and thy seed.] Iosue in the very same manner, a little before
Iosue. 24. v. 14.
his death, so iterateth these admonitions, as he mu^t needs suppose, that it
is in man's freewil, to break, or not break, Gods commandments saying: [Now
therefore fear our Lord, and serve him with a perfect and very true heart: and
take away the gods which your fathers served in Mesopotamia, and in Egypt,
and serve our Lord. But if it like you not to serve v. 15.
our Lord, choice is given you; choose this day that which pleases you etc.
And the people answered v. 16.
and said: God forbid we should leave our Lord, and serve strange gods.]
Whereupon Iosue, to ratify the covenant, concludes it, saying to the people:
[you are witnesses, that your selves have chosen unto v. 22.
you, our Lord for to serve him. And they answered witnesses. Now therefore
(quoth he) take away v. 23. v. 24. v. 25.
strange gods out of the midst of you, and incline your hearts to our Lord
the God of Israel. And the people said to Iosue, we will serve our Lord God, and
will be obedient to his precepts. Iosue therefore that day made a covenant, and
proposed to the people precepts and Judgments in Sichem.] After al which good
purposes, and solemn promises, this people fell often from God, and were
punished: repenting also were releued; as is recorded in the Histories
following, of the Judges and Kings.

4 In which mean time, many Prophets, with great Proved by the admonition of
Prophets, and other godly men.
zeal and diligence admonished sinners, as having power of the will, to sin,
or not to sin. David cried [Doe not become as horse and mule, which have Ps.
31. v. 9.
no understanding.] Arguing, that seeing they have understanding, whereby they
excel horse and mule, and al brute beasts; it behooves them not to become in
life and manners, like to brute beasts, but doing that which reason directs,
show them selves by right use of their will, that they therein also excel
beasts. And because wilful obstinacy does obscure the understanding; he
imputes affected ignorance to the will saying of such a one [he would not
understand Ps. 35. v. 4.
that he might do well.] And for that no man can without special grace, do
that is right, as the Prophet Iereremie affirms saying: [I know Lord,
Ieremies words do not disprove freewil, but testify the weakness thereof
without Gods grace.
Iere. 10. v. 23.
that man's way is not his own, neither is it in a man, to walk, and to
direct his steps:] So much the more man is bond, not to resist grace, being
often offered by God; which holy David calls making of the way, whereof he
says: [Make way to him Ps. 67. v. 5.
who mounteth upon the west] that is, resist not, but joyfully with consent of
will, receive the inspirations of God. Which sense is confirmed by that the same
Royal Prophet, showing the cause why some perish, to be their refusing to
approach to God, and fleeing from him [For behold (says he) they that Ps. 72.
v. 27. Ps. 80. v. 9
make them selves far from thee, shall perish.] Therefore also God him self
says [Heare, o my people, and I will contest thee (most seriously admonish
thee) Israel, if thou will hear me.] Again the same prophet cries unto the
Israelites [To day if you will Ps. 94. v. 8. Heb. 3. v. 8. Prou. 1. v. 24. 25.
26. 29. 30.
hear his voice, harden not your hearts.] Of the same wilful resistance,
wisdom admonishes, and threatens ruin for this contempt [Because I called
(says wisdom) and you refused; I streatched out my hand, and there was none
that reguarded; You have despised al my counsel, and have neglected my
reprehension: I also will laugh in your destruction, and will scorn, when that
shall come to you, which you feared. For they have hated discipline, and not
received the fear of our Lord, nor consented to my counsel.] Likewise on the
other side, wisdom promises Prou. 2. v. 1.
al good things to those that will hear and consent to good inspirations. [My
son, if thou will receive my words, and wilt repose my commandments with
thee, that thine ear may hear wisdom, incline thine heart to know prudence.]
Again, [If wisdom shall enter into thine heart, and knowledge v. 10.
please thy soul: counsel shall keep thee, and prudence shall preserve thee.]
Yea the whole tenure of all the Sapiential books is, to teach and persuade man,
to use rightly the two powers of his soul, understanding, and free will, by
most wholesome and divine precepts, which may illuminate the understanding, to
see that is right and just, and inslame the will, and internal affection, to
desire, love, choose, and prefer, the right path of Gods Law, before
whatsoever otherwise seems pleasant, or profitable.

5 Nevertheless, let us add some few sentences of More testimonies of the
Prophets.
other Prophets, to the same purpose. Isaias, as in the behalf of God,
promises the people, both remission of sins, and relaxation from captivity,
with this perpetual condition, if they be willing, and will hear him: then [If
your sins (says he) shall be as scarlet, Isa. 1. v. 18. v. 19.
they shall be made white as snow; and if they be red as vermileon, they shall be
white as wool: If you be willing, and will hear me, you shall eat of the good
things of the earth. But if you will not, and will provoke v. 20.
me to wrath: the sword shall devour you, because the mouth of our Lord has
spoken.] Toward the end of his prophecy, foreshewing the reprobation of the
Jews; he signifies the cause thereof to be, their wilful refusing, to hear
God calling them; and wilful choice of things which God would not. [You shall
al fall by slaughter (says he) because I called, Is. 65. v. 12.
and you have not answered; I spoke, and you have no^ heard; and you did evil
in mine eyes; and you have chosen the things that I would not.] The Prophet
Jeremy in the very same phrase says [If Iere. 4. v. 1.
thou will return, o Israel says our Lord, return to me: if thou will take
away the stumbling blocks from my face, thou shall not be moved. Because you
Iere. 7. v. 13^
have done al these works, says our Lord, and I have 14.
spoken to you early rising, and speaking, and you have not heard, and I have
called you, and you have not answered: I will do to this house (the Temple) as
I did to Silo. And they heard not, nor inclined their v. 24. Iere. 21. v. 8.
Iere. 22. v. 4. 5. Chapter 26. v. 3. 4. 2. Esd. 9. v. 16. 17.
ear, but have gone in their pleasures, and in the peruersitie of their wicked
heart.] In an other place, he recites and urges the Law, where our Lord says.
[Behold I give before you the way of life, and the way of death.] Not God, but
them selves, hardened their own necks, as is written by Esdras [And they would
not hear, and they remembered not thy marvelous works which thou have done to
them. And they hardened their necks, and gave their head to return to their
servitude, as it were by contention.] So all the Prophets in their admonitions,
and comminations, still ascribe the calamities, invasions of enemies, and the
captiuities of Gods people, to their wilful reuolting from God. As having
free will Freewil with Gods grace can merit: and can do il, notwithstanding
Gods grace offered.
and power, through Gods grace, which is never wanting to do well, and also
power to do evil notwithstanding Gods grace which forces not with
necessity, but draws sweetly, as God him self speaks by Osee his Prophet
saying: [In the cords of Osee. 11. v. 4.
Ada^ I will draw them, in the bands of Charity. And I will be to them as
listing up the yoke upon their cheeks, and I declined to him that he might
eat.] 6 This is the sweet yoke of Christ, by which Gods The same doctrine is
confirmed by testimonies of the new Testament.
Mat. 11. v. 30.
grace, and man's freewil, draw together. And this is the light burden of
Gods commandments, and sweet means to obtain remission of sins. For
what can be sweeter, lighter, or more reasonable, then the condition proposed
by our B. Savior [If Mat. 6. v. 14. 15.
you will forgive men their offenses: your heavenly Father will forgive you also
your offenses. But if you will not forgive: neither will your heavenly Father
forgive you your offenses.] Showing that it is in our will, to forgive, or to
desire revenge. And to Jerusalem he said: [How often would I gather Mat. 23. v.
37.
together thy children, and thou would not?] Plainly signifying, that their
will resisted his will. Yea though [the houshoulder bade his servant go forth
God does not otherwise compel, but by good motions: as a friend effectually
persuades by earnest inuitation.
into the ways, and compel them, whom he should Luc. 14. v. 23.
find to enter, that his house might be filled] it was not properly by
compulsion, but by ^arnest and friendly Luc. 24. v. 29.
inuitation to his feast. As when [the two Disciples going to Emaus forced (or
constrained) our Savior, to tarry there with them.] S. John says: [As many
as received Christ: he gave them power Joan. 1. v. 12. Act. 5. v. 4.
to be made the Sons of God.] S. Peter said to Ananias that [it was in his
power] to have offered, or not offered his goods to be in common, signifying
that his sin proceeded merely from his freewil.

7 In all good works it is most certain, that Gods In all good works Gods
grace being the principal cause: Yet freewil is the secundarie cause of merit.
grace, is the first and principal cause, and freewil the secundarie cause,
according to that which S. Paul says of him self [By the grace of God, I am
that 1. Cor. 15. v. 10.
which I am, and his grace in me has not been void, but I have labored more
abundantly then al they: yet not I, but the grace of God with me:] Neither the
Grace of God alone, but the grace of God with me. Both together do effectually
inhable men, to make them selves vessels of salvation, as the same Apostle
likewise writes to Timothy [if any man therefore 2. Tim. 2. v. 21.
shall cleanse himself from the vessels of contumely: he shall be a vessel unto
honor, sanctified and profitable to our Lord; prepared to every good worke]
Because he would that Philemon should have Phile. v. 14.
occasion to merit, by giving his free consent to a good work, he says to
him [Without thy counsel I would do nothing (touching Onesimus) that thy good
might be, not as it were of necessity, but Heb. 12. v. 15.
voluntary.] He exhorts the Hebrews to [folow peace and holiness; looking
diligently lest any man be wanting to the grace of God.] S James wills al to
[be subject to God, and to resist the devil, Iac. 4. v. 7. 8.
and he will slay from you; approach to God and he will approache to you. Cleanse
your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts.] S. John says [Euerie one
that has hope to see God; sanctifies 1. Joan. 3. v. 3. Apoc. 2. v. 21. Apoc.
3. v. 20.
him self] even [Iezabel (or the most wicked) has time given her, that she
might do penance, and she will not repent. To al without exception God says.
[Behold I stand at the doare and knock: If any man God offers grace to al,
sometimes knocking at the door of their hearts.
shall hear my voice, and open the gate, I will enter into him; and I will supp
with him, and he with me.] Thus much, yea any one of these so clear textes of
holy Scripture, may suffice al men that have any consideration, to show, that
as they have reason, they have also freewil, to open, or not to open the doare
of their heart, when God knocks by good inspirations.

After the fall of man, God promised a Redemer: who was also foreshewed by many
figures, and by all the Prophets. ARTICLE. 15.
WHen man had forsaken God by yelding God of his mere mercy decreed to send a
Redemer of mankind.
to the suggestion of the devil, who by falsed and subtlety, seduced our
mother Eve; and by her alurement overthrew Adam: yet God 1. Tim. 2, v. 14.
forsook not man, but by new grace, recalled him to repentance, and for his
Redemption, promised a ransom, in rigor of justice superabundant. For whereas
no men nor Angels, nor any other creatures were able, in this case, to
satisfy Gods justice: God him self ordained to send his only Son, to be
made man, and by dying temporally for all mankind, to pay man's debt of eternal
death, and so to reconcile man to his eternal Father, that al, which will
cooperate with his grace, may be reduced to eternal life; conquering death,
sin, hell, and the devil. Al which we shall, God willing, clearly show by holy
Scriptures, in the Articles following.

2 First therefore that God decreed to send a Redemer God promised this Redemer
to diverse Patriarchs.
of mankind, is proved by his promise made to certain Patriarchs; also by
sundry figures, and by all the Prophets of the old Testament. But first of al,
this verity is manifest by that which God denounced First denounced to the
devil, that the sede of a woman should overcome him.
to the old serpent the devil (when he called our first parents to account for
their sin which they committed, being deceived by the devil) saying: [I Genesis
3. v. 15.
will put enmities between thee and the woman; and thy seed, and her seed: She
shall bruise thy head in pieces.] Signifying that notwithstanding the devil had
prevailed by deceiving Eve, yet he should not still triumph for that victory,
but enmities now unhappily begun, should continue between them; and between
his accomplices, and her progeny: and that she should overthrow him, with all his
power, and so man should be set free from his thraldom, by the seed of the
woman, that is by a Redemer of mankind. This Redemer, God more expressly
promised to Abraham, Pormised it expressly to Abraham.
that he should be borne of his seed saying to him: [In thee shall all the
kindredes of the earth Genesis 12. v. 3.
be blessed.] God also revealing to him his determination to destroy Sodom,
gives this reason of Genesis 18. v. 18. Genesis 22. v. 18.
that familar dealing, for that [in him are to be blessed all the nations of the
earth.] Again to him after his prompt obedience (being read^e to have
sacrificed his son Isaac) God said: [In thy seed, shall be blessed, all the
Nations of the earth; because thou have obeyed my voice.] God renewed and
confirmed the same promise to Isaac saying: [In thy To Isaac. ^
Genesis 26. v. 4. Genesis 28. v. 14.
seed shall be blessed all the Nations of the earth.] Likewise the very same to
Jacob [In thee, and thy To Jacob.
seed, all the Tribes of the earth shall be blessed.] The same promise was also
iterated and confirmed to King David, as him self witnesses saying: [Our To
David.
Ps. 131. v. 11.
Lord has sworn truth to David, and he will not disapoint it: of the fruit of
thy womb, I will set upon thy seat.] These special promises, are accounted
very authentical by the Jews, whereupon they also expect a Redemer, of the
seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and the same to be the son of David, but
grossly erred, and still err, in not receiving him being now come, as in the
next Article is to be proved against them.

3 He was also prefigured by diverse persons, and Ou^ Redemer was prefigured by
diverse persons, and things.
other things, according to his manifold power and qualities; which can not be
sufficiently signified by few, no nor by many similitudes, which as they are
like in some respects, so they are al unlike in many other points. And
therefore we must always esteem the Colos. 2. v. 17. Genesis 4. v. 8.
thing prefigured, far to excel the figure; even as a body is more perfect,
then the shadow thereof. So By Abel.
Abel being unjustly murdered by his brother Cain, was a figure of our
Redemer, who was persecuted, condemned as worthy to die, and delivered by his
own nation the Jews, to be crucified: though actually they did not kill him,
as Cain did kill Abel, for they deny to have so done; and so Cain being
demanded where his brother Abel was, answered, [I know not] yea expostulating
with God, demanded v. 9.
again saying: [Am I my brothers keeper?] Noe in that he was just and perfect
according to the By None.
Genesis 6. v. 9.
perfection of this life, was an other figure of our Savior, who is absolutely
perfect, of whose fulness of grace, al other just receive. Also in that Noe
prepared Genesis 7. v. 23.
the Arck, in which, and no where else, was saiftie from the flood: So our
Savior has prepared his Church, out of which is no salvation. Melchizedec
Genesis 14. v. 18. Genesis 17. v. 5. Genesis 26. v. 28. Genesis 27. v. 15. Genesis 37. v. 4.
Genesis 38. v. 1. etc. Genesis 41. v. 45. Exo. 3. Nu. 13. Iudic. 17. Exo. 12. ^6. et
25. 1. Cor. 10. v. 11.
By Melchisedech
was a notable figure of our Redemer; both a King and a Priest. Abraham the
Father of many Nations; By Abraham, Isaac: and Iocob.
Isaac, ouercoming his adversaries with patience; Jacob clothed with Esaus
Garments, and kiddes skins, were figures of Christ, redeming al Nations by
his Passion, in his assumpted humanity: Joseph being By Joseph.
envied, betrayed, and sold by his brethren; But advanced, and called the
Savior of the world; prefigured him who by his humiliatio^, overcame al
injuries, and saves his people from spiritual famine. So Moses, By Moses,
Iosue, Sampso^, Samuel, David, Solomon.
Iosue, Samuel David, Solomon, and other Prophets, Judges, and Kings, were in
diverse respects, figures of the singular Prophet, Judge of the world, and King
of kings; the promised Messiah; who was also prefigured by the Paschal Lamb;
by Manna By the Paschal Lamb: Manna, the Arc: Brazen serpent.
from heaven; by the Arck of the Testament; brazen Serpent, and many other
things. Breefly the whole Law of Moses, yea and the former state of Gods
people, from the beginning of the world, did obs^urely contain and signify
Christ, and his Church, hidden in the old Testament, and revealed in the new.

4 Prophecies are yet more abundant, and more direct All the Prophets foretold
of our Redemer.
testimonies of the same coming of our Redemer, not only in the books properly
called prophetical, but also in the other parts of the old Testament. But
because we shall have occasion to produce more in diverse mysteries of Christian
Religion; here it may suffice to recite a few. Jacob blessiing his sons,
prophesied Jacob prophesied of him.
much of Christ our Savior. Amongst the rest, speaking of Judas, of whom
Christ should be borne, says thus: [The Scepter shall not be taken Genesis 49. v.
10.
from Judas; and a Duke out of his thigh, til he do come that is to be sent;
and the same shall be the expectation of the Gentiles.] That which was literally
In the figures were incl^uded prophecies.
said of the Paschal Lamb [You shall not break Exo. 12. v. 40.
a bo^e of him] was propheticallie foretold of Christ, and fulfilled, when the
soldiers breaking the legs of the other two, crucified with him; broke no bone
of him, but p^arced his side with a spear, fulfilling also an other prophecy
which said [they shall look Zach. 12. v. 10. Leuit. 9. v. 3. et 15. 16. v. 27.
Heb. 9. 10. et. 13.
on him who^ they pierced.] The sacrificing of Goa^es, oxen, and other things,
and the killing of hoastes for sin, with the carrying of their bodies without
the Camp; did prefigure and prophecy the crucifying of Christ without the
gate. It is a clear prophecy Prophesied by Balaam.
which Balaam uttered (though him self was wicked) saying: [I shall see him, but
not now; I shall behold him, but not nere* A star shall rise out of Jacob, Number.
24. v. 17. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15. 18. Chapter 33. v. 2.
and a rod shall arise from Israel; and shall strike the Dukes of Moab, and
shall wast the children of Seth.] Moses says expressly: [A Prophet of thy
Nation, By Moses more directly.
and of thy brethren, like unto me, will our Lord thy God, raise up to thee, him
thou shall hear.] Of the same Prophet he says: [Our Lord came from Sinai, and
from Seir, is he risen to us. He has appeared Number. 13. v. 17. Ios. 3. etc.
Iudic. 2. v. 16. Chapter 3. v. 9. etc.
from mount Pharaan, and with him thousands of Saints: in his right hand a
fiery Law.] Iosue, in name and office, was a figure foreshewing our Savior
Jesus Christ, who brings his people from the desert of this world, into the
land of promise, the Kingdom of Heaven. All the valiant Judges were Iosue and
all the Judges were prophetical figures of our Redemer.
prophetical figures of our Savior, in that they delivered and saved the
Israelites from their enemies. And namely Samson a professed Nazarite, killing
his adversaries by his* own death. Holy Anne, the Mother of Samuel, in her
Canticle of thankesgeuing, prophesied of Christ our Redemer saying: [Our Lord
1. Reg. 2. v. 10.
Anna prophesied of (...)
shall judge the ends of the earth, and shall give empire to his King, and shall
exalt the horn of his Christ.] In all the historical books, are not only
inserted diverse prophecies of Christ, but also the Histories them The Sacred
Histories are prophetical. Al^^ the Sapiential Books.
selves are prophetical, foreshewing Christ, and mysteries of the new
Testament. So likewise the Sapiential Prou. 3. v. 19. Chapter 9. v. 1. Eccle. 1. v.
1. 2. etc. Cant. 1. v. 1. 2. 3. etc. Ps. 2. 8. 13. 16. 20. 21. 33. 34. 39. 40.
etc.
books, contain some prophecies of Christ, the eternal increated wisdom, the
Son of God, [who by wisdom founded the earth, established the heavens by
prudence] who taking flesh of man [built an house, cut out seven pillers]
teaches to contemn al transitory things of this world, and to seek the
kingdom of heaven, which our Savior teaches; Especially the Canticle of
canticles, is a most divine Especially the Canticle of Canticles. Many Psalms
describe our Saviors Incarnation, Passion, Resur^ction etc. All the Prophets
foreshew our Redemer. See the inner Margen. And if any desire to have more
testimonies of the Prophets may see.
Bridal song, showing the eternal marriage of Christ and his Church. As for the
whole divine Palter of David, very many psalms, are properly of Christ our
Redemer, Savior, Judge, and remunetator; the rest are full of other mysteries,
incomparably more perteyning to the new Testament, then to the old.

5 And albeit the other Prophets do treat of particular things belonging to
the Jews, and their state in the old law, sometimes also of other nations, yet
most especially they foreshew what should come to pass, as well touching the
Gentiles of al nations, as the Jews, by Christ the promised, and expected
Redemer. 4 All that they say of Christ, if it should be gathered into a
compendium would make a competent volume by it self. And therefore we will only
here take out as it were of every one some one special Luc 24. v. 27. 44. Act.
3. v. 18. 24. Chapter 10.
Prophecy of Christ, for brevity sake, because 4 Isa. 8. v. 13. etc. Chapter 9.
v. 1. 6. Chapter 10. ^3. Chapter 11. v. 2. Chapter 12. v. 6. Chapter 16. v. 1. Chapter 19. v. 1.
Chapter 32. v. 1. Chapter 40. v. 3. 9. Chapter 42. v. 1. 2. 3. Chapter 45. v. 8. Chapter 46. v. 10.
11. Chapter 50. v. 4. Chapter 61. v. 1. Chapter 64. v. 1. Chapter 65. v. 1. Chapter 66. v 5. Iere.
11. v. 18. Ch 23. v. 5. Chapter 33. v. 14. Ezech. 34. v. 26. Chapter 37. v. 25. Chapter 41.
v. 19. Chapter 43. v. 2. 5. Chapter 44. v. 2. Dan. 7. v. 13. Chapter 9. v. 26. 27. Osee. ^.
v. 11. Chapter 11. v. 2. 9. Ion. 1. v. 15. Mich. 2. v. 12. 13. Chapter 4. v. 13. Chapter 7.
v. 20. Habacuc. 2. v. 3. Zach. 4. v. 2. Chapter 12. v. 10. Mal. 4. v. 1. 2. 2.
Match. 14. v. 41.
our Savior him self testifies that all the Prophets spoke of him. First then
out of Isaias who is by some called the Euangelical Prophet, because his book
in some places seems rather to be a Gospel then a Prophecy, let this sentence
stand for many, where v. 43. Isa. 7. v. 14.
he says [Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son: and his name shall
be called Emanuel] which signifies [God with us.] The like sentence has I
remie saying [Our Lord has created a new thing Iere. 31. v. 22.
upon the earth: A woman shall compass a Man,] most mature in virtue, and
judgment, though an Infant. The Prophet Baruch, after the acknowlegement
Baruc. 3. v. 38.
of Gods benefits, in the old Testament, says [After these things, he was
seen upon the earth, and was conversant with men.] So Prophets often speak of
things to come, as if they were already come. Ezechiel denounces that our
Lord says [Behold I my self will seek my sheep, and will visit Ezech. 34. v.
11. 23.
them: And I will raise up over them one Pastor, who shall feed them, my servant
David* to wit Christ the Beloved, for this Prophecy mas uttered above four
hundred years after king David's reign. Daniel describes the time when our
Redemer should come as the Angel had declared to him, saying [Seuentie weeke^
are abridged upon thy people, and Dan. 9. v. 24.
upon thy holy city, that preuarication may be consummate, and sin take an
end, and iniquity be abolished, and everlasting justice be brought, and the
vision be accomplished, and prophecy, and the Holy one of holies be
anointed.] Osee reports Osee. 13. v. 14.
Gods promise saying, [out of the hands of death I will deliver them, from
death I will redeem them, I will be thy death o death, thy bitte will I be o hell.]
Joel bids the children of Sion [reioyce and be Joel. 2. v. 23. Amos. 4. v.
12. 13.
joyful in the Lord your God, because he has given you a Doctor of justice.]
Amo^ ^arneth the Jews [to be prepared to ^ete their God. Because he that
for^eth them (...), and (...) the wind, ^eclareth his (...) to (...): our Lord
the God of (...) is his name.] A^dias says that [in mount Abd. v. 17.
Sion shall be salvation, and it shall be holy: and the house of Jacob shall
possess those that had possessed them.] Jonas not only in word but also in
act, or Jonas. 2. v. 1.
rather in passion, prophec^ed our Redemer in that he [was in the belly of the
fish three days and three nights.] Micheas shows the place of our Saviors
Mich. 5. v. 2.
nativity, saying [Thou Bethlehem Ephrata, art a little one, in the thousands
of Judah, out of thee shall come forth unto me, he that shall be the dominator in
Israel: and his coming forth from the beginning, from the days of eternity.]
Nahum foresheweth Nah. 1. v. 15.
the destruction of Idolatry, by our Savior saying; [Behold upon the
mountains, the fe^te of him that Euangelizeth, and preaches peace: celebrate
o Judah thy festiuitie, and render thy vows; because Belial shall no more add
to pass through thee, he is wholly perished.] Habacu^ in his Canticle
describes Hab. 3. v. 2. 3. etc.
Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, Doctrine, Miracles, Passion, and Resurrection,
and other mysteries [God (says he) will come from the South; and the holy one
from mount Pharon.] Sophonias Sopho. 3. v. 8. 9.
telling the Jews of their reprobation for their wickedness, prophecieth the
vocation of the Gentiles by Christ saying: [Wherfore expect me says our Lord in
the day of my resurrection, til hearafter, because my judgment to assemble the
Gentiles, and to gather kingdoms, and to power upon them mine indignation, all the wrath of my fury. Because then will I restore to the peoples a chosen
lip, that al may invoke in the name of the Lord, and may serve him with one
shoulder] that is with Christian fortitude. Aggaeus persuading the people to
prosecute the building again of the Temple, after their relaxation Aggae. 2.
v. 8.
from captivity, encorageth them with hope of their much desired, and long
expected M^ssias saying: [The desired of al Nations shall come, and I will fill
this house with glory, says the Lord of hoastes.] Zacharias admonishes the
high Priest (called Jesus) Zach. 3. v. 8.
of his negligence, in not urging forwards to build again the Temple saying:
[Thus says the Lord of hoastes. Hear o Jesus thou grand Priest, thou and thy
friends that dwell before thee; because they are portending men. For behold I
will bring my servant the Orient (Christ in his manhood) the Orient of al grace
and salvation, who from on high visits us.] And so the same Prophet
describes [the rising kingdome] Chapter 6. v. 12.
and Preistly power of Christ in his Church. [Thus says the Lord of hoastes.
Behold a man Orient is his name; and under him shall spring up and shall build a
Temple to our Lord. And he shall build a Temple v. 13.
to our Lord; and shall bear glory, and shall sit and rule upon his Throne,
and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne, and the counsel of peace shall be
between them two.] In all which power, he foresheweth that the same Redemer is
also most meek saying: [Reioice Chapter 9 v. 9.
greatly, o daughter of Sion, make iubilation o daughter of Jerusalem; behold
thy King will come to thee, the just and Savior him self, poor and riding upon
an ass, and upon a colt the fool of an ass.] Malachie, the last that writ
prophecy in the old Testament, joining together, the precursor, and the
Master, first tells of S. John Baptist (who was more then a prophet, in that
he did not only foretell of our Redemer to come, but also with voice and finger
showed him present) and then immediately adds of our Messiah, relating what
God said of them both [Behold I send mine Angel (messenger and precursor) Mal.
3. v. 1.
and he shall prepare the way before my face, and forthwith shall come to his
Temple the Dominator, whom you seek, and the Angel of the Testament whom you
desire (He that reconcileth man to God, making covenant of peace) Behold he
comes says Luc. 24. v. 27.
the Lord of hoastes.] And this may suffice for declaration Act. 3. v. 18.
that [God by the mouth of all the Prophets] foreshewed that he would send a
Redemer of mankind into the world.

Our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, is Christ our Redemer. ARTICLE. 16.
Having now declared by holy Scriptures of Presupposing that the holy Bible
is the true written word of God: it is proved thereby that our Jesus of Nazareth
is the promised Messiah.
the old Testament, that God decreed and promised a Redemer of mankind, as also
both Jews and Turks acknowledge: we are consequently to prove, which they
deny, that this divine promise, is long since performed, in JESUS of
Nazareth, the Son of the most Blessed Virgin Marie. Which most important
point of Religion, and ground of al Christianity, is principally testified by
the New Testament. But for so much as the Jews utterly reject it, as they did
the Auctor thereof, persecuting him to death; and albeit the Turks acknowledge
him to be an excellent Prophet, sent, and approved of God: yet for so much as
they prefer their false prophet Mahomet above him, and esteem their Alcheron
before al holy Scriptures, we must in this, and in most other divine mysteries
against these adversaries, necessarily recurre to Traditions; to confessed
Histories; to Miracles, and other proofs of the Catholic Article 3. and 5.
ever visible Church. By which means, the whole sacred Bible, as well the old,
as the New Testament, being first proved to be the assured true written word of
God, at least, being undoubtedly accepted by all Christians, (for whom this small
work is specially intended:) we shall here against these, and al other
adversaries, breefelie show by a competent number of correspondent places of
both Testaments, that (as al Christians profess) the promised Redemer is
indeed come into the world, the very same in whom we believe, and by whom we
hope to be saved.

2 First therefore concerning the time of his coming, This truth is proved by
consideration of the time of coming.
the prophecies of Jacob and of Daniel, do clearly agree with the Evangelists
narration. For whereas Jacob said [The ^^epter shall not be taken from Judas,
Genesis 49. v. 10. Dan. 9. v. 24.
and a Duke out of his thigh, til he do come that is to be sent.] And whereas
Daniel wrote the Angels declaration that [seuentie weeks (that is to say,
seventy times seven years, counting as al understand it, years for days)
are abridged, that preuarication may be consummate etc. and the holy one of
holies may be annointed] Agreeable to both it came to pass, when Herod
(Ascalonita) a stranger, his father an Idumean, his mother an Arabicke, was
made king of Judea, and so al Royal title of King or Duke wholly taken from
the Jews. And when these seventy weeks mentioned by Daniel, were near
expired; even then we see it came to pass, as S. Matthew Mat. 2. v. 1. v. 2. 3.
Luc. 1. v.
writes, that [IESVS was borne in Bethelhem of Judah, in the days of Herod the
king.] And not only borne, but also confidently proclaimed by the [Sages, and
feared by king Herod, to be the true king of the Jews.] S. Luke also writes,
that [S. John Baptist was conceived, and borne in the days of the same Herod
king of Iu^ie. and our Savior six months 5. 16. Chapter 2. v. 6. ^. Chapter 3. v. ^.
after.] Moreover addet^, that [In the fiftenth year of the Empire of Tiberius
Caesa^ (king Herod being dead) and the kingdom of Jury more alienated from
Royal state, for it was the^ diuid^d into Tetrarchies, of four gouerners:
Pilate, an other Herod, Philip, and Lysanias. [S. John was sent to preach and
baptize] which concurring with the seventy weeks nere about complete, al men
so assuredly then expected the promised Messiah, that [they Joan. 1. v. 19. 21.
Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15.
sent from Jerusalem Preistes and Leuits to him, to ask him, not only if he
were Elias, but also if he were the Prophet] that is the especial Prophet
Messiah showing them selves most willing and ready so to accept, if he would
have agreed thereunto: yea this circumstance of time, with other things
agreeable, was so pregnant a proof of the Messiah, that the former Herod
wanted not sicophantes which held opinion, that he was the Messiah; whereof
arose the sect called Herodians; those that joined with the Mat. 22. v. 15. 16.
Mar. 3. v. 6. Lu^. 20. v. 20.
pharasies to have entrapped our B. Savior in his speeches. Al which
manifestly detecteth, the wonderful blind folly of the Jews, expecting their
M^ssias as yet to come they know not when, after their long deprivation of king
or Duke, more then three other such seventy weeks, as were declared to the
Prophet Daniel.

3 To this purpose we may also observe, the like The sum is p^^^ed by the
exact noting of the Geneal^gies of Patriarchs to David, and so forwards.
concordance of Genealogies, in both Testaments. Moses after his narration of
the worlds beginning, and man's fall, as one well understanding, and rightly
considering, of Gods ordinance to ^estore man; Genesis 5. Chapter 10. Chapter 21. v. 2.
Chapter 25. v. 25 Chapter 38. v. 29. Ruth. 4. v. 18. etc.
amongst other passages of his History, inserteth the Genealogies of certain
first Patriarchs, from Adam to Noe; and again from Noe, to Abraham; and from
Abraham, by his Son Isaac, and Nephew Jacob; to Jacobs twelve sons, who
were, the heads of the twelve Tribes, the selected peculiar people of God, to
whom, and of whom, he promised that a Redemer should come. Likewise he
records the particular birth of Phares, and Zara, sons of Judah, one of
Jacobs sons: the lineal progeny of which Phares, is afterward set down in
the History of Ruth, til it come to King David. As in like sort for an other
mistical purpose, the Genealogy of Leui Exo. 6. v. 20. 23. 25. 1. Paral. 2. 3.
4. 6.
(an other of Jacobs sons) is expressed so far, as to Aaron, and Moses and
to Aarons s^n Eleazar, and Eleazars son Phinees. Which two Genealogies, are
most especially among many others, repeated, and prosecuted in Paralipomenon,
and so forwards partly by the written holy Scriptures, the rest by Tradition,
even to Jesus Christ, the omnipotent King, and eternal Priest. Al which
diligence was doubtless employed by the providence of God, to the very same end
and purpose, to which the Evangelists do use it: to show that our Lord Jesus,
the Son of the B. Virgin Marie, is that son of David, and of Abraham, which
was so singularly promised to them, that Son in whom al Nations should be
blessed. And therefore S. Matthew not only recites the generations from Abraham,
to King David, and so to Joseph, the spouse Math. 1. v. 1. etc. v. 16.
of the B. Virgin Marie, of the same house and family of David, and so by his
pedigree shows also the pedigree of the B. Virgin his Spouse, of whom was
borne Jesus; but also thereupon infers this necessary consequence, that
[this Jesus is he who is called Christ] In Greek, ho Christos, In Hebrew,
Messiah, In Latin, Vnctus, or rather, Ille singularitor vnctus, In English, The
anointed. As elsewhere may be more Art. 20.
fully explaned, as also the B. name Jesus.

4 Further touching his Genealogy, S. Luke also His singular manner of
generation of a Virgin, not by man, but by the Holy Ghost, shows him to be
the Messiah.
though in other manner, ascending by his legal parentage, Luc. 3. v. 23.
from Joseph to David and Abraham, and so vpwardes to [Adam, who was of God]
declares him to be come into the world, whose generation, reduces us again
to God. Wherefore both the same Evangelists, exactly declare withal, that his
generation Mat. 1. v. 18. 20. 23. Luc. 1. v. 24. 26.
being of man, yet was not by man, after the ordinary natural manner of al
others from Adam and Eve: but that he was supernaturally both conceived and
borne of a Virgin by the Holy Ghost] agreeable to the Prophecy of Isaias
saying: [A Virgin shall conceive Isa. 7. v. 14. Chapter 9. v. 6.
and bear a Son, and his name shall be called Emanuel, that is, God with us.]
Again he says: [A little child is borne to us, and a Son is given to us.] 5
The very same agreement is also in all other It is further proved by the place
of his Na^iuitie.
points of this Mystery betwixt the Prophets, and liuangelists. Concerning
the place, the Prophet Micheas Mich. 5. v. 2.
said: [This Duke or Dominator, which should govern Israel, should come out of
Bethlehem.] His name JESUS, was prefigured, by the changing of Nu. 13. v. 17.
Osee, into Iosue, or Jesus, which in the original tongue By his Name:
is the same, and was prophesied in the Canticles where the Spouse says: [Oile
powered out, is thy name] Can. 1. v. 3.
signifying his superabundant mercy, in spending him self, to save others. His
adoration by the Sages, His Adoration.
(commonly called the three Kings) was foretold in the book of Numeri, by
strange instinct, against Nu. 24. v. 17.
the mind of him that uttered it, which was Balaam saying: [A Star shall rise
from Iacob] More plainly by King David, and by Isaias the Prophet [The Isa.
60. v. 6. Ps. 71. v. 10.
Dromedaries of Madian and Epha, al of Saba shall com, bringing gold and
Frankencense, and showing forth praise to our Lord.] His presentation in the
Temple His presentation.
was prophesied by Malachias saying to the Jews, [Forthwith (after the birth
of his precursor) shall Mal. 3. v. 1.
come to his Temple the Dominator whom you seek, and the Angel of the
Testament, whom you desire.] His sleeing into Egypt was prophesied by Isaias
saying: His slying into Aegipt.
[Our Lord will ascend upon a swift cloud, and Isa. 19. v. 1.
will enter into Egypt.] The slaughrer of the Innocent The murder of the
Innocents.
children Martyrs, in and near Bethlehem, was prophesied by Jeremy saying: [A
voice of lamentation Iere. 31. v. 15.
is heard on high, of the mourning and weping of Rachel weping for her
children, and refusing to be comforted for them, because they are not.] Also
our Saviors returning from Egypt after the death His return from Aegipt.
of King Herod, was prophesied by Osee, comprising his prophecy in his
recital of a former benefit of al Isreal's delivery from Egypt saying of them
both (the one being a figure of the other) [Out of Egypt O see. 11. v. 1.
I called my Son.] His dwelling thenceforth in His dweling in Nazareth.
Nazareth, whereof he was called, Jesus Nazerenus; was prophesied by the
uniform descriptions of all the Prophets, that he should be [a Nazarite] which
Ps. 126. v. 1. Ps. 145. v. 7. 9. Ps. 83. v. 12.
signifies a keeper, a young spring and a flower, most eminently verified in
our Savior, the faithful sure keeper of his City the Church, and of all that
rely on him: the frutful young spring, whence al grace proceeds, and flower of
glory, whereto all the godly tend. He that gives grace and glory. He that
far passes al other professed Religious Nazarites in excellent Cant. 2. v.
1. Number. 6. v. 2. etc.
purity, and holiness of life. Of other particulars in the residue of our
Saviors acts and passions, we shall have more occasion to speak, in the
Mysteries following.

6 These now rehearsed, perteyning to his first entrance Though some of these
proofs may seem not to convince: Yet al together do confirm the faithful in
belief of this truth.
into this world, may serve for proof, that the Evangelists reports are al
conformable to the prophecies, figures, and promises of the old Testament. If
perhaps some textes be more obscure, or not so manifest as may convince the
contradicting spirits of Jews, or others; yet many other sentences are more
clear, and may suffice, as well to explain the rest; as to satisfy the well
disposed minds, of all that sincerly love and seek the truth.

7 For howsoever we are able, or not able, to understand Faith helps the
vndrstanding in things which to Infidels seem very hard.
divine mysteries: we Christians must hold fast our faith, which [is the
substance and ground, of Heb. 11. v. 1.
al spiritual hopes (not of things seen by corporal eyes, or perceived by
outward sense, but) of things not appearing.] We must hold fast our faith
which exacteth not sensible demonstrations, but is content with convenient
Arguments, proofs, and declarations, of credible documentes: we must hold
fast our faith which tells us, that the new Testament is the assured true
word of God. Then shall we be infalliblie warranted, that al points of
doctrine, and manners, particular, and general, expressed, and necessarily
implyied therein, are most true, and most certain.

8 Namely touching this present particular, we shall Act. 9. v. 22.
That our Lord Jesus, is Messiah, is clearly avouched by holy Scriptures and
believed by Christians.
hold fast our faith, that as S. Paul affirms [IESVS of Nazareth, who was
crucified, whom he had persecuted, is Christ] the Messiah, the anointed of
God, the Redemer of man. And as S. Peter teaches, that [to this Jesus, all the
prophets give testimonie] Act. 10. v. 43. Act. 4. v. 12.
to be the Savior [by whose name, al receive remission of sins, which believe
in him.] For neither is there (says he at an other time) any other name under
heaven given to men, wherein we must be saued] then may we securely believe, as
S. Paul again preached Act. 13. v. 23. 30. 37. Romans 1. v. 3.
at Antioch, to the Jews and Gentiles, that [of the seed of David, God
according to his promise, has brought forth to Israel, a Savior Jesus, whom
God raised from death the third day; whose body saw no corruption, according
as David had written in the psalms, thou shall not give thy holy one to Ps.
15. v. 10.
see corruption] And as the same Apostle [with vehemence convinced the Jews,
openly showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus is Christ:] we will therefore, Act.
18. v. 28.
omitting other testimonies, conclude with S. John, that he erreth damnablie,
and is a pernicious [liar, that denies Jesus to be Christ: In this (says he
again) is the Spirit of God known. Every spirit, 1. Io. 2. v. 22. 1. Io. 4.
v. 2. 3.
that confesses Jesus Christ to have come in flesh, is of God; and every
spirit that dissolueth Jesus (seperating Jesus from Christ, or from being God,
or from being man) is not of God.] This was then a note, and one special mark,
to discern the spirits of truth, Chapter 5. v. 1.
and of heresy, as it is still the principal difference between Christians, and
Jews.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, is God, the second person of the Blessed Trinity.
ARTICLE. 17.
BEsides the Jews infidelity, denying that Christ our Redemer is come into
the world: there be other impieties no less damnable of Diverse old heresies
touching Christ.
old Heretics, dissoluing Jesus Christ (as the Apostle 1. Io. 4. v. 3.
speaks in the place before alleged) that is losing a su^der things united
in our Savior, as are his deity, humanity, soul, and Body, al subsisting
in his divine Person, the true natural Son of God, the second Person of the
B. Trinity: Contrary to which Catholic faith and doctrine, Cerinthius,
Ebion, and their folowers, denied Christ to be God: the Manichies denied him to
be man, imagining that he took not a real humane soul, and body, but
fantastical. Nestorius denied, that humane nature, is assumpted into the
divine person, by Hipostatical, or Personal unity, but as by way of an
instrument, and so denied Christ to be the very Son of God, but his
instrument. Fotinus denied Christ to be God, by nature, but by grace, and
adoption, only by more abundant grace, then other Saints. Eutiches,
Appolinaris, and others, coined an other heresy, that there be two persons in
Christ. Arrius denied the Son of God, to be equal and consubstantial to the
Father. Al which, and the like heretics, our holy mother the Catholic
Church, has justly condemned: And many ancient Fathers, and learned doctors,
have confuted their erroures by these especial sacred Scriptures, which here we
shall recite, understanding and expounding them, not by private, 2. Pet. 3. v.
20.
but by the common spirit, of the same universal Church.

2 To this purpose it is especially requisite to prove For refutation of al
which heresies, it is proved that Jesus Christ is both God and man.
two principal points of faith, in which diverse other particulars are
comprised, and thereby all the ahoue mentioned heresies are refuted. The first
is, that Jesus Christ is very God. The other, that he is also perfectly and
truly man. And albeit most places that prove the one, do also prove the other:
yet for more explication of both, we shall distribute them into two Articles.
Gods first promises, to send one of womans seed, that should [bruse the
serpents head] and that Genesis 3. v. 15. Chapter 12. v. 3. Chapter 26. v. 4. Chapter 28. v.
14. Ps. 44. v. 7. 12.
[in the seed of Abraham, (and of other Patriarchs) al Nations should be
blessed] do show, that he must needs be a man, being the Issue of man, and
also must be God, because only man could not perform those promises which were
to be accomplished. More clearly Proved by the Psalms.
the Royal Prophet in plain terms, speaking in spirit to the Messiah, calls
him God saying: [Thy seat o God for ever and ever: a rod of direction, the
rod of thy Kingdom.] And speaking to the Church his Spouse says [The King
will conet thy beauty, because he is the Lord thy God, and they shall adore him]
Which words S. Paul applies to Heb. 1. v. 8.
our Savior Christ, proving thereby his excellency above the Angels, so far
also preferring him before al Patriarchs, Prophets, and Angels, as the Son
v. 2. 5. Ps. 46. v. 5. 6.
of God excels his creatures. Again the Psalmist says of Christ [He haith
chosen his inheritance in us, the beauty of Jacob which he loved. God is
ascended in Iubilation, and our Lord in the voice of Trumpet.] In commendation
of the Church, firmly founded by Christ, he says [The Highest him self founded
Ps. 86. v. 5.
her.] If Christ were not God, he could not truly be called the highest.
Inuiting al to praise Christ, he says [Exalt ye the Lord our God: and adore
Ps. 90. v. 5.
his foot- stool because it is holy.] Of the same Christ our Redemer, and of
God the Father, with distinction of divine persons, which are one God, he Ps.
109. v. 1.
says [Our Lord said to my Lord: sit on my right hand, til I make thine
enemies the foote-stoole of thy feet.] Of which speech, when our Savior
proposed a question to the Pharisees, demanding; How Mat. 22. v. 43. 44.
he is both Lord, and son of David? they could not, or else would not
answer; because they would neither confess him to be Christ, nor Christ to
be God. Of both which he convinced them, and put them to silence. What can be
more manifest, then that which the same Psalmist, in the person of the Ps. 117.
v. 28.
Church of Christ, says unto him: [Thou art my God, and I will confess to
thee: thou art my God, and I will exalt thee. I will confess to thee, because
thou have heard me: and art become my saluation] Even he whom the Jews
rejected [the stone which v. 22.
the builders rejected, the same is made into the head of the corner.] The same
is our Savior, the same Ps. 145. v. 5. 10.
is God [Blessed is he, whose helper is the God of Jacob. Our Lord will reign
for ever; thy God o Sion in generation and generation.] To this second By the
book of wisdom.
Person of the B. Trinity, by the title of wisdom, his proper attribute; the
Auctor of the Book of wisdom, ascribes the Redemption of Adam our first Sap.
10. v. 1.
parent saying [Wisdome kept him that was first made of God, father of the
world, when he was created alone, and she brought him (Adam) out of his sin.]
The Prophet Isaias describes our Redemer, to be [a By other Prophets.
child borne, and a Son given to vs] with diverse excellent names, or rather
one name framed of mauie titles, al above the dignity of al creatures. Amongst
the rest, expressly called him God [A little Is. 9. v. 6.
Child (says he) is borne to us, a son is given to us: and principality is
made upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called, Meruclous, Counseler, God,
strong, Father of the world to come, Prince of peace.] In an other place he
gives us to know, that albeit our Redemer be a Son, yet he is of
inexplicable generation. Wherefore he says, or rather negatiuely demands [Who
shall declare his generation?] Isa. 53. v. 8.
Signifying that none shall, yea that none can declare it. Especially his
eternal generation of God the Father. No nor perfectly explicate his temporal
generation, of his Virgin Mother, without Father in earth: and that he speaks
of one only person, who both is of eternal, and ineffable generation, and who
also by his Passion, should Redeem mankind; is manifest by his next words
adjoined saying [Because he is cut out of the land of Act. 8. v. 35.
the living (which the seauentie interpreters translate; From the earth shall
his life be taken) for the wickedness of my people, have I stricken him.] From
this Scripture, S. Philip the Deacon beginning to instruct the Enuch of
Ethiopia [Euangelized unto him Jesus.] Jeremy prophesying the Jews relaxation
from Iere. 30. v. 18. 19. 20. 21.
their captivity in Babylon; and withal of the Redemption of man from the
captivity of sin by Christ; shows the restoration of the City, and
Temple of Jerusalem; and of the prosperous fundation of the Church of Christ;
then adds, that [the Duke and Prince (Christ the founder thereof) shall be of
him self] that is of Jacob, and of their own kindred; and also shall be
nevertheless nere to God. [For v. 18. v. 21.
thus says our Lord: Behold I will convert the conversion of the Tabernacles of
Jacob etc. And his Duke shall be of him self, and the Prince shall be brought
forth from the midst of him] which is necessarily understood of Christ's
humanity. And touching his Divinity, God the Father says in the next words
[And I will bring him nere, and he shall come to me] which our Savior explaneth
saying [that he is in the Joan. 14. v. 10. 11*
Father, and the Father in him.] The Prophet Baruch declaring that al man's
true wisdom, proceeds from wisdom increated; affirms the same to be God
saying [This is our God; and there shall none other be Baruc. 3. v. 25.
esteemed against him] And likewise teaches, that the same person is also man
saying [After these things he was seen upon the earth; and was conversant
with me^.] Micheas foreshewing, that Christ [should Mich. 5. v. 2.
come forth of Bethlehem] according to his humanity, adds [And his coming
forth, is from the beginning, from the days of eterritie] signifying his
Deity. So other Prophets which we here omit, al do teach against the Jews,
that Christ is God.

3 As for the heretics, albeit the same convince Preued by ^extes of the new
Tastame^t, as the Church understands them.
them, we have yet more manifest testimonies in the new Testament. We will only
recite the words, of which together with ^he explanation of the Church, every
faithful Christian, may readily inserre, the Catholic conclusion. First, the
Archangel Gabriel Luc. 1. v. 35. 47. v. 69. 76.
in his divine Message from God, to the B. Virgin, declared both these points
of faith; that she should have a son, the Savior of mankind, who should
therefore be called Jesus: And that the same her Son is also God. And therefore
(said the Angel) [that Luc. 2. v. 30. 31. 32.
which of thee shall be borne Holy; shall be called the Son of God.] The same
was shortly after, testifiied again, in the several Prophecies of our B. Mat.
16. v. 16.
Lady, of Zachary, and of Simeon. Yet more plainly by others. Our Savior
himself, to establish this fundamental doctrine, demanded of his Apostles;
first what ordinary men, the vulgar sort, thought him to be, and diverse
iudgeing diversely, but not rightly: secondly he asked what them selves his
chosen Apostles thought thereof. And Peter answearing said: [Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God] which most solid answer, he not only approved, but
also highly commended: and presently promised, upon this confession, and upon
this confessor (as upon the principal point, and chief visible pastor of
Christian faith) he would build his Church. For here is confessed, that [Iesus
is Christ the expected Redemer, and that he the same, is also the very true and
natural Son of God.] The self same doctrine was again confirmed in his
Transfiguration, by the voice of God the Father saying: [This is my well beloved
Son (which Mat. 17. v. 5.
shows him to be God the Son) in whom I am well pleased] which shows him
to be the Redemer, by whom man is reconciled to God; who only, and none other
was able to please God, and appease his just wrath against mankind. Thus much
may well suffice against al miscreantes, that deny Christ Jesus to be God.

4 Yet for our more consolation against al adversaries S. John of purpose
writes much in proof of Christ's Godhead, against heretics which denied it.
of Christ, we will add more. S. John writing his Gospel more amply then the
other Evangelists, touching this point of Christ's Deity, to confute certain
heritikes risen in his time, begins with the eternal generation of the Son
of God, who is called the Word (that is, the mental conception of God,
understanding him self. For as God so produces him self, he is God the Father,
and as he is so produced, he is God the Son; therefore called the eternal
word.) And therefore the same Evangelist says [In the beginning was the word,
and the word Joan. 1. v. 1. 2.
was with God, and the word was God. this was in the beginning with God]
signifying that this divine word, the Son of God, was in eternity before
any time, or any creature was [Al things, even v. 3.
time it self, Angels, and whatsoever created thing) were made by him, and
without him nothing was made] And so testifying Christ's Godhead, applies his
narration to his purpose saying [the word was made v. 14.
flesh] al one as if he should say, God the Son was made man [and dwelt in us
(a man among men) the 5. 18.
only begotten of the Father, the only begotten, which is in the bosom of the
Father.] Whereunto perteyneth also the testimony of the Precursor S. John
Babtist saying [This (Jesus) is the Son of v. 34.
God] which verity moreover the same Jesus Christ God and man, upon sundry
occasions, affirmed, and confirmed. In his discourse made to Nicodemus,
teaching Chapter 3. v. 5. 9. 10. 11.
him, that Baptism is necessary to salvation, which, whiles he understood
not, our Lord tells him further, that he must believe it, as being taught, and
testified by him that is come from heaven, and is in heaven saying [No man has
ascended into heaven v. 13.
(and so no man can by terrestrial means know heavenly Mysteries) but he that
descended from heaven (knows and teaches them) the Son of man which is in
heauen] giving hereby to understand, that he him self the same person Jesus
Christ, is both in earth, and in heaven, being the Son of man, and the Son of
God. To the Jews that persecuted him, he said, [My Father works until now,
and I do worke] Chapter 5. v. 16. 17. 18.
which they understood to signify, that he said [God was his Father, making
him equal to God] Neither did he forbear to utter this truth for their
malignitie, but manteyned the same saying [What things soever v. 19. v. 21.
my Father does, those also the Son does in like maner] Yea exemplifyeth in
particular [As the Father does raise the dead and quikneth: so the Son also
quickneth whom he will.] And when they demanded of him, who art thou? he
answered [I am Chapter 8. v. 25.
the beginning, who also speak to you] that is the efficient cause of al
creatures, even I who also speak now to you. And they preferring Abraham v.
33. v. 58.
before him, he answered saying [Amen, Amen I say to you, that before Abraham
was made, I am. They took stones therefore and cast at him.] In an v. 59.
other conflict with this obstinate people, he said in plain terms [I and the
Father are one] vnum sumus, Chapter 10. v. 30.
we are one in substance, one and the same God. Nevertheless in respect of his
humanity (for in that respect, he is our Mediator) he declared to his
Apostles, comforting them for his departure, and that they should be glad
that he went to the Father, and that he would intercede for them, [because
(says he) Chapter 14. v. 27. 28.
the Father is greater then I] upon which words, the Arrianes stand very
peremptorily, not admitting the true sense, which is, that God is greater then
man, necessarily deduced, by conference of so many other places, as show that
Christ is God: and that there is but one God, and there Divine persons,
coeternal, and consubstantial; and yet as man, is inferior to God.

4 If any desire yet more proof, let him repair to The same is further
proved by S. Paul's doctrine.
S. Paul, who sometime impugned Christ, as if he had been neither God nor good
man: but being once converted, he preached with great zele, and diligence, that
[this Jesus is the Son of God.] Writing Act. 9. v. 20. Philip. 2. v. 6.
Colos. 1. v. 15.
to the Philippians, he auerreth, that [Christ Jesus thought it no robbery,
him self to be equal to God.] And to the Colossians affirms, that [in him
were created al things in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible; And that
in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead corporally.] In his Epistle to
Titus, presupposing it to be a known doctrine of faith, he joins, as in
appositiue terms belonging to the same Chapter 2. v. 9.
person, [our Savor God. Christ Jesus our Savior.] Likewise to the Hebrews
he says that whereas [God in former times, spoke to their fathers in the
Prophets; Tit. 1. v. 3. 4. Chapter 3. v. 4. Heb. 1. v. 1. 2. Chapter 1. 2. 3. et 4. Ps.
2. v. 7.
last of al in these days has spoken to us in his Son, whom he has
appointed heir of al (according to his humanity) by whom he made also the
worldes] which must needs be understood of his Deity. And consequently the
Apostle proves his incomparable excellency, above Angels, Moses, Iosue, and
al other Prophets, by the express word of God 2. Pet. 1. v. 17. 18. 1. Joan.
1. v. 1. 2. 3. Chapter 5. v. 1. 6. 13. Apoc. 1. v. 4. 8. Chapter 21. v. 6. Chapter 22. v.
13.
the Father, saying to him [Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee.]
And again saying: [Let all the Angels of God adore him.] And so let us
acknowledge, and adore him, omitting more proofs of S. Peter, S. John, and
other holy Scripures.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, is truly Man. ARTICLE. 18.
BEcause many of the sacred textes, recited in the former Article, which show
that our Savior Christ is God, do also Prove that he is Man; not repeating
the same, I will also add a Relying upon private spirit, is cause of errors,
and heresies.
few more, which especially declare the same truth against the Manichees,
phantastically imagining that Christ took a fantastical, not a true and real
soul or body. And against Eutiches, Dioscorus, and other old heritikes,
denying that there be two natures (divine, and humane) in Christ, falsely
sup^osing, that as there is but one person, so there should be but one nature,
and consequently seeing Christ is God, he should not be man. Thus heritikes
discussing high Mysteries by their own imaginations, run into many
absurdities, for one being grannted a thousand do follow. But whosoever will
avoid al errors in faith, as well concerning the B. Trinity, and this of the
Incarnation of Christ, as al others which exceed the capacity of our
understanding, must confidently rely upon the Church, which has that [spirit
of truth to interpret the holy Scriptures, 2. Pet. 1. v. 20.
by which the same were written. And with this resignation of our private
opinions, and resolution to follow the Churches interpretation, we may with more
spiritual profit and comfort, search the true sense of such places, as are
como^ly, or may be probably alleged, for confirmation of any truth.

2 As to this present purpose, amongst other more Exo. 12. v. 6.
Christ's true humanity is proved, by the Paschal La^be, and other things.
evident proofs, the figure of the Paschal Lamb, being indeed a very Lamb
truly and really sacrificed by the Jews; imports that Christ thereby
prefigured, is in very deed, that he appeared to be, a very man, consisting
of soul and body, and was reallie sacrificed, and that to greater effect
infinitely, then was that lamb, and al other figures. he being the Son of
God, and in unity of the same Person, being [the Lamb of God, which takes
away Joan. 1. v. 29.
the sin of the world.] And brefly all the other old Sacrifices, bloody, and
unbloody, of Abel, Noe, Melchizedech, Abraham, Isaac, Israel, and al
Sacrifices Leuit. 1. v. 2. Chapter 2. v. 12. 14. ^ Chapter 6. v. 14. Chapter 7. v. 29.
Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15. Act. 3. v. 22.
prescribed by Moses Law, in catle, birds, fruits, and whatsoever, with their
libaments, do undoubtedly show, that Christ our Savior by them prefigured, is
absolutely a real, and not an imaginary man, really sacrificed, really
accomplishing, all that which they foresignified.

3 In like sort all the Prophets do plainly describe By many Prophecies.
a real man, as Moses said to the people [A Prophet of thy Nation, and of thy
brethren, like unto me, will our Lord God raise up to thee] which S. P^ter
teaches to be performed in Christ. King David, amongst many particular
things done to our B. Savior in his Passion, shows that his persecuters
would abuse him so cruelly, and contemptibly, as if he were [a wo^me, and not a
man, a reproache of Ps. 21. v. 7. 17.
men, and an outcast of the people] Nevertheless, whiles [manie dogs
compassed him, and the counsel of the malignant besieged him] yet his wisdom
ouer-reached and overthrew their counsel, as the same Psalmist also prophesied
saying [Man shall com Ps. 63. v. 8.
to a deep hart] even then fuffilled, when the wicked bragged most against
him, when his most deep wisdom suffered him self to be apprehended bound,
led away, beaten, derided, spitte upon, whipped, and crucified in his humane
flesh and body. Al which had been no real suffering, no real satisfaction for
sin, no real Redemption of mankind, no real victory, if he were not really a
man. Neither were Christ our Lord truly [raised up to the Iere. 33. v. 14. 15.
house of Israel (as God promised by his Prophet Jeremy) and to the house of
Judah: the spring of Justice had not truly budded forth unto Dauid] if he were
not indeed, and really of the seed of Israel, Judah, and David, a very man.
Neither should he Mal. 1. Chapter 22.
more perteine to them, then to others in kindred of blood, if he were no man
at al.

4 It may therefore suffice, for confirmation of this By his frequent title of
the Son of man.
truth, against al heretical phansies, that holy Scriptures every wh^^^ call
Christ [the Son of David, Romans 1. v. 3. Heb. 2. v. 16. Act. 7. v. 56.
the Son of Abraham] and that most frequently he calls him self [the Son
of man.] S Stephen also after Christ's Ascension, in his own last conflict at
the point of death, called him the Son of man saying, that [he saw the
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.

5 S. Paul expressly teaches, that God s^nt his By S. Paul's doctrine.
Son, made of a Woman] and calls Christ as absolutely a man, as he calls
Adam a man saying, [By the offense of one (man Adam) many dyed: Gal. 4. v. 3.
much more the grace of God, and the gift in the Romans 5. v. 15.
grace of one man Jesus Christ, has abunded upon many.] Again he says [By a
man death: and by Cor. 15. 21. 22.
a man, the Resurrection of the dead. As in Adam al die; so also in Christ,
shall al be made alive. The first man of earth earthly, the second man from
heaven heauenly] still showing, that Christ our Lord, in substance of humane
nature, differs not from Adam and other men: but in many qualities, he
infinitely excels al others, and in many, is also like unto other men; as we
shall declare in the next Articles.

Christ our Lord, from the instant of his Incarnation, had fulness of grace,
knowledge, and power. ARTICLE 19.
TOgether with humane nature, Christ the Our Lord assumpted such qualities as
were agreeable to his perfection, and mane redemption.
Son of God, assumpted such qualities in soul and body, as were most
requisite and withal agreeable, both to his divine person, and to the work of
our Redemption, for which he came into this world. For so his sacred soul at
the very first instant, was endued with all sorts of grace, al manner of
knowledge, and al kind of power. Concerning grace, none can be greater then to
be united in person to God, whereby this singular man Jesus Christ is God, in
that his humane nature is united to divine nature, in divine person, in that
very act and instant, when the word was made flesh. Also habitual grace, that
superexcellent spiritual quality, which makes the subject grateful to God;
was eue^ then, and ever after, most emine^tly in the same most holy soul, as
more then al others participating divine influence; by how much it is nearer
joined in personal union, which none other is, nor ever shall be, by how much it
is more noble, then any other is, or can be; and by how much the springing
fountain excels the pound therehence dinersly replenished. So that he is
the endless and indeficient Thresurie of al virtues, and of al other graces, and
of al gifts for the assistance and enriching of al.

2 For whereas al virtues, which do perfect and adorn He had al spiritual
graces incomparably above al other men.
souls, consist in two special points, in declyning, and hating of sin, and
in loving and doing justice: the Royal Psalmist contemplating the perfection of
all the same in our Savior, says unto him in prophetical spirit [Thou have
loved justice, Ps. 44. v. 8. Iac. 1. v. 16.
and have hated iniquity: therefore God (from whom every good and perfect gift
descends) thy God (peculiarly thy God by personal union) has annomted thee
with the oil of gladness, above thy felowes] above al other participantes,
which are more or less endued with like divine inspiration, but he far above
al, as also Isaias denounces saying [The Spirit Isa. 11. v. 2. 3.
of our Lord shall rest upon him: the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
Spirit of counsel and strength, the Spirit of knowledge and piety, and the
Spirit of the fear of our Lord shall replenish him.] And so describing other
streams of grace, in his Kingdom the Church, shows that al are derived from
him, saying to all the faithful [You shall draw Isa. 12. v. 3. Joan. 1. v. 14.
Luc. 4. v. 1.
waters in joy, from the Saviors fountains.] And accordingly the Evangelists
write, that [he is full of grace and verity, full of the Holy Ghost, that God
did not give him the Spirit by measure] signifying that some others are full of
grace, receiving answearable measure thereof to their capacity. But our Savior
received superabundance for all, whereupon S. Ioa. 3. v. 3. 4. Ioa. 1. v. 16.
John Baptist said [Of his fulness, al we have receiued] S. Paul says, that [to
every one of us, is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

3 In like sort even from his incarnation, Christ Christ as man had al knowledge
even from his Incarnation.
our Lord had al knowledge, not only by his personal union, but also his
glorious soul, by fruition of God pectfectly seeing al things, that ever were,
are, or shall 3. Reg. 4. v. 30. 31.
be. A figure hereof was [the wisdom of Solomon, which passed the wisdom of
al them in the cast, and of the Egiptians. And he was wiser then al men: wiser
then Ethan the Ezralite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Dorda, the sons of
Mahol. And he was v. 34.
renomed in all nations round about. And there came from al people to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and from all the Kings of the earth which heard his
wisdom. 3. Reg. 10. v. 1. v. 5. 6.
The Queen of Saba came and proved his wisdom: and seeing and hearing him, she
had no longer breath: And she said to him. The report is true which I heard in
my Country, concerning thy wisdom, and I did not believe them that told me,
til my self came, and saw with mine eyes and have proved, v. 7.
that the half has not been told me; greter is thy wisdom, and thy works,
then the rumor which I have heard.] This and much more is recorded of King
Solomon; and al is but a dark shadow of our Sauiorus wisdom. Him self
avouches plainly to Mat. 12. v. 42.
the proud Scribes and Pharisees, that [this Queen shall rise in the Judgment,
and shall coudemne them, because she came from the ends of the world, to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, and behold (says he) more then Solomon here.]

4 Moses, and many other Prophets by inspiration, Proved by the Prophets.
saw this wisdom of Christ, and were thereby Joan. 1. v. 9. Iere. 31. v. 22.
illuminated. For [he is the light that lightneth al other lights that come
into this world.] Jeremy saw this perfection of al grace, virtues, and
knowledge, to be in our B. Savior, whilst he was yet in the B. Virgins womb,
when he said [Behold our Lord has created a new thing, a woman shall compass a
man] circundabit virum, not only hominem, which might be a child as well in sense
and understanding, as in bodily stature, but virum, a mature man, of virile
judgment, in the state of an infant newly conceived, not borne into the world.
Whereto holy Simeon agrees, singing in his Canticle, when he joyfully held
the same infant in his arms, at his presentation in the Temple, being the
fourtith day from his birth, pronouncing him to be [the light to the Luc. 2. v.
32.
revelation of the Gentiles: and the glory of the people of Israel.]

5 His first manifest revelation recorded in the holy The first manifestation
of his wisdom was at the age of twelve years.
Scriptures, was at the age of twelve years, when he was found in the Temple
of Jerusalem, sitting in the Luc. 2. v. 42.
midst of the Doctors hearing them, and asking them questions. Showing so
profou^d knowledge, that as the Evangelist writes [al were astonished that heard
him, v. 46. 47.
upon his wisdom and answeares.] What more he From the age of thirty years,
he showed more and more wisdom.
did, is not written; til he was about thirty years old, when he came to S.
John Baptist, causing S. Luc. 3. v. 23. Mat. 3. v. 15. Mat. 4. v. 1. 2. 3. v.
17.
John otherwise unwilling, to baptize him [for so it becomes us (said he) to
fulfill al iustice] to participate and perform al good work, though to them
not needeful, for edification to others. Thence he passed into the desert,
fasted forty days and nights, was tempted, and overthrew the tempter. Then
called disciples, preached the kingdom of heaven. Al with such manifestation
of knowledge, and wisdom, that the Jews stricken with admiration, said each to
other wondering [How does this man know letters Joan. 7. v. 15.
whereas he has not learned anie] For all the neighbors and Country knew that
he had not gone to schole: That he had still lived with his parents, Joseph
(whom they supposed to be his father) and Marie his Mother, and was subject to
them. And so accounting him the son of a Carpenter, v^learned, and of the
same trade of life. [How came this Mar. 6. v. 3. Mat. 13. v. 54. 55. 56.
man (say they) by this wisdom and virtues, as are wrought by his hands? Is
not this the carpenters son? (a carpenter as Saint. Mark relates) Is not
his Mother called Marie? (perhaps Joseph was now departed this life) and his
brethren James and Joseph, and Simon, and Jude, and his sisters are they not
with us (for such indeed were his cosins by blood) whence therefore haith he al
these things? And they were scandalized in him. But wisdom v. 57. Mat. 11. v.
19.
is justified of her children.] Further he showed his wisdom and inscrutable
knowledge, by detecting the secret cogitatio^s of his adversaries, and answering
thereunto [Iesus seeing their thoughts, said: wherefore Mat. 9. v. 4.
He knew the secret thoughts of men's hearts.
think you evil in your hearts?] Again, to prove his forgeuing of sins, to
be no blasphemy as they thought [he said to the sick of the palsy, arise,
take up thy bed, and go into thy house.] v. 6.
And when many believed in his name, seeing the miracles which he did, yet he
did not commit him self unto them [For he knew al (says the Evangelist) Joan.
2. v. 24. 25. Mat. 16. v. 8. Luc. 9. v. 47. Mat. ^4. v. 36. Mar. 13. v. 31.
and because it was not nedeful for him, that any should give testimony of
man, for he knew what was in man.]

6 Of which his universal knowledge, the Apostles He knew the day of Judgment
but would not reveal it.
having good experience, both in them selves and others [asked him when
Jerusalem should be destroyed, and when the general Judgment should be?] of
both which he gave them certain sigues, but the very time and day, he would
not tell them saying, [that no body knows it, neither the Angels in heaven,
but the Father alone, nor the Son, but the Father] which last words, the
Arrians allege, for their herefie, to prove that the Son of God is inferior
and inequal to the Father. And other heretics called Agnoites, urge the same,
against the universal knowledge of Christ as he is man. But one answer of the
Catholic Church serves to both the errors, that our Savior, whose office is
to reveal al things that are nedeful, and conu^nient to be known, has not
in commission to reveal the last day of general Judgment, and so he knows
it not to tell it to others; But that himself knows it no man of understanding
can doubt, seeing he is the Judge of al, and therefore knows al things
perteyning thereto: Else he were not a competent Judge, if he knew not, as well the
time, as al other points belonging to that office. Neither can that prophecy
of Zachary be well understood of any other day, then the day of general
Judgment, where he says: [There shall be one day, which is known to our Lord,
Zach. 14. v. 7.
not day nor night, and in the time of the evening, there shall be light]: Much
less as he is the Son of God can he be ignoraut (as the Arrians said) of
this or any other thing, that either shall be or can be. As for other
objections made by the same Agnoites upon the words of S. Luke [Iesus proceeded
Luc. 2. v. 52. Mat. 8. v. 10.
in wisdom, and age, and grace, with God, and m^n:] And that he merueled at
the great faith of the Centurion, which (say they) imporreth that he was
ignorant of the cause of the C^nturions great faith; is as clearly answered.
For those words of He proceeded in experimental knowledge. He would seem to
marvel though he knew the same thing before.
S. Luke import only experimental knowledge, and in this our Savior proceeded,
having before habitual knowledge of the same things. And whereas he merueled at
the Centurions faith; he thereby gave al to understand, that the Jews faith was
d^^ectiue, and this Gentiles faith admirable, and wor^^ie to be admired, and
imitated by the Jews. And so by this, and by other continual occasions, he
more and more made known, that he ever from his I^ca^nation, had al knowledge.
And so S. Peter professed saying, [Lord thou know al things: thou know
that Ioa. 21. v. 17.
I love thee.] Neither did he learn any thing of men, nor of Angels, but is
the absolute Master and Doctor of al, as the Prophet Joel calls him: willing
[the children of Sion to rejoice in our Lord, Joel. 2. v. 23. Ioa. 13. v. 13.
because he has given you a Doctor of Justice.] So also his Apostles rightly
called him Master, which title him self approved and ratified, saying to them
[You call me Master, and Lord, and you say well, for I am so] As also before
this he had taught them saying [One is your Master Christ] Not that there Mat.
23. v. 8. 10. 2. Tim. 1. v. 11.
may not be other masters under him (for S. Paul was appointed a master of
the Gentiles) but because Christ is the eminent and principal Master of al: He
is only absolute Master, independent of others; He [whom God has set on his
right hand in celestials, Ephs. 1. v. 20. 21.
above al Principality and Potestate, and Power, and Domination, and every
name that is named in this world, or in the world to come.]

7 Finally Christ's incomparable power, which is Christ's omnipotent power is
signified by the name JESUS.
an other principal excellency, is also proved by many holy Scriptures. For
first his holy name JESUS, that is Savior, imports his singular power, that
by him and by no other there is salvation, as S. Peter avouched to Caiphas, and
other rulers among the Iew^s, saying: [Be it known to al you, Act. 4. v. 10.
and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth
this man (who has been lame from his mothers womb) stands before you whole.
For neither (says he) is there any name v. 12.
under heaven, given to men, wherein we must be saved.] And S. Paul teaches
that [in the name of Jesus Phil. 2. v. 10.
every knee bow, of the celestials, terrestrials, and infernals.]

8 Also the name CHRIST, that is the Anointed Also by the name CHRIST.
shows to us his three singular offices; that he is the Prophet, of whom all the other Prophets did foretell: Joan. 1. v. 22. Ps. 109. v. 4.
the Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, and the King of
kings, whose kingdom shall have no end. Of him therefore al true Prophets,
Preistes, and Kings, have both their title, and power of persons anointed.
This his power he expressly Luc. 1. v. 33. Mat. 28. v. 18. 19. Joan. 20. v. 22.
23.
signified to his Apostles as his Patentes of commission saying: [Al power is
given to me in heaven, and in earth: going therefore teach ye al nations. As my
Father sent me, I also do send you, whose sins you shall forgive they are
forgeuen them, and whose you shall retain, they are reteined] signifying as well
that he had received power as man, from God, as that his power extends it
self, to give and confer power to other men, his Ministers: whereof is more
frequent mention then I shall need here to recite.

9 In way also of correction our Savior temporally He had also temporal power.
punished offenders: as [when he found in the Joan. 2. v. 14. 15.
Temple some that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the bankers sitting, he
made as it were a whippe of small cords, and drove them al out of the Temple
And practiced the same in correcting faults.
with their sheep and oxen, and the money of the bankers, he powered out, and
overthrew the tables] which was one of the first things he did, in manifesting
him self to be Christ our Redemer. Again in the same kind, not long before his
Passion, on Palm Sunday [when he was received with joyful Mat. 21. v. 12.
acclamations into Jerusalem, he entered into the Temple of God, and cast out
(...) ha* sold and bought in the Temple and the tables of the bankers, and the
chaires of them that sold pigion, he overthrew.] So Which power is universal
over al persons, and al things.
without limitation of things or persons [God has Ioa. 3. v. 35. Ephesians. 1. v.
22.
given al things in his handes] as the Evangelist testifies, and as S. Paul
also writes [God has subdued al things under his feet, and has made him
head over all the Church, which is his bodie] not of part, but of all the Church:
Angels and men, Clergy and Laity, Princes and Peoples: not only a Ioa. 13. v.
13. 1. Tim. 4. v. 10.
Master to teach, and to instruct, but also a Lord to command, and to correct
[He only the Savior of al men, especially of the faithful] to wit of the
faithful, as of members actually united to the head, and of al others living in
this world, as of those that have it in their power, through his grace, which
is wanting to none, that they may be united if they will, and be saved. Which
universal power, of Chtist, the same Apostle again avouches and proves by
David's Prophecy, that Christ's dominion is over al. [For in that (says the
Apostle) God subjected al Ps. 8. v. 7. 8. Heb. 2. v. 8.
things unto him, he left nothing not subject to him.]

Christ our Lord took also man's infirmities, not opposite to perfection.
ARTICLE. 20.
AS our Lord in humane nature, had even from Christ subjected him self to death
and penalties of this life, but not to sin.
his incarnation, al qualities of perfection: so he also took al man's
infirmities not contrary thereunto. subiecting him self to death and other
penalties as the debtes of man's sins, for the which he came to satisfy.
But to sin it self, he was in no wise subject. As all the Prophets and
Apostles teach us, he ever most perfectly [loued Justice, and Ps. 44. v. 8. Is.
53. v. 9. 1. Pet. 2. v. 23. Joan. 8. v. 46.
hated iniquity. He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth.]
Wherefore him self most worthily challenged his adversaries, to charge him
therewith if they could [Which of you (says he) shall argue me of sin?]
Neither had he, nor could have any inclination to sin (called fomes peccati,
food or norishment of sin) being the holy one, Mat. 1. v. 18. Luc. 1. v.
35. Io. 14. v. 30. Io. 8. v. 12. Luc. 1. v. 79.
conceived by the Holy Ghost, united in person to God the Son, and having
fruition of God in his ever blessed soul. He was ever so wholly free from al
spiritual defectes, that [the Prince of this world had not in him any thing at
al.] Neither could he be Nor to ignorance. Nor to any deformity.
ignorant of any thing, who is [the light of the world sent to illuminate all that sit in darcknes. Neither in body was he subject to any deformity,
monstruousitie, or unaccustomed natural diseases, as lamenes, blindness, deafnes,
palsy, leprosy, or the like. For of him is verified also, according to his
corporal constitution, that saying of the Psalmist [Goodlie Ps. 44. v. 3.
of beauty above the sons of men; grace is powered out in thy lips.]

2 Other general infirmities common to al mankind, He took al other
infirmities.
for the sin of Adam; our celestial Adam Christ, voluntarily admitted, and
undertook in him self. He would be passible and mortal; that he might suffer
and dye for all men: [he was wounded (says Isaias Isa. 53. v. 5. 7.
the Prophet) for our iniquities; he was broken for our sins. the discipline
of our peace upon him, and with the wail of his stripe, we are healed. And he
was offered, because him self would] Yea his Passion exceded al others,
whereupon he says in the Lamentations [O al ye that pass by the way, attend
Lamen. 1. v. 12.
and see, if there be sorrow like unto my sorrow] Because he suffered for all,
he would suffer most of al. [Because the children (says S. Paul) have
communicated Heb. 2. v. 14.
with flesh and blood, him self also (that is Christ) in like manner has been
partaker of the same] has also taken flesh like to the flesh of sinners,
passible and of the same kind that sinners have, which in an other place, he
calls [the similitude of the Romans 8. v. 3.
flesh of sin [For others having flesh of sin, he had the like flesh, but
without sin [that by death he might destroy him that had the Empire of death]
that is to say the devil. For seeing he has taken the seed of man [he would in all things be like unto his brethren, that he might become a merciful and
faithful High Priest before God, that he might repropitiate the sins, (or
make a reconciliation for the sins) of the people.]

3 Neither did he only take this mortality, and passibilitie He suffered to
make our suffering acceptable.
in flesh that he might thereby dye, but also that he might therein suffer other
penalties for our sins, and to make our suffering acceptable and fruictful
[yet if we suffer with him, that we may also be Romans 8. v. 17. 2. Tim. 2. v.
12. Mat. 4. v. 2. Ioa. 4. v. 6. Ioa. 19. v. 28.
glorified with him.] For our benefit therefore, and for our example, he would
be hungry after forty days fast in the desert. He would then also be
tempted, to teach us to resist tentation. He would be wearied of his journey
and sit down to rest him by a fountain in the Country of Samaria. He would
be thirsty on the Cross; and innumerable the like. [For in that wherein him
self suffered, and was proved, he is able to help them that are tempted and
proved.]

4 Likewise in his soul, to wit, in the inferior He also suffered in the
sensitive power of his soul.
sensitive part or power thereof, our Savior assumed our infirmities. For
albeit his B. Soul was ever glorious, seeing God most perfectly of all the
blessed, yet the influence of his soul, which should otherwise redound even to
the body, was by Gods disposition, for more merit, and our greater
benefit, suspended, that not only our Saviors body, but also the sensitive
power of his blessed soul, was subject in this life to ordinary afflictions
of other souls. Hence it was that by the Prophet David our Savior said [My
soul is replenished with euils] with Ps. 87. v. 4.
great tribulations. For so was his soul afflicted in the garden of
Gethsemanie, the first night of his passion when [he began to wax sorrowful,
and to be Mat. 26. v. 37. 38. Mar. 14. v. 33.
sad;] when he also said to his Disciples [My soul is sorrowful even unto
death] And as S. Mark relates [began to fear, and to be heauie] which motions
in Christ our Lord, were real afflictions, infirmities of humane nature, and
called in him Prop^ssions; Our Lord had not passions, but propassio^s.
whereas the like in us are real passions preventing the order of reason, but in
him following the order of reason, for that his reason so directed, and his will
subiecting it self to Gods will, so ordained, that the sensitive power of his
soul, should be subject to fear, sadness, and sorrow: but withal, still Mat.
26. v. 39. 42. Luc. 22. v. 42.
subject subject to reason, and his will submitted to Gods will: As in the same
Agony he absolutely prayed [Father not as I will, but as thou will, not my will,
but thy will be done.] Al which infirmities voluntarily assumpted, with the
unspeakable dolours thereby even as willingly sustained, did not deprive his
soul of glory. He was both viator, and comprehensor.
For he was still, as well in the time of his Passion, as all the rest of his
temporal life, both Comprehensor, and Viator, to wit, he was both in
possession of eternal glory, and also in the way to eternal glory: both in
heaven, as him self said [the Son of Joan. 3. v. 13. Iere. 14. v. 8.
Man which is in heauen] and also traueling in the way to heaven, as Jeremy
the Prophet signifies, admiring thereat, and demanding of him [Why will thou be
as a soiourner (or stranger) in the land, and as a wayfaring man, turning into
lodge] or tending toward lodging place?

The blessed Virgin Marie, is the Mother of God: and most excellent of al
created persons. ARTICLE. 21.
BEfore we proceed further to speak of particular It pertains to al
Christians to believe, that the B. Virgin Marie, is the Mother of God.
things which our B. Savior did, and suffered in this transitory life: it
rests for co^plement of the third Article of the Apostles Creed, to declare
brefely, a special point of the Christian doctrine, that the B. Virgin, Mother
of Jesus, is thereby also MOTHER of GOD. And consequently, by the same
exaltation and pearls dignity, is the most excellent of al created persons. I
say of al persons created, because Christ our Savior, is a Divine Person
Increated. Concerning therefore the former point, that she is truly the Mother
of God, although it be not expressly said in the holy Scripture, that the B.
Virgin is the Mother of God, as the heritike Nestorius objected: yet is it
necessarily deduced from holy Scriptures; and the denial thereof is condemned
to be heritical, by the holy Ephesine Council. Which yet we urge not in this
present trial, but according to our purpose, prove it by the confessed written
word of God.

2 The Evangelist S. Matthew writes, that [of this It is proved by necessary
consequence of holy Scriptures.
Mat. 1. v. 16. v. 23.
B. Virgin Marie, was borne JESUS, who is called CHRIST: who is also called
EMANVEL, (which being interpreted, is) God with vs] Alleging against the
Jews, that Isayas so prophesied, and so called the child her son. S. Luke
writes, that Isa. 7. v. 14.
[S. Elizabeth, being replenished with the Holy Ghost, (admiring the B.
Virgins humility) cried out with a loud voice and said, [Whence is this to
Luc. 1. v. 41. 42. 43.
me, that the Mother of my Lord does come to me.] It is true, that Christ, not
only as God, but also as man, is our Lord: yet here the title of Lord,
imports the greater cause of admiration, rather then the lesser, and she
speaking by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, rather meant our Lord God, then
Lord as he is man. Which is also confirmed by he^ next words explicating such
an effect, as imports divine power in the Virgins Son saying [For behold v.
44.
as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the infant in my womb
did leap for joy.] And therefore she might well call her, the Mother of our Lord
God, from whose Son, her own son received such grace, as could not proceed
from any other, then from God. S. Paul also testifies, that God was borne of
the Issue of David, saying [Christ, Romans 9. v. 5. Chapter 1. v. 3.
who is above al things GOD, blessed for ever, was borne of the Jews,
according to the flesh; and of the seed of Dauid] which was by his Mother the
B. Virgin. And therefore she, of whom God was borne, is as properly called the
MOTHER of GOD, as is said, [God is borne of the Jews.] Likewise S. John says
expressly [Iesus is the Son of God: This 1. Joan. 5. v. 5. 20. Article 17.
is the true God] which is already declared by many other sacred textes. Upon
al which premises, is necessarily inferred, that the B. Virgin, being the
Mother of Jesus, who is God: is the Mother of God; even as certainly and
demonstratiuely, as it is inferred that she is the Mother of Christ. For
neither had Jesus his anointing, or offices, of Prophet, King, and Priest,
whereof he is called Christ, from his Mother.

3 As likewise neither had he his soul from his Mother, Proved by a clear
example and proper speech of al men.
nor any other men have their souls from their parents: and yet is not she,
nor any other mother, called the Mother of the flesh of her child, but of the
child consisting of soul and body, and subsisting in humane person (speaking
of al other mothers and children) so our B. Lady the Virgin, Mother of Jesus
her Son, consisting of distinct natures, divine and humane; and his humanity
consisting of soul and body, and all the three natures, Deity, Soul, and
Body, subsisting in divine person; most truly and is most properly called the
Mother of God. An other An other example; illurating this point of faith.
example, though it does not prove our purpose, yet to illustrate this truth,
is in a Queen, the wife of an absolute King, bearing a Son, is truly the
mother of a Prince. And when this Prince her Son comes to be King, she is
truly the mother of the King. And it were too nice, too precise, yea, an
improper and false speech, to say, she is not mother of the king, but only of
that man who is king, though he had not his kingdom by his mother. So the B.
Virgin, bearing her Son Jesus, who is Christ, and who is also God: is no
less truly the Mother of God, then she is the Mother of Christ, and the
Mother of Jesus. Because God, the most B. Trinity, vouchsaifed to make her the
Mother of Jesus, who is Christ and God.

4 In that therefore this most blessed Virgin is so The B. Virgin mother of God
is most excellent of al creatures, except only the humanity of Christ.
exalted as none can be higher to be the Mother of God, it necessarily soloweth
that she excels al other humane, and Angelical persons, in grace and glory:
and after the most sacred humanity of Christ her son, is most excellent of
al other creatures. For further declaration whereof we have abundance of
figures, prophecies, testimonies, and other proffes Proved by Gods promise that
the devil should be overcome by the seed of a woman.
in the holy Scriptures. First of all that decree of God to send a redemer of
mankind reueiled straight after our fall, includes this B. Virgin as
principally cooperating with our B. Savior, in the combat against Genesis 3. v.
1. 6.
the devil. For whereas the devil first assaulted our mother Eve, and then by
her means overcame our father Adam; our merciful God in examining this v. 9.
transgression, began with Adam, whose sin, and not Eues, infected and
overthrew us al. But upon 12. 13.
his answer, alleging Eues allurement, whereunto he consented; God also
hearing her excuse, and accusation of the serpent (the devil) that had deceived
15.
her; premonishing them, and in them us al, that this enmity begun between
the serpent and the woman [should continue between them, and between the
serpents seed (folowers or adherentes) and the woman's seed, and that she and
her seed, should bruise the serpents head in peeces] Signifying, that as the
devil by the cooperation of a woman, overcame man: so by cooperation of a woman
he should be overcome, his head bruised in pieces. Neither can the Jews deny,
but that this prediction perteyneth to the Mother of Messiah, who indeed is
the B. Virgin Mother of God.

5 To whom also perteyned, that Adam called the The same was prefigured by the
name of Eua.
name of his wife Eve [because (says the holy text) 20.
she was the mother of all the liuing] for so Eve signifies. And most properly
agrees to the Mother of God, truly called the mother of all the living; being
Mother of life it self, Jesus Christ, God, and Man: [who is the way, the
verity, and the life] Joan. 14. v. 6.
whereas the other Eve was to be mother of us al, as we are mortal and
continually dying. But was called mother of the living, in figure of her that
most especially and most nearly, should cooperate to the incarnation of our
Redemer Christ, by whom al men should recover life.

6 As will also more evidently appear if we consider Other figures of the old
Testament of the most blessed Virgin were these.
the special graces of certain other renowned holy women, and compare them
with the Mother of God. For so we shall easily see, that they were indede, some
in one respect, some in an other, significant figures, or shadows foreshewing
this supereminent Virgin, who by many degrees excels them al. Sara the wife
of Abraham when by special grace she had Genesis 11. v. 29. Chapter 17. v. 17. Chapter 18.
v. 11. Chapter 21. v. 2. Chapter 24. v. 67. Chapter 25. v. 24. Chapter 39. v. 32. Chapter 30. v.
22. Exo. 15. v. 20. Iudic. 4. v. 4. 17. 1. Reg. 1. v. 2. Chapter 2. v. 1. etc.
Judith. 15. v. 10. Est. 9. v. 1. Luc. 1. v. 5. Chapter 2. v. 36, 37.
Sara.
been long barren, and nature was deficie^t; conceived and bare a son in her
old age of nintie years. Rebecca Rebecca
the wife of Isaac, and mother of Esau and Jacob, twins. Lia, and Rachel
wives of Jacob, mothers of Lia. Rachel.
the more principal heads, of the Tribes of Israel. Marie the sister of Moses
and Aaron, a virgin Prophetess. Marie. (...)
Debora the wife of Lapidoth, a Prophetess, that directed Barach the Judge, or
Capi^ane general of the Israelites army. I^^el that killed Sisara I^^el. Anna.
their inuadi^g enemy. Anna, the wife of E^cana, and mother of Samuel the
Prophet, and she also a Prophetess. Judith a widow: And Esther, a* Judith.
Esther.
Queen, who upon se^eral occasions, and by diverse means, delivered the whole
people of Israel, from* great distresses, and imminent dangers of ruin.
Lastly, Anna, her own* mother. Elizabeth and a^ other Anna, a* Prophetess.
S. Anne, o^r B. Ladies own mother; and S. Elizabeth, the mother of S. John
Baptist: and an other holy Anne, a Prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, a
religious old widow; were al endued with manifold graces, most of them more by
miracle, then by the ordinary power of nature, became mothers of most renowned
children; one of them a Virgin, and two widows, and the rest wives: by their
many noble virtues, and sundry heroical acts, did well fore-signifie, but
none of them, nor al together, if they had been joined in one person, could
match this singular spouse of God, the Tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, some time
a wife, and afterward a widow, but still a perpetual Virgin, and the chosen
Mother of God: which is the greatest preeminence that could be given her.

7 An other very great preeminent grace, was her Her singular privilege to be
both a perpetual Virgin, and a Mother, was prefigured by the bush burning, and
no^ consuming.
singular privilege, to be both a Virgin, and a Mother; which besides the
examples of barren women, by Gods power made fruteful, was further signified
by other miraculous operations, very aptly resembling this particular
mystery. As when our Lord Exo. 3. v. 2.
appeared to Moses in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush: he saw
that the bush was on fire, and was not burnt. which as a figure, did well
represent Luc. 1. v. 35.
the most B. Virgin, who being ouershadowed with the flaming fire of the holy
Ghost, did conceive and bear a son, her most pure Virginity still conserved.
Also Aarons dry rod, bringing forth Aarons ^odde.
Number. 17. v. 8.
flowers and fruit, was a like figure of the same immaculate Virgin, made
fertile above al course of nature. So likewise Gedeons wool fleece, at one time
Gedeons fleece.
Iudic. 6. v. 38. 40.
found full of dew, all the ground being dry about it; an other time found dry,
all the ground being wette, prefigured the self same fertile Mother of God, still
remaning a pure and perpetual Virgin.

8 To al which and the like prophetical figures The same privilege foretold by
the Prophets: David, Isaias.
rightly agree the predictions of prophets. For the Royal Psalmist said, that
Christ by his incarnation Ps. 71. v. 6. Isa. 11. v. 1. Ruth. 4. v. ^2.
should [descend as rain upon a fleece, and as drops of rain falling upon
the earth] Isaias the prophet affirmed that [a rod should come forth out of
the root of Iesse (who was otherwise called Isai the father of David) and that
a flower should rise up out of this rod.] Which rod none but Jews deny,
to be the B. Virgin; and that the flower is the Messiah the same Jews
willingly confess. And more expressly Isaias says: [A virgin shall conceive and
bear Isa. 7. v. 14. Ezech. 43. v. 2. 5.
a sonne] whom also Ezechiel seems to prophecy, Ezechiel.
though under the shadow of the Temple, saying [the earth shined at his
Majesty, and the house was filled with the glory of our Lord.] For so was the
B. Virgin more and more replenished with grace, by conceiving Christ the
fountain of grace and glory. And concerning her perpetual Virginity, the
same Ezechiel says more plainly (if by the ^ast part of the Temple, we
understand, as al Christian writers do, the Mother of Christ) that [this Gate
shall be Ezech. 44. v. 3.
shut, and it shall not be opened.]

9 Of her singular spiritual perfection, above al others, Her singular
p^^fect^^ ^^ al virtues.
King Solomon haith many goodly sentences in his Canticles, by which God him
self testifies al her virtues in general, saying [as the Lilly among Cant. 2.
v. 2. Chapter 4. v. 1. Chapter 7. v. 6.
the thorns: so my love among the daughters. How bewtiful art thou o my love,
and how bewtiful art thou. How comlie my dearest in delights?] and innumerable
the like. Which albeit they are spoken also of the whole Church, the general
spouse of God, and of every faithful soul his particular spouse: yet
singularly perteine to the most excellent, and most eminent of al. Especially
that praise which comprehends al sanctity, together with all purity: [Thou
art al fair my love, and there is not a spotte Chapter 4. v. 7.
in thee.] More fiigures and prophecies might be recited, of the old Testament,
but these may suffice.

10 Now let us more particularly touch, the sacred It is most probable that our
B. Lady was preserved from original sin.
history of her most blessed life, whereof* be many worthy works extant, and
therefore I will here only name the especial h^ades. Whether this chosen Vessel
of God, being ordained before al worlds, and in the fulness of time, prepared
to be the Mother of God, was ever subject to original sin, or rather
prevented by sanctifying grace, is a question disputable, which I will not
discuss. Only this we may say as certain, that Christ her Son, is also her
Savior, for so he is of al mankind, which he performed to her in such manner,
as was most to his ow^e honor, as he was both God and Man; which should also
be to her most merit, and most glory. But That she was sainctified before her
birth is a point of faith.
that she was sanctified before her birth, is a point of faith, believed and
defined by the Church, though it be not expressed in the holy Scriptures. As
neither is there any mention at al of her Parents nor of the time nor place
of her birth, nor education: which yet are known by Tradition. And to al
persons of reasonable understanding, and discourse, it is sufficiently
credible, that the Mother of God had, not less, but greater Privileges in her
manner of sanctification, then any other se^uant of Christ: and namely greater
prerogative therein, then the Prophet Jeremy, or her Sons Precursor S. John
Baptist, The prophet Jeremy, and S. John Baptist were sanctified before their
birthes.
both which were sanctified before they were borne, in their mothers wom^e; as
holy Scriptures testify. Of Jeremy thus before I formed thee (says Iere. 1.
v. 5.
God) in the womb, I kn^w thee, and before thou came forth of the matrice, I
sanctified thee.] Of S. John Baptist, the Angel said to Zachary his father [He
shall be replenished with the Holy Ghost, Luc. 1. v. 15.
even from his mothers womb.] Much more the elected Mother of God was
sanctified, and replenished with the Holy Ghost, either in the same instant,
or presently after, that her B. soul informed her natural body. And so the
Church celebrateth her immaculate coming into the world, with two solemn
feasts; the one of her Conception, or first sanctification; And that she never
committed any sin is also a point of faith.
the other of her holy Nativity. By which sanctification she was so
confirmed, and established in grace (as the pillar of truth believes) that in all 1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
her life she never committed any actual sin at al, neither mortal, nor
venial: but made continual progress in all virtues. She was espoused to Joseph,
by Gods ordinance for diverse reasons.


11 At the age of three years, as constant Tradition teaches, she was
presented by her parents, to be instructed amongst virgins in the Temple: and
Mat. 1. v. 18. 20.
there remained, til she was espoused to holy Joseph by Gods especial
ordinance, for diverse great reasons; as well in respect of our B. Savior, whom
she Sap. 4. v. 3.
should conceive and bear, lest he might have been 1.
reputed of illegitimate birth; and that some besides 2.
his Mother, might take a fatherly care of him in his infancy; as in respect
of the holy Virgin, lest she 3.
might have been defamed, or punished as a fornicatrix; Deuteronomy. 22. v. 21. Mat.
2. v. 13. 14. 20. Mat. 1. v. 19.
and that she might have comfort and help 4.
of her spouse in all difficulties, fleeing into Egypt, remaining there,
destitute of other friends, returning thence, and in other necessities. As also
her 5.
marriage was requisite, in respect of others, that they might have the
confident and irrefragable testimony of Joseph, that Christ was borne of a
Virgin, because in this case, his only Mothers assertion, might seem suspected
and insufficient. She vowed perpetual virginity.


12 That her Virginity, was confirmed and consecrated to God by vow, is
inuinciblie proved by her prudent reply to the Angel, demanding of him by what
means she must conceive, as he had told her that she should, not expressing
the manner how. And therefore she said not; How can this be done, as doubting,
but [how shall this be done?] and withal yelding her reason, why she inquired
[because (says Luc. 1. v. 34.
she) I know not man] which necessarily implies her vowed state of life never
to know man. Else this reason should have had no ground, if she had been in
state to have known man afterward. But because Number. 30. v. 14.
she had by Gods will, and her spouses consent, vowed perpetual Virginity,
the Angel made not answer that she might know man, and so conceive and bear
a Son; but he answered [the Holy Ghost Luc. 1. v. 35.
shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee. And
therefore also that which of thee shall be borne Holy, shall be called the Son
of God; because there shall not be any thing v. 37.
impossible with God.] By whose omnipotent power, perpetual virginity could
not hinder his will, and decree, to be borne of a Virgin.

13 Wherefore being by the will of God, both a wife, As her dignity exccelleth
al others: so her fulness of grace excelled, by which God made her worthy to be
his Mother.
and a vowed Virgin, and in all other respects, made a fit Habitacle for the
Son of God: the most B. Trinity addressed unto her a Legate from heaven, the
Archangel Gabriel, who accordingly saluted her [Haile full of grace, our Lord is
with thee: blessed Luc. 1. v. 28.
art thou among women.] Full indeed, even so full, of grace, as made her most
worthy before al other women, that ever were, or shall be, to be Gods Mother.
For it is a general and infallible rule, that to what purpose, office, or
function soever God calls any person, he withal gives answerable grace to
perform the same, if the party so called, hinder it not. So says S. Paul of
him self and other Apostles, [God has made us meet Ministers of the new
Testament.] 2. Cor. 3. v. 6.
Even so she being chosen to the highest dignity that can be in any degree of
Motherhood, was replenished with correspondent grace to the purposed effect. By
virtue whereof, her virtues still increased. Whereby she still proceeded in all
virtues.
No sooner did she understand, that she was chosen to be the Mother of God, but
she professed Luc. 1. v. 38.
her self his meanest servant [Behold (says she) the handmaid of our Lord] and
with most prompt obedience to Gods will, adds [Be it done to me according to
thy word.] No sooner does she hear of her old Cousin Elizabeth's estate, being
six months gone with child, but [with speed rising up, v. 39.
she went into the hill Countrie] from Nazareth in Gallilie, into Judah, to visit
and serve her aged Cousin, abiding with her the other three months, with much
and mutual congratulation of each to other, for so unspeakable works of God
performed in them both. Where also at the very first salutation of the B.
Virgin imparted to S. Elizabeth [the child (S. John) in his mothers womb, did
leape] for joy. [Elizabeth also replenished with the Holy Ghost, v. 41. 44. 42.
cried out with a loud voice] with the same words uttered before by the Angel
[Blessed art thou among al women] adding thereto the ground and cause of al
blessedness [and blessed (says she) is the fructe of thy wombe] which is Jesus
Christ. Again, expressing her hearty joy [And blessed is she that believed:
because those things be accomplished, that 45.
were spoken to her by our Lord. Where we also She was also an especial
Prophetess.
may observe, that our B. Ladies belief and consent cooperated to the
accomplishing of our B. Saviors Incarnation. In this most holy Visitation
also, the B. Virgin Mother, uttered the Divine Canticle, MAGNIFICAT, containing
no fewer Mysteries 46.
then words.

14 After her returning from her Cousin, diverse afflictions Diverse tribulations
happened unto her for increase of merit, mixed with comforthes, and continual
spiritual joys.
hapened to the same most B. Virgin, for exercise of her prudence, patience,
humility, and al her virtues. Just Joseph her dear Spouse, now perceiving her
to be with child, not yet knowing the Mystery, which God had wrought in her,
is so troubled, that to avoid perplexity in this case to him as yet Mat. 1.
v. 19. v. 20.
doubtful, he resolved to depart from her. But the God of al comfort is at hand
[An Angel of our Lord appeared unto him in sleep saying: Joseph son of
David, fear not to take Marie thy wife, for that which is borne in her, is of
the Holy Ghost.] Again, shortly after this, they undertake no small journey,
from Galilee into Judah, to be enrolled there in Luc. 2. v. 4.
Bethlehem, according to the Emperors Edict, in the place of their proper
Lin^age [being of the house and famil^e of David.] There our B. Savior is
borne in poverty [wrapped in clothes, and laid in a manger] v. 7.
for want of a cradle. But Angels sing praises, Glory in the Highest to God,
and in earth peace to v. 14. v. 15. 20.
men of good will.] Shepherdes visit the Infant, glorify and praise God. Ere
long, there came also from Mat. 2. v. 1. 2. v. 11.
far Countries [Sages (or Kings) led by a starre] the first fruictes of
Gentiles, with their rich and Mistical offeringes [of Gold, Mirh, and
Frankencense.] In the mean season (so were afflictions still mixed with joys)
[the child was circumcised the eight day] Luc. 2. v. 21.
from his birth, sheeding his first precious blood for our sakes [and was
called IESVS] that is to say, SAVIOVR. The fourtith day also from his birth, he
was by his parents [Presented in the Temple] and v. 22. Exo. 13. v. 2.
the most immaculate Virgin Mother, although exempted from the bond of the
Law, because she conceived not by seed of man, yet for humility and
edification [offered, as the Law (of others) required, Leuit. 12. v. 2. 8. Luc.
2. v. 24.
a pair of Turtles, or two young pigeons] where she was admonished by old holy
Simeon, of future great tribulations: whereof some presently ensued, being
forced to flee into Egypt. Neither at their return from thence, could they
dwell in any part of Judah [fearing v. 34. 35.
Archelaus] the Son and successor of that Herod which killed all the male
infantes of two years old and under, in and near to Bethlehem, and therefore
retired again to Nazareth. In the residue also of her cohabitation with her B.
Son, we may consider, that enterchanges of sorrows and gladness, continually
occurred, though one only is recorded, from their return out of Egypt, til the
thirtith year of our Savior his age. That one was, when she and Joseph
unwitting, left the child [Iesus of the age of Luc. 2. v. 43.
twelve years in Jerusalem, and not finding him (as they thought they should)
amongst their kinsfolk, and acquaintance; with great grief returned seeking,
and the third day (with joy) found him in the Temple, v. 46.
By our B. Ladies example we are admonished, to meditate holy Mysteries.
sitting amongst the Doctocs.] Al which, as well written as not written, she still
kept in mind, [concerning them in her hart] as the Evangelist twice Luc. 2. v.
19. 51.
records upon occasions of the Angels and shepherdes, first rejoicing at her
Sons Nativity, and of this absence and conference of the child Jesus with
the said Doctors in the Temple: which may suffice to admonish us by so devout
example, to consider and meditate these and the rest. For of the rest of her
most pious life, after the coming of the Holy Ghost upon her with the
Apostles; and others and of her death* happy and glorious assumption, nothing
is written in holy Scriptures, but very much in authentical Histories, to
which we remitte you.

15 And so with the zealous devout woman described ^or her nerenes in nature to
our B. Savior, and for her many most eminnet graces, al faithful generations
account the glorious virgin mother, most blessed.
in the Gospel, we may say, as she did with heart and voice [Blessed is the
womb that bare this Son Luc. 11. v. 27. 28.
of God, and blessed are the breasts that gave him suck: yea, and most
blessed is she above al other women] and men, and Angels, next after her Son,
because she above all the other [heard his word, and Mat. 12. v. 50.
kept it.] She the Mother of grace, the Mother of mercy, the Mother of life,
the Mother of Christ Jesus, God and Man, who [on the Cross, commending Ioa.
19. v. 26. 27.
her to the provident care of S. John the Evangelist peculiarly beloved,
commended him also reciprocally to her, and in him, all the faithful to her
potent intercession. She whom [al generations (that is al true Luc. 2. v. 49.
servants of God worthily) call blessed: because (says she) he that is
Mighty, has done great things to me, and holy is his name. Amen.

Christ our Savior, after thirty years private life (when S. John Baptist
had first begu^ne) preached his Gospel: confirming it diverse ways. ARTICLE. 22.
WE may not well otherwise begin, to recite S. John Baptist endued with many
spiritual graces, prepared the way to our Saviors manifestation.
the acts and sufferinges of our B. Savior, then by touching first briefly
the principal things which his precursor S. John Baptist, did and suffered;
who prepared the way to his manifestation, and so proceed by way of an Epitome,
according to the larg^r narrations of the Evangelists. When therefore S. John
was conceived, more by miracle, then by course of nature, of Luc. 1. v. 7. 15.
a mother both [long barren, and become old; he was replenished with the Holy
Ghost (and sanctified) in his mothers wombe] as the Gospel expressly testifies.
And it is most probable, that the same was done, when the B. Virgin having
conceived, and then bearing our B. Savior in her womb, visited and saluted
Elizabeth her Cousin his mother. For [then the same child (as is before said)
did leap v. 41. 44.
for joy, in Elizhbethes womb; and she also was replenished with the Holy
Ghost.] Whether this use of reason was accelerated, that he could then
understand Christ to be present; is not certain to us, nor necessary to be
discussed. For it suffices that his soul was sanctified, whether it actually
understood or no, as infantes are sanctified in baptism, and receive faith in
habit, but not in act, til they come to the use of reason. In his young age
being a child, He lived from his childhoode in the desert an austere li^e.
both very virtuous and (...), as may be clearly vnstoode, by the sequ^le of
his life, related by the Evangelists, he retired into the desert, there, as the
sacred History expressly reports, he lived so austerly, that he had his
garment (not many, but one garment) Mat. 3. v. 4. Luc. 1. v. 80. Luc. 7. v.
33. 34.
of Camels hair, and a girdle of a skin about his loins: and his meat was
Locustes, and wild honey.] He came [neither eating bread, nor drinking wine]
so abstineous, that the caueling calumniators, neither liking of his hard life,
nor of our Saviors familiar conversation, said [the one had a devil, and the
other was a gurmander, a drinker of wine, and a friend of publicans and sinners.]

2 At the age of near thirty years, coming by direction He afterward
preached penance, baptized, and gave testimony, that by Christ, is remission
of sin, and salvation.
Mat. 3. v. 1. Mar. 1. v. 4. Luc. 3. v. 3. Mat. 3. v. 8.
of the Holy Ghost, from the inner desert, to the desert of Jury, near to
Jordan [he preached the Baptism of Penance unto remission of sins, to do
penance, and to yeald fruictes worthy of penance] and baptized in warer saying
[there comes a stronger then I, after me, whose lachet of his shoes, I am not
worthy, stouping down, to loose. I baptize you in water, but he shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost.] Yet would our Savior, amongst others, receive the
baptism of John, who otherwise thought it not meet. And by voice of God from
heaven saying [this is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am v. 14. 17. Ioa. 1. v.
27. 30. 36.
well pleased] S. John's testimony was confirmed; given by him, as well to the
Legates of the Jews, sent of purpose; as to the people, and also to his own
Disciples: he still auouching, that not he, but Jesus, is the Messiah. For [his
disciples having emulation for him] when many resorted to our Savior, they
came to him and said [Rabbi, he that was with thee Joan. 3. v. 26.
beyond Iordane, to whom thou did give testmonie, behold he baptiseth, and
al come to him. S. John answered and said: A man can not receive any v. 27.
28.
thing, unless it be given him from heaven your selves do bear me witness
that I said, I am not Christ, but that I am sent before him. He that has the
29.
Bride (to wit the Church) is the Bride-grome: but the friend of the
Bride-grome, that stands and hears rejoices with joy, for the voice of the
bridegroom: this my joy therefore is filled. He must increase, 30.
and I must diminish.] Thus did S. John most faithfully discharge, the high
office of precursor, committed unto him from heaven, in no wise arrogating more
to him self, then truly belonged unto him. And Mat. 11. v. 7.
Our Savior also gave testimony, and great comme^dation of S. John.
so our B. Savior mutually gave him testimony with singular commendations and
praises, that [he was indeed a Prophet, and more then a Prophet] a most
constant witness of the truth [not clothed in soft v. 8. 9. 10. 11.
garmentes] like to courtiers; for [there has not risen among the borne of
women (Christ borne of a Virgin, excels al) a greater then John the Baptist]
As an Angel in purity, and office of his mission, in spirit Elias. He failed
not to tell the Pharisees, and Mat. 3. v. 7. Mat. 14. v. 3. Mar. 6. v. 14. 18.
27.
Saduces, that they were vipers brood. He spared not to rebuke Her^d the
Tetrarch of Galilee, for incestuous adultery: keeping the wife of his brother
Philippe, an other Tetrarch of Itur^a, and Trachonitis. For which his just
admonition, Herod incensed also by the barlot whom he kept, picking an
occasion by the fr^uelous pretense of a sacrilegio as oath, beheaded S. John.

An Epitome of Christ's Actions from his Baptism to his passion: the space of
three years.
3 In the mean season, whiles S. John did preach, Mar. 1. v. 12. 13. Mat. 4.
v. 1. 2. 3,
and baptize, our B, Savior immediately after his own Baptism, going into the
desert, fasted there Which being almost al in the words of the sacred text, we
here omit to include the^ in the form of Our Savior being baptized of S.
John went into the desert, fasted forty days, and suffered him self to be
tempted. In presence of many turned water into wine.
forty ^aies, and forty nights; in the end whereof, suffering the devil to
tempt him, ouerc^me the tempter. Then calling, or rather ad^itting some
Disciples, and him self ^ith them being invited to a Joan. 2. v. 2. 8. 9.
marriage in Cana of Galilee; wrought his first pulique miracle, by turning
water into wine. A figure, and an example of transubstantiating bread into his
own body, and of wine into his blood. [At the feast of Pasch, going to
Jerusalem, and finding in the Temple some that sold oxen, and sheep, and
doves, and Joan. 2. v. 13. 14. 15. 18.
the bankers sitting, he drove them al out with a whip and the money of the
bankers he powered out, and overthrew their tables.] And some expostulating, by
what authority he did these thinges] requiring a sign or miracle, he not
vouchsaising to do any other miracle at that time, (the effect indeed
declaring his power) he obscurly insinuated his death and Resurrection: which
some not understanding, calumniated 19. 23. Io. 3. v. 1. 3. 5. 22. 26.
his speech. Nevertheless [manie believed More publicly he corrected
disorders in the Temple.
in his name, seeing the signs which he did. Then came Nicode^ns, a Pharesee
and Prince of the Jews to him by night, whom he instructed of the necessity
of Baptism, and in other points of faith. Then he preached much.
And as he taught, he also practiced, baptizing many by the ministry of his
Disciples; S. John, as yet Joan. 4. v. 2.
baptizing in the same Country of Jury, in Enon, beside Salm^.

4 But when S. John was cast into prison by Herod, Wrought many miracles and
became famo^s.
and the Pharisees understood that our Savior made many Disciples, or had
many folowers, he left Jury and went again into Galilee. Joan. 4. v. 3. v.
4. ad 43. Mat. 4. v. 13. Io. 4. v. 46. Isa. 9. v. 1. Joan. 4. v. 50. 53. Mat.
4. v. 13. Mat. 4. v. 18. Mar. 1. v. 16.
In which journey, His discourse with Samaritanes.
passing through the Country of Samaria, he made a large and divine speech, to
a Samaritane woman, which came to draw water at Jacobs fountain where he sat.
Henceforth, leaning Nazereth, he made his special aboade in Capharnaum, a
sea-towne of Galilee, His habitation in Capharnaum, and Acts in other parts
of Galilee.
bordering upon the Tribes of Zabulon and Nepthali. There he first healed a
Lords son of an ague by his word, absent, not going to him as the noble man
requested. Whereupon he, and his whole house believed. So he preached publikly in
Galilee, and became famous. Then he called Disciples to remain with him, as of
his retinew and family, which hitherto had not left their former trades, and
states of life. The first was Simon (whom he had already Luc. 5. v. 10.
purposed to call Peter, as afterward he did) and Andrew his brother; James
and John also brethren; al four fishers. When he called the other Apostles,
Mat. 9. v. 9.
excepting S. Matthew, whom he called from the bank of money or custom house,
is not recorded in holy Scripture. Neither as yet did he make any of them
Mar. 1. v. 25. Luc. 4. v. 35.
Apostles, til about a year after: But proceeds in work and doctrine. In the
Sinagogue at Capharnaum, he expelled a devil out of a man; and taught the
people as having power (working in their hearts) not as the Scribes, only
filling their cares with vain Mat. 8. v. 14. 15.
sound of words. Going into Peter's house, he cured his mother in law of a
fever, by touching her hand, so presently, that she arose and ministered unto
him. In like manner he cast out devils, and cured al diseases, even of all that
came, or were commended unto him. He refused two that offered to follow Mat. 8.
v. 19. 22. Joan. 2. v. 25. Mat. 8. v. 26. 28. etc.
him; and advised an other to stay with him, that offered to go bury his
father, for reasons to him self olny known: for he knew what was in e^erie
man. On the sea he appeased a great tempest by his only word, commanding the
winds and the sea, and they obeyed him. He expelled more devils out of two men,
in the Country of Gerasens, and permitting them to enter into swine, the whole
heard ran with violence headlong into the sea, and so were drowned; that al
might know the malice of devils against men, if they were permitted: And with
al^^^ Christ's dominion Christ's power over men's temporal goods, for their
spiritual good.
over al wicked spirits and power over men's temporal possessions, for their
spiritual good, though v. 34.
these worldly Gerasens did not make that fruict of it; but contrariwise came
and besought our Savior Christ, that he would pass from their quarters.

5 Taking therefore a boat and returning to Capharnaum, whiles he preached in a
house, there came Mat. 9. v. 1.
so many together to hear the word, that there was Mar. 2. v. 1.
no place, no not to enter in at the dote, and four men crying one sick of
the palsy in his bed, when they could not enter by the door for the multitude,
they uncovering the roof did let down the couche wherein the sick man lay. And
our Lord Jesus seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy; Have a good
heart son, thy sins are forgeuen thee. Which when certain Scribes and
Pharisees there present heard, they thought in their hearts, that he spoke
blasphemy. But he seeing their secret thoughts, detected them saying: wherefore
think you evil in your hearts? And to make them know, that the Son of man
Christ declared his power to remitte sins by a visible miracle.
has power in earth to forgive sins; he said to the sick man: arise, take up
thy bed, and go into thy house. And forthwith rising before them, he took
up his bed and went into his house, magnifying God. And all the multitude
seeing it, glorified God, Mat. 9. v. 8. Mat. 9. v. 14. 15. Mar. 2. v. 18. Luc.
5. v. 33. Mat. 9. v. 23. Mat. 9. v. 35.
that gave such power to men. After this, he instructed S. Iohnes Disciples
concerning fasting, which they and the Pharisees practiced, more then his
Disciples, yelding them a reason, why his Disciples as yet fasted not, but
should do afterward. He also raised the Archisinagogues daughter from death,
cured a woman of a bloody flixe; healed two blind men; and dispossessed an
other of a devil which had made him blind, and du^me, and so was restored both
to sight and speech. Al which, the Evangelists relate Though many of our
Souiours miracles be recorded, yet not al in particular.
of his actions, the first year of his preaching, adding in general, that he
went about all the Cities and towns, teaching in their Synagogues, preaching
the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, and curing every disease, and every
infirmity.

6 At the Feast of Pasch, in the beginning of the second Christ's Acts in the
second year.
Joan. 5. v. 8.
year, coming to Jerusalem, he healed a man by his only word, that had been
thirty eight years sick, and was come to the pond of Probatica, to get Virtue
of miracles is sometimes given to creatures, especially to such as belong to
sacred uses. The Scribes and Pharisees were very supersticious in keeping the
Sabbath day, which is now abrogated by Christ.
health, but others still preventing him, could not enter first into the water,
after the motion thereof by an Angel. Whereupon the Jews picking a quarrel,
because it was the Sabbath day, persecuted our Savior, and Io. 5. v. 17. 18.
Mat. 12. v. 3.
the more, because in justifying his fact, he insinuates, that God is his
Father. He also confuted the Pharisees, which blamed his Disciples, for brusing
the ears of the corn on the Sabbath day, and told them plainly, that the
Son of man, to wit him self, is Lord of the Sabbath also: foreshewing
(which by his Resurrection is effected) that the Sabbath 8. 11.
day should cease to be the holy day. And as for such necessary works, to
draw a sheep or other cattle out of a ditch; much more to cure a man in body
or soul, is good and lawful any day. And on another Sabbath day, preaching in
the Synagogue, where Mar. 3. v. 5. Luc. 6. v. 8. 10. Mat. 12. v. 12.
was a man with a withered hand, looking round about upon them with anger,
being sorrowful for the blindness of their heart, he said to the man that had the
withered hand, arise and stand forth into the midst: Stretch forth thy hand.
And he stretched his hand forth and it was restored to health, even as the
other. Whereupon the Pharisees replenished with madness, commoned one with an
other, what they might do to Jesus: And going forth, made consultation against
Mat. 12. v. 14. Mar. 3. v. 6. Luc. 6. v. 12. 13. Mat. 10. v. 5. Mar. 6. v. 7.
Luc. 9. v. 1.
him, not only amongst them selves but also with the Herodians, how they might
destroy him.

7 But our Lord Jesus ascending into a mountain, passed the whole night in
prayer, and when the day Our Savior out of al his disciples made twelve
Apostles.
was come, he called his Disciples, and chose and made twelve of them Apostles.
Their names be these: The first Simon (to whom, says S. Mark, he gave the name
Peter) and Andrew his brother: James of Zebedee, and John his brother:
Philippe* and Bartholomew: Thomas, and Matthew: James of Alpheus, and Thaddeus:
Simon Chananeus, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him. These twelve our Savior
sent to the Jews only (the time being not yet come to call the Gentiles) to
preach, that the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Also to cure the sick, raise
the dead, cleanse the Leepers, and to cast out devils, al free cost, saying to
them, gratis you have received, gratis give ye.

8 In the same mountain before that his Apostles Our Lords S^rmon in the mount
conteyneth a perfect form of good life.
went with their great commission, he made that divine Mat. 5. v. 1. 2. etc.
Luc. 6. v. 20. 21. Mar. 4. v. 21. 24.
Sermon, called the Sermon of our Lord in the mount, containing the perfect
pattern of a Christians life, as well of the Clergy as Laity, showing that the
Scribes and Pharisees justice (which was then counted most perfect) was
insufficient: namely touching the precepts against Murder, Adultery, Avarice,
Swearing, Revenging, Usury, and Hatred, o^ Enemies. Teaching likewise that the
Pharisaical Not only says, but also other good works not in outward show, but
sincere from the heart, are necessary to salvation.
pretended justice was also insufficient in other works Mat. 6. v. 1. 2. etc.
Mat. 7. v. 1. 2. etc.
of justice concerning Alms, Prayer, Fasting, and care of temporal
necessaries: warning to be ware of rashly iudg^ing other men's intentions, and
small imperfections. Nevertheless to take notorious wicked persons (whom he
called dogs, and swine) for such as they plainly appear.

9 Finally he exorteth to frequent and seruent prayer, v. 7. 8. etc.
for Gods grace; to do to al as we would they should do to us: laboring to
enter in by the narrow gate, and strait way that leads to life. Because only
hearing and saying well, without doing the will of God, suffices not to
salvation. which Sermon S. Matthew compriseth in the fifth sixth and seventh
chapters of his Gospel. S. Mark and S. Luke touch some points of it more
briefly. After these so full instructions the Apostles proceeded in there
mission.

10 Our Lord so prosecuting his works, and multitudes Christ's most excellent
zeal was counted madness by worldly men.
so resorted unto him, that they could not have leisure to eat, insomuch that
some of his kinsfolk thought he was become mad. But the Scribes Mar. 3. v.
20. 21.
more maliciously said: that in Beelzebub prince of devils, he cast out devils.
In particular so soon as he was descended from the monntaine he cleansed a Mat.
8. v. 3. Mar. 1. Luc. 5. Mat. 8. v. 13. Luc. 7. v. 14. 15. etc. Mat. 11. v. 2.
4. 5.
Leper that professed belefe in his only word, and touch, saying: Be thou
clean; and he was clean. With like expedition, yea absent from the sick
party, he healed a centurions servant of the palsy: And raised a widows
son of Naim, only saying, young man, I say to thee, arise. And he that was
dead, sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to his mother. S. John in
prison, seeing his Disciples not yet satisfied, that our Lord Jesus is Christ,
sent two of them unto him; and they see, and hear, that he made the blind to
see, the lame to walk, the lepers clean, the deaf to hear, the dead rise
again. v. 7. etc.
And when they were departed, our Savior highly praised S. John as is before
related. Then a Pharisee Parag. 2.
inuiting Christ to dinner, the renowned penitent The renowned penitence of S.
Marie Magdalene.
Marie Magdalene, watered his feet with tears, wiped Luc. 7. v. 36. etc.
them with the hairs of her head, kissed them often, and anointed them with
ointment. which the Pharisee disliking, despised her. But our Savior preferred
her much before him: And invited al to true repentance, with promise to remitte
their sins saying: Come ye to me all that labor and are burdened, Mat. 11. v.
28. 29.
and I will refresh you* take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I
am meek and humble of heart, and you shall find rest to your souls: For my yoke
is sweet, and my burden light. Neither Mat. 12. v. 28.
did he only releue their souls, but also their bodies from sickness and
vexations of devils, as has been said, and yet more follow. For even in the
presence of calumniators, he cast out a devil which made a man blind and dumme,
that he forthwith spoke, and saw. Luc. 8. v. 2.
And taught expressly, that the hearing and keeping of Our B. Lady more happy
for hearing and keeping Gods word, then for nerenes in blood to Christ our Lord.
Gods word, far excelled kindred of mother, brothers, and sisters; and that
those kindsfolke were more blessed for doing the same, then for their nernes
Ps. 77. v. 2. Is. 6. v. 9. Mat. 13. v. 4. 24. 31. 33.
to him in blood. The Church is compared to diverse things.
But in regard of many untoward and reprobate hearers, he spoke many things
in parables, as the Prophets had foretold, comparing the Kingdom of heaven,
that is the militant Church and the means of ateyning erernal salvation, unto
visible known things. So he proposed a parable of one that sowed seed, which
fell on sundry sorts of ground; of one that sowed good seed, and of his
enemy sowing cocle upon it: others, of mustarde 44. 47. Mat. 13. v. 54. 55.
seed, of leaven, of threasure hid in the field, of the precious stone, and of
the net. Returning to Nazareth, S. John Baptists martyrdo^ in the second
year of our Saviors preaching.
he preached in the Sinagogue, and did some miracles; but few believing, not
esteming him, as knowing his parents and private education; there he blamed
their incredulity, and parted from thence. Hearing then that Herod had
beheaded S. John, to give example of convenient mourning for the departed, and
to show horror of so execrable murder, he retired by boat with his Apostles,
into a desett, place of Tiberias. Mat. 14. v. 16. Mar. 6. v. 37. Luc. 9. v. 13.
Io. 6. v. 5. 6. etc. Mat. 14. v. 29.


11 Whither notwithstanding great multitudes followed Acts of the third year.
Our Savior fed five thousand men, with five loaves.
him on foot out of the Cities, who^, besides spiritual food, he fed also
corporally; five thousand men, besides women and children, with only five
barlie loaves, and two fishes; who having eaten so much as they would, the
twelve Apostles filled twelve baskets of the fragments that remained. The night
following, he spent in prayer in the mountain, whilst his Disciples were
tossed on the sea, sailing with a contrary wind til the fourth watch of the
night. For then he came to them walking on the water, and He walked on the
water* and gave S. Peter power to walk on the water. Manna being a figure of
the B. Sacrament, Christ promised to give the thing prefigured far more
excellent then Manna.
gave Peter also power, to walk upon the waters. Much people again slocking to
him at Capharnaum, Io. 6. v. 30.
some required of him a further sign, alleging that their fathers did eat
Manna, in the desert (a bread from heaven.) Whereupon our Savior said to them:
Moses gave you not the bread from heaven, 32.
but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. And avouched to them that
he would give, (not the figurative, but) the true bread, his own flesh to eat,
which far excels Manna. And 51.
the more they replied, and murmured, the more he affirmed, and confirmed his
speech saying: My flesh 55.
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. With the like assertions in
plain terms, without parable; which discourse hapened about Pasch, in the
beginning of the third year of his preaching.

12 Then came to him from Jerusalem, Scribes and Christ reproved frivolous
traditions which were contrary to the Law.
Mat. 15. v. 1. 2. 3.
Pharisees, saying: Why do thy Disciples transgress the traditions of the
Ancientes? For they do not wash their hands when they eat braed. To which
cauil our Savior answered, not by rejecting lawful Traditions, but by showing
this which they alleged, to be a frivolous tradition; and withal convinced
them of transgressing Gods commandemen^ for their own tradition, and
temporal lucre. Which manifest difference, between Authentical, and Did many
miracles, and continued his divine doctrine.
Mat. 15. v. 21. 28.
Pharisaical Traditions, is declared before. Art. 3. Briefly we here recite his
actions only, and so remitte you to the sacred text. In this third year he
healed the daughter of the Cananite, woman most earnestly craving the same.
Cured a man deaf and du^me, Mar. 7. v. 32. 33.
using ceremonial Rites of spitle, putting his fingers into the man's ears,
touching his tongue, loking up unto heaven, groaning, and saying Epheta. Fed
Mat. 15. v. 29. 30. 32. etc.
four thousand men, besides many cures in the desert mountain near to the
sea of Galilee, with seven loves, and a few little fishes, after three days
aboade there, al other victuales being spent; and there remained seven baskets
full of fragmentes. Denied Mat. 16. v. 4.
to give any other sign to the temptimg Pharisees, and Saduces, but the sign
of Jonas the Prophet, who was thr^e days and nights in the whales belie. But
willed his Disciples, to beware of their leaven, 6. 12. Mar. 8. v. 23. 25. Mat.
16. v. 13. 15. 16. etc.
that is their corrupt doctrine. Healed an other blind man in Bethsaida, by
spittle, and imposition of hands, and that by degrees, making him first to see
a little, and then perfectly. Demanding of his Apostles first, what they his
Apostles said of him; and Simon Peter answearing: thou art Christ, the Son of
the living God; he said: Blessed art thou Simon Bariona. And I say to thee,
thou art Peter, He declared S. Peter to be a Rock, promising thereon to build
his Church.
and upon this Rock, I will build my Church. He Mat. 16. v. 21. 24. 25. Mat. 17.
v. 2. Mar. 9. v. 24. Luc. 9. v. 28. 2. Pet. 1. v. 18. Mat. 17. v. 21. 27. Mat.
18. v. 1. 6. 10. 21. 34.
told them also that he should be slain in Jerusalem, and rise again the
third day: and admonished them that al must be ready, in preparation of mind,
and resignation of them selves to suffer, and to dye if need shall require for
him, then, for theirs, and al others encoragement, to suffer with patience, in
hope of glorious reward. He was transfigured in mount Thabor, called by S.
Peter, the holy mount; but would not have it known til after his death and
Resurrection. In the mean time, he prosecuted his accustomed works, cast out
a devil which his Disciples could not do, for which were required Prayer and
Fasting. Paid Tribute for him self, and for Peter though they were free.
Taught Humility against ambition: Threatened the seandalizers of little ones,
admonishing that their Angels guard them. That it is necessary to forgive each
other from the hatt.

13 At the Feast of S^enopegia, or Tab^rnacles (in The time of his passion
drawing near, our Lord repaired to Jerusalem, where ^ he would suffer death.
the seventh Month) he leaving Galilee, went into Io. 7. v. 2. 10. Luc. 9. v.
53. Luc. 17. v. 11. 15. Joan. 7. v. 14. Joan. 8. v. 4. 11. 31. 40. 59. Ioa. 9.
v. 1. 6. 7. 40. 41. Ioa. 10. v. 1. 2. etc.
Iewrie toward his Passion. In this Journey, the Samaritanes, not affording him
lodging, yet he taught mildnes to be used toward them. In the way, he healed
ten lepers, of which, one only showed him self gratful, and the same was a
Samaritane. Coming to Jerusalem, he taught openly in the Temple: And Still
teaching and working miracles.
great dispute arose amongst the people, some defending, others impugning him.
He absolved a woman taken in adultery, not favoring sin, but joining mercy
with justice. After much divine doctrine, some endeavoring to kill him, he hid
him self, and went out of the Temple. Presently after he gave sight to a man
that was borne blind, by anointing his eyes with clay and spitle, and by the
man's washing in Siloe: and charged the Pharisees with wilful blindness.
Continuing his speech to them, taught the true office of good Pastors, and
duty of good sheep. Then he sent also seauentie two Disciples, to preach Sent
other senentie two disciples with power to preach, and to work miracles.
saying: the harvest truly is much, but the workmen Luc. 10. v. 1. 17. Luc.
10. v. 30. 38. 42.
few. And they returned with joy, showing that the devils were subject unto
them in his name. By a parable of a wounded man releued by a Samaritane, he
taught that al men are neighbors, and to be helped in their necessities.
Martha enterteyning him, he preferred Mary's contemplative life, before her
active: And taught the force of prayer: Reprehended Luc. 11. v. 1. 2. 38. Luc.
12. v. 4. 15. 35. 36. Luc. 13. v. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7.
the preposterous cleanes of the Pharisees, denouncing woe to them, and to the
Scribes, for many faults. He taught his Disciples, not to fear the killers
of the Encoraged his Disciples not to fear persecution not death.
body: To cast away care of riches: And watch as faithful servants, the
coming of our Master. By occasion of Pilates cruelty, kill^ng certain in
Galilee, and of the fall of the Tower of Siloe: he admonished al to have
repentance, lest they also perished sudenly: Declared Gods patience by the
Parable of a fructles fig tree, suffered to stand one year more. Healed a
woman that had been crooked eightene v. 10. 11. 12. 14. 15. 32. Luc. 14. v. 2.
26.
years, justifying the doing thereof on the Sabbath against a calumniator, and
contemned the threats that Herod would kill him. Again on the Sabbath day, he
healed one sick of the dropsy. And again taught all the faithful, to renounce
al they had even their life, to follow him. In the feast of Dedication, Io. 10.
v. 22. Luc. 15. v. 3. 8. 11.
some attempting again to apprehend him, he went forth of the Temple, and
passed over Jordan. Against the Scribes and Pharisees, he justified the
admission of publicans and sinners, by the parables of a lost sheep, the lost
groate, and of the prodigal son. Advised to do alms and good deeds, for
gayning Luc. 16. v. 1. Mat. 19. v. 3. Mar. 10. v. 2. Luc. 16. v. 18. Mat. 19.
v. 10. 12. Luc. 16. v. 19. Luc. 17. v. 1. 2. Luc. 17. v. 6. Mar. 17. v. 20.
Luc. 18. v. 10. Mat. 19. v. 14. Mat. 20. v. 1. 7. 8.
everlasting life, hy the parable of a prudent, though unjust balife. To the
tempting Pharisees, seeking to draw something from his Doctrine against Moses,
he answered, that Marriage is indissoluble. And thereupon commended single
life, for the better atteyning of heaven. Against vnm^rciful rich men, Proposed
Euangelical counsels without precept.
he proposed an example, of a rich glutton, and poor Lazarus. Foretelling that
scandals will be, pronounced woe to the scandalizers. Showed the sorce of Faith,
even to remove trees with a word, and mountains if need be. Taught humility
by example of a publicane, and a Pharisee, praying with diverse dispositions of
minds and opinions of them selves. He received and blessed little children. And
exhorted a rich young man, to forsake al, and become perfect. By a parable of a
householder, hyring workmen into his vine-yerd, he showed, that God never
cease, from the beginning of the world, unto the end thereof, to call men into
his Church, to work there, and to have eternal life for their wages.

14 In Bethania (not full two miles from Jerusalem) Ioa. 11. v. 1. 39. 44. 47.
51.
The raising of Lazarus from death, with all other actions and doctrine, so
vexed the malignant that they ceased not til they had procured our Saviors
death upon the Cross.
he raised Lazarus from death, when he had been four days buried. Whereupon the
chief Preistes and Pharisees gathered a Council against him: and Ca^phas being
high Priest, prophesied, that Jesus should die for the Nation. Our Savior also
him self more Mat. 20. v. 18. 19.
plainly foretold to his Apostles, that he should very shortly be delivered to
the chief Preistes, and Scribes, and by them to the Gentiles, and be mocked,
scourged, and crucified. And the third day should rise again. Luc. 18. v. 42.
After this, going to Jericho, he healed a blind man, before he entered into
the town. In the town he lodged with Zacheus a publicane: and against Luc.
19. v. 1. 10.
murmurers, justified his fact. Going out of the town, healed other two blind
men. Being returned to Bethania, and sitting at supper in the house Mat. 20. v.
29. Mat. 26. v. 6. 7. 12.
of Simon the Leper: Marie Magdalene powered a box full of precious ointment
upon our Saviors head, whereat some murmured, counting it wast: pretending that
it might have beue sold, and given to the poor; but our Lord commended her
act, as a Mar. 14. v. 3. 8.
good work, and done in good season, anointing his body, for his future
burial, the which he knew to be near at hand.

15 In the mean time, he conuersed as publikly Christ entered into Jerusalem
with great solemnity, a little before his death.
Mat. 21. v. 7. 8. 9. Mar. 11. v. 1. 7. 10. Luc. 19. v. 35. Io. 12. v. 13.
as before, yea with more solemnity then hitherto, he came ryding on an Ass
into Jerusalem, his Disciples spreading their garments, and the people with
Palms in their hendes, going forth to mete him; st^owing bows in the way
saying: Osanna, Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Blessed is
the Kingome of our father David, (...)na in the highest, the King of (...).
When he was Gloriously entered, the whole City was (...). He not only (...) his
doctrine, but also (...) his (...) in (...) abuses.
And c^^ning into the Temple, he cast out^d that Mat. 21. v. 12. L^c. 19. v. 45.
bought and sold in the Temple, and overthrew the (...), of the ^ankers, and
chaires of them that sold pigeons, as he had three years before corrected the
same abuse. He also healed all the blind and lame. Gentiles sought also to see
him. He cursing a fig tree, it presently withered. To his enemies he
avouched, Mat. 21. v. 20. Luc. 20. v. 2. 3. 9. 18. 19. Mat. 21. v. 23. 33. Mat.
22. v. 21. 30. 41. Mat. 23. v. 3.
his power to be of God. Foreshewed by parables, their reprobation, and
vocation of the Gentiles. As of the husbandman that killed both the servants,
and the son of the Landlord. Of the king that invited ghestes, to the marriage
feast of his son. He defeated their malice, answearing the question of paying
tribute to Caesar. Stopped also their mouths, by answearing the Sadduces
question, concerning the Resurrection. And the Pharisees, touching the greatest
Commandment. And by demanding of them, how Christ is both the son, and the
Lord of David? He taught his Disciples and the multitudes, to do as they teach
which sit in Moses chair, but not as they do. He preferred a poor Mar.
12. v. 42.
widows offering of two mites, before the offering of the rich. He foretold to
some of his Disciples, the destruction of the Temple, and of Jerusalem. And Mat
24. v. 4. etc.
by that occasion, of the coming of Antichrist in the end of the world; and of
his destruction, and consummation of the world. And by parables of ten Mat.
25. v. 3. 14. 31.
virgins, and of talentes delivered to servants, showed how it shall be with
the faithful at the day of Judgment; but without parables, that they which do
not good works, shall be damned. Judas bargained with the high Preistes, to
betray our B. Savior.

16 And our Savior eating the Paschal Lamb Mat. 26. v. 14. Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. Ioa. 14. 15. 16. 17.
Our Lord instituted his everlasting testament in the Sacrifice and Sacrament
of his own body and blood: concluding with e^hortation and prayer.
with his twelve Apostles, washed their feet, instituted the B. Sacrifice, and
Sacrament, of his Body and Blood in forms of bread and wine; made them
Preistes to consecrate and offer the same. Judas went forth; and our B.
Savior, made a long Sermon to the rest, and his Prayer to God for them, and
for all the elect.

Christ our Lord suffered most greuons torments: Death on the Cross: and was
buried. ARTICLE. 23.
AL Christians know, that Christ our Savior, That God would be made man, and
dye on the Cross for man, was to the Jews a scandal: and seems to the
Gentiles foolishnes.
besides his manifold labors, suffered great persecutions; and finally death
on the Cross. But many either do not know, or do not duly consider, the
cause why God would not only be made man, but also dye on a Cross for man:
which mystery, is so strange to man's conceipte, that [to 1. Cor. 1. v. 23.
the Jews (expecting a Redemer worldly potent) it was a scandal: to the
Gentiles (seking humane wisdom) it seemed foolishnes.] Nevertheless [God 27.
haith chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the (worldly)
wise: and the weak things of the world has God chosen, that he may confound
the strong] For this is the true wisdom, and mighty power of God, as S. Paul
teaches [Because 21.
(says he) in the wisdom of God, the world did not by wisdom (by
consideration of Gods works) know God: it pleased God by the foolishnes (as
it seems to worldly men) of preaching Christ crucified, to save them that
believe in him] Because the world would not, by consideration of Gods so
admirable works (as the heavens, the earth, Angels, Men, Planets, Stars,
Elements, and al other creatures) know and rightly serve the Creator: it
pleased the same Creator of al [to exananite him self] to become man, yea, a
very poor man; to undertake great travails, to suffer most spitful
reproaches, and most cruel torments, to be nailed upon a Cross, and so to
dye: thereby to save al mankind, if them selves will, that is, effectuallly to
save al them that believe in such a one, and withal duly serve him [by taking
up each one their own Cross and following Mat. 16. v. 24.
him.]

^ Seeing therefore this is the only means ordained God did ma ni ways foreshew
this Mystery.
for man's Redemption and salvation, then the which, no other point of faith,
can seem more strange; our Lord God has never ceased, since the fall of man, to
make this mystery known, by signs, preachinges, examples, and in the
appointed time, by real performance thereof in his humane nature, to the full
accomplishing of all that was thus decreed to be done, and suffered by Christ
our Redemer. To this purpose, It was presigured by Adams and ^ues penalties and
death.
God gave notice to Adam and to Eve, with grace of repentance for their
transgression, that they, and al mankind, nor here in excepting that seed
which should bruise the serpents head; must both dye, and also suffer, other
penalties of mortal flesh, exemplifying in these, that [Adam with much toyling,
should labor Genesis 3. v. 16. 17. 18.
the earth, and in the sweat of his face, should eat bread, til he returned
again to earth: and that Eues travails should be multiplied in children
bearing] and the like. A more proper example of our By the death of Abel.
Saviors death, was in just Abel, the very first that died of mankind. For as
he being innocent, and his works good, was slain by his natural brother Cain,
Genesis 4. v. 4. 8. 1. Io. 3. v. 12.
not for any other reason, but because [Cain his works were wicked, and his
brothers iust] so the just one Christ, God and man, was persecuted to death, by
the Jews his brethren in flesh [because his life and doctrine, was contrary
to their works.] An other figure of our Saviors death was showed in [Isaac,
the beloved son of Abraham] together with Sap. 2. v. 12. Genesis 23. v. 2. 10.
13.
[the ram that was sacrificed in his place.] For so By Isaac and the Ram.
Christ our Redemer offered him self in Sacrifice, dying on the Cross, not in
his divinity, being impassible, represented by Isaac remaining alive, but in
his Humanity, signified by the ram, that was slain in the Sacrifice. Joseph
the son of Jacob, besides By Joseph.
Genesis 37. v. 4. 27. 28.
other respects, in that he was for his innocent life hated, sold for money,
and betrayed by his brethren, prefigured our B. Savior, hated by the Jews,
betrayed and sold by Judas, for thirty silver pieces. The which is more
plainly prophesied ^y Zachary, who Zach. 11. v. 12. 13.
foretells of Christ, speaking thus [They weighed my hyre (or price) thirty
pieces of silver: cast it forth to the statuarie; a goodly price that I was
priced at by them.] The Paschal Lamb, very particularly, By the Pascal Lamb
and other sacrifices.
Exo. 12. v. 3. 6. 18.
and al bloody Sacrifices generally, were figures of the Lamb of God,
sacrificed upon the Altar of the Cross, though also in many respects, they
did withal signify the self same Sacrifice offered Exo. 24. v. 8. Leuit. 1.
v. 3. Nu. 19.
daily in unbloody manner, in the Catholic Chuch of Christ. Holy Job, in his
great afflictions (a pattern By Jobs suffering.
of patience) was so express a fignre of our Saviors sufferinges, that not
only all the worldly and bodily calamities, which fell upon him, were more
eminent in Christ, but also some things were affirmed Job. 6. v. 2. 3.
of Job, which are only verified in our Lord. As his speech, that if [his
sins and calamities were wayed in a balance, according to the number of the
sand of the sea; his calamity would appear heauier] which can not be
otherwise expounded but by understanding it of Christ, who had no sin at al.
And so between much, and nothing, is an infinite comparison. Whereas Job also
says, that [his adversaries Job. 30. v. 10. Mat. 26. v. 67. Job. 2. v. 7. Mat.
27. v. 30. 39. 40.
were not affraied to spitte in his face] he does not say that they so did to
him, but the Evangelists write, that the rabble of cruel tormenters, did
spitefully spitte, in our B. Saviors face. [Iob was stricken by Satan, with a
very sore boil, from the sole of the foot, even to the top of his head.]
Our Lord and Savior, was tied to a pillar, and beaten with whippes, from the
feet, to the head, crowned with thorns, and his hands and feet stricken
through with nails, were made fast to the Cross; and then Job. 2. v. 9.
Iudic. 16. v. 30.
was also reproached by the Synagogue of the wicked, much more then Job was by
his wife. Strong Samson, By Samson.
was an other figure of our Savior, especially in his death, making greater
slaughter of his enemies, thereby, then by his life.

3 Moreover all the Prophets, were not only, by It was often foretold by the
Prophets.
their great and many tribulations, some also by their deaths, figures of our
Saviors afflictions and death but also prophesied expressly, that he should
both suffer many torments and despites, and finally dye for man's
Redemption. The Royal Prophet David in sundry persecutions, resembled greater
which happened to Christ our Savior. As when fleeing from Absalon, he cried to
God [why are they multiplied Ps. 3. v. 2. Ps. 7. v. 2.
that trouble me? many rise up against me. O Lord my God, I have hoped in
thee: save me from all that persecute me] and often the like in other
distres^es. He prophecieth also of Christ's Passion, expressing diverse
particular parts, even as the Evangelists have written them, since they were
accomplished. As be those words of his [God my God have respect to Ps. 21. v.
1. Mat. 27. v. 46. Mar. 15. v. 34.
me, why have thou forsaken me?] signifying, that by the will and power of God,
the glory of Christ's soul should not redound to his release of pains on the
Cross, but that he should suffer as if his soul had not been glorious, or not
united to his Divinity, yea more then any other servants of God. Whereupon he
says [In thee our fathers have hoped: they Ps. 21. v. 5. 6.
hoped, and thou did deliver them; they cried to thee, and were saved (were
temporalie delivered or redeemed) they hoped in thee, and were not confounded]
(not denied particular consolation) [But I am v. 7.
a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and an outc^st of the people. All that
see me, have scorned me, v. 8. 9. et Sap. 2. v. 12.
they have spoken with the lips, and wagged the head saying [He hoped in the
Lord, let him deliver him; let him save him, if he will have him.] Further Mat.
27. v. 39.
he adds [Manie dogs have compassed me, the counsel of the malignant, has
beseged me.] Speaking of the reproaches, he says [They have divided my
garments amongst them: and upon my vesture, they have cast lot.] Likewise of
Judas the traitor Io. 19. v. 24. Ps. 40. v. 10. Io. 13. v. 18. Act. 1. v. 16.
he says [The man also of my peace (one of his particular family) in whom I
trusted, who did eat my breades, has greatly trodden me under foot. Let their
habitation be made desert: and in their Tabernacles, let there be none to dwel]
fulfilled in Judas, and those that plotted the treason, and barganed with him.
Of Judas his desperate sudden destruction, and of supplying the place and
office of his Apostleship, the same Prophet says [Let his days Ps. 68. v. 26.
Act. 1. v. 19.
be made few (fulfilled in that he hanged him self the same day) and let an
other take his Bishoprick] performed in S. Mathias. Again the Royal Prophet,
as in Christ's speech says [They gave m^gale Ps. 108. v. 8. Act. 1. v. 1. Ps.
68. v. 22. Mat. 27. v. 48. Io^. 19. v. 29. Ps. 30. v. 6. Luc. 23 v. 46. Cant.
1. v. 13.
for my meat, and in my thirst, they gave me vinegre to drinke] fulfilled when
gale and vinegre were given to him on the Cross. And presently was fulfilled
that which the same Prophet foretold, that our B. Savior should finally say in
the instant of his death [Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.] The
Spouse also in the Canticles, meditaring our B. Saviors Passion and death,
compriseth much in few words saying [A bundel of Mithe my beloved is to me, he
shall abide between my brest^s] as if she should say I need not say more by
words, but I will ever meditate of his Passion in my heart. As briefly the
Prophet Isaias describes our Saviors state in the time of his death [as one
despised, and Is. 53. v. 3. 12.
most abject of men: a man of sorrows, and knowing infirmity. He has
delivered his soul unto death: and was reputed with the wicked.] And by the
same Prophet our Lord him self speaks thus [I have trodden Is. 63. v. 3. Lam.
3. v. 30. Mat. 26. v. 67.
the press alone, and of the Gentiles, there is not a man with me.] By Jeremy
thus [I as a mild lamb that is carried to a victime] Conformably thereto says
the same Prophet Jeremy [He shall give the cheek to them that strike him] as
the Evangelists record, that al was fulfilled. Daniel also tells the time,
[from the going forth of the world (from the time Dan. 9. v. 25.
that the promise shall be performed that Jerusalem be built again after the
captivity) unto Christ the Prince, there shall be seven weeks, and sixty two
weeks. And after sixty two weeks, Christ shall be ^laine. And Zachary
insinuated, that he should be nailed on the Cross [for it shall be said to him:
Zach. 13. v. 6.
what are these wounds in the midst of thy hands? And he shall say; with
these was I wounded in the house of them that loved me foretelling withal, that
his dearest friends, al his Disciples, should flee for fear, in the instant of
his apprehension [Strike the Pastor, v. 7. Mat. 26. v. 31.
and the sheep shall be dispersed.]

4 After al these, and other Prophets, Christ himself Christ himself did
foreshew his death on the Cross.
amiddest his works and doctrine, premonishing his Apostles, foretold them
that [he must go to Jerusalem Mat. 16. v. 21. Chapter 17. v. 12. Chapter 20. v. 18.
19. Mar. 8. v. 31. Chapter 10. v. 33. 34. Luc. 9. v. 22.
and suffer many things, of the Ancients and Scribes, and chief Preistes,
and be killed, and the third day rise again. And as they had done to John
Baptist: so also the Son of man shall suffer of them] Again almost a year
after he foretold them the same thing [Behold (says he) we go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered to the chief Preistes and to
the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the
Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged and crucified.] He also insinuated to his
enemies, which sought to kill him, that indede Chapter 18. v. 31. Io. 7. v. 6. 8.
Io. 10. v. 15. 18. Mat. 21. v. 35. 36.
they should have their will therein, but not so soon as they desired [My time
(says he) is not yet come: but your time is always ready my time is not yet
accomplished.] Again he said to them plainly [I yield my life, for my sheep.
No man takes it away from me: but I yield it of my self.] The same also by a
parable of husbandme^, that killed both the servants, and son of their Lord.
By all which it is manifest that the death of our Redemer was ordained by God,
and revealed to the Patriarchs and Prophets; and by them, as also by him self,
foretold to others, even as it is come to pass, and largely written by the
Evangelists, which may suffice against the Jews, and Pagane Infidels.

5 But against some other Infidels which bearing The Cross whereon Christ died,
is thereby made holy and honorable.
the name of Christians [are enemies of the Cross Phil. 3. v. 18.
of Christ] disdaining and condemning the holy sign thereof as if the kind of
death which our B. Savior sustained, had added nothing at al worthy of
special consideration, and grateful memory: it rests to be declared, that
not by chance; nor by the only malice of the Jews, but by divine ordinance,
for important reasons, the Cross was chosen rather then any other manner of
death, because it was most painful, most reproachful, and most odious. For [the
law Deuteronomy. 21. v. 23. Gal. 3. v. 13. Colos. ^. v 14.
denouncing him accursed of God that hangs on a tree] our Savior [would be
made a curse, to deliver vs] from other curses of the law [wyping out the hand
writing that was against us, fastening it to the Crosse] And that with this
divine promise, that it should become most honorable and comfortable to ture
Christians, terrible to the devil, and forcible against al Phil. 2. v. 8. 9. 10.
spiritual enemies. For as S. Paul expressly teaches that because Christ our
Lord humbled him self made obedient unto death: eue^ the death on the Cross:
For this thing God also has exalted him, and has given him a name which is a
boue al names; that in the name of Jesus every knee bow of the celestials,
terrestrials, and infernals] wherefore as the name of Jesus Christ is the more
exalted because he dyed on the Cross: so the Cross it self whereon he dyed is
singularly esteemed amongst special Relics, as an instrument of his more
glory, and of our Redemption.

6 And also the sign thereof worthily kept, and used Also the signof the Cross
^ profitable to the faithful, and terrible to the devil.
in memory of his so glorious and triumphant victory, and of the inestimable
benefit, which we receive by this occasion; as also to the greater confusion
of the devil who was thereby overthrown; the wisdom and power of God so placing
the salvation Gods wisdom ordained like instruments of our spiritual good, as
had been occasion of our sal.
of mankind in the wood of the Cross, that from whence death did rise, thence
also life might rise again: and he that did overcome in wood, in wood also
might be overcome through Christ our Lord dying thereon. Which most ancient and
universal doctrine of the Church, is grounded in the holy Scriptures. Jacob
the holy Patriarch formed a The Cross was presigured in the old Testament.
Cross by laying his hands upon the heads of Ioseps two sons, the one arm
crossing the other. For when Joseph had set his elder son to the right hand
of Jacob, and his younger son to the left hand; [Iacob changing hands, put
his right hand upon the younger, and his left hand upon the elder] and that
wittingly, contrary to Joseph's mind, because his blessing given to those
children was mystical, signifying not only that the younger of those brethren
should be preferred before the elder, but also that in time of grace and new
testament, the Gentiles being younger people of God, should excel the Jews;
which should be effected by our Savior Christ dying upon a Cross. Otherwise
if Jacob would not have represented the Cross, he might either have laid his
right hand first upon one, and then on the other, or else have caused them to
change places. It is true that the mistical sense does not always
demonstratiuely prove that thing which is otherwise doubtful: yet it does well
illustrate, and make that more credible which is more obscure in Christan
Religion. And that the crossing of Jacobs arms so wittingly done, was
mystical, is confessed by all Divines, and al Cotholiques generally understand
it to be a mystery of the Cross of Christ. [The piece of Exo 15. v. 25.
wood also which Moses by Gods commandment cast into the bitter waters, werby
they were made sweete] doubtless was mystical and does aptly resemble the daily
benefits which we receive by the holy use of the Cross, in Sacraments and
other blessings. Likewise when [Moyses lifted up his hands praying] Exo. 17.
v. 11. 12. Leuit. 9. v. 22.
for the arm which fought against Amelech: and [Aaron streching forth his hand
when he blessed the people] well prefigured the sacred hands of Christ, lift up
and streched out on the Cross. And as the rock in the desert yelding plenty
of water, signified Christ giving abundance of grace; so [the Nu. 20. v. 11.
Nu. 21. v. 9. Io. 3. v. 14. Chapter 12 v. 32.
rod wherewith it was stroken] represented the Cross made of two pecces of
wood. As for the brazen serpent, which has no more resemblance in it self then
the other things had: yet is proposed for an example, and similitude by our
Savior, that [as Moses exalted the serpent in the desert, so must the son
of man be exalted] to wit on the Cross.

7 By the Prophet David Christ so plainly signifies The virtue and use of the
Cross, was prophesied before Christ.
his death on the Cross saying: [they have dug Psalm. 21. v. 18.
my hands, and my feete] that the obstinate Jews finding no better euation
from so clear a prophecy, have shamefully corrupted the sacred text. By the
Prophet Isaias our Lord says: [I will put a Isa. 66. v. 19.
sign in them, that in the day of Judgment shall see his glory.] No doubt
this sign is some general mark of distinction between his children and his
enemies, and may more then probably be vndrestood to be the sign of the
Cross. But in Ezechiel a particular sign is appointed wherewith al must be
signed that fruictfully mourn for their sins [Passe (says Ezech. 9. v. 4.
our Lord to his Scribe) through the midst of the City, in the midst of
Jerusalem, and sign Thau upon the forheades of the men that mourn and lament
all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof.] Mark them with Thau,
that is with the Hebrew letter, which is formed like to a Cross, and
signifies a sign or mark, which is also resembled by the greek letter Tau.
and the latin T. And so [those in whose forheades this sign was found, were v.
5. 6.
saved from the destruction] wherein [al others old and young perished that were
not so signed.]

8 Neither can any man tell, nor reasonably imagine, what other sign it should
be, but the sign of the Cross, which shall appear in the clouds, in sight of
the whole world, when our Savior shall come in Majesty to judge the world,
whereof him self has foretold saying [The powers of heaven Mat. 24. v. 29. 30.
Mar. 13. v. 26.
shall be moved: And then they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds
with much power and glory. And then shall appear The sign of the Son of man
in the heauen] which sign doubtless, will no less consound al other enemies
of the Cross, then the cruel and spiteful Jews, that would needs have Christ
to be crucified upon the Cross, pretending that [it was not lawful for them to
kill any man] Ioa. 18. v. 31. 32. Luc. 24. v. 25. 26.
meaning to crucify any man. For so it is plain by S. John's words saying
[that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which he said, signifying what death
he should dye.] Thus holy Scriptures witness that Christ our Redemer must
suffer death, and that on the Cross [and so to enter into his glory.]

9 For no so^er had our B. Savior yielded up his Christ's glory began to be
spread, immediately after his death.
most holy soul, but his glory began to appear. The Sun, whiles he was
dying on the Cross, had lost his light. And [from the Sixth Hour, there was
Mat. 27. v. 45. 50. Mar. 15. v. 37. Luc. 23. v. 45. 46.
darkness made upon the whole earth, until the Ninth Hour] but then [he putting
forth a mighty voice, and so giving up the Ghost] immediately [the veil of the
Temple was rent in two pieces, from the top, eue^ to the bottom, the earth
did quake, and the rocks were torne] yea and the stony hearts of the people
Io. 19. v 30. 38. 39,
were mollified [the Centurion (who had charge to see the wicked sentence
executed) seeing that together with the mighty voice, he had yielded up the
Ghost] and the rest which was done, glorified God saying [Indeede this man was
the Son of God: this man was just.] And [al the multitude of them that were
present together at that sight, and saw the things that were done, returned,
knocking their breasts.] The devout [women bought spices, and Luc. 23. v. 45.
46. Io. 19. v. 30. 38, 39.
prepared costly ointmentes for his burial. Joseph, a Senator of Arimathea, a
secret Disciple, went in boldli^ to Pilate, obtained the Body of our Savior;
and Nicodemus, a Prince of the Jews (hitherto also a secret Disciple) bringing
a mixture of Mirh and Aloes, about an hundred pounds (together with Joseph)
taking the sacred Body, wrapping it in Sindon, bound it in linen clothes,
with the spices: And so laid it in a new monument, hewed in a rock of stone,
wherein never yet any man had been laid.] So would our B. Savior show example
in him self [by his glorious Sepulchre] long before prophesied Ps. 15. v. 10.
Is. 11. v. 10.
by Isaias, how the glory of the just, begins from their death, where the
glory of the wicked ends.

The glorious soul of our B. Savior, parting from his body, descended into
hell. ARTICLE. 24.
FOr better declaration of this Article, it must What place is understood by
the word HELL in our Creed.
first be understood, what the holy Apostles mean by the word Hell, in this
place. In the written history, of the creation of the universal world: mention
is first made only of heaven and earth, as the two general places, containing
al creatures of the whole world. In which general signification, Genesis 1. v. 1.
Chapter 2. v. 1. 4. 6. 8.
the name Heaven, co^prehendeth, not only the Emperial highest heaven, where
holy Angels and other glorified Saints, see God in eternal bliss: but
alsoother heavens or spheres of Primum mobile, of the fixed Stars, and of the
seven Planets, yea and the air; for birds are called Volatilia caeli, Fowls
of 26.
the heaven, that is of the air: And consequently the element of fire (which
is between the air and the Moon) is comprehended in the same general name of
heaven. In like manner, the name of earth, conteyneth not only the land, but
also the seas, and other matters, as is more distinctly expressed in those
words [God called the dry land, earth; and the v. 10.
gathering of waters, he called Seas.] But of Hell, there is no express
mention, before the History of the Patriarch Jacob, where he says: [I will
descend Genesis 37. v. 35. Chapter 42. v. 28. Nu. 16. v. 30. 33.
unto my son into hell.] And in the History of the schismatical rebels,
Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, with their accomplices, it is written, that [they
descended quick into hel] yet in neither of these places is described, what,
nor where hell is, more then that the way to it, is descending downwardes. And
is most generally said, to be within the earth, and so is furthest distant from
heaven: the whole orb of land and water being compassed with the air. Most
certain it is by holy Scriptures, that hell is a distinct place both from
heaven, and earth. So Job says [God is higher then heaven, deeper then hell,
longer Job. 11. v. 8. 9.
then the earth, and broader then the sea] where Heaven, Hell, Earth, and Sea,
are recited as the four general parts of the universal world. S. Paul reduces
them to three; showing that [to the name of Jesus, every knee must bow, of the
Celestials, Terrestrials, Phil. 2. v. 10.
and Infernals] that is to say, in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell. By which, and
many other holy Scriptures, it is clear, that there is a hell, and that it is
distinct in situation from heaven, and from the face of the earth.

2 And it is no less certain, that there be distinct That there are diverse
helles, is proved by ma^e holy Scriptures.
and different parts of hell; which is inuincibly proved by many places of
holy Scriptures. First by the two places already recited. For it can not be,
that Jacob saying, that [he would descend into hel] where he supposed his Son
Joseph to be, spoke of the same hell, or same part of hell, into which Moses
says the rebels [descended down quicke] the one being the place of eternal
damnation, and torments of the wicked: the other a place of rest, and assured
expectation of just souls, not above the earth, but beneath, according to the
prop^^etie of his speech saying I will descend unto my son into hell. Likewise
the renowned old Martyr Eleaz^rus, saying [he would rather be sent into hel]
then f^yne conformity 2. Mac. 6. v. 23. 24. 26.
unto wicked laws, against the Law of God; could not mean the hell of the
(...). For even therefore, he yielded his body to temporal death, that he might
[escape the hand of the almightie] and avoid damnation of his soul. Holy
Job also distinguishes Job. 17. v. 13.
two helles: one wherein is rest and repose, where he says [If I shall expect,
hell is my house, and in darkness I have made my bed] an other hell, wherein is no
rest nor hope, which he expresses by a negative interrogation, putting the
case that al his things should [descend into most deep hell: v. 16.
there at least (says he) shall I have rest think thou] And this he calls
[ profundissimum infernum, the most deep hell:] of which hell no doubt he
speaks, where he describes the wretched state of wicked men that prosper in
this world, saying [They lead their Job. 21. v. 13.
days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to hel] Conformably to this
distinction of diverse helles, the Royal Prophet says to God [Thou have
delivered Ps. 85. v. 13. Ps. 87. v. 7.
my soul out of the lower hel] And speaking of his enemies malicious
endeavors, he says: [they have (so much as lay in them) put me in the lower
lake.] Solomon also signifies, that there be diverse helles where he says [The
path of life above the Prou. 15. v. 24.
learned, that he may decline from the lowest hell.] Seeing then the holy
Scriptures testify diverse helles, Christ descended into the hell of rest, not
of torment.
or diverse parts of hell, much different in quality of torments, and of rest,
and in situation higher and lower: it must needs be the highest hell, into
which we profess in our Creed, that Christ our Savior descended in his
glorious soul, leaving his sacred Body on the Cross.

3 This doctrine is further confirmed by the estate That none of mankind entered
into heaven before Christ: was signified by the keeping of the gate of Paradise.
of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and other just persons, departed this life
in the old Testament, whose souls were free from hell of the damned; and yet
could not enter into heaven before our Savior came in flesh and opened the
way, which is proved by many holy Scriptures. First in signification hereof
holy [Ch^rubi^s, and a slaming and turning sword, Genesis 3. v. 24.
were placed at the gate of paradise, to keep the way of the tree of life.] In
the law of Moses which was (...) in the high Priest.
in most things figurative, Aaron being high Priest was forbid to enter at al
times into the Sanctuary, that was within the veil before the Propiciatorie:
Leuit. 16. v. 2. 17. 30. Heb. 9. v. 8. 9.
into which he could enter only [once in the year, in the feast of general
Expiation] and no other but the high Priest at any time. [The holy Ghost
signifying this (says S. Paul) that the way of the holies, was not yet
manifested, the former Tabernacle So expounded by S. Paul.
as yet standing. Which (says he) is a Parable (or figure) of the time
present.] An other like figure Deuteronomy. 1. v. 1. Chapter 34. v. 5. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 27. Chapter
4. v. 22.
was in Moses, who [was not suffered to enter into By other figures.
the promised land of Chanaan] signifying that the Law delivered by him, could
not bring any to heaven, the true land of promise. [Behold (said Moses in the
Champian wilderness of Moab) I dye in this ground, I shall not pass over Jordan,
you shall pass, and possess the goodly land.] Again the same was prefigured
by that all the children of Israel mourned upon Aarons death, and likewise upon
Moses, but not upon Iosue, because they represented the old Law: and Iosue
bringing the people into Deuteronomy. 31. v. 7.
Chanaan, and setting them in possession of it, signified our Savior Christ,
who brings his servants and children into heaven, and gives them possession
of eternal inheritance. Of Aarons death, it is written thus [Al the multitude
seeing that Aaron was Nu. 20. v. 30.
dead, mourned upon him thirty days, throughout al their families.] Of Moses
the very like words are recorded, that [the children of Israel mourned Deu.
34. v. 8. Iosue. 24. v. 29. 30.
him, in the champion Country of Moab, thirty daies] But of Iosue, it is only
said [After these things, (after the history of his acts) Iosue the son of
Nun, the servant of our Lord dyed, being an hundred and ten years old; and
they bruied him in the coasts of his possession in Thamnath-sare which is
situated in the mountain of Ephraim, on the north part of mount Gaas] without
any word of mourning, which assuredly was not without Mystery. Neither can
it be without Mystery, nor well signify any other thing, then this whereof we
here treat, that such a one, as being innocent from wilful murder, having not
voluntarily, but by chance medlie, killed any man [was delivered from the
hand of Nu. 35. v. 11. 13. 22. 23.
the revenger, and by sentence brought into a City of refuge, (to which he had
sledde) must tarry there until the High Priest that is anointed with the holy
oil do dye. And after that the high Priest is 25. 28.
dead, then shall he (that had without hatred and enmity slain a man) return
into his Country.] For even so after the death of our High Priest Jesus
Christ, the just and innocent souls being in saiftie from the revenger, in
that part of hell called Abraham's bosom, and Limbus Patrum, the Lake of the
Fathers, were delivered from thence, and with him returned into their Country
which is Heaven. The prou^^ Prophets.


4 Besides mystical figures, the Prophets did also foreshew, that Christ our
Savior descended into hell, and from thence delivered the captives, which were
retained there until he came. For what can be more plain proof that our B.
Savior was sometime there, then that which him self says by his Prophet David
directing his speech to God [My flesh shall rest in Ps. 15. v. 9. 10.
hope: Because thou will not leave my soul in hell.] If there were no other
place to prove this point of our faith, this alone is sufficient. But for
superabundance let us see more. The same Royal Prophet in an other Psalm says
literally of him self, or in the person of any just soul after great
affliction, but prophetically of Christ [I am become as a man without Ps. 87.
v. 5. 6.
help: free among the dead.] For so was ou^ B. Savior free among the dead,
that were in captivity, yea so potent and glorious, that he made the place of
former captivity, a place of Joy, performing there, that which he most
graciously promised to the penitent thee^e on the Cross saying [Amen Luc. 23.
v. 43.
I say to thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise.] The words also of
God the Father to Christ our Savior, written by Isaias [I have given Is. 42.
v. 6. 7.
thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, that thou
might open the eyes of the blind, and bring forth the prisoner out of
prison, and them that sit in dar^knes, out of the prison house] which
Prophecy, besides the moral sense of lightning those that are in error or
ignorant, and delivering sinners from captivity of sin, does allegorically
signify the light and liberty which our Savior brought to the Saints in
Limbo, by his descending into that hell, where they were in dar^knes and in
prison, til he came and (...) them. In both which senses the Prophet Osee
seems to describe the victory of Christ over death and hell saying: [I will be
thy death o death: thy bitte will I be Osee. 13. v. 14. Zach. 9. v. 11.
o hell.] And Zacharias more plainly speaks thus to Christ our Redemer [Thou
also in the blood of thy Testament, have let forth thy prisoners out of the
lake, wherein is no water] And congratulating with the same prisoners for this
delivery says to them [Conuert to the munition ye prisoners of hope, to 12.
day also declaring I will render thee duble.] So it was a duble benefit to be
delivered from prison, and to be made partakers of glory.

5 In the new Testament this Mystery is more reveled. The same doctrine is
confirmed by the new Testament.
The Evangelist writes that when our Savior was Baptized [the heavens were
opened] signifying Mat. 3. v. 16.
that heaven was shut in the old law, til Christ opened the way by his passion,
and that none could enter therein before him. In the mean season he The first
confirmation.
preached and sent his Disciples to preach [that the Mat. 4. v. 17.
kingdom of heaven is at hand] which evidently Chapter 10. v. 7.
The second.
shows, that as yet, whiles Christ was mortal in earth, there was no entrance
into heaven, but shortly should be entrance thither. The souls also of The 3.
those persons, whom our Savior raised from death, Luc. 8. v. 55. Luc. 7. v.
55. Joan. 11. v. 44. Luc. 16. v. 22. 25.
in the mean time til they returned to their bodies, were neither in heaven
(for then it had been no benefit, but a great damage for them to come again
into this world) neither in hell of the damned (for from thence there is no
redemption) nor returning. And therefore they were in some other place. The 4.
souls of poor Lazarus the beggar, and of the rich glutton, were in [places
far distant] yet both in lower parts, both in hell, but the one [in Abraham's
bosome] the other [in hell of tormentes] For it follows in the text, that
Abraham said to the damned 26.
glutton, that [Lazarus is comforted, and thou art tormented. And besides this,
between us and you, there is fixed a great Chaos, that none can pass from
hence to you, neither from thence hither.] Again 5.
concerning Christ him self S. Paul expressly says that [he descended into the
inferior parts of the earth] Ephesians. 4. v. 9.
which no caueler can possibly interpret of his grave. For besides that his
grave was hewed in a rock upon the face of the earth, not in the inferior, or
lower parts of the earth, the Apostle in the next words saying [He that
descended, the same is also v. 10.
he that ascended above all the heauens] speaks of places quite opposite, the
one far above the other 6.
beneath the earth. He teaches also in an other Epistle, Heb. 10. v. 20.
that [Christ Dedicated a new way into the Holies] that is into Heaven. By
which word Dedicated, he shows that he was Auctour, beginner, and the first
that entered of al mankind. And he says also, 7.
that the Ancient Saints of the old Testament, [being approved by faith
received not the promise] Heb. 11. v. 39.
til others of the New Testament, should receive it with them.

Our Savior Jesus Christ, rose from Death the third day. ARTICLE. 25.
BEing most true (for truth it self spoke it) that Our B. Savior most of al
men humbled himself; and therefore is most exalted.
[he which humbles him self, shall be exalted] Luc. 18. v. 14.
the same is chiefly verified in him that says it, our Lord Jesus Christ. Of
whom we have seen in the precedent Articles, that he humbled him self much
more, then any other ever did, or could do. Which is most evident, if we
consider his Person, and humiliation, comparing them with other greatest
persons of the whole world and their humblest actions: If we may call it
comparing, when we frame a mutual conceit in our mind things of infinitely
differing, because properly speaking, there is no co^pariso^ between the
Creator, and creatures. For Kings, Emperoures, and Popes, yea Angels,
Archangels, Cherubines, and Serapimes, with all other glorious Saints: Also
the most Blessed Mother of God, are creatures: Christ our Lord, is God the
Creator. Who descending from the Throne of God, exinaniting him self, took
man's nature, and therein humbled him self Phil. 2. v. 8.
made obedient unto death, even death of the Crosse] which was most
contemptible. And albeit some men wilingly, for Gods cause, sustained the
same kind of death, as S Peter, S. Andrew, and others, yet they having been
sometimes sinners, had deserved to suffer pains for their own sins; but our
B. Savior never was, neither could be, a sinner, and so infinitely excelled al
others in humbling him self. And v. 9.
for this very cause, is exalted infinitely, above al others.

2 Which his exaltation immediately began, when His exaltation begane immediately
upon the last point of his humiliation.
he came to the last point, and full consummation of his nost profound
humility, which was, when his most sacred body hang bloudlesse, and
soulelesse, on the Cross: his most precious blood lay al poured out in sundry
places, in Pilates palace, in the high ways, trodden under feet, but most part
thereof on the Cross, and ground where it stood, and his soul descended into
the lower parts of the earth, the prison of captives, a part of hell. Lo this
was the full periode of perfectest humility that ever was, or shall be. Now
therefore instantly his exaltation began. For instantly his glorious soul
(whose motion from place to place, is by instantanial action of the mind) was
in Limbo with the holy Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and other Saints of
the old Testament, lightning the place, and all that were therein, by his divine
light, with inexplicable claritie, brightness, joy, bliss, and fruiton of
eternal glory. And all this also according to the sensitive power of his soul,
which hitherto was passible: the superior power being always glorious.
Exaltation also of Art. 20. parag. 4. Art. 23. parag. 8.
his fame and reputation, began by and by after (as is already noted) when the
Centurion and many others, srely and publikly, said of him, this was a just
man, the Son of God. And very shortly began the exaltation of his sacred
Body (as we have also said already) when Joseph and Nicodemus, with other
devout respectable persons, took it down from the Cross, and with costly
spices, and finest linen, buried it most solemnly, in a new most honorable
Tomb. Thus his Exaltation began, and proceeded that first evening after his
victorious death. All the next day being the Sabbath day, and the greatest of all the year by reason it was within the Feast of Pasch, and Azims, he became more
and more renowned by public discourses, which were made of his admirable
virtues, as of [an excellent Prophet, mighty in Luc. 24. v. 18. 19. 20.
work and word, before God and all the people; and how their chief Preistes and
Princes, had delivered him into condemnation of death and crucified him] a
thing so famous, that none, no not strangers in Jerusalem, could be ignorant
thereof, as plainly appears by the report of the two Disciples going to Emaus
the third day.

3 But what congratulations were among the holy Much more his glory appeared
in Limbus.
Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, and blessed confessors, in Limbus for their
fruition of Christ our Lord his presence, and of their long expected glory; is
to be meditated in heart, for with words it can not be uttered. Much more the
third day his glorious The third day his body also became glorious.
exaltation proceeded. For then his soul returning into his body, made the
same also glorious, and so he rose from death. which Mystery was foreshewed
Which was prefigured in the old Testament.
as well by figures, and prophecies of the old Testament, as by our B. Saviors
own prediction, whiles he was mortal. Amongst other figures, the sudden
[aduancement of Ioseph] the Patriarch, after Genesis 41. v. 43.
his many afflictions, did well resemble our Saviors spedie rising from death
after his so great humiliation. The space of three days was also insinuated by
[the carrying of the Arc of the covenant of Nu. 10. v. 33. Io. 16. v. 7. Chapter
14. v. 23.
our Lord, three days before the people of Israel, providing a place for the
camp.] So him self said [It is expedient for you that I go, for I go to
prepare you a place. And if I go and prepare you a place, I come again and
will take you to my self: that where I am you also may be.]

4 The Royal Psalmist very often prophecieth of Foretold by the Prophets.
our Saviors Resurrection: as implicitly signified in his own depresment,
and delivery with more advancement [I have slept (says he) and been at rest;
Ps. 3. v. 6. Ps. 15. v. 9.
and have risen up; because our Lord has taken me] More plainly in an other
Psalm [My flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my soul in hell
(which necessarily presupposes, that his soul should descend into hell)
neither will thou give thy holy 10.
one, to see corruption.] Christ's natural Body, being naturally corruptible,
especially being dead, was by divine power, preserved from corruption. Whereby
Act. 2. v. 31. Act. 13. v. 35. 36.
S. Peter convinced the Jews, that Christ is risen from death, and that this
prophecy is verified in our Saviors body, and could not be verified in
David. And so concludes no less against the heritikes, of this time denying
Christ's descending into hell, then against the Jews denying his Resurrection
in these plain words [that David foreseeing, spoke of the Resurrection of
Christ: For neither was he left in hell, neither did his flesh see corruption.]
The same is proved by the title of an other Psalm, which is also Canonical
Scripture, where it is said [ unto the end, for the morning enterprise] The
Psalm Ps. 21. v. 1.
is wholly of Christ, and the greatest part, is of his Passion and death, And
the title insinuates the effect of his death, which is man's Redemption: made
known by his Resurrection [who was delivered Romans 4. v. 25.
up for our sins, and rose again for our iustification] Likewise an other
title shows that this effect of Christ's Resurrection should happen [in the
Ps. 23. v. 1.
first of the Sabbath] the first day of the week; which is our Lords day the
Sunday. Again holy David as it were in his own person, but prophetically in
Christ's name says [Lord when will thou regard? Ps. 34. v. 17. 22. Ps. 40. v. 9.
restore thou my soul (or life) from their malignitie, mine only one (my
body) from the Lions. Thou have seen o Lord, keep not silence. Lord depart not
from me. They (mine enemies) have determined an unjust word against me. Shall
not he that slepetn add to rise again? Let not the tempest of water drown
Ps. 68. v. 16. 30.
me, nor the depth swallow me; neither let the pit shut his mouth upon me:
Thy salvation o God has received me] Elsewhere, changing his form of speech,
he says directly of Christ [Our Lord has reigned, Ps. 92. v. 1.
he has put on beauty, our Lord has put on strength, and has girded him
self] He that took upon him our infirmities and as a Lamb suffered him self
to be led unto torments; after his death, took upon him armor, and girdle
of warfare, to reign in his Kingdom [His right hand has wrought salvation
Ps. 97. v. 1. Ps. 109. v. 1. Ps. 131. v. 8. 11. Act. 2. v. 30. Ps. 141. v. 8
to him self. Our Lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand, til I make
thine enemies the footstool of thy feet. Arise Lord into thy rest; thou, and
the Arck of thy sanctification. Our Lord has sworn truth to David, and he will
not disapoint it (saying) of the fruict of thy womb, I will set upon thy
seat.] Again as if Christ spoke, he relates him praying to his Father thus
[Bring forth my soul out of prison, to confess unto thy name: the just expect
me until thou reward me.] Generally all the Prophets, fore-shewing Christ's
Passion, and his death, add thereto his speedy Resurrection. But Osee more
particularly says [He will revive us after two days; Osee. 6. v. 3.
in the third day, he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.] And
Jonas prophesied the same by fact, being [in the belie of the fish three days,
and Ions. 2. v. 1. 11.
three nights which our Savior him self says was so sufficient a sign, that
the wicked and adulterous generation, should have none other. For (says he) as
Mat. 12. v. 39. 40.
Jonas was in the whales belie three days and three nights: so shall the Son
of man be in the heart of the earth, three days, and three nights.]

5 He had before this, told the same incredulous Christ's own predictions of
his P^surrection.
w^angling people, when they demanded a sign: that they should kill him, and
that he would raise him self again, but he spoke it in a parable saying:
[di^solue Joan. 2. v. 19. 21.
this temple, and in three days I will raise it* which they did not, or rather
would not, understand. For he spoke of the temple of his body. But to his
disciples he said without parable in proper and plain terms: that [he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer Mat. 16. v. 21.
many things of the Ancients, and Scribes, and chief Priests, and be killed,
and the third day rise againe] Nere about a year after he told the same being
then nere at hand, saying: [Behold we go up to Jerusalem, Mat. 20. v. 18. Mar.
8. v. 34. Chapter 10. v. 34. Luc. 9. v. 22. Chapter 18. v. 33.
and the Son of man shall be delivered to the chief Priests, and to the
Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death: and shall deliver him to the
Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and crucisied: and the third day he shall
rise again.] Al which predictions duly examined, and considered, may
abundantly suffice to prove against the Jews, that Messiah should both dye on
the Cross, and rise again from death, to immortality, even as all the
Evangelists, and some other Apostles have written that Christ our Lord did.
And now it were bootles to allege more of the new Testament against them
because they utterly reject it. And we shall have more oportune place in the
next Article, to recite sundry apparitions together with other special acts
of our B. Savior, between his Resurrection and Ascension.

6 In the mean while, it rests to resolve a small How our Savior was three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
doubt: How our B. Savior was three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth, as S. Matthew writes that him self said he should be: seeing the same and
other Evangelists affirm, that he yielded up his Ghost at the Ninth Hour,
which is three hours after midday, was buried that evening, and after one
whole day more, rose from death the next morning very early. So that it seems
there was no more time between his death and Resurrection, but one whole day,
and small parts of other two days, with only two whole nights (which we call,
Friday night, and Saturday night, and no part at al of a third night. This
difficulty may be explicated two ways; First by understanding The first
explication.
the words three days, and three nights to signify three natural days of
twenty four hours the day and night, as in the beginning of Genesis it is
said [Euening and morning made one day] Genesis 1. v. 5. 8. 13.
And so by the figure Sinecdoche, in usual manner of speech, there were three
days, to wit, part of Friday, al Saturday, and part of Sunday. Secondly The
second explication more conformable to the text.
understanding artificial days which are only whiles the Sun is in our
Horison; and the time of darkness without the Sun, is called night, which may
seem more agreeable to our Saviors distinct speech of three days and three
nights. Then we answer, that the space of time on Friday between our Saviors
death, and the night following, by Sinecdoche, was the first day of the three
days: the first half of night following belonging to Friday, was the first
night of the three nights; the other half from midnight forward, belonging to
Saturday, was the former part of the second night, to which succeeded the second
artificial day; and the former part of night, which was til midnight,
perteyning also to Saturday, did make the second night complete; then from
midnight forwards perteyning to Sunday, was therefore the third night, counting
part for the whole. And the morning which then followed, though it was a very
small part, yet was it the beginning of the third artificial day. And so our B.
Savior was three days, and three nights, that is, some part of every one of
three days and of three nights, in the heart of the earth. More clearly
verified of his soul in L^mbo; then of his body in the grave; for that his
body was neither so soon in the grave, neither was the grave in the heart of
the earth.

Christ our Lord appeared often after his Resurrection; and ordained diverse
things perteyning to his Church. ARTICLE. 26.
AS in other points of faith our Savior confirmed Our Lord proved his
Resurrection by sundry apparitions.
his doctrine, not only by preaching, but also by visible factes, especially
miraculous works: so in this special Article of his Resurrection from death,
it pleased his divine wisdom, not only by testimonies of holy Scriptures, and
his own predictions; but also by visibly appearing alive, after his death and
burial, and by other sensible Acts, to prove and confirm, that he is truly
risen again, with the self same natural body, which he had before; but
changed in some qualities, being now made glorious, and immortal. Yet would he
not appear to al men in public, as he conuersed when he was passible and
mortal. For that was neither convenient for his glorious state, nor necessary;
no, nor so profitable to the faithful: whose merit is greater [beleuing
without seing] then when Ioa. 20. v. 29.
they are persuaded thereto by visible means. And for inducing al to believe
Christ's Resurrection, it is sufficient, that after he was publicly killed by
the Jews, [God raised him up (as S. Peter teaches) Act. 10. v. 39. 40. 41.
He apeared also for special ^ffaires.
the third day, and gave him to be made manifest* not to all the people, but to
witnesses preordeined of God: to us who did eat and drink with And for more
consolation of such as believed already.
him after he rose again from death.] But besides this cause of propagating
the belief of this Article by such witnesses: he appeared also for other
affairs, of ordeining more Sacraments, and the Hierarchy of his Church: And
thirdly for the more consolation of his Apostles, and some others. 1. Our
Savior first appeared to his mother after his Resurrection.


2 To which particular effect, he appeared no doubt: And that first of al, to
his afflicted Mother, of al others Luc. 2. v. 35.
most faithful, most hopeful, most dearly loving him, and most dearly beloved
of him; though there be not express mention thereof in the holy Scriptures, as
a thing nedeles to be there written, being in it self, so convenient, meet,
and reasonable, that whosoever will not so think without proof of express
Scripture, proves him self over simple [without understanding.] Mat. 15. v. 16.
Wherefore presupposing that our Lord and Savior appeared first to his B.
Mother, his next apparition (the first of those that are written by Mar. 16. v.
1. 9.
the Evangelists, whereby any was induced to believe, and might be a fit
witness to others) was the 2. To S. Marie Magdalene.
same morning of his Resurrection, to S. Marie Magdalen, who with other [deuout
women, visiting the Mat. 28. v. 1. Mar. 16. v. 1. Luc. 24. v. 4. Joan. 20. v.
3. 4. 10.
holy Sepulcher, were told by two Angels, that he was risen, and so were bid
to tell the Apostles, which they did] whereupon [S. Peter, and S. John, running
to the monument, and not finding him, departed thence] but she returning
[stoode there alone weping: and our Lord appeared to her, seming to be the
Gardener: but he calling her by her name, she knew him, and fell at his feet,
yet was not permitted 3. To her again with other two devout women.
to touch him.] Thirdly he appeated again Io. 20. v. 11. 15. 16. 17. Mat. 28.
v. 9.
to her and the other holy women in the way, saying to them [Al hail. And
they came near, and 4. To S. Peter.
took hold of his feet, and adored him.] Fourthly he appeared to S. Peter:
For in the evening, the two Disciples returning from Emaus, testified that [our
Lord is risen in deed, and has appeared to Luc. 24. v. 34. 1. Cor. 15. v. 5.
Simon.] And S. Paul says, that he was seen of Cephas: and after that of the
eleven.] Fifthly he 5. To S. James.
appeared to S. James, for so S. Paul adds [Morouer v. 7.
he was seen of James; then of all the Apostles] signifying that our Lord
appeared particularly to S. Peter and to S. James, before his apparition when
they were many together. Sixthly toward evening 6. To two disciples going to
Emaus.
of the same first day [our Lord joined him self in company Luc. 24. v. 15.
18. ad 35.
of Cleophas and an other Disciple going to Emaus. to who^ he interpreted holy
Scriptures concerning him self. And going with them as to lodge, was at last
known to them in breaking of bread, and then he vanished out of their sight.]
Seauenthly 7. To ten of his Apostles.
yet [the same evening, our Lord appeared to his Luc. 24. v. 36. Ioa. 20. v. 19.
Io. 20. v. 26. Io. 21. v. 1. 4. 7. Mat. 28. v. 16. 17. 1. Cor. 15. v. 6. Luc.
24. v. 50. 51.
Apostles, being together (al but S. Thomas) the doares being shut.] Eighthly
[the eighth day, he 8. To all the eleue^ Apostles, the eight day.
appeated again to his Apostles, S. Thomas being also present.] Ninthly he
appeared to S. Peter, and other Six at the sea of Tiberias. Tenthly he
appeared 9. To S. Peter and other six.
again to the eleven Disciples in Galilee.] Eleuenthly he was seen of more
then five hundred brethren together, as S. Paul writes, though he neither 10.
To the eleven in Galilee.
expresses the time nor the place. Twelthly our Lord appearing again to his
Disciples, brought 11. To more then five hundred.
them forth into Bethania, and in sight of them, and others, ascended into
heaven. This is the sum, 12. To the Apostles and others, at his Ascension.
and order, so near as we can gather it out of the four Evangelists, with a
suplement of S. Paul, of the apparitions of our Savior between his
Resurrection, and Ascension.

3 whereunto S. Paul adioyneth that last of al [Christ 1. Cor. 15. v. 8.
He appeared also to S. Paul really in body: proved by five arguments.
our Lord was seen also of him self] And that the same was a real apparition of
our Savior in his humanity, is evidently confirmed, by that the Apostle
alleges it, even as he does the other apparitions, First proof.
to prove that Christ is indede really risen from death to glorious
immortality. And by the very same 2. Proo^e.
fundamental point of faith, he proves also the general Resurrection of al
mankind, at the last day of general Judgment. And it is likewise proved to be
3.
a real apparition of Christ in his body, by the words of Ananias saying to
S. Paul [Brother Saul our Act. 9. v. 17. Chapter 22. v. 15. 16.
Lord Jesus has sent me, he that appeared to thee in the way: the God of our
Fathers has preordeined thee, that thou should know his will, and see the
just one, and hear a voice from his mouth (Mark also the reason why he should
see and hear Christ from his own mouth) because (says Ananias) thou shall be
his witness to al men, of those things which thou have seen and heard.] Yet
further the same is 4.
confirmed by our B. Saviors own words to S. Paul saying [Rise up, and stand
upon thy feet; for Act. 26. v. 16.
to this end have I appeared unto thee, that I may ordeine thee a minister and
witness of those things, which thou have seen, and of those things wherein I
will appear to thee] which last words import his extraordinary Mission like
to the other Apostles, sent immediately by our Savior him self. According 5.
whereto, S. Paul writes to the Galatians thus [Paul Gal. 1. v. 1.
an Apostle, not of men, neither by man; but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, that raised him from the dead] So we see, that Christ our Lord,
appeared in earth after his Ascension. And that he ca^ dispose of his most
sacred body, as it pleases him.

4 Here also we are to consider of S. John's advertisement; Christ ordained
diverse things in the forty days after his Resurrection.
that [there are many other things which Io. 21. v. 25.
Jesus did, that are not written] in the holy Scriptures. And touching his
Acts in this time, whereof we now speak, S. Luke says that [he showed him
Act. 1. v. 3.
self alive to his Apostles after his passion, in many arguments, for forty
days appearing to them, and speaking of the kingdom of God] which necessarily
imports that he did more then is expressed in the twelve Apparitions above
recited: whereof more then half were performed the first day of the forty.
And the former six of them, were particular and private Some of his apparitions
were private to few.
to very few persons: the last two were public to many; so that only four
of these Apparitions perteyne properly to the Collge of the Apostles. In the
Some more public to many.
first of which four, by coming unto them, the doares being shut, he declared
his body to be glorious, which could penetrate and pass through an other
solid body: and also to be his true body consisting Some were proper to the
College of the Apostles.
of flesh and bones, which a spirit has not. There Luc. 24. v. 39.
he gave them power to forgive, and to retain sins: instituting the holy
Sacrament of Penance: And that with a solemn Ceremony. For [he breathed Joan.
20. v. 22. 23.
Our Lord gave his Apostles power to remitte sins.
upon them and said: Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose sins you shall forgive,
they are forgeuen the^: and whose you shall retain, they are retained.] In the
next apparition, [our Savior coming in like manner Ioa. 20. v. 26. 28.
to the Apostles, the doares being shut, said to Thomas, (who was absent
before, and would not believe) He removed al doubt and scruple touching his
Resurrection.
put in thy finger hither, and see my hands; and bring hither thy hand, and
put it into my side; and be not incredulous, but faithful] whereupon S. Thomas
then said [My Lord, and my God] Whether v. 28.
he did touch our B. Savior, or no, the Evangelist does not tell, but it seems
more probable, that he believed upon sight without touching; for our Savior
said to him [Because thou have seen me Thomas, 29.
thou have beleued] He saw the outward appearance, and so believed, not only that
it was his Master and Lord; but also God, that so appeared and spoke unto him.
And so had part of that blessing, which our Lord upon this occasion announced
to al saying [Blessed are they that have not seen, and have 29.
believed.] In the third apparition to the Apostles, (for so S. John calls it,
though they were not al Io. 21. v. 1. 4. 7. 10.
present, but so many, and such as represented their College) our Savior
constituted his Apostle Simon He constituted S. Peter the visible head of the
whole militant Church.
Peter, his general Vicar in earth, with commandment and Commission [to feed
both his Lambs, and v. 17.
his sheepe] which are al Chrstes flock, Clergy, and Lai^le. And withal
signified unto him [by what 18. 19.
death he should glorify God] But would not reveal the like touching S. John;
bidding them be content 22. Mat. 28.
not to know it. In the fourth of those apparitions He gave his Apostles
commission to preach his Gospel in all the earth.
that seem more proper to the Apostles, which was v. 17. Mar. 16. v. 14. Mat.
28. v. 20.
in Galilee; our Savior gave to them al a most ample Commission, to preach in
the whole earth, and [to teach al Nations, baptizing them and teaching them to
observe al things, whatsoever he had commanded them, with promise also to be
perpetually with them (by assistance of his Spirit) al days, even to the
consummation of the world.] And either in the same place or rather when they
were returned to Jerusalem, Luc. 24. v. 49. Act. 1. v. 8.
he gave them a special commandment, to tarry together in the ^^itie, til they
should be endued with power from high, saying [you shall receine virtue of the
Holy Ghost coming upon you, and you shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem,
and in all Jury, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth] These
particular actions of our Blessed Savior, are easily, and clearly gathered out
of the sacred text.

5 By other sacred textes, it is also certain, though Some Sacraments were
instituted in those forty days.
not so evident, that Christ likewise instituted other Sacraments, and made
other ordinances, whiles he was on earth, after his Resurrection, as is known,
and continually preached in his Church* warranted by diverse holy Scriptures,
and namely by the places And other ordinances made.
even now recited, where S. Luke writes, that Act. 1. v. 3.
[for forty days remaining in earth he appeared to his Apostles, and spoke
of the Kingdom of God] that is of things perteyning to the Church which is
his Mat. 28. v. 20.
Kingdom: whereof S. Matthew testifies, that Christians [must be taught to
observe al things whatsoever Christ commanded to his Apostles to teach them]
yet expresses not what those things are. And where S. John in the last
conclusion of his Gospel, which was last written of all the new Testament, says
expressly [that al things are not written.] Diverse Ioa. 21. v. 25. vltimo.
other places do further testify, the practice and use of other Sacraments,
which necessarily presuppose None can in(...) any ^acrament but Christ only.
their institution by Christ: because none other ever had, nor any Apostle, or
any their successors ever presumed, to have authority or power to institute
any Sacrament. Where else our Savior was, or whom else he admitted to his
presence, albeit the holy Scriptures do not express: yet not without cause
it is supposed, that those holy souls whom he lightened in Limbus, remained
with him, and so ascended with him into heaven. For that they were delivered
from Limbus, is proved by the apparitions testified by S. Matthew, that [their
bodies also (for some time) rose out of Mat. 27. v. 52. 53.
their graves (which could not be without their souls) and after Christ's
Resurrection, came into the holy City, and appeared to many.]

Christ our Lord ascended into heaven: sits on the right hand of God.
ARTICLE. 27.
AN other great degree of our B. Saviors exaltation, is his Ascension into
heaven. A point of like necessity to be proved against Christ's Ascension is
proved by figures of the old Testament.
the Jews, as his Resurrection. And therefore we will first prove it by
Authority of the old Testament, which they acknowledge to contain both
figures, and prophecies of Messiah. And for more consolation of Christians,
declare the same by the New Testament also. Enochs translation, and Elias
assumption being, Genesis 5. v. 24. 4. Reg. 2. v. 11.
as the Jews Rabbis confess, not only strange and miraculous works of God,
but also Prophetical signs of some things to be done by Messiah; do most
directly represent, our Saviors admirable Ascension into Heaven: with
conformable resemblance of the figures or signs to the thing signified. For
they being yet mortal, were removed from the common conversation of other
mortal men, by the ministry of Angels: the one transported; the other taken
up in a fyrie chariot into the air: and must return to preach, and give
testimony of truth against Mal. 4. v. 5. Apoc. 11. v. 3.
Antichrist, and finally by glorious Martyrdom, pay the debt of death. But
Christ our Redemer having by his proper death paid abundant ransom for all
mankind, can not dye any more, is now immortal, by his own proper power, is
ascended above all the heavens, sits on the right hand of God. So the thing
prefigured, incomparably excels the figure. Ios. 3. v. 3. 15.
Likewise Iosue (otherwise Jesus) both in name and office, saving the
Israelites from their enemies, and bringing them out of the desert through
Iordane into the promised land: clearly prefigured Christ our Savior, who
brought all the Saints of the old Testament out of Limbus, and continually
brings Saints of the New Testament, from this vale of affliction, through
Baptism, and other Sacraments, into heaven the true land of promise, of
eternal rest and joy; whither he first of al ascending, opened the gate, and
made way for others, which by Moses and his Law, could not be done.

2 As the Royal Psalmist saw in spirit, and prophesied The same was foretold by
the Prophets.
by way of inuiting the glorious Angels to congratulate the assotiation of
humane nature with Angelical [Lift up your gates ye Princes (says he) Ps. 23.
v. 7.
and be ye lifted up, o eternal gates, and the King of glory shall enter in.
Who is the King of glory (said the holy Angels?) Our Lord strong and mighty
(says the Prophet) our Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your gates ye Princes
(says he again) and 8.
be lifted up o eternal gates: and the King of glory shall enter in. Yet the
blessed Angels admiring demand again [who is this King of glory?] The prophet
9.
answeareth [The Lord of powers (that is the Lord of al powers as well Angelical
as humane) he is the King of glory.] In humane nature assumpted, Christ is
[diminished less then Angels] In Divine Ps. 8. v. 5.
nature, Creator and Lord of Angels. And not only by Hypostatical union, but
also by merit of his Passion, and state of Kingdom [He is crowned with Ps. 8.
v. 6. 7. 8. Ps. 46. v. 6. 7. 8.
glory and honor; appointed over al creatures, al things subjected under his
feet. God (Christ God and Man) is ascended in Iubilation: and our Lord in
voice of Trumpet. Sing ye to our God, sing ye; sing ye to our King, sing ye.
Because God is King of all the earth, sing ye wisly.] In an other psalm, the
same Prophet directing his speech to Christ him self says [Thou art ascended
on high: thou have taken Ps. 67. v. 19.
captivity, thou have received gifts in men] Fulfilled, when our Lord
ascending with triumph, carried with him, those which were captives, until he
spoiling the enemy, set them free, and received them with all other elect of
mankind, as a gift of God, a Ps. 2. v. 8. Ephesians. 2. v. 6. Chapter 4. v. 8. Ps. 109.
v. 1.
reward of his victory; making them then, and continually others [to sit
with him in the celestials] and so [gaue gifts to men] as S. Paul interprets
the same prophecy. In this also is fulfilled an other testimony of David
saying [The Lord said to my Lord; sit on my right hand] And the question is
hereby solued, which the pharisees could not answer. How Christ is both the
Son and Lord of David. Mat. 22. v. 43. Act. 2. v. 35. 36. Cant. 3. v. 11.
[For (says S. Peter) God has made this Jesus, who^ the Jews have crucified,
both Lord, and Christ.] Now the Church beholds king [Salomon in the Diadem
wherewith his mother has crowned him, (or wherewith his body which he took of
his mother, is crowned) in the day of his despousing, and in the day of the joy
of his heart.] To the same purpose, the Prophet Isaias foretold, that when our
Lord, after his bloody conquest, should rise from death, and ascend in
triumph; the Angels with admiration Isa. 63. v. 1.
should say [who is this that comes from Edom with dyed garments, from Bosra?
this bewtiful one in his Robe, going in the multitude of his strength?] To
which demand, our almighty Conqueror, answeareth [I that speak justice, and
am a defender to saue] showing that by very justice, not by violent invasion,
but by rigorous satisfaction for all men's sins, he had overcome the enemy
of mankind, recovered the pray, possessed his own Kingdom, and deserved
crown. Of this also the Prophet Micheas speaks, who foretelling the
progress of the Church, ascribes it to Christ's merits, by which Mich. 2. v.
13.
he opened heaven gates: [For he shall ascend (says this Prophet) opening the
way before them: they shall divide, and pass through the gate, and shall enter
by it, and their King shall pass before them: and our Lord in the head of them.]

3 Most agreeable to these and other Prophets, our Our Savior did foreshew that
he would ascend.
Lord him self foretold, that not only after his Passion he would rise from
death, but also that he would ascend into heaven. [To Nicodemus he said, that
Io. 3. v. 13.
no man has ascended into heaven (a plain text, that before Christ, no man
had ascended into heaven) but he that descended from heaven, the Son of man
(by takiing humane nature; for then his only soul entered into heaven, being
always glorious, and therefore he adds) which is in heaven.] But concerning
his Body being then mortal, he said to his Apostles the very night before his
death [I go to prepare Io. 14. v. 2. 3.
you a place. And if I go and prepare you a place; I come again, and will take
you to my self, that where I am, you also may be. I told you not Io. 16. v. 5.
7. 10.
these things from the beginning, because I was with you. And now I go to him
that sent me. I tell you Declares reasons why it was expedient.
the truth, it is expedient for you that I go: for if I go not, the Paraclete
shall not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.] Again, after his
Resurrection, he said to Marie Magdalen [Goe to my Io. 20. v. 17.
brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father; my God,
and your God.] And in the fourtith day, from his Resurrection, when in sundry
Apparitions, conuersing with his Apostles, and others, he had disposed
whatsoever was requisite for the time: lastly, [lifting up his hands, he
blessed the^. Luc. 24. v. 50. 51. Act. 1. v. 9. Mar. 16. v. 19. Ps. 67. v. 34.
Luc. 24. v. 52. Io. 20. v. 29.
And whiles he blessed them, he departed from them, and a cloud received him
out of their sight.] Thus were they made eye witnesses, of our Saviors
admirable Ascension into the clouds: but with eyes of faith, they saw him also
[mounted upon the Heaven of heavens.] And so [adoring, went back into Jerusalem
with great joy.]

4 For albeit his visible presence is taken from the Merit of faith is greater
by Christ's Ascension.
faithful, yet the merit of faith is hereby the greater [beleuing and not
seing] And for so much as humane flesh is in him already ascended into heaven,
Christian hope of others ascending, at the general Hope is also increased.
Resurrection, is so strengthened, as the Apostle doubed not to say: that [God
has made us to s^^te with Ephesians. 2. v. 6. Colos. 3. v. 1. 2.
And Charity more inflamed.
him in the caelestials.] Charity Likewise is hereby inkindled in Christian
hearts [to love, and to seek the things that are above, where Christ is
sitting on the right hand of God: to mind and affect the things that are
above, not the things that are on the earth.] In regard therefore of such
spiritual benefits received by Christ's Ascensio^, the Apostles were
replenished with great joy, and most diligently taught how necessary and
profitable it was for man's eternal advancement; and so ordained of God, that
Christ having paid man's ransom, and being risen from death should not remain
visibly in earth, but that Act. 3. v. 21.
[heauen (says S. Peter) must receive him, until the times of the restitutio^
of al things, which God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets from the
beginning of the world] And that this is for our behoof he confirms in his
Epistle [Iesus Christ (says he) is on 1. Pet. 3. v. 22.
the right hand of God, swallowing death, that we might be made heirs of life
everlasting, being gone into heaven: Angels, and Potentates, and Powers
subjected to him.] S. Paul in likemaner exhorting the Roman Christians, to
confidence of Christ's assistance in persecution, for the faith proves the
assurance Romans 8. v. 33. 34.
of help, and protection [against al accusers, al condemners, al persecuters,
because the same Christ Christ as man is the principal Intercessor for men.
Jesus, is the defender of his elect; that dyed, yea that is risen also again;
who is on the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.]
Instructing also the Ephesians touching Gods goodness, and power, to bring
them into the excellent inheritance of heaven, proposes to them an example of
his mighty power, in the supereminent exa^ting Ephesians. 1. v. 20. 21.
of our Savior Christ [which he wrought, in raising him up from death, and
setting him on the right hand in celestials, above al Principality, and
Potestate, and Power, and Domination, and every name that is named, not only
in this world, but also in that to come.] Which his Exaltation above al
creatures, being most due for his merits, was also convenient for other me^nes
salvation, as the same Apostle teaches the Hebrews, [for it was semely (says
he) that we Heb. 7. v. 26.
should have such a high Priest, holy, innocent, impolluted, separated from
sinners, and made higher then the heavens.]

Christ our Lord will come in Majesty, and judge the world. ARTICLE. 28.
OF Christ our Lord his former coming into As our Savior came first in
humility: so he will come in Majesty.
this world, in all humiltie, to Redeem mankind: we have according to our
imbecilitie, so declared the Christian doctrine, as we trust may suffice and
satisfy the well disposed that require proof, or confirmation thereof, by holy
Scriptures alone. Now we are in like manner to speak of his second coming,
which will be in great Majesty, to judge the world, rendering to every one
according to their w^l or evil deserving, reward, or punishment everlasting.
For although it be also certain by our Catholic faith, that every soul
parting from the body, immediately receives an immutable sentence Eccle. 11.
v. 3. Mat. 10. v. 26.
of eternal salvation, or damnation; yet must there be a general judgment of
al together, agreeable to the former particulars: that al may clearly see, the
justice thereof, the secrets of hearts being then to be reveled: and presently
withal, shall the same sentences be put in execution, as well in the bodies, as in
the souls; which until the day of general Resurrection, are not felt in the
dead bodies, but in the souls only.

2 Of both which divine Tribunals, holy Scriptures The particular Judgment is
proved by many holy Scriptures.
afford abnuda^t proofs, partly by examples of Gods procedinges both
toward the godly, and the wicked; the penitent and impenitent; and most
clearly by express Prophecies and testimonies, that Christ our Redemer, is the
appointed Judge of the whole world, Angels and men. The first example of
mankind Genesis 4. v. 9. 10.
(which most properly pertains to us) was in Abel, the first man that dyed,
whose cause God justifying, after his death, showed his state to be happy Heb.
11. v. 4.
and blessed. And so he is the first in the Catalogue of Saints recited by S.
Paul. And contrariwise, Caine for murdering of him, was cursed upon earth. Gen
4. v. 11. Genesis 5. v. 24.
An other example of particular judgment, is proposed in holy Enoch yet
living in body, who after three hundred sixty five years, was taken by God,
to some place of rest and joy, from the troubles of this world. The cause of
which particular privilege, (besides Gods providence, reserving him for the
Churches service in time of Antichrist) S. Paul signifies saying [for before
his translation, he had testimony Heb. 11. v. 5.
that he had pleased God.] Sometimes also God exercises judgment upon sinners
by death. Genesis 7. v. 22. 29.
As when [he clean destroyed al living substance that was upon the earth, from
man, even to beast, but only Noe, and those that were with him in the Genesis 19.
v. 23. 24. Exo. 14. v. 28. 29.
Arc.] And when [he rained upon Sodom and Gomorha brimstone and fire;
delivering just Lot from that destruction.] So likrwise [Pharao, and his army,
were so overwhelmed in the red sea, that not so much as one of them remained]
but the children of Israel marched through the midst of the dry sea, and the
waters were unto them, as in stead of a wall, on the right hand, and on the
left. Holy Job testifies, Job. 27. v. 21.
the just judgment of the wicked saying [the burning wind shall take him up,
and carry him away, and a whirle wind shall put him violently, out of his
place.] Briefly that God gives particular sentence at the death of enerie one,
is clear in the examples of [poore Lazarus and the rich glutton] of Luc. 16.
v. 22. Mat. 17. v. 12.
S. [Iohn Baptist] the precursor of our Savior and [of Judas the traitor] and
of many others whose salvation or damnation is expressed in the holy
Scriptures.

3 And that nevertheless there shall be a general Act. 1. v. 18. Nu. 16. v. 32.
Heb. 11. *
The general Judgment ^^ often prophesied in the Psalms.
Judgment of al, is likewise testified in many places: and withal that Christ
our Savior is the Judge. So the Royal Prophet, in the second Psalm,
describing Christ's kingdom, concludes with their happiness, that shall be
found his true servants, in that day of wrath saying [When his wrath shall
burn in short Ps. 2. v. 13. Ps. 49. v. 3. 4. 6.
time; blessed are all that trust in him] More clearly in diverse other psalms
[God will come (says he) manifestly, our God, and he will not keep silence. Fire
shall burn forth in his sight; and round about him a mighty tempest. He shall
call the heaven from above, and the earth to discern his people. And the
Heavens shall show forth his justice, because God is judge. Behold he will give
to his voice, the Ps. 67. v. 35.
voice of strength; give you glory to God upon Israel; his magnificence and
his power in the clouds.] Christ him self by the pen of the same Prophet,
says [When I shall take time, I will judge justices. Ps. 74. v. 3. 4.
The earth is melted, and all that dwell in it. I have confirmed the pillars
thereof.] Again the Prophet says to Christ [Thou art terrible, and who shall
resist Ps. 75. v. 8. 9. 10.
thee? From that time thy wrath. From heaven thou have made thy judgment
heard. The earth trembled, and was quiet (silent for fear) when God arose unto
Judgment, that he might save all the meke of the earth.] And because our
Savior practices mercy, especially in this life, and in the day of
Judgment, will do strict justice: the psalmist calls him God of revenge
saying [Our Lord God of reuenges, Ps. 93. v. 1.
the God of reuenges, has done freely (not fearing, nor respecting any
person) will judge freely and justly. As therefore the wicked fear judgment, so
the just (when their conscience is clear) desire it. Whereupon the holy
Prophet prays in just zeal, saying: [Be exalted thou which iudgest v. 2. 3,
the earth; render retribution to the proud. How long shall sinners o Lord; how
long shall sinners glory? Ps. 95. v. 11. 12. 13.
Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice, the sea be moved, and the
fulness thereof. the fields shall be glad, and al things that are in them. then
shall the trees of the woods rejoice before the face of our Lord, because he
comes: because he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the round Ps. 96. v.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
world in equity: and peoples in his truth. Cloud and mist round about him;
justice and judgment the correction of his seat. Fire shall go before him, and
shall inflame his enemies round about. His lightness shined, (that is shall most
assuredly shine) to the round world: the earth saw, and was moved. the
mountains melted as wax, before the face of our Lord: before the face of our
Lord all the earth, the heavens have showed forth his justice, and al peoples
have seen his glory.] So certainly shall al these things come to pass that
the Prophet speaks as if they were past already [The rivers (such as have
wattered Ps. 97. v. 8. 9.
true faith with good works) shall clappe with hand: the mountains (those that
seek heavenly things not earthly) together shall rejoice at the sight of our
Lord, because he comes to judge the earth: He will judge the round earth in
justice, and the peoples in Ps. 128. v. 4.
equity. Our just Lord will cut the necks of sinners] all that to the end
persist in sin.

4 Other Prophets also forewarne us of the same The same great day is
foreshewed by other Prophets.
great day, most terrible to the wicked, and most joyful to the blessed [Behold
(says Isaias) the day of Isa. 13. v. 9.
our Lord shall come cruel and full of indignation, and of wrath, and fury, to
bring the land to a wilderness, and to destroy the sinner thereof, out of it]
which prophecy was verified, in the destruction of Babylon, as in the figure;
but more exactly shall be fulfilled in all the wicked at the day of Judgment, as
is more clear by the words following, fore-shewing the signs that shall come
before the last day [Because v. 10.
(says he) the stars of heaven and their brightness, shall not display their
light; the sun is darkened in his rising, and the moon shall not shine in her
light. And I will visit over the evils of the world (says our 11.
Lord by his Prophet) and against the impious their iniquity: and I will make
the pride of infidels to cease and will humble the arogancie of the strong.] Al
which was fulfilled in Babylon, in small part, in comparison of that which shall
be perfectly performed in the whole world, when Christ shall judge al. In like
manner the same Prophet speaks again, both of the ruin of Babylon, and of
the end of this transitory Is. 30. v. 37. Chapter 34. v. 1. 4. Chapter 66. v. 14.
and sinful world. [Behold (says he) the name of our Lord comes from far,
his burning fury, and heavy to bear: his lips are filled with indignation,
and his tongue is a devouring fire. Come nere ye Gentiles and hear, and ye
peoples attend; let the earth hear, and the fulness thereof; the round world and
every spring thereof. The heavens shall be solided together as a book, and al
their host shall fall away, as the leaf falls from the vine, and from the
fig tree.] In his last Chapter in plainer terms, he says [The hand of our
Lord shall be known to his servants, and he shall be wrath with his enemies. 15.
Because lo our Lord will come in fire, and his Chariots as a whirle wind; to
render his fury in indignation, 16.
and his rebuking in flame of fire. Because our Lord shall judge in fire, and in
his sword to al flesh; and the flame of our Lord shall be multiplied. I come
that I may gather together (their works, and v. 8.
their cogitations) with all Nations, and tongues and they shall come, and shall
see my glory.] Jeremy also prophesied The concordance of Jeremy, and S.
John, Prophesying by word, and by fact, the destruction of the wicked.
Iere. 50. v. 15. 16. etc.
the utter destruction of Babylon, mistically signifying the like miserable
end, yea far greater misery of the city of the devil, which is the
universal congregation of the wicked, opposite to the City of God; concluding
in the very same manner concerning Babylon, as S. John concludes concerning the
universal company of the reprobate, saying to the Leuite Chapter 51. v. 63. 64.
that should read his Prophecy to the people [When thou shall have finished
reading this book (says he) thou shall tie a stone to it, and shall throw it
into the midest of Euphrates: and thou shall say So shall Babylon be drowned,
and she shall not rise up from the face of the affliction, that I will bring upon
her; and she shall be dissolved.] Thus the Prophet. And the like words S. John
writes of an Angel [Fallen, fallen is the great Babylon (so he calls the
Apoc. 14. v. 8.
devils city) which of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, made al
Nations to drink.] The like Apoc. 18. v. 21.
fact also, that ^ a strong Angel, took up as it were a great millstone, and
threw it into the sea saying: with this violence, shall Babylon the great city
be thrown, and shall now be found no more.] The Prophet Joel. 2. v. 30. 31.
Joel foretells certain terrible singes, which God will send before the day
of Judgment saying [I will give wonders in heaven, and in earth; blood, and
fire, and vapor of smoke. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon
into blood, before the great and horrible day of the Lord does come.] Again of
the Judgment it self, and of the place, God almighty says [I will gather
together al Nations, Joel. 3. v. 2.
and will lead them into the valley of Iosaphat, and I will plead with them
there, upon my people, and upon mine inheritance Israel, whom they have
dispersed in the Nations, and have divided my land] by making schisms in his
Church. Habacu^ foreseing the cruel persecution of the faithful by Antichrist
as one that resolves to suffer al afflictions with patience, to gain
everlasting peace in the day of Judgment, says [I heard, and my belly was
troubled; Hab. 3. v. 16.
at the voice, my lips trembled] to which natural infirmities, al men are
subject; but by spiritual fortitude, every one must say with the Prophet as
follows [Let rottennes enter in my bones, and swarm Ibidem.
under me; that I may rest in the day of tribulation, that I may ascend to our
girded people] He calls that last day, the day of tribulation, because none
other is comparable to it; and the elect Saints, he calls the girded
people, because they feight manfully in [this life, which is a warfare upon
earth.] Job. 7. v. 1.
Sophonias prophesying the destruction of Ietusalem, has these words more
perfectly to be fulfilled in the whole troop of the wicked, then they were in
the desolation of that one City [their silver (says Soph. 1. v. 18.
he) and their gold, shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath
of our Lord; in the fire of his jealousy, shall all the earth be devoured,
because he will make consummation with speed to all that inhabit the earth.] In
like sort prophecyeth Zacharias of the destruction of Jerusalem, and jointly,
and that more especially, of the final ruin of all the wicked saying: [Our Lord
my God shall come, and al Zach. 14. v. 5. 6. 7.
the Saints with him. And it shall be in that day, there shall be no light, but
cold and frost. And there shall be one day which is known to our Lord, not day
nor night; and in the time of the evening, there shall be light] signifying,
that after that day, there be no more days and nights, but petpetual night to
the ^amned, and perpetual day to the blessed. Most planly says Malachias
[Behould the day shall Mal. 4. v. 1.
come kinled as a furnace, and all the proud, and all that do impieti^, shall be
stuble, and the day coming shall inflame them, says the Lord of hosts, which
shall not leave them root, and spring.] For during this life During this life
al sinners may repent, but they that dye in mortal sin are eternally
impenitent.
there still remains the root of Gods grace, whereby sinners may repent, if
they will, and bring forth fruicte worthy of penance. but after death the doare
of grace, and consequently of repentance is shut for ever.

5 In the new Testament we are often and more clearly for Our Lord has
foretold that the Judgment will be strict and ter^ible.
warned to expect and be ready for Christ our Redemer his coming to judge: not
only at the death of every one, but also at the end of this world in his
general Heb. 6. v. 2.
Judgment. Our Savior him self presupposing that the Jews knew, or ought to
know, this necessary point of belief, told such as believed not in him at his
first coming, how hard it will be with them, when Mat. 11. v. 22. 24.
he shall come to judge, saying: [to the cities of Corozaim, Bethsaida, and
Capharnaum] that [it shall be more tolerable to Tire and Sidon, and to the land
of Sodom, in the day of Judgment, then for you.] Mat. 12. v. 41. 42.
That also [the men of Niniuie, and the Queen of Saba, shall condemn the
Iewes] that lived in his time. Contrariwise, to those that contemning the
world, Mat. 19. v. 28.
follow him, he said: that [you which have followed me in the regeneration when
the Son of man shall s^tte in the seat of his Majesty; you also shall sit
upon twelve seats, iudgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel. Discoursing also with
the quareling Jews, he avouches his authority of the universal Judge, saying
[the Father has given al judgment to the Io. 5. v. 22. 23. 27.
Son, that al may honor the Son, as they do honor the Father. And he
has given him power to do judgment, because he is the Son of man.] H^
(...) shall come before the day of Judgment.
An other time his Disciples demanding, what signs shall be of his coming to
judge, and of the cousummation of the world, he told them these five. First
that [manie false prophets (orpreachers) shall come, Mat. 24. v. 3. 4.
and shall seduce manie] and procure wars and persecution 1.
against the faithful [but the end is not yet.] Secondly, that notwithstanding
persecution [his Gospel 6. 14.
2.
shall be preached in the whole world, for a testimony to al Nations: and then
shall come the consummation] yet not immediately, but shortly after. Thirdly 3.
(not long before the end of the world) there shall be great decay of faith and
Religion, and public practice of abominable heresies, which our Savior
calls [ Abomination of desolation.] S. Paul calls it 15. 2. These. 2. v. 3.
Mat. 24. v. 21. 22. Apoc. 13. v. 5. Mat. 24. v. 29.
[ Apostac^e, or Reuolt] to be made by Antichrist, and extreme persecution,
greater then ever before or after.] Fourthly [for the elect, the days of this
greatest 4.
persecution shall be shortned] Antichrist being suddenly destroyed, when he shall
have reigned forty two months, that is, three years and a half. Fifthly
that [after the tribulation of those days, the 5.
Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall not give her light; the Stars shall ^al
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be moved.] Besides these, S. Two
other signs. 6.
John has prophesied a Sixth sign, that [two witnesses Apoc. 11. v. 3.
(which by conference of other holy Scriptures, are proved to be Enoch and
Elias) shall come in the time of Antichrist; and shall prophecy, a thousand, two
hundred, sixty days (which is almost three years, and a half) clothed with
sackcloth; 7. 11. 12.
shall be slain by the beast] Antichrist [and afrer three days and a half,
they shall rise from death, and ascend into heaven.] Many holy Scriptures
testify Deuteronomy. 4. v. 30. Is. 50. v. 20. Ezech. 16. v. 15.
7.
also, an other sign to come near to the end of the world; that the whole
Nation of [the Jews, shall be converted to Christ. ^ Shortly after these
signs, shall come the last day, very suddenly, when men do not think of it.

6 Our Savior also describes in general, the form The form of the general
Judgment.
Am. 4. v. 12. Mich. 4. v. 6. Mal. 4. v. 6. Romans 11. v. 26. Mat. 42. v. 30. 31.
Mat. 25. v. 33. 34. 35.
of the Judgment. that [the sign of the Son of Man (doubtless the Glorious
Cross) shall appear in the clouds before him, coming in much power, and
Maiestie] the Angels instantly bringing al men in their revived bodies, and
setting the blessed on his right hand, and the wicked on his left hand; he will
say to al on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, possess you the
kingdom prepared for you from the fundation of the world] reciting the reason
of his sentence to be the performing of the works of mercy and to them at the
left hand, he will say, [get ye away from me ye cursed into fire everlasting, 41.
which was prepared for the devil and his Angels] 46.
because ye have not done works of mercy [and these shall go into punishment
everlasting; and the just, into life everlasting.] Again our Lord in the last
night of his Passiion, said to Caiphas and other persecuters Mat. 26. v. 64.
[Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man, sitting on the right hand of the
power of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven.]

7 Immediately as our Lord was ascended into heaven; Al are admonished to be
ready when our Lord shall came to Judge.
two Angels appearing in white garments, testified to the beholders, that [he
shall so come, as Act. 1. v. 11. Act. 17. v. 30. 31. 2. Tim. 4. v. 1. Romans 14.
v. 8. 9.
they have seen him going into heaven.] S. Paul preaching to the Athenians,
declared, that [God denou^ceth unto men, that al every where, ought to do
penance; for that he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in
equity, by a man whom he has appointed] plainly teaching, that our Savior
Christ as man, is constituted Judge of al; quick, and dead; good, and evil.
[For whether we live (says S. Paul) we live to our Lord; or whether we dye, we
dye to our Lord: therefore whether we live or dye, we are our Lords. For to
this end, Christ died 10. 12.
and rose again, that he may have dominion, both of the dead, and of the
living. For we shall al stand 1. These. 4. v. 16. 1. These. 5. v. 2. 3. 2. These.
1. v. 10.
before the Judgment seat of Christ.] Therefore every one of us, for him self,
shall render account to God. For our Lord himself, in commandment, and in the
voice of an Archangel. and in the Trumpet of God, will descend from heaven. The
day of our Lord shall come, as a thief in the night. For when they shall say,
peace and security, then shall sudaine destruction come upon them, as the
pains to her that is with child, and they shall not escape: when he shall come
to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that have
believed.] There wi^ come Heretics that will deny the Resurrection and
Judgment.


8 S. Peter also foreseing in spirit of prophecy, that certain heritikes, in
the latter days will deny the Resurrection, and general indgeme^t; warns al
to be mindful, what the Prophets, Christ himself, and his Apostles 2. Pet. 3.
v. 2. 3.
have taught [knowing this first (says he) that in the last days shall come
mockers in deceit, walking according to their own concupiscenses saying:
Where is his promise, or his coming? For since the time that the Fathers slept,
al things do so persevere from the beginning of creature] To which vain
Argument the Apostle answeareth, charging them with wilful ignorance: showing
that [as the world was v. 6. 7. 8.
once ouerflowed with water; so it shall be destroyed by fyre] at the day of
Judgment [that with our Lord a thousand years, are as one day. our Lord
slacketh not his promise, as some do esteem it, but 9.
does patiently, not willing that any perish, but that al return to penance.
And the day of our Lord shall 10.
come as a thief, in the which, the heavens shall pass with great violence:
but the Elements shall be resolved with heat; and the earth, and the works
which are in it, shall be burned.] Likewise S, John exhorts to abide in the
doctrine, which is already delivered, and received; and not to harken to new
masters [Now little children (says he) 1. Io. 3. v. 28.
abide in Christ, that when he shall appear, you may have confidence and not be
confounded of him in his coming.] Devils shall also be judged.


9 S. Jude teaches also expressly, that Angels are Mat. 8. v. 29. 1. Cor. 6. v.
3. Iud. v. 6.
subject to this general Judgment; and that such as did revolt from God, shall
then have a further sentence besides that is given already saying [The Angels
which kept not their principality, but forsook their own habitation, he has
reserved under darkness in eternal bonds, unto the Judgment of the great day.]

10 That day shall our B. Saviors exaltation, be Christ's exaltation shall be
complete all the day of Judgment.
fully complete. Then will he also make complete, the glory of al his Saints,
making them a kingdom everlasting. [Behold he comes (says S. John) Apoc. 1.
v. 7.
with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they that pricked him
(crucifying him) and all the tribes of the earth (that are his enemies) shall
bewail them selves Apoc. 6. v. 15. 17.
upon him. The kings of the earth, and Princes, and Tribunes, and the rich,
and the strong, hid them selves (in vain so endeavoring) because the great
day of their wrath is come. And so shall it be proclaimed by Angelical [Trumpet,
and loud voices, Apoc. 11. v. 15.
that (not only the Empereal heaven but also) the kingdom (of this world) is
made our Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever, and ever.

Amen.

God the Holy Ghost (with the Father and the Son) inspireth and sanctifies
the Church, and al true members thereof. ARTICLE. 29.
SO much more necessary it is to declare this Article, The signification of
the word Holy Ghost.
of our belief in the Holy Ghost: because many having in some competent
sort, ^arned the former Mysteries, concerning the creation of the world, and
Redemption of man; yet have so small knowledge of this, which more particularly
perteyneth to sanctification; that if they be demanded, as certain Ephesians
were, by S. Paul [whether they have received Act. 19. v. 2.
the Holy Ghost] perhaps they will answer as those did [Nay; neither have we
heard, whether there be a Holy Ghost] whereas al Christians, are bound to know,
that the Holy Ghost, is the third Person of the B. Trinity. From whom, equal
with the Father and the Son, the Church, and the members rherof, receive al
godly inspirations sanctifications, and other spiritual gifts. For albeit the
name Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit, generally taken, may signify glorious
Angels, or blessed souls, for they are holy spirits: yet being expressed
without limitation of Angel or man, when it is absolutely said, [the Holy
Ghost] or [the Holy Spirit] it properly Joan. 4. v. 24.
and only signifies the most eminent holy Spirit, God the Creator of al other
spirits. And so it is common to al three persons of the B. Trinity. But for
distinction of the same divine Persons, this It is appropriated to the third
Person of the B. Trinity.
name Holy Ghost, in a strict sense, is appropriated to the third Person only;
which proceeding from the Father, and from the Son; is personally and really
distinct from them both, being al in nature one God, in persons three, al
equal, coeternal, and consubstantial, as is before declared in the Article of
the B. Trinity. Wherefore having considered the former Art 7. parag. 8.
works of God, which (as likewise al others done in his creatures) being
common to the whole B. Trinity, are by use of holy Scriptures, appropriated
to the Father, and to the Son: now we are in like manner (by his grace of whom
we speak) to show other divine works appropriated to the Holy Ghost. How
through his gracious inspirations, Gods servants have ever been, and shall be
illuminated in knowledge of truth, and sanctified with holiness of life.

2 Of innumerable examples, a few may suffice, as well Al knowledge natural and
supernatural, is Gods gift.
concerning knowledge of natural things, as of supernatural. Adam not only in
the state of innoce^, cie, knew the natures of beasts [geuing them names
agreeable therto] and that the first [woman was taken Genesis 2. v. 20. 23. Genesis 3.
v. 20.
out of man] but also after his fall by new inspiration he [called the same
woman Eua] mistically signifying, that a woman (the B. Virgin Mother of God)
should be the Mother of all the living. For she is the singular woman [that has
bruised the serpents head] not Eve, who was the mother of all that dye, and a
special occasion of death. [Enos (by like instinct Genesis 4. v. 26.
of the Holy Ghost) inuocated the name of our Lord.] Abraham knew that the
Egiptians would take his wife, and by what means, both his own life, Genesis 12.
v. 12. 13. Genesis 24. v. 14. 18. Genesis 27. v. 8. Chapter 39. v. 8. Chapter 4. v. 8. Chapter
41. v. 16. Chapter 49. Exo. 15. Deuteronomy. 32.
and her chastity, should be preserved. His servant Eliezer foresaw what the
maid would answer that should be wife to Isaac. Rebecca the same woman,
directed her son Jacob how to obtain his Fathers blessing, and inheritance.
Joseph had significant dreams; and interpreted the dreams of the two
Eunuchs, and of Pharao. Jacob prophesied of al his sons. Job was learned and
holy. Moses writ the History of things past, above two thousand years
before he was borne. It shall not need to speak of his singular knowledge of
greatest Mysteries, compr^sing many in two Canticles. Al these and many more
received both knowledge and sanctity of the Holy Ghost, not by natural wit,
nor by only humane industry. But as the Royal Psalmist sings [The voice of
our Lord] God the Son, being the word of God the Father [the voice of our
Lord] Ps. 28. v. 3. 4. 5.
proceeding from them both, which is the Holy Ghost [vpon waters] the God of
Majesty has thundered; our Lord upon many waters: the voice of our Lord v. 7.
8.
in power, in magnificence, breaking Ceders; the voice of our Lord dividing
flame of fire, shaking the desert preparing hearts (swift dear) In his Temple 9.
al shall say glory.] Again the same Psalmist acknowleging that he received
the spirit of Prophecy by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, says [My heart
has uttered a good word: my tongue is Ps. 44. v. 2.
the pen of a Scribe that writes swiftly.]

3 Concerning also sanctification, the sam^ Prophet Justification and
sanctification, are greater gifts of God: and are appropriated to the Holy
Ghost.
describes the Church, being euriched with the gifts of the Holy Ghost; to
be as [a fat mountain. Ps. 67. v. 16. 17.
a mountain crudded as cheese] united in her godly members [wherin it has
pleased God to dwell even to the end.] For which marvelous works of the Holy
Ghost, making men new in spirit, al are invited to [sing to our Lord a new
song; because Ps. 97. v. 1. etc. Sap. 1. v. 7.
he has done marvelous things.] Conformablie hereto says the wise man [The
Spirit of our Lord has replenished the whole world: and that which conteyneth
al things, haith the knowledge of voice.] Of the voice of the Holy Ghost,
speaking of the Church, the Prophets make frequent mention. [Manie peoples
(says Isaias) shall go and shall say, Is. 6. v. 8.
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of our Lord and to the house of the
God of Jacob: and he will teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths. I
heard the voice of our Lord (the Holy Ghost says Act. 28. v. 25. Is. 34. v.
16.
S. Paul) saying, whom shall I send; and who shall go for us? Search ye
diligently in the book of our Lord, and read: because that which proceeds out
of my mouth, he has commanded, and his Spirit; the same has gathered them.
Come ye to me and hear this: I have not spoken in secret from the beginning,
Is. 48. v. 16. 17.
from the time before it was done. I was there, and now the Lord God has sent
me. and his Spirit. I the Lord thy God, that teach thee profitable things,
that govern thee in the way that thou walk.] It would be endless to recite
all that perteine to this purpose in the Prophets: and is nedeles in so certain
a doctrine. Let the words of Joel serve for the rest speaking of the coming of
the Holy Ghost to the Apostles: [It shall be after this, I will pour Joel. 2.
v. 28. 29.
out my Spirit upon al flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy. your Ancients shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions: yea and upon my servants, and handmaides, I will pour out my Spirit.]
The same did Amos Prophecy in Amos. 2. v. 11.
fewer words, the Holy Ghost saying by him [I raised up of your sons to be
Prophets, and of your young men Nazarites. Is it not so, o children of Israel
says our Lord. Signifying, that as in the old Testament there were Prophets
that taught the truth, and Nazarites that professed a special state of life,
absteyning from wine, and al delicious drinks: so Joan. 14. v. 26. Mat. 19. v.
12. 21.
in the New Testament, there should be both true Pastors to teach al truth, and
votarie religious persons, which embrace, and observe Euangelical counsels, by
inspiration and operation of the Holy Ghost. Sanctifying grace is more
abundant in the new Testament.


4 For this is that mighty power and virtue, which Luc. 24. v. 49.
Christ our Savior said his Father had promised to send: for which [he
commanded his Disciples, to tarry and expect in Jerusalem, til they should be
endued therwith] which strength being given them, they were not the^ afraid
*to go as sheep and la^bes in the midst Mat. 10. v. 16. 20. Mar. 13. v. 11.
Luc. 21. v. 15.
of wolves. without solicitude how to answer persecutors, always confident in
that our Savior has taught, that it is not the weak and frail man, that
speaks but the Holy Ghost [the Spirit of the heavenly Father that speaks
in the^] This is that [power of the most high, which came upon the B. Virgin,
Luc. 1. v. 35.
ouershadowed her] and wrought the most B. Incarnation of the Son of God.
This is the power of al powers, that works in nature, about the course and
power of al creatures. In this power [our Mat. 12. v. 28. Luc. 11. v. 20. Act.
2. v. 1. 4.
Savior him self as man, cast devils out of men.] With this Holy Spirit, all the faithful which were together in Jerusalem were replenished] both with
confirmation, and augmentation of sanctity; and also with miraculous power [to
speak with diverse tongues, according as the same Holy Ghost, gave them to
speak.] S. Paul likewise (being converted) received the same effects of
graces, both sanctfying, and enabling him to work miracles. Whereupon he says
[Our Gospel has been to you, not only in word, 1. These. 1. v. 5.
but in power also, and the Holy Ghost] though justifying grace, and
sanctity, be the principal, and most necessary gift, and therefore the same
Apostle Two kinde^ of grace th^ne called only gratia gratis data: th^ther also
gratum faciens.
says [God has not called us into uncleanness, but 1. These. 4. v. 7.
into sanctification] because sin may consist, with other power of
authority, prophesying, working miracles, and the like; but not with
sanctification. Therefore (says he) he that despises th^se things, despises
not man but God: who also haith given his Holy Spirit in us.

5 And because Gods goodness often offers his Man's cooperation is required
with Gods grace.
grace to every one, the Apostle admonishes al, to accept and cooperate
therewith, without resistance [the Spirit (says he) extinguish not: Prophecies
1. These. 5. v. 19. 20. 1. Cor. 12. v. 4. 5. 6. 11.
despise not. there are divisions (or varieties) of graces, but one Spirit.
there are divisions of ministrations: but one Lord. there are divisions of
operations, but one God, which works al in all. And al these things works
one and the same Spirit, dividing to every one according as he will. that which
every one has received, in that must he labor.] So must the whole body of
the Church and every member [Kepe the good depositum by the 2. Tim. 1. v. 14.
Holy Ghost, which dwells in us.] S. Peter speaking of the assured truth
which is in the whole Church grounded his assertion in this, that God by
inspiration has revealed the same truth to some special servants of his, to
instruct the rest, saying: [the holy men 2. Pet. 1. v. 21.
of God spoke inspired with the Holy Ghost.] And S. John speaking of eu^rie
particular faithful soul, grounded in true faith which he has not of him
self, 1. Io. 5. v. 6.
but by the gift of the Holy Ghost says [It is the Spirit, which testifies
that Christ is the truth.]

The universal Church consists of holy Angels, and other glorious Saints,
with the faithful in earth: of al which Christ as Man, is the Head. ARTICLE. 30.
OF all the works, and creatures of God, his Church is most principal;
co^prehending two parts. the one triumpha^t in heaven, consisting of glorious
Angels, and other Saints, which have vanquished the world, the flesh, and the
devil. the other part being yet in warfare against the same enemies, is
therefore called Militant. Of both these Christ is Head of the universal Church:
and of al men living in this world, but not of the damned.
parts; and also of other men, so long as they live in this world, Christ as
Man is the immediate Head under God. For better explication whereof we may
observe five distinct sorts of members, diversely united to Christ our head,
and in him, each to others. The first and most excellent sort, are those who
are united to our B. Savior in eternal glory. The second, which being yet
mortal, are united to him by the perfect* virtue of Charity, and justifying
grace. The third, which are united by true faith, but without good works. The
fourth, which are in possibility Io. 10. 16.
and shall be united: but are not for the present actually. The fifth, which are
also in possibility to be united, so long as they are in this transitory
life: but will never be actually united. For Christ our Lord is also their head
and Savior, having redeemed them meritoriously, though not effectually, as S.
Paul distinctly teaches saying [Our Lord is 1. Tim. 4. v. 10. 1. Io. 2. v. 2.
the Savior of al men, especiially of the faithful.] And S. John says:
[Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the whole worlds.] But after the death of the reprobate, Yet is Judge both of
the blessed, and damned.
Christ is their Judge, having redeemed them among the rest of al mankind, but
is not their head any longer, because they are utterly cut of, and are out of
al possibility to be united. Yet for so much, as the two last sorts are not
actually united to Christ nor actual members of his mistical body the Church;
we are not to speak more of them in this present Article. Only we are to show,
that the triumphant part (containing all the glorious Saints) and the
militant, contening both the just (as well in Purgatory, as in earth) and other
faithful though not just; do make one universal body with Christ our Lord
head thereof.

2 Which may be declared by many holy Scriptures; That Christ is Head of the
whole Church, triumphant and militant, is proved by holy Scriptures.
namely by the vision of the Patriarch Jacob, who [saw in his sleep, a ladder
standing upon the earth, Genesis 28. v. 12. 13.
and the top thereof touching heaven; the Angels also of God, ascending and
descending by it, and our Lord leyning upon the ladder. And when he was awaked
out of sleep, he said: Indeed our Lord is in this place and I knew not. And
trembling he said: how terrible is this place* this is none other but the house
of God, and the gate of heauen] whereby is evident, that the militant part of
Gods Church on earth, and the triumphant in heaven, is one house, containing
mortal and immortal persons, our Lord as head and Master of both, reigning in
both, as appears by his leyning on the ladder, which touched both heaven and
earth. Al which the wise man (resiting this vision) calls the King dome of
God saying: that [wisdome conducted just Jacob, fleeing Sap. 10. v. 10. Nu. 1.
v. 2. ad 46. Chapter 3. v. 14. Chapter 26. v. 51. Chapter 33. v. 1. etc. 1. Esd. 2. v. 1.
ad 66.
his brothers (Esa^s) wrath, by the right ways; and showed him the Kingdom of
God.] Also the special numbering of Gods people, as well in the desert,
expecting to possess the promised land of Chanaan, as returning from the
captivity of Babylon, unto the same land eftso^nes promised, and after
seauentie years restored, does represente the two estates of one and the same
Church, first militant, and finally, triumphant, in the mean time some blessed
members resting in possession of eternal glory; others laboring in hope to
enjoy the same heavenly kingdom.

3 Many like figures do resemble this one Mystical Confirmed by other figures
and prophecies.
body, the city of God; which is very largely described in a vision to
Ezechiel the Prophet, and written Ezech. 40. 41. etc.
by him in his nine last chapters alluding to the restoration of Jerusalem,
after the captivity of Babilo^. but so describing a Temple to be reedifyed, as
far eccelleth, not only that which was built by Zorobabel upon the old
ruins, but also Salomons first Temple, and that also which was enlarged,
adorned, and enriched, by Herod Ascalo^tes; but must therefore needs be
understood of the whole Church of God, partly in the old Testament, more
amply in the new, but most fully and complete, in the state of glory. And
therefore the whole description severally perteyning to diverse parts, shows
that al is one perfect body. For where the Prophet says: that [the Chapter 40. v.
1.
Spirit of God brought him into the land of Israel] he signifies that he being
then personally present in Chaldea nere to Babylon, his vision imported what
should be done in the land of Israel. Where he adds [and left me upon a
mountaine] he understands v. 2.
Mount Syon whereon the Temple stood, but saying [exceding high] has an higher
sense then ca^ be verified of Mount Sion, not being so extraordinary in
height. Where the [ascent to the gates of v. 22. 26. 31. 32. 34. 49.
the utter wall, had seven steps, and the ascent to the gates of the inner
wall had eight] it well signifies the greater perfecttion required in the New
Testament, then in the old. And the inner court into The old Testament
prefigured the new: and the new resembles the state of glory.
which those gates gave entrance, represented the court of heaven. Likewise in
the whole description, and in the conclusion knitting up al, and saying: [these
are the names of the Tribes. these shall be the first fruictes of the
Sanctuary, of the Preistes. these Chapter 48. v. 1. 10. 16. 29.
are the measures of the city. this is the land which you shall divide by
lotte, to the Tribes of Israel.] It is evident that the old Testament had these
things as figures of the new; and the Mysteries in the new Testament are
representations of greater things in heaven. As namely Christ him self the
Head of this universal Church, was in the old Testament only in figure,
prefigured by diverse persons, Sacrifices, Sacraments, and other things. In
the new Testament he came really in body, but mortal in infirmities, his
glory hidden, still remains in the B. Sacrament, but invisible. In heaven he
the self same is in glory, and most visible: filling al with his Majesty. As
yet until the end of this world there shall be many viatores way faring holy
persons, servants of God in this time of warfare. In the end al members of the
Church shall be comprehensores participating glory: which [now do see as in a
glass, and shall then see face 1. Cor. 13. v. 12.
to face] then shall there not be these two names of militant and triumphant
Church, for all shall be triumphant: not two names of one City as now there are,
but one. For [the name of the City (says this holy Chapter 48. v. 35.
Prophet) from that day: Dominus ibi, our Lord there.] Signifying that to be
the perfect complet City of God, where our Lord is visible, and glorious
lightning al.

4 Which S. John in a like vision, declares saying: The criumphant and the
militant Church is one entire body under one head: Christ.
[Night shall be no more, and they shall not need the light of lamp, nor the
light of the sun: because Apoc. 22. v. 5.
our Lord God does illuminate them: and they shall reign for ever and ever.]
Generally al those places of holy Scripture which show that our Savior
Christ, is Head of all the Church militant and triumphant; do prove withal that
both these estates of the Church are but one body [one flock, as having Joan.
10. v. 16. Apoc. 17. v. 14.
one head, one Pastor] the lamb that shall overcome al sirce enemies that fight
against him: because [he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kinges] and they
(shall also overcome al enemies) that are with him called elect, and faithful.]
For which victory [God Chapter 19. v. 16. Ephesians. 1. v. 23.
has also set the same Jesus Christ] our Savior [aboue al Power, and
Domination, both in this world and in heaven: and has made him Head (not over
part, but) over all the Church which is his body, (not bodies) the fulness of
him which is filled al, in in al] being made the full and perfect head by his
dominion over the whole body.

The militant Church conteyneth two general menbers: the Clergy, and Laity;
under one visible head. ARTICLE. 31.
BY how much an Army is more or less furnished The universal Church is the
most complete, and most excellent Army.
with necessary men, money, and munition; better or worse set in batle ary;
so is it in it self stronger or weaker, more or less pleasant to behold; and
to the enemy more or less terrible. The whole Church of God is an Army most
complete, most puisant, most glorious, and most terrible to the contrary
confused conuenticles of the devil. Of this whole perfect Army, we have
begun to sheake in the precedent Article; showing that during the course of
this world, it conteyneth two patres Triumphant and Milita^t, yet is al one
body, and has one head. To the more principal part which is the celestial
Ierarchie, and heavenly Army; Solomon, or rather Christ him self by the name
of Solomon, says [Thou art al fair o my love, and there The trinmpha^t Church
is al fair without spotte.
is not a spot in thee.] In the end also the same shall Cant. 4. v. 7. Ephesians. 5.
v. 27.
be said of the whole body, when [Christ shall present to him self (as S. Paul
teaches) a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing,
but shall be holy and unspotted.] Now that this glorious Army is most
beautiful, most strong, and most terrible to al damned reprobates, may be more
conveniently avouched, then with needles proofs further demonstrated.

2 But that the other part also is the most holy, The militant Church is
fair, but not al fair, yet the fairest of al Congregations in earth.
most fair, most strong, and every way the most excellent Army, that can be
in earth; and absolutely invincible, we shall in several chapters following
declare, by holy Scriptures. And first ingeneral, as Christ has said to his
Triumphant spouse [thou art Cant. 4. v. 7. Cant. 6. v. 3.
al fair o my love, and there is not a spot in thee] so he said to the part as
yet militant: [thou art fair o my love, sweet and comlie, as Jerusalem,
terrible as the army of a camp set in array.] For albeit this militant Church
be not al fair, and unspotted, as the triumphant is: yet it is truly called [
fayre] by remission of sins [ the beloued] of Christ our Redemer: [ sweete]
by infused virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity, Religion, with all moral virtues, and
gifts; [ comely] composed of requisite well joined members, persons of al
sorts and degrees, adorned with v arieties of spiritual furniture: [ as
Ierusalem] strongly united and walled [ terrible] to al enemies [ as the army
of a camp set in aray] fensed within and without, with internal virtues, and
external behavior, [armed with two swords [spiritual and temporal; [brother
Lue. 22. v. 38. Prou. 18. v. 19.
helped of brother] a most strong citie] two camps in The Clergy and Laity
as two arms, and two shoulders of one dodie, under one head.
one; the Clergy and Laity, as two arms, and two shoulders, but one body
under one head.

3 Which distinction, of spiritual and temporal states, with their distinct
functions, and powers, is so necessary for uniform government in all cities,
kingdoms, and common welthes, (by reason that Proved by the law of nature, and
of al nations.
men consist of souls and bodies) that also heathen Infidels by instinct of
nature, and law of al nations, have these offices of Preistes, and civil
Magistrates. So holy Scriptures report, that in Egypt were preistes [Putiphar
the priest of Heliopolis] of such estimation, Genesis 41. v. 45.
that his daughter was thought a meet wife for Joseph, being made governor of
the land, next under the king. There also [the Preistes were not only Genesis 47.
v. 21. 22.
endued with lands, but also had a lowance in the time of famine and scarcity
of corn, out of the common barnes, and were not driven to sell their
possessions, as the people did; so that in the whole land of Egypt the fifth
part of al fruictes was paid to the king, 26.
saving the land of the Preistes, which was free from this condition.] And by
this means the preistes not needing to travel corporally for their living, had
leisure to study, and became great Mathematicians; and many of them with all,
were Magicians: as they were also Idolaters, serving false gods. In like manner
al countries Exo. 2: v. 16.
had preistes conformable to their Gods, and Where is no Priest, or no
Sacrifice, is no Religion.
pretensed religions. For where is no priest, no sacrifice: there is no
religion, no God.

4 But especially among the faithful from the beginning Exo. 3. v. 1.
were always true Preistes. The first borne In Gods Church before the
written law, the first borne of al families were Preistes.
and head of every family was a Priest; until God changed that course,
giving a written law to his peculiar people, the children of Israel, by the
hand of Moses: as appears by the same law where God commanded Moses saying:
[Take the sum of the Nu. 1. v. 2.
whole assembly of the children of Israel by their kindreds, and houses, and
the names of every one whatsoever, of the male sexe] yet with exception saying
[Number not the tribe of Leui; neither shall Thenceforth only the tripe of
Leui were clergy men. And in that tribe, only the family of Aaron was
capable of preisthood.
thou put the sum of the^ with the children of Israel: v. 49. 50.
but appointe them over the tabernacle of testimony, and all the vessel thereof;
and whatsoever pertoyneth to the ceremonies. they shall carry the tabernacle, 51.
and all the furniture thereof: and they shall be in the ministry, and shall
pitch round about the tabernacle. When you are to go forward, the Leuittes
shall take down the tabernacle: when you are to camp, they shall set it up:
what stranger soever 2. Reg. 6. v 6. 7. Nu. 1. v. 52. 53.
(of any other tribe) comes to it he shall be slain. And the children of
Israel (the other tweule tribes) shall camp every man by his troops, and
band, and host. Moreover the Levites shall pitch their tents round about the
tabernacle, lest there come indignation upon the multitudes of the children of
Israel, and they shall watch in the custodies of the tabernacle of testimony.]
Thus the offices of the Levites were designed ingeneral. And after the setting
Nu. 2. v. 4. 10. 17. 18. 25.
of them and all the rest of this camp in array, the Levites ever in the midest
of the whole army, and subordinated to Aaron; God particularly signifies the
disanulling of Preistes, and clergy men in all other tribes, which hitherto
were the first borne, saying expressly Nu. 3. v. 9. 1^. 41. 45.
[I have taken the Levites from the children of Israel, for every first borne;
and the Levites shall be mine. More particularly concerning preistes the Nu. 8.
v. 16. 18. Exo. 28. v. 1.
highest order of all the Levites, our Lord said to Moses [Take unto thee Aaron
thy brother with his sons, from among the children of Israel, that they may
do the function of Preisthoode unto me.] Again to signify that not only
vocation, but also ordination, and diverse consecrations, for diverse orders,
were to be made [our Lord commanded Moses Leuit. 8. v. 2. etc.
to take Aaron and his four sons, and by prescripte different manners of
anointing, and with diversity of Ceremonies, to consecrate Aaron High Priest,
and his sons Preistes. The other Leueites were also ordained Nu. 8. v. 6. 7.
etc.
by a prescript form, and ceremonial rite, and then employed to their several
offices in the tabernacle of couenante.

5 Al other tribes were the Laity, or people of All the other tribes were
subject to the Clergy in spiritual causes.
15.
the self same faith and religion, with the Preistes and other Levites, but
remaining in their temporal state, were also disposed in the camp of Gods
Church, some in authority, others in subjection, many in both, in respect
that they were subordinate superiors to some, and subjects to others. And for
most part one was supreme of temporal persons, and causes, but in spiritual
causes these were al subject to spiritual superiors. So was Iosue by Gods
ordinance made successor to Moses, not in all his authority, (for Moses had
both spiritual and temporal) but as the sacred text declares [in part of his
glorie] which was in Nu. 27. v. 18. 19. 20.
temporal government: for Eleazer was high priest, and to him was Iosue
directly subject in all spiritual causes: and in some sort in temporal affairs.
For And in temporal causes also when thereon depended spiritual good.
[when any thing was to be done, Eleazar the priest v. 21.
shall consult the Lord (says our Lord him self) At his word shall he go out,
and go in (that is undertake or not undertake any common important
enterprise) all the children of Israel with him, and the rest of the multitude.]
So were both Judges, and Kings, being successors to Iosue, not only subject in
spiritual causes to the High Preistes, but also were to consult God by them,
and to take direction of them in temporal doubts, and difficulties. So king
[Dauid 1. Reg. 23. v. 9. 10. 11. Exo. 28. v. 30. Leuit. 8. v. 8. 2. Par. 19. v.
11. Mat. 18. v. 17. Mat. 22. v. 21.
willed Abiather the Priest to apply the Ephod] for that was the manner of
consulting God (and according to Gods answer received) by that means [Dauid
parted from the city of Ceila] where otherwise Saul would have supprised him.
So Amarias the high Priest ruled in those things, which perteyned to God (in
spiritual things) and Zabadias a prince of the house of Judah, was over those
works which perteyned to the kings office. So our Savior him self Our
Savior commanded to repair to the Church for correction of obstinate
offenders.
distinguished Clergy and Laity, bidding us repare to the Church for the
correction of such as are obstinate in error: And to render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's: and the things that are Gods to God.

6 And being to establish a new Law, he planted a new Clergy; neither of the
only first borne as in the law of nature; nor of one tribe or kindred only as
in Christ in the law of grace ordained a new Cleargi^e, by vocation and
ordination.
the law of Moses; but of al tribes, and al nations, whether first or later
borne, by due vocation and ordination, to be consecrated preistes, according to
the order of Melchisedech; with other inferior Clergy men of greater and
less distinct orders: with spiritual power both of oder and Jurisdiction. So
our B. Savior, our eternal high Priest, ordained first his Apostles, and after
them other seventy two disciples. Mat. 10. v. 1. 2. Luc. 10. v. 1. 2. Act. 6.
v. 6. Act. 13. v. 3.
So his Apostles ordained Deacons, also more Bishopes, and Preistes. So S. Paul
affirmed of him self saying: [I am appointed a preacher, and an Apostle: doctor
of the Gentiles] He ordained S. Timothee, S. Titus and others. And al by right
vocation, and ordination, every high priest (and the 1. Tim. 2. v. 3. Chapter 3.
v. 2. Heb. 5. v. 1. 4.
same rule is of all the Clergy) being taken from among men (taken from the
people or Laity) is appointed for men in those things that perteine to God.
Neither does any man take the honor (of such function) to him lelf, but he
that is called of God as Aaron.] Secular power and subordinatio^ of Princes,
and other Magistrates, is by divine ordinance.


7 Secular power likewise is of Gods ordinance [For there is no power but of
God.] And therefore Romans 13. v. 1.
whatsoever commandment, or coaction is not of God, is not of his ordinance,
but by his permission only. So that by Gods ordinance al subjects are bound to
obey al superiors spiritual and temporal in things good or not evil [Let
every soul be subject (says Ibid.
S. paul) to higher powers] wills his disciple Titus [to admonish the people
to be subject to Princes Tit. 3. v. ^. Heb. 13. v. 17.
and Potestates; to obey at a word, and to be ready to every good work.] To
the Hebrews he writeh also thus: [obey your Prelates, and be subject to them:
for they watch as being to render account for your souls.] S. Peter as often
in his actions, 1. Pet. 2. v. 13. 14.
so also in his writing by his spiritual authority, admonishes al to obey
temporal authority, saying: [Be subject to every humane creature for God:
whether it be to king as excelling; or to rulers as sent by him, to the revenge
of malefactors, but to the praise of the good.] By all which we see the
admirable beauty, strength, and excellency of Gods Church, above al other
companies, or common welthes, best set in array; [for there is no other
nation, no other Deuteronomy. 4. v. 7. 8.
people so renowned that has these ordinances (these spiritual and temporal
judgments, ceremonies, holy rites, and orders) as God has set in his
people his spouse the Church.]

As well the Clergy as Laity contain particular bodies (communities and
corporations) with several heads: al subordinate in one whole body, to one
supreme visible head. ARTICLE. 32.
IT does not a little both beautify and strengthen the militant Church, that
there be in it diverse particular bodies to wit: the Pastoral Clergy
distinguished into Archbishopriques, Bishopriques, diverse Religious orders; and
other spiritual communities: also distinct temporal Kingdoms, Dominions, free
Cities, and other Christian Commonwealthes, with innumerable Corporations; al
spiritually united in one mistical body. For as variety does Variety of
members well united, does both beautify and strengthen the body.
much adorn: so does union fortify the whole community. Whereas otherwise if
any either particular [house, or universal kingdom, be divided in it self,
Mat. 12. v. 25. Mar. 3. v. 24. 25. Luc. 11. v. 17.
it must needs come to ruin and desolation.] But by how many more members and
parts it has well combined every part assisting and defending others: so much
the more firm^ly the whole is conserved. We shall therefore first declare that
the Church of God, ever had, and perpetually is to have, great diversity of
states, professions, and functions: and then show, that by the same divine
providence, they are al perfectly united. Concerning the former point even from
the beginning of the world, as men increased and multiplied, they professed
diverse trades of life, and excercised sundry offices. First Adam (as common
tradition tells us) did dig, and Eve did spinne, Genesis 3. v. 17. Genesis 4. v.
2. 20.
certain it is, that they did travel in labors. Abel was a shepherd, and
Cain a husbandman. Iabel was the father of them that dwelt in tents, and
heardesmen Iubal father of them that sang on harp and 21. 22. 26.
orgaines. Tubalcaine was a smith, working in brass and Iron. Enos is renowned
for his special devotion in the service of God. So are Seth, Enoch, Noe, and
Genesis 6. v. 2.
others, who were therefore called the sons of God. At which time and so
forwards until the law of Moses, the first borne and heads of families were
Preistes.

2 And amongst Preistes there was subordination Subordination in spiritual
causes, where was no subordination in temporal dominion.
of superiors, and inferiors. For Melchisedech did Genesis 14. v. 19. 20.
bless Abraham, who was also a Priest and took tithes of him, both which
preeminences show spiritual superiority, and subjection; though in
temporalties neither of them was subject to the other. Job Job. 1. v. 5.
was a Priest for he offered sacrifices for his children, and was also a King
or absolute Lord. Moses being constituted supreme governor spiritual and
temporal of Gods peculiar people, with spiritual authority also over the king
of Egypt, had his brother Aaron subordinate to him, as a prophet, to speak as
he should direct him [I have appointed thee (said our Exo. 7. v, 1. 2.
Lord to Moses) the God of Pharao: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet:
Thou shall speak to him al things that I command thee, and he shall speak to
Pharao, that he dismiss the children of Israel out of his land.] In temporal
affairs Iosue of Exo. 17. v. 9. 10.
the tribe of Ephraim, was his substitute, and appointed by him general
captain, to fight against Amelec. Hur of the tribe of Judah was an other
assistant in public occasions. As appears by that which Moses said to the
people when he went into the mountain: [Expect here (says he) til we return
Exo. 24. v. 14. Exo. 18. v. 21. 25.
to you: you have Aaron, and Hur with you: If any question shall rise you shall
refer it to them.] Besides Magistrates not subject to one an other, were al
subject to one chief head:
these Moses ordained Tribunes, and under them Centurions; Quinquagenerians,
and Decurians. Al which were superiors of certain companies and particular
bodies. Again of every tribe one was made the Prince, and so were accepted
and called [the most noble princes of the multitude by their Nu. 1. v. 4. 16.
tribes and kindereds, and the heads of the host of Israel] the temporal state
consisting of twelve Tribes: al which had their distinct portions of lands
allotted them, and were bond by the law [not to make Nu. 36. v. 7. 8.
marriages, but each Tribe within it self, that so their inheritances might not
be mingled; and that the Tribes might remain, as they were separated by our
Lord.

3 The spiritual Tribe of Leui, contained four distinct Four distinct
communities in the Tribe of Leui, with particular superiors.
communities. The first of Preistes, and three degrees of other Levites. For
the Patriarch Leui, Nu. 3. v. 17.
having three Sons, Gerson, Caath, and Merari, of Ceathes Progeny, Aaron was
assumed and made High Priest, and in him, and his offspring, was established 1.
Preistes.
the whole order of Leuitical Preisthood. The rest of Ceaths issue, were made
the first degree of Levites 2. Caathites.
after the Preistes called [Caathites; whose offices Nu. 3. v. 31. Chapter 4. v. 16.
were to guard the Sanctuary, and to carry the Ark and Table whereon it stood.
Also the Candlestick the Altares, and all the vessels of the Sanctuary; to
prepare and keep the oil for lamps, incense, and holy oil of unction, the
veil, and al other implementes.] 3. Gersonites.
The second degree were [the Gersonites, Nu. 3. v. 26. Chapter 4. v. 26. Nu. 3. v.
36. Chapter 4. v. 31.
the sons of Gerson, whose charge was, to guard and carry the Tabernacle, the
cou^r thereof, the hanginge curtains, cords, all the furniture thereof, and
vessels perteyning to the Altar.] The third and inferior 4. Merarites.
degree, were Merarites, the Sons of Merari, whose office was to keep and
earie the bordes, bars, pillars, with their feet, pinnes, and cords
belonging thereto.] Every degree had their several Superior. And when the
Temple was built, and use Ios. 21. v. 34.
of the Tabernacle ceased, these orders were disposed [to serve in and about
the Temple; some Musicians, Chapter 3. v. 36. Chapter 4. v. 31. 1. Par. 23. v. 26. Chapter
25. v. 26. Nu. 18. v. 2. 3. 6.
some thresurers, others porters] al served the Preistes: For so [our Lord said
to Aaron. Thy brethren of the Tribe of Leui, and the Scepter of thy Father,
take with thee, and let them be ready at hand, and minister to thee: but thou
and thy Sons, shall minister in the Tabernacle of testimony, and the The
superior of the Preistes, was chief superior of al.
Levites shall watch upon thy Precepts, and upon all the works of the
Tabernacle. I have given you your brethren, the Levites out of the midst of
the children of Israel, and have delivered them a gift to the Lord, to serve in
the ministeries of his Tabernacle. And thou and thy Sons, look to your
Preisthood; 7. 1. Par. 6. v. 31. 49. 2. Esd. 12. v. 43. 44.
and al things that perteine to the service of the Altar, and that are within
the veil, shall be executed by the preistes. If any stranger approach, he shall
be slain.] Well resembling in diverse respects, the ministry of Christian
Preistes, with Deacons, Subdeacons, and inferior orders, serving them in the
holy Sacrifice of the Altar.

4 There were also in the old Testament, certain Religions orders in the old
Testament. Also special Prophets were sent extraordinarily. Likewise God
ordained temporal Magistrates ordinary.
Iudic. 13. v. 5. Nu. 6. v. 2. Iere. 35. v. 2. 4. Reg. 1. v. 7. Chapter 2. v. 7.
Chapter 6. v. 1. 1. Mac. 2. v. 12. 2. Mac. 14. v. 6. Nu. 11. v. 16. 17. 25.
Religious orders, observing special rules of life, binding them selves thereto
by voluntary vows [the Nazarites, Recabites] and others. Likewise many holy
Prophets were raised up by God, and sent to admonish al sorts (Preistes and
people) of diverse Tribes besides the Levites. Moreover [our Lord ordained
seauentie Ancientes of Israel, for Counselers, and Rulers, to ease the burden
of the chief Superior, imparting to them of the spirit wherewith Moses was
endued, and they prophesied from thence forward] and assisted in the
government. After Moses and Iosue, there were many changes, and also
interruptions of temporal chief gouerners. And at Sometimes extraordinary.
sundry times, God raised up certain men of diverse Tribes, by the title of
Judges, to deliver and defend Iudic. 2. v. 16. 1. Reg. 8. v. 5. 3. Reg. 12. v.
16. 19. 4. Reg. 17. v. 6. 2. Par. 11. v. 13. 1. Reg. 25. v. 11. 1. Esd. 1. 2.
Esd. 1.
the people from invasions of enemies. After which, they had Kings, Saul,
David, and Solomon, reigning over al Israel. Then ten Tribes reuolting,
Temporal government sometime changed.
made them selves by Gods permission, a several King, and were a distinct
kingdom til they were carried captive into Assiria. The other two Tribes (and
And interrupted.
the Tribe of Leui) remaining subject to K. David's successors, til they also
were carried captives into Babylon: From which time they never recovered the
Royal state of a Kingdom; though after seauentie years captivity, the Medes
and Persians conquering Babylon, released the Jews, permitting them to
return, and repair their Temple, and City of Jerusalem. But again after
this, they were brought under the Grecians, and by them, extremly persecuted.
Last of al, they were subdued by the Romans, and suffered to use more
privileges, especially in Religion, yet still subject in civil causes. But the
state of Preistes and Succession of High Preistes still conserved and continued.
Levites, was still conserved: Namely the succession of High Priests, was
continued even to Caiphas. Who (though with wicked meaning) truly judged it
[expedient, Ioa. 11. v. 50. 51.
that one man should dye for the people, and the whole Nation perish not.] Thus
did the Church of the old Testament contain many particular societies, with
their several heads, both in the spiritual, and temporal states remaining al
one intyre body, with one spiritual supreme head.

5 Much more the Church of Christ consisting of In the Church of Christ, are
distinct temporal Dominions; al subject to one spiritual head.
al nations, is adorned and fortified with varieties, in both states. the
temporal containing many Kingdoms, Dukedomes, Dominions, free Cities, and
other absolute common wealths, some governed in form of Monarchy, some by
Aristochracie: some by Diuiochacie, others more or less mixed. And in these are
innumerable corporations, every one having a proper head subordinate to
superiors, yet not one temporal head as King or Emperor of al. But al subject
to one spiritual supreme head; else al could not There are also many particular
communities of the Clergy with several heads, but al subject to the Supreme
visible head of the militant Church.
be one perfect body. In this whole Militant Church of Christ, are also
contained many particular Churches with perfect subordination to one supreme
visible head: under whom are others also in subordination, making a formale
Ecclesiastical Ierarchie of Preistes, Bishopes, Archbishopes, P^^mates,
Patriarchs, and one supreme visible Pastor of al. To the Clergy also
pe^teyne al Religious orders who though they have not ordinary Jurisdiction,
or charge of souls, yet by spiritual labors, prayers, preaching and many
other good works, nourish, strengthen, and beautify the whole Church.
Likewise Universities, Colleges, Seminaries, and other houses of students in
liberal Attes: especially professing the sacred, and honorable faculties of
Divinity, Canon, Civil, and municipial Laws, and of Phisike, with the like
united companies, are al members, ornaments, and fortifications of one and the
same Catholic militant Church, whereof both the Proved by holy Scriptures.
Prophets and Apostles have written. Holy David Ps. 44. v. 11. Ps. 47. v. 14.
calls this Church [a Q^eene standing on the right hand (in prosperous state)
in golden raiment, compassed with variety. Set your hearts on her strength
(says the same Prophet to al her children) and distribute ye her houses]
observe w^l how many particular Churches were spidily founded in the world by
the Apostles, and other Apostolical men [In Ps. 67. v. 27.
Churches bless ye God our Lord. Let Israel (the Church of Christ) now say,
that our Lord is good: that his mercy is for ever. Let the house of Aaron Ps.
117. v. 2. 3. 4. Ps. 121. v. 5.
(the clea^gie) let them which fear our Lord (al sorts of faithful persons)
now say that his mercy is for ever.] In an other Psalm thus: [Seates sat
there in Judgments (in Jerusalem) and Seats upon the house of Dauid] in the
Church of the new Testament. So God promised by Isaias, saying: [I will restoare
Is. 1. v. 26.
thy Judges, as they have been before, and thy counselors as of old. After
these things thou shall be called the Just, a faithful City.] Al fully
performed in the Church of Christ: into which are entered, and still do enter,
al nations. So our Lord sending his Many particular Churches are al one Church.
holy Spirit [encreased the faithful daily together] Act. 3. v. 9. 41. 47. To.
16. v. 3. Phil. v. 2. Apoc. 1. v. 4.
al in one Church; yea many Churches in one. S. Paul [rendered thanks to
Prisca and Aquila, in the behalf of all the Churches of the Gentiles] and
[saluted their domestical Church.] He shall salute also an other [domestical
Church, in the house of Philemon] and writ several Epistles to particular
Churches. S. John likewise writ his Apocalipse [to seven Churches] in the
province of Asia. Many Churches, many Nations, many Dominions, many
Corporations, of the faithful, which, as they do excellently adorn the whole
Church with variety: so do they also strongly fortify it, being perfectly
united: whereby they al make but one Church; which is the second point proposed
in the beginning of this Article. And so we shall now further declare it with
other marks, by which the true Church is known from al other congregations.

The true Church of Christ is known by special marks: the first of which is
Unity. ARTICLE. 33.
AL Christians acknowlegeing that there is a It is a principal cont^ouersie at
this time to know the true Church.
Church, not only in heaven, but also in earth: it is nevertheless the maine
question called into controversy at this time, which is the true Church of
Christ? Some supposing one congregation, to be the faithful children of God,
some an other, according to their contrary doctrines in points of faith; some
thinking there may be many without subordination of one Superior of al, yea
different in opinions, touching matters of belefe; some also imagining, that
the true Church haith sometimes failed, and been no where visible to the world;
and that it may so decay hearafter: Yet al agree in It may be known by
certain marks.
general, that it may be known by special marks and notes, but wh^t those
are, is the very issue of controversy between Roman Cotholiques, and other
pretensed Religions. For all protestants and others, proceeded, or parted from
them, do commonly assign these two: the true preaching of Gods word, and
the right administration of his Sacraments, which indede agree to the true
Church, and to none other congregation; but are not the proper marks thereof
The marks assigned by Protestants, are as hard to be known as, the thing
which is sought.
whereby to know it. Because marks or notes whereby to know any thing, must be
more clear, then that thing which we desire to know: otherwise, as the
proverb says, it were to teach ignotum per ignotius, a thing unknown, by
that which is less known, or as little known. Whereas these two which they call
the proper marks are as hard to be known as is the Church it self, or rather
harder: and are challenged by all Sectaries, every sort arrogating to them
selves that they only have the spirit of truth, preach the true word of God;
rightly administer his Sacraments: and are the true Church; and that al others
are in error, and no members of the true Church. Wherefore we must of
necessity try this cause by other evidences; and what better Romans 12. v. 6.
trial can a^ie reasonable persons require, then the very words set down by
the holy Apostles, in their Creed, which al Christians every where profess;
I believe the Holy Catholic Church. In that they say The Apostles Creed
acknowleged by all Christians, expresses certain marks of the true Church.
Unity. Sanctity. Universality.
Church, not Churches, they plainly signify, that al particular Churches are
united, and make one only complete Church: one intyre body, consisting of
many members, with uniform consent in the same faith and Religion. And so
Unity, is the first mark and note of the true Church. The second is
Sanctity, the Apostles saying, it is Holy. In the word Catholic, we have
the third mark which is Universality. And in that the Apostles, who taught
this Creed, were the first planters of this Church of Christ it is truly
called Apostolical, not only by the holy Council of Nice, but also English
protestants admit the same Nicene Creed, in their public service. And so
we have the fourth mark, which is The fourth mark is Antiquitio*
Antiquity of the true Church, even from Christ and his Apostles. And in this
fourth, mark is necessa^i^y included Succession of lawful Pastors rightly
called and admitted into Ecclesiastical function. To take away Other two marks
are, Perpetuity, and visibilitie.
also two common euasions of protestants, pretending, that the true holy
Catholic Apostolical Church, has been interrupted for a long time, and is
now by them restoared, or at least (say they) it was sometimes invisible, but
not wholly corrupted, and utterly decayed: We contrariwyse will show, by many
evident holy Scriptures, that the true Church is both perpetual; without
interruption; and also perpetually visible, and never invisible.

2 First then concerning Unity, which is the first Unity of the Chuurch was
prefigured by the creation of Man.
mark, and consists in consent of al true members confessing the same faith,
in subordination to one visible head: it was prefigured by the procreation of
al mankind. For God creating only one man, and Genesis 2. v. 22.
out of his side taking a ribbe; built or framed the same into the first woman;
of which two, all the rest are propagated; and so originally al from one. An By
the Ark of Noah.
other figure of the Churches unity was expressed in the Ark of Noah, which
was but one, by which he and Genesis 6. v. 14. 16.
his family with a few other earthly creatures were conserved alive, all the
rest being drowned in the diluge: which whole machine being great, had but one
door for entrance, and one window to lighten al, and it was in the top of the
Arc finished in on cubite: from whence the middle and lowest rowmes By the Arc
of testimony.
received light, through the floores. The same was Exo. 25. v. 10. Exo. 26. v.
1. 3. Reg. 6. v. 1.
likewise fore-signified by the Arc of testimony made of durable wood setim.
Also by the tabernacle with Tabernacle, and Temple.
many appurtenances. And by the Temple. Every of which signified the Church
in diverse particular proprieties, and namely in unity.

3 As is more clear in the Prophets. The Royal Proved by diverse Prophets.
Ps. 67. v. 6. 7. 17.
Psalmist speaking of the Church says: [God in his holy place; God that
makes men to inhabit of one manner in a house. A mountain crudded as chee^e]
Ps. 132. v. 1.
fast combined into one. [Behold (says he in an other psalm) how good, and
how joyful a thing it is, for brethren to dwell in one.] Christ him self, by the
pen Cant. 4. v. 12. Can. 6. v. 8.
of Solomon says: [My sister Spouse, is a garden enclosed, a garden (indeed)
enclosed, a Fountain sealed up. My dove is one, my perfect one, she is the
only to her mother] As the old Sinagogue was one consisting in manner of one
nation: so is the Church of Christ but one, though it comprehends innumerable
Nations. Isaias in his Canticle of praise to God for the good change of the
Jews Sinagogue, into Is. 26. v. 1. 2. 3.
the Christian Church, says [In that day shall this song be sung in the land of
Judah. Sion, the City of our strength, a Savior: therein shall be put a wall, and
a bulwark. Open ye the gates, and let the just Nation enter in* that keeps
truth; the old error is gone, thou will keep peace] signifying that many
peoples entering into the Catholic Church of Christ, who is of the Tribe of
Judah, shall in truth and peace, prefer Sio^ the head Church, before al others,
al being united thereunto. This union was likewise foreshewed to Ezechiel by the
holy Spirit, saying to him [Thou Ezech. 37. v. 16. 17.
Son of man, take thee one piece of wood, and write upon it. Of Judah, and of
the children of Israel his fellows. And take an other piece of wood and write
upon it. Of Joseph the wood of Ephraim, and of all the house of Israel, and his
fellows. And join them one to the other for thee, into one piece of wood, and
they shall be into an union in thine hand. To the same effect was revealed to
Sophonias by our Lord saying [then (in the new Testament) Soph. 3. v. 9.
will I restoare to the peoples a chosen lip, that al may invoke in the name
of our Lord, and may serve him with one shoulder.] Many peoples professing
with their lips one faith, and with joined forces as with one shoulder,
defend and manteine the same.

4 Our Sau^ours [coate wrought throughout without Ioa. 19. v. 23.
Signified by our Saviors Coat. Manifestly taught by our Savior, and his
Apostles.
seame] was doubtless a mistical figure of his indiu^sible Church: yet his own
divine doctrine, is more manifest, affirming, that [there shall be one fold, and
Ioa. 10. v. 16.
one Pastor] And that in his Church, is manifestation of truth; out of it, al
obscurity, uncertainty, and falsehood. [To you (that are within the fold) it
is Mar. 4. v. 11.
given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God, but to them that are
without, al things are done in parables] they may see, and read, and hear,
and not understand, til they enter into this one fold of al Christ his ^lock.
When the Apostles preached Act. 2. v. 47. Romans 12. v. 5. 1. Cor. 10. v. 17. Chapter
12. v. 12.
[those that believed, were al g^^hered together that should be saved.] And [we
being many (says S. Paul) are one body in Christ, and each one, an others
members. Being many, we are one bread; one body, all that participate of one
bread. As the (natural) body is one, and has many members, and all the
members of the body, whereas they be many, yet are one body: so also Christ
his mistical Body, is many in one. [And if al were one member, where were the
v. 19. 20.
body? But now there are many members indeed, yet one body: one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism.] Ephesians. 4. v. 5.
Al which and the like, show, that the true Church is al one body, consisting
in unity and consent in all points of faith, and community of Sacraments,
and other holy Rites, with the mutual fellowship of al particular Churches,
joined in perfect union, as well Unity consists in professing of one faith:
and in regiment under one head.
in doctrine of belief, as in regiment of one supreme head. Because the
Militant Church in earth, is a true and perfect Monarchy as we shall further
declare by holy Scriptures. And first that it was so in the old Testament,
whereby is more clearly demonstrated that so it is in the new.

In the old Testament there was ever on supreme visible head of the Church.
ARTICLE. 34.
Moses being to write the law which he Moses before he writ the law,
described the beginning and progress of mankind.
Genesis 1. v. 1. 2. etc. 26. Chapter 2. v. 7. 21. 22. 25. Chapter 3. v. 1. 6. 7. 15.
received of God, first of al shows the beginning of al creatures, and more
particular of man, in what happy state he was in paradise; how he fell from it:
how he and part of his progeny through Gods special grace which is offered to
al, were made his peculiar peop^^: though others wilfully running their own
ways, ^^l further into wickedness and into innumerable gross errors.

2 In which history this (...) ^^storingrapher most In the genealogies of the
Patriarchs especially sets forth the succession of the chief Super^or.
especially records the things perteyning to Gods selected people, and
therein very exactly recites the generations of Adam the first man, by his
right line to Noe, and so to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, otherwise called
Israel, of whom the same chosen people were called the children of Israel:
showing hereby the continual succession of one superior, from generation to
generation. For there can be no other reason well imagined, but because these
only were the supreme heads, and rulers of the Church, why Moses professing
to write [the generation of Adam] Genesis 5. v. 1. 4.
should therein omit both Cain, and Abel his first sons, and al other sons
(for he begat also other sons and daughters) and only name Seth. Again
omitting al other sons of Seth, he names Enos alone. Likewise in all the rest
til he come to Noe. Yet expressly notes withal, that every one of them [begate
v. 7. 10. 13. 16. 19. 22. 26. 30. Genesis 11. v. 10.
other sons and daughters.] In the same manner Other genealogies are only
recited to a few generations: but the right line of the Patriarchs is declared
from Adam, to Jacob, and his twelve sons.
he prosecuteth the lineal succession of Noe, by the generations of his Son
Sem to Abraham: and so to Isaac and Jacob: giving us by the way to understand
(which also confirms our purpose) that whereas Abraham had an elder Son
called Ismael, whom God [made also into a great Nation] yet [Goddes Genesis 17. v.
20. 21.
special promise and covenant, was established with Isaac.] And Isaac having
two Sons called Esau, and Jacob, the younger which was Jacob, was preferred,
and made succssor to his father, as is often testified in Genesis 25. v. 23. Mal.
1. v. 2. Romans 9. v. 13. Genesis 4. v. 17. Chapter 10. v. 1. 2. etc. Chapter 1^. v. 10.
holy Scriptures [The elder shall serve the younger. Was not Esau brother to
Jacob says our Lord? and I loved Jacob and hated Esau,] Diverse other
Genealogies, are also recited by Moses, but without continuance, as of Cain
before the flood. Afterward of al Noes sons; until the division of tongues
and Nations. Thence forward, only of Sem lineally by [Arphaxad, Sale, Heber,
Phaleg, Ragau, Serug, Nachor, Their, Abraham] with breife mention, that every
one of them [begate other Sons and daughters] And namely of Abrahames
brethren Nachor, and Aaron. Likewise the Genealogies of Nachor. Genesis 25. v. 1.
3. 12.
Also of Abrahames younger sons by his last wife Cethura, and of Ismael; and
of Esau the elder Son of Isaac; are recorded to a few generations. But Jacobs
progeny, is continually declared, and exactly numbered by all his twelve sons,
and their thirtene Nu. 1. v. 2. Nu. 3. v. 15. Nu. 26. v. 2. 17. Exo. 6. v. 14.
15. 16. 26.
Tribes after their delivery from the Egiptians dominion. But before this,
whiles they were in Egypt, the Princes of the three first Families, Ruben,
Simeon, and Leui, are recited so far as Aaron and Moses, and no further, it
sufficing for that present purpose to show the Pedigree of these two, by whom
the whole Nation was to be brought out of the land of Egypt, God then putting
the supreme gonernme^t of them al into Moses his hands, and appointing Aaron
his chief assistant: until which time, the first borne, and al heads of
Families, were their Preistes, and the chief Prince, was also the chief
Priest.

3 Now therefore when it pheased God to give his In the written law Aaron was
ordained high Priest, with a perpetual succession.
Church a written Law, with many new sacred Rites and ordinances: and
principally to change their Preisthood [For the Preisthood being translate^, it
is necessary Heb. 7. v. 12.
(says S. Paul) that a translation of the Law be also made] his divine goodness
first constituted Moses an extraordinary both Prince and Priest, making him
[the God of Pharao, and Aaron his Prophet] Ex. 7. v. 1.
And so proceeding amongst other his divine ordinances [our Lord commanded
Moses, to consecrate Leuit. 8. v. 2. 4. 6. 13. etc.
Aaron] the ordinary [High Priest, and al his sons Preistes] which Moses
performed accordingly [in sight and hearing of the multi^^de, gathered before
the door of the Tabernacle.] To this Institution were also added particular
precepts declaring their offices, and the eminent power, and supreme authority
of the High Priest in spiritual causes, with due correspondence between ^in,
and the temporal chief head. His first preeminence and privilege, was to teach
the truth; which is signified by Exo. 28. v. 15. 22. 27.
his Preistly ornaments called [Ephod, which he bare on his shoulders: and
Rationale of Judgment fastened on his breast, linked together with golden
chains, hooks, and ringes above, and with hyacynth lace beneath, adorned with
twelve most precious stones, and the names of the twelve Tribes engraven
therein.] These did the High Priest carry with his other vestures, whenever he
entered into the Sanctuary. And [in the Rationale of Judgment were written,
Doctrine and Verity.] And so by Gods special assistance, v. 30. Leuit. 8. v.
8. 1. Reg. 23. v. 9. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8.
he declared the verity of doctrine in doubtful cases. And thereupon God
expreslly commanded his people in great difficulties, to repair for final
direction, to his high and most authentical Judge, saying [If thou perceive
that the Judgment with thee is hard and doubtful between blood and blood,
cause and cause, leprosy, and not leprosy; and thou see that the words of
the Judges within thy gates, do vary: arise and go up to the place which the
Lord thy God shall choose. And thou shall come to 9.
the Preistes of the Leuitical stock, and to the Judge that shall be at that
time; and thou shall ask of them, who shall show thee the truth of Judgment:
and thou shall do whatsoever they that are Preistes 10.
of the place (which our Lord shall choose) shall say and teach thee, according
to his Law, and thou shall 11.
follow their sentence; neither shall thou decline to 12.
the right hand, nor to the left hand. But he that shall be proud refusing to
obey the commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministers to the Lord
thy God, by the decree of the Judge, that man shall dye, and thou shall take
away the evil out of Israel. And the whole people hearing, shall fear, 13.
that none afrerward swel in pride.] These plain words of the divine Law, do
not only show God^ ordinance of one priest to be chief Judge, and President in
the consistory of Preistes, but also that others were then bond under pain
of death, to obey his sentence. In consideration of which Preistly power; the
Prophet Malachie so much the more blamed Preistes of his time for their
faults, which were aggrauated by reason of their function; and therefore put
them in mind thereof saying [The lips Mal. 2. v. 7.
of the Priest shall keep knowledge; and others shall require the Law of his
mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of Hostes] the messenger of God
almighty.

4 By occasion also of this supreme authority given Rebellion rising against
this ordinance, was suppressed, and Aarons Supremacy confirmed by diverse
miracles.
to Aaron, and other High Preistes, certain Levites, Nu. 16. v. 1. 3. 31. 39.
with some of Rubens Tribe, disdaining the same, revolted, and rebelled against
Moses, and Aaron: which enormious schism God presently punished, with the
miraculous destruction of many. And by an other manifest miracle, declared
Aarons authority over all the Preistes of the other Tribes. [Take Nu. 17. v. 2.
(said our Lord to Moses) a rod of every one of all the Princes of their
Tribes, twelve rods, and the name of every one thou shall write upon his
rod. And the name of Aaron shall be in the Tribe of Leui. 3. etc.
one rod shall conteyne all the Levites families: and thou shall lay them in the
Tabernacle of covenant before the testimony where I will speak to thee.
Whosoever I shall choose, his rod shall blosome. which when Moses had laid
before our Lord in the tabernacle of testimony; returning the day following he
found Aarons rod in the house of Leui budded, and the buddes thereof swelling,
the blossoms were shot forth: which spreading the leaves were fashioned into
almondes. Moses therefore brought forth all the rods from the sight of our
Lord, to all the children of Israel, and they saw and every one received their
own rods. And our Lord said to Moses: Carry back Aarons rod into the
tabernacle of testimony, that it may be kept there for a sign of the
rebellions children of Israel, and let their complaints cease from me, lest
they dye. And Moses did as our Lord had commanded] thus was Aaron established
high Priest. To him succeeded his Nu. 20. v. 25. 26. 1. Par. 6. v. 3. ad 14. v.
53. 3. Esd. 13. v. 10. Ioa. 11. v. 49. Ioa. 18. v. 13. Nu. 27. v. 18. 19. 20.
21.
Eleazar succeding to Aaron, was superior to Iosue: not only in spiritual
causes, but also in temporal, in special cases.
son Eleazar. and so others for the most part of the same line, and some of
his brother Ithamars progeny, but al of Aarons family: As is gathered by the
history of Paralipomenon, unto the captivity in Babylon, and by the
testimony of Nehemias, nere two hundred years after, and even to Annas, and
Caiphas named in the Gospel. their authority was directly, and principally in
spiritual causes, of faith and manners. And in temporal affairs so far only
as perteyned to the spiritual. Which appears in the substitution of Iosue, to
succeed Moses in temporal government. Where our Lord said thus to Moses.
[Take Iosue the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and put thy hand
upon him, who shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, and all the multitude: and
thou shall give him precepts in the sight of al, and part of thy glory; that
all the Synagogue of the children of Israel may hear him. For him if any thing
be to be done, Eleazar the Priest shall consult the Lord. At his word shall he
go out, and shall go in, and all the children of Israel with him: and the rest
of the multitude.

5 By this authority Ioiada the high Priest calling 4. Reg. 11. v. 4. 12. 15.
16. 2. Par. 33. v 1. 5. 7. 11.
The supreme authority of high Priest, is further proved by practice.
to him Centurions, and souldiars, with other Preistes, and Levites, restored
Ioas the right King to his scepter, and kingdom of Judah, and causing the
usurping Queen Athalia to be slain. By the same spiritual authority, Azarias
the High Priest, with fourscore other Preistes, repressed king Ozias, having
14. 15.
taken the Censer into his hand to offer incense to our Lord, saying unto him
[It is not thy office Ozias, 4. Reg. 15. v. 5. 2. Par. 26. v. 17. 18.
to burn incense to our Lord, but of the Preistes, that is of the children of
Aaron, which are consecrated to his kind of ministry: go out of the
Sanctuary, contemn not, because this thing shall not be reputed to thee for
glory of our Lord God. And Ozias being angry, and holding in his hand the
Censer 19. etc.
to burn incense, threatened the Preistes, and forthwith there rose a leprosy
in his forhead before the Preistes in the house of our Lord by the Altar of
incense. And when Azarias the High Priest had beheld him, and all the rest of
the Preistes, they saw the leprosy in his forhead, and in have they thrust him
out: yea and him self being fore afraid, made have to go out, because he felt
by and by the plage of our Lord: Ozias therefore the king, was a leper until the
day of his death, and he dwelt in a house apart full of the leprosy for the
which he had been cast out of the house of our Lord.] So it pleased God again
by miracle, to manifest the High Preistes authority over kings in cause of
Religion, as before his divine goodness had declared Aarons supremacy, against
the schismatical rebels.

6 But ordinarily there was very good correspondence Acknowleged by good kings.
between the kings, and High Preistes, with mutual respect of each to others.
So king Iosaphat [commanding the Judges of his Cities, to deal uprightly, 2.
Par. 19. v. 6. 8. 16.
as exercising judgment, not of man, but of God appointing also Levites, and
Preistes, and Princes of Families, to judge causes in Jerusalem; expressly
distinguished, the spiritual and temporal offices and officers saying [Azarias
the Priest and your Bishop, shall be chief in these things which perteine to
God. Moreover Zabadias the son of Ismahel who is the Prince in the house of
Judah, shall be over those works which perteine to the kings office] plainly
acknowlegeing, that spiritual judgments (which he calls things perteining
to God) perteine not to the kings office: but are of an other Jurisdiction;
yet did kings, and other temporal Ios. 3. v. 8. 1. Par. 16. 17. ^3. 24. 3.
Reg. 2. 2. Par. 19. 2. Par. 29. 4. Reg. 22. 1. Esd. 2. 3. 4. etc. Iere. 33. v.
34.
Dukes and Judges, justly, and laudably cooperate, in putting spiritual
precepts, and divine ordinances in execution. So did Iosue, David, Solomon,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Zorobabel, and the same did al good temporal
Princes, together with the high Preistes. And al other good Preistes and
people, duly obeyed them both.

7 And contrariwise, the evil disposed impugned Wicked men especially impugned,
both Pastoral, and Royal superiority.
them both when they could, and when force failed the wicked, yet by
murmurations, detractions, calumniations, cursinges, and other evil speeches,
they maligned the two most renowned families of Aaron, and David. Which God him
self, to whom nothing can be hid, reveled to his Prophet Jeremy saying, But
God protected them both.
[Hast thou not seen what this people has spoken saying. The two kindreds
which the Lord has chosen, are cast of, and they have despised my people,
because it is no more a Nation before them.] So did envious detractors wish and
speak evil of these two houses, of Aaron and David, which God had especially
chosen, and still protected. But al Prophets, being most holy men, yielded al
honor and ever had most due reguard, to serve both these eminent States. For
example. The Prophet Aggeus by Gods inspiration, directed his prophecy
jointly Agg. 1. v. 1.
to them both; beginning thus [The word of our Lord was made in the hand of
Aggeus the Prophet to Zorobabel, the son of Salathiel, Duke of Judah, and to
Jesus, the son of Iosedec the Grand Preist] who willingly heard his
admonition, and undertook 12.
the holy work, to build again the destroyed Temple of God, whereto he
exhorted them.

Christ our Savior ordained S. Peter chief of the Apostles: and visible Head
of the Militant Church. ARTICTE. 35.
Saint Paul's doctrine, that [God has made It is no derogation to Christ, to
have a Vicar general in earth. It is necessary for diverse pregnant reasons.
Ephesians. 1. v. 22.
Christ Head over all the Church] may sufficiently satisfy any doubtful
person, that it does nothing derogate from Christ, to have a Vicarial head of
his Church Militant. For seeing it derogateth not from Divine Majesty, to have
made Christ as Man, the head of all the Church, both Triumphant, and Militant:
Neither does it derogate from Christ to have a Vicar in earth. Moreover, 1.
Christ [so loving the Church, that he delivered him Ephesians. 5. v. 25. 29.
self for it] does not less fortify and furnish the same with all things
necessary, then was the Church of the old Testament. Seeing therefore the Jews
Synagogue, had by Gods special providence, a visible supreme spiritual
governor (as is showed by the Art. 34.
holy Scriptures) it must needs be very absurd to 2.
say, that the Spouse of Christ has not this so requisite strength and
ornament of one supreme visible Pastor. It is also clear, that the Gospel can
not be authentically preached in all Nations, except there be one chief Prelate
of al, to whom the charge of al perteyneth: because none can preach, unless
they be sent. Again to say, that the particular Churches 3.
extant in this world, are not one entire Church, consisting of many and
diverse members, is directly against S. Paul^s doctrine, and other holy
Scriptures 4.
Romans 12. v. 5. 1. Cor. 12.
before recited. Finally, to say that al these members do make one visible
body; yet have not one v. 12. To. 10. v. 15. Apoc. 12. v. 3. Chapter 17. v. 3. 7.
9.
supreme visible head, but many: is to account the Church a monstrous body,
with many heads.

2 But to convince these absurdities, with irrefragable That S. Peter was
chief of the Apostles and head of the whole militant Church, is proved by
Christ's purpose, promise, and factes, and by S. Peter's, and other Apostles
practice.
authority of holy Scriptures: we shall show so briefly as so important a
cause will permit, that Christ our Lord, did actually constitute his Apostle
S. Peter, the chief of all the Apostles, and supreme visible Pastor of the whole
Militant Church in earth. For more discussion whereof, we may observe, that his
divine wisdom, first signified his purpose herein by words and factes; then
promised the same thing: afterward actually performed it. And lastly that S.
Peter practiced, and the other Apostles acknowleged, the same supremacy.

3 First therefore, when S. Andrew having already The first proof. Christ
foretold that Simon should be called Peter, which signifies a Rock.
been with our Savior, brought his brother Simon to see him [Iesus looking
upon him said; thou art Joan. 1. v. 42.
Simon the son of Iona: thou shall be called Cephas, which is interpreted
Peter. So the Hebrew or Syriake word Cephas, is in Greek Petros or Petre, in
Latin Petra, in English, a Rock; which being applied for a man's name, the
termination is altered, and so in the Latin is called Petrus, and in English
(so near as our language well serves) Peter. But translating our Saviors
speech, into proper English words, he said: Thou art Simon, thou shall be
called a Rock. By which manner of imposing new names in holy Scripture, is
ever signified some important Mystery implied in the Etymology or original
signification, of the same word imposed for a proper name. As when God changed
the name [ Abram into Abraham] he signified thereby, that the Genesis 17. v. 5.
Genesis 32. v. 28.
same Patriarch should be the Father of many Nations. [Iacob] which signifies
supplanter, was changed into [Israel] signifying one that sees, or
contemplatteh God. Osee the son of Nun, was changed Chapter 35. v. 10.
into [ Iosue] or Jesus, to signify, that in figure of our B. Savior, he
should save the children of Israel from their enemies, bring them into the
promised land of Chanaan. And our Lord and Redemer [was named Jesus, signifying
Savior, before he was Luc. 1. v. 31. Mat. 1. v. 21. Luc. 2. v. 21.
conceived, because he should save his people from their sinnes] So this new
name Rock, or Peter, foretold by our Savior; did undoubtedly foreshew, that
he should be employed as a Rock in some special work of God. Whom the sequel
did shortly after declare to be the Rock whereupon Christ would Mat. 7. v. 24.
build his Church. Which meruclous well accords with the conclusion of his
divine sermon in the mount, teaching that a wise man builds his house upon a
Rock.

4 Not long after our Saviors prediction, of changing The second proof.
Christ preached in S. Peter's ship, and bade him launch into the sea.
Simons name into Peter, he foreshewed also by a fact his purpose to make the
same Peter ch^ife of Luc. 5. v. 1. 2. 3.
his Apostles. For when [by the lake of Genesareth, the multitudes pressed upon
him to hear the word of God, he seeing two ships on the shore, went into one
of them which was Simons, and there sitting, taught the multitudes out of the
shippe] And after his sermon [he said to Simon, Launch forth into 4.
the deep, and let loose your nets to make a draught. And Simon answearing,
said unto him. Master, laboring all the night, we have taken nothing; but in
thy word, I will let loose the net. And when they had done this, they enclosed
a very great multitude of fishes, and their net was broken. And they bekned
to their fellows that were in the other ship, that they should come and help
them. And they came and filled both ships, so that they did sink. Which when
Simon Peter did see, he fell down at Jesus knees saying. Go forth from me
because I am a sinful man o Lord. For he was wholly astonished, and all that
were with him, at the draught of fishes which they had taken. In like manner
also James and John the sons of Zebedie, who were Simons fellows. And Jesus
said to Simon, fear not; from this time now, thou shall be taking men.] Is it
not clear in this narration of S. Luke, that there being two ships, our
Savior (al whose actions are our instructions) made choice to preach in that
which was Simons, making use also of the other, to help Simon in the great
draught of fishes, that he bade Simon only, launch into the deep? That Simon
only falling on his knees, expressly acknowledged our Lords great work, and
his own unworthiness? That al being astonished, our Lord spoke only to Simon,
bidding him not fear? Foretelling him only before the rest, that he should
become a fisher of men? whereas James, and John, and the other Apostles, should
become also fishers of men? Is it not here manifest that our Lord in this fact,
foreshewed a future preeminence, and primacie of Simon, above the rest.?

5 Let us further see how the same proceeded to effect. The third proof. The
title FIRST, is ascribed to S. Peter, and he is always first named.
Immediately after our Savior had showed these apparent figures of his
intention, calling disciples to Io. 1. v. 40. Mat. 4. v. 18. Mar. 1. v. 16.
Luc. 5. v. 2. Mat. 10. v. 2. 3. etc. Mar. 3. v. 16.
remain with him, as of his proper family (which hitherto none did) albeit
Simon was younger brother to Andrew, and by him first brought to see Christ; yet
is first named by all the Evangelists, as well in their first calling to be
Disciples, as when the twelve were made Apostles, and wheresoever their names
are recited he is continually first named. And which makes the thing most
assured, S. Matthew adds it as his proper title saying: [the names of the
twelve Apostles be these: the first Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his
brother] and then recites the rest diversely from the other Evangelists: For
S. Luc. 6. v. 14. Act. 1. v 13.
Mark names James in the Second place: S. Luke in his Gospel, and in the
Acts of the Apostles observes not the same order, but al put Simon Peter in
the head of their Catologue.

6 Now concerning his new name, which our Savior The fourth proof. Christ
actually gave him the name PETER.
foretold when he first saw him, he actually gave it him, at the very first
time when he ordained this renowned College of twelve Apostles, as all the three
Evangelists (which report their names together) do testify. S. Matthew saying:
the first Simon, Mat. 10. v. 2. Mar. 3. v. 14. 16. Luc. 6. v. 14. Io. 6. v. 8.
who is called Peter. S. Mark more expressly signifying it to be done at that
time, says: [He (to wit Christ) made, that twelve should be with him: and he
gave to Simon the name Peter.] S. Luke says: He chose twelve whom he made
Apostles: Simon whom he surnamed Peter. S. John also in his Gospel sufficiently
shows the preeminence of S. Peter, describing S. Andrew by the title of S.
Peter's Luc. 6. v. 14.
brother saying: Andrew the brother of Simon Peter. And so does S. Luke.

7 Neither may we here omit the miraculous Christ gave him power to walk on
the waters.
walking of S, Peter upon the waters granted to him only, and sure not without
mystery. For when Mat. 14. v. 26. 27.
he with others sailing in a boat, saw our Savior walk on the Sea, and
thinking it to be a ghost, for fear cried out. He saying to them: [Haue
confidence, it is I, fear not: Peter said; Lord if it be thou, bid me come to
thee, upon the waters. And he said come: then Peter descending out of the
boat, walked upon the water to come to Jesus.] As therefore Christ by his
walking upon the sea, as well as upon the land, showed his power over the whole
world: so it pleased him by this fact, to signify that Peter's Jurisdiction
should be extended over al, by sea and land. That also which immediately
follows in the next words of S. Peter's fear, seeing the wind v. 30. 31.
rough, and of his asking and receiving help from Christ, teaches us that
notwithstanding the infirmities of gouerners, Christ our Savior holds them
up, and by them conserueth his Church. We know right well that Protestants
deny and contemn these proofs, and it is easy to deny, when they can not
otherwise refute Catholic doctrine; but we urge them to tell us directly what
other true sense these speeches, and factes can have? Needs they must grant,
that al these things were done for special purposes, and written by the
Evangelists, for confirmation of Christian doctrine. And therefore we join
issue with them, that this is the true sense which al Catholic writers
avouch, rather then any other which they can allege to the contrary.

8 But now we come to more known places, yet not 6. Christ promised to build
his Church upon Peter, as upon a Rock.
more frequent, then conuincing proofs in this present point of S. Peter's
Supremacy. The time approaching that our Savior would pass out of this
world, for instruction of his Apostles concerning the form of government which
he would ordeine, and leave with them, for the stabilitie of his Church, he
demanded of them, as well the peoples opinions, as their own judgments, whom
they supposed him self to be, saying: [Whom say men that the Son Mat. 16. v.
13.
of man is?] they reporting the diverse brutes of the people, according to their
imaginations; he replying, demanded of his twelve Apostles [But whom 15.
do you say that I am? Simon Peter answered and said; Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God.] 16.
Which point of faith is the ground of al Christian Religion: that Jesus, the
Son of the B. Virgin, (thereof called the Son of Man) is the promised
Messiah, and also the very natural only begoten Son of God. This confession
being made by S. Peter in behalf of them al (for all being demanded, he alone
answered) Christ, not further requiring every ones particular answer, but
proceeding to his purpose, approved and commended Peter's answer, saying:
[Blessed art thou Simon Bar-iona because flesh and v. 17.
blood has not revealed it to thee; but my Father which is in heaven. And I
say to thee: That thou art 18.
Cephas, and upon this Cephas, will I build my Church.] So is the Siriake, or
Hebrew text. In Greek and Latin, in these terms [Thou art Peter, and upon
this Peter] In English, translating the words into their proper signification,
we must say thus [Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my Church.]
In all languages, the demostratiue pronone this, has neccessarie relation to
the word going before, and can not be referred in right construction, to any
other thing, as Protestants do wrast it, and absurdly refer it to Christ
himself, or to the faith of Peter, not to his person. For if our Savior had so
meant, as they will seem to imagine: then he would have said, upon a Rock, not
upon this Rock. But he did not say so, and therefore it is clear that he did
not mean as they say, but he absolutely meant as he spoke to his Apostle: Upon
that which thou art, will I build my Church, for none can deny his words [thou
art a Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my Church] And so in the next
words, declares the stabilitie of his Church being built upon a Rock: saying
that [the gates of hell, 18.
(that is all the forces coming from hell) shall not prevail against it.]

9 To the very same purpose he also adds; speaking 7. He promised him also to
give him the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
still to the same Apostle: [And I will give to thee Mat. 16. v. 19.
the keys of the kingdom of heaven.] Every one knows that the giving of
keys, is giving of power, and a^ctoritie, to let in, or keep out of that
place, where to the keys perteyne. And our Savior giving to S. Peter the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, explicateth his meaning. yet further, that S. Peter's
sentences, and judgments in earth shall have effect, not only in earth, but
also in heaven, saying: [whatsoeuer thou shall bind upon earth it shall be
bound also in the heavens: and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, it shall be
loosed also in the heavens, wherein is necessarily understood S. Peter's
Primacie above the other Apostles: who also received Mat. 18. v. 18.
spiritual power to bind and loose in earth which accordingly is bond and
loosed in heaven. For in case any other should attempt to bind or loose
contrary to S Peter, then must his sentence prevail, and that which any
other attempteth contrary to him, is not of force, because otherwise (which is
absurd, and impossible) Gods word should be contrary to it self, and in some
place, should not be verified, if the other Apostles binding and loosing, were
not subordinate, and subject to S. Peter. But being so understood, the seming
contradiction is reconciled, and the holy Scripture, in both places, is most
true. 8.


10 After this declaration of our Savior, in presence He paid tribute for S.
Peter as for the head of a family.
of al his Apostles, that he would build his Church upon S. Peter, whom for
this purpose he had made a Rock: He showed likewise by an other act, the same
thing, that S. Peter should be head of the Apostolical College and family next
and immediately under him self. For condescending to pay Mat. 17. v. 25.
the Tribute of a Didrachme, exacted for the heads of Families; he sent S.
Peter where to have a Statere, being in value two Didrachmes, and so to pay it
for them both. [Goe thy ways to the sea (said 27.
our Savior to Peter) and cast a hook; and that fish which shall first come
up, take; and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a Statere, take
that and give it them for me and thee] Why our Savor would have this Tribute
of house-holders, to be paid for Peter alone, and not for any other of the
Apostles, there can not possibly be any other reason imagined, but because he
was indeed the head of that Family, as Christ's principal Vicar, and by him
so to be constituted.

11 If this text were not clear enough, yet it is The Apostles understood by
this fact, that S. Peter was designed to be the head of them al.
made more manifest, by the Apostles present dispute about Superiority, written
by S. Matthew in Mat. 18. v. 1. ^. etc. Mar. 9. v. 33. 34.
the next words. And that it hapened presently, S. Mark testifies saying,
that our Savior, when they were come to Capharnaum, asked them [What did you
treat of in the way? But they h^ld their peace, for in the way, they had
disputed among themselves, which of them should be the greater?] And therefore
to cure this infirmity [he called the twelve and said unto them: If any man
will be first, he shall 35. 36.
be last of al, and the minister of al. For he that is the lesser among you al,
he is greater] So teaching humility, and withal auouching Superiority. For
they al easily understood, superiority to be necessary. And to ob^^ine
higher places, James and John had suborned their mother to intercede for them.
Mat. 20. v. 20. 21. 22.
Whereupon she [adoring, requested, that th^se her two sons might sit, one
at his right hand, and one at his left hand in his kingdome] But our Lord
again answearing them said: [You know not what you desire] admonishing and
exhorting them, to think of suffering with him, and not of ^uling and
ouerruling as Gentiles do. And lastly said to them Luc. 22. v. 26.
al, the ^ight before his d^eth [He that is the greater among you, let him
become as the younger, and he that is the leader, as the waiter] still consuming
his former words, and factes, that there must be a greater, and a leader
amongst them; not S. James no^ S. John, nor any that sought the first place,
but he that was called, must undertake that office.

12 Accordingly S. Peter for most part spoke in the name 10. S. Peter
ordinarily spoke in the name of them al. And was reputed the chief by the
Evangelists.
and behalf of al. And others ordinarily spoke of him as of the leader and
chief. When our Savior took only three to be present at his transfiguration,
S. Mat. 17. v. 2. 4. Mar. 9. v. 3. 5. Luc. 9. v. 29. 30. 31. 32.
Peter, S. James, and S. John, they were al ra^ished with joy, seeing a Glimse
of Christ's glory, [for his face did shine as the Sun, and his garments
became white as snow, g^stering excedingly] only S. Peter was bold to propose
that which they al thought [But Peter (says S. Luke) and they that were with
him, were heavy with sleep. And awaking, they saw his Maiestie] Moses also
and Elias appearing in Majesty: Then [Peter said, Lord it is good for us to be
here. If thou will, let us make here three Tabernacles; one for thee, one for
Moses, and one for Elias.] At an other time, our Lord going forth into a
desert place to pray [Simon Peter and they that were with him (says S. Mark)
sought Mar. 1. v. 36.
him out.] Our Savior being pressed in the multitude, and demanding who had
touched him [Peter (says S. Luke) and they that were with him said. Luc. 8. v.
45.
Master the multitudes throng thee etc.] When many went back at Capharnaum,
not understanding his divine discourse concerning Manna, and the B. Sacrament
of his Body; and he saying to the twelve [wil you also depart? Simon Peter
answearing Joan. 6. v. 68.
(for all) said: Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal
life.] When our Lord showed the fr^^ct of contemning the world, and following
him: Peter answearing said to him: Mat. 19. v. 27.
Behold we (meaning himself and the other Apostles) have left al things and
have followed thee; what therefore shall we have? ^ When our Savior by a parable
showed the nec^ssitie of diligent watching, [Peter said to him: Lord do thou
speak this parable Luc. 12. v. 41. Mat. 21. v. 20. Mar. 11, v. 21.
to us, or to al?] And when he had cursed a figtree, and incontinent it
withered, all the Disciples merueled: but only [Peter (as the mouth of al) said
to him: Rabbi, behold the figtree that thou did curse, is withered.] Al which
his ordinary answearing, demanding, and speaking as a public person; the
Evangelists relations also in that special manner saying: [Peter, and they that
were with him] do plainly show that he was the chief and head of the rest.
11. Our Lord washing his Apostles feet, began with S. Peter.


13 To these evident proofs we must yet adioyne other factes, and speeches of
our Savior, confirming this doctrine of S. Peter's Primacie. It pleased our
Lord after the supper of the old Testament, before he instituted the new
Sacrifice, to wash al his Apostles feet. And that he began with S. Peter Io.
13. v. 4. 5. 6. 7. etc.
as the chief, who first replying and refusing, as seming to him unmeet, but
upon Christ's words submitting him self to his will, is clear by S. John's
narration: telling that our savior [rose from supper, laid a side his upper
garment, took water in a basin, girded him self with a towel, and so came to
Simon Peter; and Peter said to him: Lord do thou wash my feet. Jesus said
to him: that which I do thou know not now: hereafter thou shall know.] yet
[Peter said to him: thou shall never wash my feet. But our Lord Jesus
answered; If I wash thee not, thou shall not have part with me.] then Peter
submitted him self, and so without more reply all the rest.

14 Again the same night our Savior declared in 12. Praying for them, prayed
singularly for S. Peter.
plain words an other important difference, and singular priuelege of S.
Peter above them al, given to him as the head, for the confirmation of his
brethren. Our Lord said (in presence of al, but directing his speech to Peter
only) [Simon, Simon behold Luc. 22. v. 31. 32.
Satan has required for to have you for to sifte as wheat: but I have prayed
for thee, that thy faith fail not; and thou once converted, confirm thy
brethren.] The devil desired to sift and try them al, as this text makes
manifest; our Lord prayed also [for his other Apostles, and for all that should
believe Io. 17. v. 11. 19. 20.
by their word] as S. John testifies, yet more especially [he prayed for
Peter, that his faith should never faile] by which prerogative of the head, the
whole body is confirmed, and vpholden in unity and verity, free from schism
and heresy, against all the assaults of the devil; and so al are strengthened
that hold the faith and union of Peter. Thus much before Christ's death. 13.
The Angel willed the holy women to tell S. Peter by name, that Christ was risen.


15 After his Resurection, the holy Angel that declared to S. Marie Magdalene,
and the other devout Mat. 16. v. 7.
women, that our Lord was risen from death, willed them to go and tell the
Disciples, and Peter, only naming Peter for his prerogative, and eminent place
above the rest, for else it might have sufficed, to have comprehended him in the
general name of Disciples, 14. S. John respected S. Peter as his Superior.
if he had been but equal with them.

16 Neither otherwise neded S. John, coming first Io. 20. v. 5. 8.
to the monument to have stayed, that S. Peter might enter first, but for that
he respected S. Peter as his designed Superior. There may be (we doubt not)
some other Mystery also understood by this Act. for holy Sriptures are
fertile of many senses. But amongst others the very letter declares
Ma^oritie in S. Peter, above S. John.

17 And that our Savior appeared to S. Peter, before Luc. 24. v. 34.
15. Christ appeared to him first of all the Apostles.
his apparition to them al together, is testified by the two Disciples, to whom
he appeared the same first day in the way to Emaus. For they returning
presently to all the Apostles at Jerusalem, affirmed expressly, that [our Lord is
risen in deed, and has appeared to Simon.] And so S. Paul says [He was seen
1. Cor. 15. v. 5.
of Cephas, and after that, of the eleven.] Al which are signs sufficient of
his Preeminence. 16. Christ constituted S. Peter the Pastor of the whole
Church, of al lambs; and al sheep.


18 But his full establishment in the Ecclesiastical Primacie, Io. 21. v. 1. etc.
is most plainly described by the Evangelist S. John, in the third public
Apparition of our Savior to his Disciples, by the sea of Tiberias. Where S.
Peter understanding that it was our Savior which spoke to him from the shore,
walked to him upon the water, without any further commadement, as before he
had done upon our Lords word. Whereas the other Disciples came in the boat,
drawing the net of fishes. After which narration of our Lords 4. 5. 6. etc.
so appearing on the shore: of S. Peter's going on the water; of the taking of a
great, and certain number of fishes, without breach of the net: of their
dyning together: and of the assurance which every one of them had that it was
our Lord, which so manifested him self: Together with this so clear an
history: he proceeded to the principal point saying [Therefore Io. 21. v. 15.
when they had dy^ed; Jesus said to Simon Peter: Simon of John love thou me
more then these? He Christ required more love of S. Peter the^ of the rest.
said to him: yea Lord thou know that I love thee. He says to him: Fee^e my
lambs. Jesus says to him Ib.
again: Simon of John love thou me? he says to him: yea Lord thou know
that I love thee. He said to him, Feed my lambs. Jesus said to him 17.
the third time: Simon of John love tho^ me? Peter was st^^^ken sad, because
he said unto him the third time; ^o ^est thou me? And he said to him: Lord thou
know al things: thou know that I love thee. Jesus said to him: Feed my
sheepe] Thus the sacred text. C^^ a^ie man require more plain words? more
sole ^itie? more full a^ctoritie? more amaple jurisdiction? W^erfore did not
equal love suffice* but more love was necessary in S. Peter then in the other
Apostles; but because his charge of souls was greater then theirs? Why was he
demanded thrice the same thing, but that by so solemn an institution, he and
all the world might know his greater obligation to feed our Saviors flock?
What needed the thre-fold admonition to feed, but that before al other good
works of alms deeds, praying, fasting, and other virtues, Charity in
feeding souls, with true faith, wholesome Laws, and just regiment, excels
in the supreme pastor? Finally who can be excepted, or exempted from S. Peter's
jurisdiction, when al Christ's flock, young and old, Laity, and Clergy,
[Lambes and sheepe] are by Christ committed to S. Peter's charge? Whosoever will
be counted a sheeepe or Lamb of Christ, is under the charge of S. Peter; if
not under him, then is he none of Christ's fold, nor flock.

19 It rests breefly to see some practice of this 17. S. Peter practiced his
Primacie in the election of S. Mathias.
supreme office in holy Scriptures. Presently after our Lords Ascension, the
eleven Apostles, with our B. Lady and other faithful persons (in all nere an
hundred and twenty) remaning together in prayer, S. [Peter rising up, in the
midst of the brethren said: Act. 1. v. 13. 14. 15. 16. etc. Ps. 40. v 10. Ps*
108. v. 8. Act. 1* v. 25. 26. Act. 2. v. 2. 3. etc. 12. 13. 14.
you men brethren, the Scripture must be fulfilled which the Holy Ghost spoke
before by the mouth of David concerning Judas; who was numbered among us, and
obtained the lotte of this ministerie] And so S. Peter beginning to execute his
Vicarshippe; gave instruction and order, by which S. Mattthias was elected
Apostle in place from which Judas was fallen, to make up again the number of
twelve Apostles. 18. S. Peter first preached after the coming of the Holy
Ghost.


20 When the Holy Ghost was come, and had replenished the faithful with gifts
of tongues, and other graces, whereat al were astonished, and some scorners
deriding said [these are full of new wine: S. [Peter standing with the other
eleue^ Apostles (as head, in all their names) lifted up his voice, and spoke to
them: Ye men Jews and al you that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known to you,
and with your ears receive my wordes] my words (says he) For albeit he alone
spoke, yet he justly challenged audience and due regard to his speech being
Superior, and speaking with authority, as also the effect by and by showed.
For he declaring that it was not dru^kennes, as the deriders at first supposed,
[but the Holy Ghost that gave them knowledge and utterance, with all tongues, to
speak the great works of God] He proved [by the Prophets Joel and David, that
v. 16. 25.
Jesus, whom the cruel Jews had crucified, was risen from death, ascended into
heaven, had sent the Holy Ghost] pouring out abundance of grace. [And the
people hearing these things, were compunct 37. 38. 41.
in hart] and by S. Peter's further instruction, the rest of the Apostles
assenting and assisting [three thousand persons were baptized the same day.]

21 Together with preaching, S. Peter also first 19. S. Peter wrought the first
miracle, and answered the Adversaries.
of all the Apostles, confirmed the faithful, and converted infidels by working
miracles. [S. Peter, Act. 3. v. 1. 2. 3.
and S. John, going into the Temple, there was in the porch a poor man lame
from his mothers womb, who asking alm^s of them, S. Peter with S. John 4.
looking upon him said: look upon vs] he so doing, and hoping to receive some
thing of them, S. [Peter said, Silver and Gold I have not: but that which I
have, the same I give to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazereth, arise
and walk. And taking his right hand, he lifted him up; and forthwith his feet
and soles were made strong. And springing, he s^oode and walked, and went with
them into the Temple, walking and leaping, and praising God] whereupon all the
people being [astonied, agast] and wondering: 12.
S. Perer declared, that [not in their own power, but in the power of Jesus,
whom they had killed, and in the faith of his name, this man was stre^gthned,
and received perfect health in the sight of them Act. 4. v. 1. 3. 4.
al] Many of the hearers [beleued and the number of the faithful was made five
thousand] But [the Magistrates of the Temple, and the Sadduces, put these two
Apostles into ward all that night. And on the 5.
morrow, Annas, Caiphas, with other Princes, Ancientes, and Scribes, and as
many as were of the Preistes stock, gathering into Jerusalem, causing the two
Apostles to be brought before them: asked, in what power, or in what name, have
you done this?] Then S. [Peter said to them. Ye Princes of the 8.
people and Ancientes, if we this day be examined for a good deed, upon an
impotent man; in what he has been made whole: Be it known to al you, and to
all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth whom you
did cruci^ie, whom God has raised from the dead; in this same this man
stands before you whole.] 20. He punished the sacrilege of Ananias, and
Saphira.


22 In matter also of Judgment and correction of delinquentes among the
faithful: S. Peter, as Head Act. 5. v. 3.
and Judge, condemned and punished, the sacrilegious crime of Ananias and
Saphira his wife. who by divine inspiration, knowing their secret fault,
publicly reproved them both severally. First the husband [For lying to the
Holy Ghost, and defrauding] the community [which he hearing, fell down 5.
and gave up the Ghost. And about three hours aflet, the wife not knowing what
was chanced to her husband, came in. And S. Peter said unto her; 7.
tell me woman, whether did you sell the land for so much? And she said, yea for
so much. Then said S. Peter to her; Why have you agreed together, to tempt the
Spirit of our Lord? Behold the feet of 9.
them that have buried thy husband, are at the doare, and they shall bear thee
forth. And forthwith she fell 10.
before his feet and gave up the ghost. And the young men going in, found her
dead, and carried her forth, and buried her by her husband.] Other acts of
Apostolical Act. 8. v. 14. 17.
power and jurisdiction, were likewise first exercised by S. Peter. As [the
imposition of hands upon the baptized, whereby they received the Holy Ghost.
The reproving of Simon the Magitian, for 20.
offering to buy that spiritual power with money. Not that S, Peter only did
these functions, but in that he first put them in execution, his primacie
plainly appears. 21. He wrought more frequent miracles then any other of the
eleven Apostles, and the faithful respected him as the chief.


23 And so does not only his first working of miracles before the other
Apostles, but also his greater and most frequent miracles of all the twelve
Apostles, show the same. S. Luke writes, that all the Act. 4. v. 30. 31.
Apostles prayed for this special grace, to work cures and signs in the holy
name of Jesus: And when they had prayed, the place was moved wherein they were
gathered, and they were al replenished with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the
word of God Act. 5. v. 12.
with confidence. In general also he says, that by the hands of the Apostles,
were many signs and wonders done among the people: but of S. Peter's miracles,
he makes more particular mention, then of all the rest. [The faithful people
did bring forth v. 15.
the sick into the streets (says he) and laid them in beds, and couches,
that when Peter came, his shadowat the least, might ouershadow any of them,
and they al might be delivered from their infirmities. And there ran together
unto Jerusalem, the 16.
multitude also of the Cities adjoining, bringing sick persons, and such as
were vexed of unclean spirits, who were al cured.] Doubtless the other Apostles
did also cure many, yet only S. Peter is here named. And in their answeares to
the persecuters, commanding them to cease from preaching Christ. [But 29.
Peter answearing and the Apostles, said: God must be obeyed rather then men,]
Al answered by the mouth of S. Peter. Shortly after the Martyrdom of S.
Stephen, and conversion of S. Paul, the Church being grown over al Iewrie,
Galilee, and Samaria; S. Peter visiting al, wrought sundry miracles. [At Act.
9. v. 32. 33. 34. 40. 41.
Lidda, he healed a man named Eneas, who had laid eight years in bed sick
of the palsy.] At Ioppa [he raised a godly woman named Tabitha from death.]

24 Moreover S. Peter received the first Gentiles 22. He received the first
Gentiles into the Church.
into the Church of Christ, and that by warrant [of a Act. 10. v. 11.
vision from heaven showed to him self, with a commandment to admit al
nations.] whereto also agreed an other vision made to Cornelius a Gentile, with
express direction [to send into Ioppe, to Simon v. 5. 6. 28. 32. 38. 24. 28.
surnamed Peter, and of him to hear the word of God] And finally S. [Peter
instructing the same Cornelius, with all his family, kindred, and special
friends, called for this purpose; commanded them to be baptized.] Before which
fact of S. Peter, though [some that had been dispersed (when S. Stephen Act.
11. v. 19.
was stoned to death) walked unto Phenice, Cypres, and Antioch: yet they spoke
the word to none but to the Jews only] that were in those places. But after
that S. Peter had thus begune and returning to Jerusalem, avouched and
justified the same, by warrant of the visions, against other Christian Jews,
which reprehended him for it. Then [others also 20. 21.
spoke to the Greeks in Antioch, preaching our Lord Jesus. And the hand of our
Lord was with them, and a great number of beleuers was converted to our Lord.]

25 In many cases, and namely in question of Superiority, 23. He was most.
the Judgment of adversaries is a great confirmation, especially persecuted by
the enemies.
who impugning the whole body, especially assault the head. So the incredulous
Jews opposing with all their might against the Church of Christ, more egerly
persecuting S. Peter, showed thereby that they held him for the chief of the
Apostles. As appeared by king Herodes proceeding: who [seing it pleased the
Jews, that he had killed Act. 12. v. 2. 3. 17.
S. James (to do them a great pleasure in that kind) apprehended Peter also
(attempting nothing against the other S. James, being then also in Jerusalem)
but because it was the feast of Azimes, he cast him into prison meaning after
the Pasch to bring him forth to the people] In the mean time keeping him with
an extraordinary guard [of four quaternions of 4. 6.
souldiars, bound also with two chains, and when he slept, he laid between two
soldiers.] Neither were they deceived in holding him to be the greatest of the
Apostles, for the whole Church did know him so to be; which they declared by
their more instant [praier without intermission for his deliuerie] which 5. 7.
etc. 11.
effect God granted [deliuering him by the ministry of an Angel, out of
Herodes hand, and from all the expectation of the Iewes] for the longer
government of the Church: Which can not stand without unity, nor unity be
conserved without one supreme head: No not by a general Council, except it have
one chief Judge.

26 Example whereof is extant, in the Apostolical 24. He was chief head of the
Apostolical Council.
Council holden at Jerusalem, which shall be our last proof in this plaee of S.
Peter's Supremacy above all the other Apostles. For [when all the Apostles Act.
15* v. 47.
were met, and when great disputation was made, al having spoken that they
thought most true, producing their particular judgments, according to their
several opinions, for better discussing of the controversy then [Peter rising
up (says S. Luke) Ibidem
said to them (to wit to the whole Council assembled) Men brethren, you know
that of old days, Act. 10. v. 20. 25. 10.
God among us chose, that by my mouth, the Gentiles should hear the word of
the Gospel, and believe.] And so he decided the case, that [the Gentiles were
not to be burdened with Circumcision, and other parts of the old Law, which
yoke (said he) is not to be put upon their necks. To whose sentence al agreed.
And S. James, as proper Bishop 13. 14.
of that place, promulgated the same; thereto adjoining his own conformable
judgment, as Catholic 22.
Bishops ever since use to do in holy Councils. S. Paul also, and S.
Barnabas, with Barsabas and Silas, were sent for this purpose to Antioch. And
all the other Apostles (whatsoever any of them thought before (for the
controversy was great) uniformly after S. Peter's sentence [beleued, observed,
23.
and taught the same, subscribing [by their handes] to that which he, as their
head, definitiuely declared.

27 We might yet add more proofs, as that S. Other textes of holy Scripture
which also prove this truth: are here ^mitted, because these before alleged,
may abunda^tly suffice.
Peter first administered Confirmation, that for him, being in prison, the whole
Church made perpetual prayer, as we touched even now: also that S. Paul Act. 8.
v. 17. Chapter 12.
in defense of his fact, which some Corinthians disliked, alleged the example
of other Apostles, and namely of Cephas, pleading that thing to be lawful,
which Cephas the Rock of the Church did approve. His going to Jerusalem to see
Peter, abiding with him fi^tene days, and conferring points of Christian 1.
Cor. 9. v. 5. Gal. 1. v. 18. 19. Gal. 2. v. 27.
doctrine with him, lest otherwise he might have erred, and the like which I
will omit: not doubting but that any Catholi^ue divine may co^fidently join
issue upon one any of these four and twenty proofs, which soever a
Protestant his adversary, shall think to be the weakest, to prove this point
of Catholic Luc. 22. v. 36. 39. 50. Io. 18. v. 10. 11. Act. 8. v. 20.
doctrine, that S. Peter was chief of the Apostles: and visible head of the
whole militant Church in earth. Much more do al these together, most fully and
super abundantly demonstrate the same.

Christ ordained a continual Succession of S. Peter's Supremacy: to the end of
this world. ARTICLE. 36.
REason may satisfy al reasonable persons, The like necessity of one supreme
head which was in the beginning of the Church, continues to the end of this
world.
that our Savior establishing his Church, ordained one, and the same form of
government to continue therein, as well after the Apostles time, as during the
space of their temporal lives. Seeing therefore he constituted one chief head to
be his Vicar in earth, which was S. Peter (as is clearly showed in the
precedent Article) it consequently follows, that still there is, and must be,
one like supreme visible head, his Successor, and Christ's Vicar, from time to
time, because the same necessity remains of one head, conformable to the
body; which otherwise would be both monstrous with many heads, and subject
to ruin by d^uisiion within it self. And therefore our Lords provident care
Mat. 12. v. 25. Mar. 3. v. 21. Luc. 11. v. 17. Mat. 28. v. 20.
(that no such inconvenience fall upon his Church) does indeed continue without
intermission, to the very end of this world. For so he expressly promised by
these most loving words [Behold (said he to his Apostles, before his
Ascension) I am with you al days, even to the consummation of the world.]
which promise we see, is not limited to any shorter time, but amply extended,
even until this world shall be consummated. And so pert^yned not only to the
Apostles, but also to their true successors. For neither could they, nor any
of them, always tarry in this Militant Church, nor Christ's care cease, nor
his promise be frustrate at any time.

2 How then is this performed? The Royal Psalmist How sons are bo^^ by the
Church and. made fathers
in spirit of Prophecy, foreseing the Succession of Pastors, which should
continually feed and govern the Church of Christ, speaks thus unto her [For
Ps. 44. v. 17.
thy fathers, there are borne sons to thee: thou shall make them Princes over
all the earth.] The Apostles were the fathers sent by Christ, which begat the
Christian Church: by preaching the Gospel, converted many Nations; by
Baptism, many sons were borne to the Church; by Apostolical ministry,
many particular Churches were founded, al members of one universal militant
Church. Of these her own sons, the same Church ordeineth Bishopes, and other
Pastors; so making them spiritual Princes over all the earth. And that in the
same Monarch^cal form of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and sacred subordination,
as at first our Savior ordained: so does he conserve and continue it [For
Jesus Christ (says Heb. 13. v. 8.
S. Paul to the Christian Hebrews) yesterday, and to day, the same also for
ever.] And therefore his fact in ordeining one Apostle Superior of the rest,
sufficiently instructs us, that he has therwithal instituted one Apostolical
Bishope, successor of the sa^e chief Apostle, the ordinary Superior of al
other Bishopes, though there were none other proof besides in holy Scripture.
Nevertheless the same Christian doctrine, is further confirmed, by diverse of
those sacred textes, by which S. Peter's Supremacy is already declared, and
also by some others. And by no place at al in holy Scriptures, can the
contrary ever be proved, nor with any reason avouched. The perpetual
succession of one supreme head in the


3 Among other, proofs, this truth is easily understood by the figure thereof.
For in the old Testament, there was ever one visible head of Gods Church of
Christ, is proved by example of the old Testament.
Genesis 5. v. 1. 3. 6. etc. Genesis 10. v. 1. 2^. 1. Par. 1. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. Exo. 6.
v. 1. 28. Exo. 29. v. 30. Leuit. 8. v. 2. 1^. Nu. 20. v. 25. Ps. 44. ^. 18. Is.
62. v. 6. Ezech. 37. v. 24.
Church: one chief Patriarch in the Law of nature. In the written Law, for his
time, Moses extraordinary, but most part of the same time, Aaron was the
ordinary high Priest. Him succeeded Eleazer his son; after him, his son
Phinees, and so other High Preistes in continual succession. Much more assured
is the succession of chief Pastors in the new Testament [They shall be mindful
of Gods glory and name in all generation and generation. Upon thy wales (says
God to Jerusalem, the Church in all Nations) I have appointed watchmen all the
day and a^ ^^^ night; for ever they shall not hold their peace: you that
remember our Lord, hold not your peace.] These and other Prophets, foreshewing
that there shall ever be Pastors in the Church, presuppose their subordination
in v^itie, under one head. Which Ezechiel expressly affi^meth of Christ, by the
name of David [My servant David (says our Lord) shall be King over them, and
there shall be ONE PASTOR of them al] which undoubtedly is Christ, sometime
visible ^n earth, and still inuisibly teaching by his visible Vicar, one known
supreme Pastor, who is also necessary by this Prophets doctrine, for the
uniting of al Nations in the Church of Christ. Because none can be
authentically sent, It is necessary for the sending of preachers into heathen
countries.
Romans 10. v. 15.
to preach unto infidels, but by the Supreme Pastor of Christ's flock. For one
flock necessarily requires one Pastor: and a visible body, a visible head.
Yea such a head, as does and must mutually cooperate with other members, and b^
assisted by them, as having need of their help (which Christ our principal
head needs not) For of such a head S. S. Paul speaks of such a h^ad* as
has need of seete, and other
Paul speaks: exhorting al estates of the Church, each sort to do their
functions with peace and concord: showing that none is able to execute al
requisite offices; but al have need of others help. For example. Amongst
other members of a natural body, resembling the diverse members of the Church,
[the head (says he) can not say to the feet, you 1. Cor. 12. v. 20.
are not necessary for me] which speech can not be rightly applied to our
Savior Christ, because he can truly say to the feet, and to al other members
of his Church, you are not necessary for me. For although he of his good
pleasure, uses the ministry of his servants, yet he needs them not, for
he can do what him pleases without them. And [when Luc. 17. v. 10. Job. 22.
v. 3.
they have done al things that were commanded them; they must say we are
unprofitable seruantes] because to Christ, [they bring no profit] to him they
are not necessary. Two things therefore by this Apostolical doctrine we
learn, very conformable to the Prophet even now alleged; that the Mistical
body of Christ, has one visible head; and that it has such a head, as needs
other members, and namely feet, which are Preachers of Gods word, called
[the Is. 52. v. 7. Romans 10. v. 15.
beautiful ^eete of them that Euangelize peace, that Euangelize good things.
This ministerial head has his eminent authority for the confirmation of the
whole body.


4 This ministerial head therefore, is the Pastor of Pastors in earth, the
supreme visible head, above al other members. more especially priuileged, for
the confirmation of his brethren; because he is the invincible Rock, whereon is
continually building, and daily adding, of more faithful souls. [Vpon this
Rock (said our Savior, having designed his Apostle Mat. 16. v. 18. Io. 21. v.
16. 17.
S. Peter for this purpose) will I build my Church.] It is clear also, that our
Lord after his Resurrection constituted his former designed Deputy with charge
to seed both Lambs and Sheep. But this his fact was but the beginning of his
promised work, for this work is, and still will be in hand, til the end of this
world. And therefore this ministerial visible Rock, is still in the world. Else
could not visible persons be adjoined to an invisible or imperceptible
fundation, which perpetual Apostolical office, and continual building, S. Paul
describing, teaches, that [Christ gave, some Apostles, and some Ephesians. 4. v*
11. 12.
Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, to
the consummation of the Saints (or faithful) unto the work of the ministry:
unto the building of the (Church the mistical) body of Christ, until we meet
al into the unity of faith, 13.
and knowledge of the Son of God.] Whereby it is evident, that Apostolical
authority and function, remains in the Church, even to the end of this
world.

5 And that the same resideth in S. Peter's successor, Christ's prayer that S.
Peter's faith should never fail, has special effect in S. Peter's successors.
is likewise evident, besides al former proofs, by our Saviors declaration to
S. Peter, that whereas [Satan had required to sift and try them al: he Luc. 22.
v. 31. 32.
had specially prayed that Peter's faith should not fail.] Which different
providence toward him, more then toward the others, perteined (as the event
haith showed) to their successors, rather then to them selves. For none of them
in their own persons, ever failed in their faith, after they once believed
Christ's Resurrection. But in their successors the difference is most clear.
For the successors of all the other Apostles, some sooner, some later, al now
many hundred years since, have failed in faith, and their particular
Provinces, are fallen from the union of one head, and into other errors. many
also into Turcisme, and Paganism. Only the successors of S. Peter, remain in
the same faith and Religion, without change; through the efficacy of Christ's
prayer, and singular providence, that Peter's faith shall never fail, nor the
gates of hell prevail, against the Church builded upon this Rock.

6 Now to dispute who is S. Peter's successor, i^ no less strange, then to make
doubt of all the successions, as well Ecclesiastical as temporal in the whole
world. For there is no greater certentie, that Romulus, Numa, Caesar, Cicero,
and Nero, were sometimes in Rome* nor that our English Nation came from
Ge^manie, and possessed the greatest part of this land, which before perteined
to the Ancient Britans, whom we call Walshmen; nor that we the same English
Nation, were converted from Paganism to Christianity by S. Augustine, and
other Religious men, sent for this purpose by S. Gregory called the great,
then Pope and Bishope of Rome; nor that William Duke of Normandy, did conquer
The Protesta^t^ paradox that S. Peter was never at Rome, is no^ less absurd
then to say: that William Duke of Normandy, did not conquer England. And the
like.
England, and became King thereof; nor that King Henry the seventh, overcame
King Richard the third, and afterward reigned King of England. Neither is
there more certainty of the beginninges, and successions of any other Kings,
or Bishopes of Christian Countries: then there is of S. Peter's residing
sometimes, and finally dying, in Rome. A thing testified, not only by all
Ecclesiastical Histories, innumerable Fathers, both Greek, and Latin: but also
known from age to age, without interruption, by the perpetual monuments of
places in that City where he resorted, exercised sacred functions, where he
was imprisoned, where he died by Martyrdom on a Cross. By the memories of his
Sepulcher, and Relics; together with S. Paul's, who died there the same day.
By the Records also of the Martyrdomes of other thirty two Bishopes his next
successors, al Martyrs for the same faith. Of S. Siluester also a holy
Confessor, and so of their continual successors even to this present Bishope,
and Pope, Paul the fifth. Besides which vndoubtful witnesses, to require
further proof of S. Peter's being in Rome by holy Scriptures, is both
ridiculous (as though neither point of faith, nor matter of fact, can be
certain, except it be expressed in holy Scriptures) and also superfluous,
because it is abundantly proved otherwise. And therefore may we boldly say, that
the denial of it, is obstinate folly, grounded in malice, of those that hate
the same holy seat. A Paradox feaned by John Calvin; broached, and bruted by
him, and the like, for lack of other means, for to hold up their badde
cause, and new doctrines.

7 Whereas therefore our Adversaries exact proof We require of our Adversary to
prove by holy Scripture, that S. Peter was never at Rome. We also prove by S.
Peter's Epistle, that he writ the same in Rome.
of this point by the holy Scripture; we answer. First, that we being so
long and undoubted possessors of the affirmative assertion, that S. Peter was
at Rome, and died there; we justly plead prescription, and put our adversaries
to prove the contrary by holy Scripture. Secondly, we avouch, that S. Peter
writ his first Epistle extant in the New Testament, then resident in the
City of Rome, which he mistically called Babylon saying: [The Church 1. Pet.
5. v. 13.
saluteth you that is in Babylon coelect.] This we say and hold, with many
Ancient, learned, and holy Fathers and Doctors, for more then probable. But
whether this place prove it or no; we hold and believe amongst other points of
faith, that there is, and ever shall be, to the end of this world, an
Apostolical seat in the Militant Church of Christ, according to S. Paul's
doctrine to the Ephesians. Ephesians. 4. v. 11. 13.
And by evident reason we deduce, that the Bishopes No other Church does, not
can, at this time challenge con^^nual succession ^om any of the Apostles but
on^e the Roman.
seat of Rome, is the Apostolical seat, and that none other seat, can
rightly pretend, so to be at this day, but only that of Rome. And this may
suffice for our purpose, touching the first mark of the true Church. which is
unity and consent, consisting in belefe of the same faith and Religion of al
faithful Christians, and in confession thereof in union with one supreme
spiritual Pastor, and head of the whole Church in earth: and so I conclude the
same. And none other is the true Church of Christ which has this mark of
unity and consent.

The true Church of Christ is Holy. ARTICLE. 37.
AN other mark of the true Church is Sanctity, As a tree is known by the
fruicte, so the true Church by the effect of her doctrine, tending to piety
and holiness.
according to the Apostles Creed: where we acknowledge the Church to be Holy.
Our Savior also gave this note to discern true and false Prophets [by their
fruictes. A good tree Mat. 7. v. 17. 18. 20.
yeldeth good fruicte (says he) and the evil tree yeldeth evil fruictes. A
good tree cannot yield evil fructes: neither an evil tree yield good fruictes
therefore by their fruictes you shall know them. For every tree is known by his
fruicte.] Where therefore we see holy and wholesome doctrine to be taught
yelding good fruictes, as frequent prayer, much fasting, many good works;
often repairing to holy Sacraments, special care to keep Gods commandments,
observation of Euangelical counsels, with continual endeuoures to proceed in
virtues, to the honor of God, and edification of al men, there may we well
think to be the true Christian Church. And those which give way to loosnes of
life, can not be the true Church.
Contrariwise, we may assuredly know that congregation to be a Sinagogue of
Satan, which teaches and practices little prayer, few, or inordinarie fastes,
but only when every one will; which holds opinion, that no good works merit
any reward, that no Sacrament remitteth sin, nor conferreth grace; that the
commandments are impossible to be kept; al vows of perpetual chastity, and
of other state of Religious life, to be unlawful, whereof follows both less
care to keep Gods precepts, or to do other good works whereunto al men are
bound: and also Mat. 25. v. 42. 1. Tim. 5. v. 12.
the breach and contempt of Sacred vows; which S. Paul calls [Breach of
faith and damnable.] Neither is the Church only known and discerned especially
in these days from the false pretended, and reformed companies, by the note of
holiness, but by the same is also most excellently adorned, and renowned, that
albeit many of her members are sinners, yet she loses not the denomination,
but still is Holy, by reason of her holy faith, holy doctrine, holy
Sacrifice, Sacraments, with other Rites, and holy functions. And in respect
also of many true holy servants of God, ever existing in the Church, out of
which there can not be any holy person, nor true sanctity at al [no more
then a branch can bring forth fruicte unless Io. 15. v. 4.
it be in the vine] or a separated member live that is not in the body.

2 Of which double privilege as well to be known The true servants of God were
known by their holy conversation.
by her holiness, as to be singularly adorned therewith, let us see more
particular testimonies of holy Scriptures. By the holy conversation of
Abraham, and Genesis 20. v. 14.
Sara, with their family [Abimelech King of Gerare, saw that they were the
people and servants of God.] And whereas before he thought to make them his
subjects; seeing them to be protected of God, presented Abraham with honorable
gifts, granting him al freedom and privilege: [the land is before 15.
you (said he) dwell whersoeuer it shall please thee.] Isaac also gained peace
and estimation with the Philistines, Genesis 26. ^. 16. 26. 27. 28.
who first expelled him from them; but afterward made leauge with him, yelding
this reason of their better affection toward him [we saw (said they) that the
Lord is with thee] when God had multiplied the children of Israel brought them
out of Egypt, and made with them an express covenant, that he would be their
only God, and they should be his peculiar people. He promised them two especail
priuilegies; Preistly function, whereby they might rightly serve him; and
sanctity, that he might justly reward their service saying: [You shall Ex. 19.
v. 6.
The peculiar people of God were called aholie nation.
be unto me a Preistly Kingdom; and a holy Nation.] So he gave them
accordingly spiritual functions, [holie Rites, and holy precepts] caused them
Ex. 20. v. 21.
to make a [holie Tabernacle, with the Arc of Testament, Propitiatory,
Altars, holy Vestiments; al implementes and ornamentes] thereunto requisite.
Finally in the principal ornament of the High Priest The law is holy, and
requires holiness.
[the Plate of sacred veneration, God commanded Ex. 39. v. 29.
to be engra^en; The holy of our Lord.] Very often inculcated his general
[Precept to all the assembly of the children of Israel: Be ye holy, because
Leuit. 11. v. 44. 46. Leuit. 19.
I the Lord your God am holy. Sanctify your selves, and be holy, because I
am the Lord your God: keep my precepts and do them; I the Lord that sanctify
you. You shall be holy unto me, because v. 2. Chapter 20. v. 7. 8. 16. Deuteronomy. 4. v.
6. 7. 8. 9.
I the Lord am holy. And I have separated you from other peoples that you
should be mine. This is your wisdom and understanding before al Peoples.
Neither is there other Nation so great, so renowned, that has the Ceremonies,
and just judgments, and the whole Law, which I will set forth this day before
your eyes: Keep thy self therefore, and thy soul carefully. Thou shall not
make league with Idolaters, Dent. 7. v. 23. 5. 6. Chapter 14. v. 2.
thou shall not make marriages with them. Overthrow their Altares, and break
their statues, and cut down their groves, and burn the sculptiles: because
thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God. The Lord thy God has chosen thee
to be his peculiar people of al peoples that are upon the earth. Our Lord has
spoken to thee, that thou should Deuteronomy. 26. v. 18. 19.
keep al his commandments, and he make thee higher then al Nations which he
created, to his praise and name, and glory, that thou may be a holy people
of our Lord thy God, as he has spoken. The same title of holiness is ascribed
to Gods peculiar people, by the Prophets.


3 As the Law, so likewise the Prophets, amongst other excellent properties,
asscribe holiness to the Church. King David distinguishes her by this title
from al other congregations. For albeit God works marvelous things in the
whole world; yet Ps. 67. v. 67.
nowhere else does he bestow sanctity. [God in his holy place. God that makes
men to inhabit of one manner in a house. Holiness becomes thy house Ps. 92. v.
5. Ps. 98. v. 8. Ps. 113. v. 2. Ps. 131. v. 13. 14. 15. 16.
o Lord. Exalt ye the Lord our God; and adore ye in his holy mount; because
the Lord our God is holy. Iewrie was made his sanctification, Israel his
Dominion] signifying that the Israclites were the peculiar people whom God
sanctified, and in whom he especially dwelled and reigned [Because our Lord
has chosen Sion: he has chosen it for an habitation to him self. this is my
r^st for ever and ever (says our Lord) here will I dwell, because I have chosen
it. Blessing, I will bless her widow, her poor I will fill w^^h breades. Her
Preistes I will cloth with salvation: and her Saints shall rejoice, with
ioyfulnes.] This Spouse of Christ is described in the Can. 3. v. 6.
Canticles [ascending by the desert as a little rod of smoke of the aromatical
spices of Mirh and Frankencense, and of al powder of the Apoticarie] that Is.
4. v. 3.
is, full of al holy virtues and good works [Euerie one that shall be left in
Sion, and shall remain in See Isa. 4. v. 3. Chapter 11. v. 9. Chapter 27. v. 13. Chapter
48. v. 2. Chapter 56. v. 7. Chapter 63. v:
Jerusalem (says Isaias) shall be called holy, every one that is written in
life in Ierusalem] Generally the Prophets utter their discourses of the Church
by these terms [The holy Mount, The holy City The holy People: Isra^l is
holy to our Lord, The holy City Jerusalem; Monnt Sion shall be holy and the
like.

4 Accordingly in the new Testament, Holiness is more Luc. 1. v. 74.
Chapter 63. v. 18. Chapter 64. v. 11. Iere. 2. v. 3. Chapter 31. v. 23. Ezech. 20. v. 40.
Dan. 3. v. 28. Chapter 9. v. 11. Chapter 12. v. 7. Iocl. 2. v. 1.
required, and more abundantly given [that without fear (said just Zachary)
being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve our Lord in holiness
and Justice before him al our days.] So his blessed Son John the Baptist, by
life and doctrine, preached holiness, teaching [sinners to do penance] Mat. 3.
v. 8. Io. 15. v. 14.
penitents [to bring forth worthy fruictes thereof.] Our Savior confirmed the
same in all his actions, and in his sermons, assirming that [his servants and
friends are known by keeping his Precepts.] S. Paul commends the Romans,
not only for their holy faith, as being [renowmed in the whole world] but also
Romans 1. v. 5. Chapter 16. v. 19. Romans 6. v. 19. To. 12. v. 1. 2. 1. Cor. 5. v. 8.
Gal. 5. v. 25. Chapter 6. v. 9. 15. Ephesians. 1. v. 4. Ephesians. 4. v. 1.
for [their obedience which was published in every place] encoraging them
toprocede, and [exhibite Confirmed in the new testament.
their bodies to serve Justice unto sanctification, a living host, holy
pleasing God; not co^formed to this world, but reformed in the newnes of their
minde] Admonishes the Corinthians [to purge the old leven, and become new
past, to feast in the Azimes of sincerity.] Likewise the Galatians [that if
they live in the spirit; they also must walk in spirit, and doing good, not to
fail, that so in time they may reap good not failing. For in Jesus Christ,
neither Circumcision avails, nor prepuce, but a new creature.] He teaches
the Ephesians, that [God has chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy and
immaculate in his sight] beseching [al to walk worthy of the vocation in which
they are called.] Not a small part of al his Epistles, is exhortatiue to
holiness of life: and the other Apostles, writ much more of the necessity of
good works, presupposing true faith. Both which are in the Church, and in Art.
45
none other congregation, whereof we shall speak more in due place, having here
only touched that point as by the way, to show, that notwithstanding great and
daily sinners amongst the faithful; yet the Church is truly called holy.

5 But now especially we speak of holiness as it is Gods true servants have
been called by diverse names for distinction sake.
a notorious mark amongst other titles whereby the true Church is known. For
as when [God having Genesis 2. v. 19.
formed al beasts of the earth, and fowls of the air, brought them to Adam,
that he might see what to call them, and all that Adam called any creature, the
same is his name] and by such names, each kind is known from others: even so
the faithful servants of God, have always been distinguished and known by
certain names and titles, from other that serve false Gods, or follow false
religions. And therefore it will not be ungrateful I suppose, nor unprofitable,
but rather necessary, for all such as be in doubt, which is the true Church, to
consider by what ordinary names the true servants of God have been usually
called and distinguished from other peoples of false and of no religion. For by
this very means if there were no other way of trial (as indede there be many)
al may be sufficiently satisfied that sincerely search the truth, with resolute
mind to embrace it when it is declared unto them.

6 Wherefore to repeat this point from the beginning; shortly after that Cain
made separation from his parents, and brethren, and as the holy Scripture
relates it [went forth from the face of our Lord] Genesis 4. v. 16.
Gods true servants, not only for their more comforth, but also for distinction
sake, were called [ the 1. The sons of God.
sons of God] And the other which were gone out, were called the sons of
men. These two sorts were so distinct companies, and perteyned to opposite
cities, of God, and of this wicked world, that it was a grievous fault in [the
sons of God to take Genesis 6. v. 2. 4.
wines of the daughters of men.] Of which untowardly marriages, came the wicked
generations of monstrous great people called Giants.

7 For these and other sins, the world being drowned, eight persons only
reserved alive, of whom mankind being again multiplied: the devil yet eftsoon
seduced whom he could. And by false and violent dealing of some, the most part
conspiring or yelding to build an high Tower under pretense to avoid the
danger of the like sloud: the Patriarch Heber with his family was free from
that presumptuous attempt, Genesis 11. v. 7.
which God so confounded, by division of their tongues, that they could no
further build. And only Heber, and the rest that were innocent, kept their
ancient tongue: which thence-forward, was 2. The Hebrews.
called, for distinction sake, the Hebrew tongue. And those true servants of
God, began to be called the Hebrews, especially those that succeeded him in
true Religion, and were of the line of his son Phaleg. For of his other son
Iectan, came thirtene Nations, Genesis 10. v. 25. 26. Genesis 14. v. 13. Genesis 39. v.
14. 17. Genesis 40. v. 15. Chapter 41. v. 12. Chapter 43. v. 32. Ex. 3. v. 18. Chapter 5. v.
3. Chapter 7. v. 16. * Genesis 36.
of so many diverse tongues, as appears in the Genealogies of Sem. And so
[Abraham was surnamed the Hebrew, when he dwelt in Mambre, nere to Sodom] and
so were al of his progeny by Isaac and Jacob, called Hebrews. The Egiptians
called Joseph an Hebrew; and him self called his Country where his Father and
brethren dwelt, the land of the Hebrews, which was a part of Chanaan, but this
name belonged to the^ people, not to the Country. And which especially shows
our purpose, God was called, the Lord God of the Hebrews.

8 But besides this name (which continued til Christ his time) for more
particular distinction from other Nations, which were also descended from
Heber, and Abraham; the peculiar people of God, were called 3. The Children of
Israel.
the Children of Israel. Especially after their parting out of Egypt. Which
sussiced til by the division of their kingdom, the greater part violently
usurped the name of Israel, calling them selves, the kingdom v. 31. Ex. 1. v.
1. 7. 9. 13. Chapter 3. v. 10. Chapter 4. v. 22. Chapter 7. v. 4. Leuit. 1. v. 2. etc. 2.
Esd. 4. v. 1. 2. Chapter 6. v. 2. 3. 4. Mat. 10. v. 5. Io. 4. v. 9. 22. Apoc. 2. v.
9. Chapter 3. v. 9.
of Israel; and the other was called the kingdom of Judah; wherwithal happened
the enormous schism first made by Jeroboam, continued by others til their
captivity, and lastly renewed with erection of a schismatical Temple in
Ga^izim, in the Country of Samaria.

9 By which occasion, a further distinction being 4. The Jews.
necessary, the true Israelites were called the Jews, and the schismatikes,
Samaritanes. Between whom grew so great difference, that each part refrained
conversation with the other. Albeit the Samaritanes were in error [adoring
they knew not what, and salvation was of the Jews.] These were the four
general surnames appropriated to the faithful of the old Testament whereby the
true Church was known and discerned from Infidels, Paganes, Heritikes, and
Schismatikes.

10 Likewise the faithful of the new Testament, in shorter time, even in the
primitive Church of Christ, received proper titles, by which, the true Church
in all succeding ages, has been, and is, clerly known, from al Infidels,
Heathnish peoples, Jews, Turks, Heritikes and Schismatikes. First whiles
Christ him self in his own person, preached his holy Gospel, those that
believed his doctrine, 5. Disciples.
were called his Disciples, not only those which in Io. 3. v. 2. Io. 19. v. 38.
Act. 9. v. 36.
special manner were sent to preach: but also others, as Nicodemus, Joseph,; yea
also devout women had the general name of Disciples.

11 But after the coming of the Holy Ghost, those that believed in Christ, and
by holy baptism were incorporated into his mistical body, the holy Church,
6. The Saints. The Holy.
were entitled by the name of Saints: and thereby known and distinguished
from the Jews that remained obstinate against our Savior. By this name
Ananias a Disciple at Damascus, co^sidently called his brethren of the same
faith in Christ; when he was warned by a vision from God, to repair to Saul
newly converted. For hereupon he answered [Lord I have Act. 9. v. 13.
heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints in
Jerusalem.] S. Luke calls them by the same name, relating that S. Peter Act.
9. v. 33.
making a visitation [came (says he) to the Saints that dwelt at Lidda.]
Adding that S. Peter being at Ioppe, called the Saints to receive 41.
comforth of the reviving of a holy woman from death. S. Paul acknowleging his
own former Act. 26. v. 10.
false zeal: says he had shut up many of the Saints in prison. Severally
in all his Epistles saluting those to whom he writ, he calls them Romans 8. v.
28. Chapter 12. v. 13. Chapter 15. v. 25. 26. 31. Chapter 16. v. 15. 1. Cor. 14. v. 33. Chapter
16. v. 1. Ephesians. 2. v. 19. Chapter 3. v. 8. Chapter 6. v. 18. Phil. 4. v. 21. 22. Iac.
2, v. 26.
the Saints. Also upon other occasions he so uses most frequently the same
term, requesting the Romans to assist the necessity of the Saints, telling
them that he is going to Jerusalem to minister relife to the Saints [to the
poor Saints that are in Jerusalem.] Besecheth their prayers that he may be
delivered from the Insidels in Iewrie, and that the oblation of his service,
may become acceptable to the Saints. Saluteth all the Saints there. To the
Corinthians he avouches, that he taught peace in all the Churches of the
Saints. Commends to them to make collections for the Saints. He
comfort the Ephesians, and in them all the faithful, that they are Citizens
of the Saints, and the domestical of God. Without arrogancy says of
himself. To me the least of all the Saints* is given this grace, a mong the
Gentiles, to Euangelize. He wills them to pray instantly for all the Saints.
Salute (says he to the Philippians) every Saint. All the Saints salute you.
I will omit other places for this purpose. The other Apostles likewise
acknowledge and use this title of holiness as proper 1. Pet. 1. v. 15. Iud. v. 3.
Apoc. 5. v. 8. Chapter 8. v. 3. 4. Chapter 13. v. 7. 10. Chapter 14. v. 12. Chapter 19. v. 8.
Chapter 20. v. 9.
to the Church, and to her children in general. S. John, according as was
reveled unto him, declares the communication that is between the Saints in
heaven, and the Saints in earth saying [The four living creatures, and the
twenty four Seniors (Saints in heaven) fell before the Lamb, having harpes
and golden vials, full of odoures which are the prayers of Saints, that is, of
the faithful in earth. For he calls them Saints against whom Antichrist
shall make battle [whose patience and faith shall be tried] whose constancy in
virtues, signified by [silke, wherewith the Church is clothed, and the
iustifications of Sainctes] So proper it is to the Church of Christ to be
holy, and to be truly called [the Camp of Sainctes] that most Sectaries,
especially of this time, rarely or never in their sermons, or writings,
vouchs^ife her this title. For they well know it agrees not fitly to their
congregation, but rather puts Christian people in mind of our holy Mother,
against which they make opposition. But the holy Apostles inspired by the
Holy Ghost, taught us to call her holy in our daily Creed.

12 An other most renowned title of the Church, 7. Christians.
and of her children, is the name Christian, first asscribed to the faithful
[Disciples of Christ at Antioch] Act. 11. v. 26.
when by S. Paul's, and S. Barnabies preaching, there was a great multitude
converted. Of which most honorable name, there is but only twice more any
mention in holy Scriptures. Once by King Agrippa saying to S. Paul [A little
thou perswadest Act. 26. v. 28.
me to become a Christian.] And once S. Peter expresses this name in his first
Epistle, admonishing al to look to their behavior, that [none 1. Pet. 4. v.
15. 16.
suffer as a malefactor; b^t if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, and let
him glorify God in this name.] By this are the faithful rightly distinguished
from Jews, Turks, and Paganes, but not so plainly from heritikes, who being
once christened, keep the name in some sort of Christians. Neither did the
holy Simb. Apostol. Luc. 10. v. 16.
Apostles put this name Christian in their Creed, 8. Catholics.
but after the title holy, added Catholic, by which we are to know true and
false Christians.

The true Church of Christ is Catholic. ARTICLE. 38.
AMongst al Marks of the Church, the name Sectaries practice two ways to
deprive the true Church of the name Catholic.
Catholic, has so prevailed, that false pretending congregations, could
never by any slight get this title; whereof finding them selves utterly
destitute, partly they strive to dispossess the true Church thereof, by
imposing upon her other names framed for their present purpose. As the Arrians
By nicknaming Catholics by other names.
called the defenders of Christ's Consubstantialitie with God the Father;
Homousians: and the sectaries of this time, call those which hold the same faith
with the Pope, the Bishope of Rome, Papists; And by putting the name Catholic
out of the Creed.
partly they endeavor to extinguish the name Catholque, as Lutheran
Cathechismes have thrust it out of the Apostles Creed, putting in Christian for
it: and some English Bibles have left out the word Catholic in the title of
S. James, and S. Iudes Epistles; some others have the word General in place of
it, fearing and abhorring the very ^ound of it, because in the proper
signification which is Universal, it does confound them: though in the titles
of these Epistles, it signifies, that whereas other Epistles, namely of S.
Paul, were directed to particular Churches or persons for the benefit of al:
these were immediately written to the whole Church. So in this point, as
likewise in some others, our Adversaries are like to the woman whose child
being dead, contended for an others living child, and when she could not
obtain it, cried to have the living child destroyed [be it neither mine nor
thine (said the false 3. Reg. 3. v. 26. 27.
pretending mother) but let it be deuided] No (said wise Solomon) give the
living child to the true mother] let it not be killed. So our B. Savior
greater then Solomon, protector of his Church, will not have the title
Catholic, thrust out of our Creed, not mangled nor extinguished, but to
remain intyre to our true and holy mother the Catholic Church.

2 By which especial make amongst al others, the That the Church is universal,
is proved by many holy Scriptures.
true Christian Church is known from al heretical co^^enticles. For albeit in
the whole Bible, the Church is not expressly called Catholic; yet the thing it
self that (...) in many Nations, and shall be propagated into the universal
terrestr^al world is abundantly proved by the holy Scriptures, whereof we shall
here recite (...) store. Noe prophesying of his (...) said (...) be (...), a
servant Genesis 9. v. 25. 26. 27.
of servants shall he be unto his brethren. Blessed be the Lord God of Sem,
Chanaan be his servant. God enlarge Iapheth, and dwell he in the Tabernacles of
Sem, and Cha^^^n be his servant.] Fulfilled as in the figure, when the children
of Israel, of Sems race, subdued the land of Chanaan: Iaphets progeny in the
mean times, inhabiting the utmost coasts of the earth, as well in the
continent, as the Islands. But in the mistical sense principally intended, this
prophecy is more fully performed in this time of the New Testament, when
Infidels, signified by Chanaan, are subjected to Christians, consisting at
first both of Jews and (...), and the Jews shortly after, for the most part,
failing in faith, and impugning Christ; the Gentiles not only succeeded in place
of the Jews, but also the Church by them is dilated into al parts, even to
the ends of the earth. And al Heritikes, and false sects of religion from
time to time, are convinced, and by authority of the Catholic Church,
subdued and corrected. The same dilatation of the Church, was promised Genesis 15.
v. 5. Chapter 17. v. 5. Romans 4. v. 11.
by God to Abraham, that [his seed should be innumerable, as the Stars of
the firmament and sands of the sea] and in confirmation thereof, was called
[the Father of many Nations] not only verified in his natural progenies, but
much more in his spiritual children, for so S. Paul expounds this promise,
and calls [Abraham the Father of all that beleue] in Christ. Also of faithful
Gentiles, called Genesis 22. v. 18. Chapter 26. v. 4. Chapter 28. v. 14. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43.
1. Reg. 2. v. 9. 10. 2. Reg. 22. v. 44 45. Ps. 17. v. 44. 45. 50. Ps. 2. v. 8.
prepuce, that are not circumcised [Because in his seed should be blessed all the Nations of the earth.] Renewed also and confirmed to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Though the Jews Church never failed [God being propitious to the land of his
people] yet in comparison of greater multitudes in the Gentiles borne to
Chirst, holy Anna prophesied that [the barren woman should bear very many,
and she that had many children, was weakened; and our Lord (Christ) shall judge
the ends of the earth.] The Royal Prophet signifies also the vocation of
many Gentiles, in place of the Jews saying in the name of Christ unto God
[Thou wilt keep me to be the head of the Gentiles, the people which I know not,
will serve me, the children aliens will resist me (for some time: nevertheless)
with the hearing of the ear, they will obey me.] God also by the pen of the
same psalmist, says to our Savior Christ [I will give thee the Gentiles for
thine inheritance, and thy possession the ends of the earth.]

3 During the old Testament, the Church was almost That the Church is more
propagated in the new Testament the^ it was in the old, is proved by the
Psalms.
included in one Nation [God is known (said Ps. 75. v. 2. 3.
this Royal Prophet) in Iewrie, in Israel his name is great, his place is made
in peace, and his habitation in Sion] But since our Redemer paid the ransom of
mankind [When God arose unto Judgment, that 10.
he might save all the meek of the earth.] Now is his Kingdom most amply
enlarged, as the same Prophet clearly testifies, in these and the like divine
speeches through his whole Psalmodie saying [With Ps. 21. v. 26. 28. 29. Ps.
38. v. 3. Ps. 34. v. 18. Ps. 39. v. 10. 11. Ps. 44. v. 18. Ps. 64. v. 3. Ps.
65. v. 8. Ps. 66. v. 3. Ps. 67. v. 23. 33. Ps. 71. v. 8. 10. 11. Ps. 85, v. 9.
Ps. 86. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. Ps. 88. v. 3. ^1. etc. Ps. 92. v. 1. 2. 3. Ps, 95. v. 2.
10. Ps. 101. v. 16. Ps 116. v. 1. Ps. 137. v. 4.
thee (o God) is my praise in the great Church. All the ends of the earth shall
remember, and be converted to our Lord. All the families of the Gentiles shall
adore in his sight. Because the Kingdom is our Lords, and he shall have
dominion over the Gentiles. Our Lord upon many waters. Therefore shall peoples
confess to thee. Our Lord a great King over all the earth. Al flesh shall come
to thee. Ye Gentiles bless our Lord. In all Nations thysaluation. Let al
Peoples o God confess to thee. I will convert into the depth of the sea. Ye
Kingdoms of the earth sing to God: sing to our Lord. He shall rule from sea
unto sea: and from the river even to the ends of the rownd world. The kings
of Tharsis, and the Islands, shall offer presents: the kings of Arabia, and of
Saba, shall bring gifts. Al kings of the earth shall adore him: al Nations shall
serve him. Al Nations whatsoever thou have made, shall come and shall adore
before thee o Lord: and they shall glorify thy name. The fundations (of this
Church) in the holy mountains; our Lord Ioueth the gates of Sion, above all the Tabernacles of Jacob. Glorious things are said of thee, o City of God.
Our Lord has reigned* he has established the round world which shall not be
moved. Show forth his glory among the Gentiles: his m^ruelous works in all
peoples. Say ye among the Gentiles, that our Lord has reigned. The Gentiles
shall fear thy name o Lord: and all the kings of the earth thy glory. Praise
ye our Lord al ye Gentiles: praise him al ye peoples. Let all the kings of the
earth, o Lord, confess to thee.] What better proof, then these so often
repeated universal terms, can any man require, for the universality of the
true Christian Church, as well in respect of al places, as persons, Princes, and
peoples of al degrees. Especially if we consider the diverse manners of
Prophetical utterance, sometimes by plain affirmation, other times by way of
praying God it may be; praising God that it is so; congratulating with the
faithful, in inuiting them to be grateful in words, and deeds, every way
foreshewing, that so it will come to pass.

4 Will ye see also like predictions of other Prophets? The same by other
Prophets.
Isaias in a Canticle of thanks to God, for benefits bestowed on al mankind
by Christ, inuiteth the faithful to make known among al people, Gods Is. 12.
v. 4. 5.
so gracious cogitations [Sing ye to our Lord, because he has done
magnifically: show this forth in all the earth.] In an other place, under the
names of Egiptians and Assirians, very great kingdoms, Is. 19. v. 18.
he prophecieth the conversion of al Gentiles [In that day (says he) there
shall be five Cities (that is many Cities) in Egypt, speaking the tongues of
Chanaan (which was then the Country of Gods peculiar people) and swearing
(not by false Gods Ibid. v. 24.
but) by the Lord of hosts.] In that day shall Israel be a third to the
Egiptian and Assirian (meaning they shall agree in participating Gods grace) a
Is. 25. v. 6. 7.
blessing in the midst of the earth. The Lord of hosts will make to al
peoples in this mount, a feast of fat things, a feast of vintage of fat
things full Is. 27. v. 6.
of marrow, of vintage purified from dregs. Israel shall flourish and spring,
and they shall fill the face of the world with seed. Sing ye to the Lord a new
Is. 42. v. 10.
song: his praise is from the ends of the earth. Ye that go down to the sea,
and you the fulness thereof. Ye Islands, and inhabitants of the same. Hear ye
Is. 46. v. 11. 13. Is. 49. v. 1.
Islands, and attend ye peoples from a far. The Gentiles shall walk in thy
light (says this Prophet to the Christian Church) and kings in the brightness
of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and Is. 60. v. 4.
see; al these are gathered together: they are come to thee: thy sons shall
come from a far, and thy daughters shall rise from the side. Then shall thou
see and abound, and thy heart shall m^ru^l and be enlarged, 5.
when the multitude of the sea shall be converted to thee; the strength of the
Gentiles shall come to thee. For the Islands expect me, and the ships of the
sea 9.
in the beginning, that I may bring thy sons from a far. They shall know
their seed in the Gentiles, Is. 61. v. 9.
and their budde in the midst of peoples. All that shall see them shall know
them, that these are the seed which our Lord has blessed. The Gentiles Is.
62. v. 2.
shall see thy JUST ONE, and al kings thy noble one; and thou shall be called
by a new name, which the mouth of our Lord shall name.] Conformably to all this
says the Prophet Jeremy [In that time, Iere. 3. v. 17.
Jerusalem shall be called the Throne of our Lord: and al Gentiles shall be
gath^red together to it in the name of our Lord into Ierusalem] which is
fulfilled in that al Nations some sooner, others later, are joined to the Church
begun in Jerusalem, when most part of the Jews impugning it, refused for to
hear. Yea even such N^^^ons as seemed to be most Iere. 48. v. 47. Chapter 49. v. 39.
rejected* as exp^sly M^ab and Elam, are named for example: that al shall be
converted in these last days of the New Testament. Ezechiel likewise
foresheweth the conversion of al Nations [elder and younger Ezech. 16. v. 61.
in place, and as daughters of the Jews, but by an other covenant.] Osee
[admonisheth the kingdom Ose. 2. v. 23.
of Judah, not to disdain to call the Gentiles brethren, nor Samaria their
sister] in respect that they should be converted to Christ [in greater number
Joel. 2. v. 28.
then the Jews. Especially the Gentiles, unto whom God will say [my people art
thou.] God again says by his Prophet Joel [I will power out my Spirit upon al
flesh.] Micheas says [God shall Mich. 4. v. 4. S^ph. 3. v. 9. Zach. 8. v. 22.
Chapter 14. v. 9.
be magnified, even to the ends of the earth.] Sopho^ias, that [al peoples
shall invoke the name of our Lord with a chosen lip, and serve him with one
shoulder.] Zacharias, that [manie Peoples shall come, and strong Nations, to
seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to beseech the face of our Lord, and
that our Lord shall be King over all the earth.] Malachie relates our Lords
premonition to the Jews saying [From the rising of the Sun, Mal. 1. v. 11.
even to the going down, great is my name among the Gentiles.] Al which most
assured prophecies, and others which we willingly omit, do necessarily show,
that the true Church can not be contained in one or few Countries, nor
restrained to few persons at any time, but is, and must be, universal.

5 Yet here remain principal proofs of this truth of the new Testament; which
I will touch so briefly as well may be. Our Savior upon occasion of a Centurians
Confirmed by Christ and his Apostles.
great faith that was a Gentile, declared that [manie shall come from the East*
and weast (and the Mat. 8. v. 11. Luc. 13. v. 29. Mat. 13. v. 4. 5. 7. Luc. 12.
v. 32.
North, and the South) and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob
in the kingdom of heaven.] By sundry parables he also teaches that of a
small beginning should grow a great body. For albeit when the seed of the
Gospel is sown, three parts perish, and only as it were the fourte part
prospers: yet that in respect of the whole world, the Church is a little
flock; yet being compared with any other commonwealth of the whole world, it
clearly excels it, not only in value from the beginning, but also in
quantity after that it was once propagated by the holy Apostles. For [it is
like Mat. 13. v. 32.
to a gra^e of mustard-seede, which is the least of al seeds: but when it is
grown it is greater then al herbs, and is made a tree. It is also [like to a
little 33.
leaven, which being put into a great quantity, as it were into three measures
of meal, leueneth the whole.] which we see verified of the Christian doctrine
grown over all the world, more dilated then Iudaisme (which was the true
religion, but is long since degenerate:) Larger also extended then Turcisme,
then any sort of Paganism, any sect of heresy, Arianisme, Pelagianisme,
Donatisme, Lolardisme Lutheranisme, Caluinisme, or any other whatsoever.

6 For neither the Arrians which were sometime many, No one Sect of Heretics,
nor other Infidels, is equal in greatness to the true Church.
could be spread in all Christian Provinces, and are long since decayed: nor the
Turks, who do now possess much, can compare with the Catholic Church in
number, or extension of Provinces and peoples, even to the East and West
Indies. And if they were equal in largenes of place, or number of persons, yet
they fail also in universality of time, beginning long after Christianity
was planted in the world. But of antiquity with succession, we are to speak
in the next Article.

7 Concerning Universality of the Church, in respect It is further proved that
the Church is universal in respect of al nations.
of places and persons, our Lord further taught, that [his Gospel should be
preached in the whole Mat. 24. v. 14. Mar. 13. v. 10. Mat. 28, v. 19.
world for a testimony to al Nations.] He also gave commandment so to preach
it: ordeyning his Apostles [to be witnesses unto him in Jerusalem, and in all
Jury, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth.] After Christ's
Ascension, S. Paul received Act. 1. v. 8. Luc. 24. v. 48. Romans 1. v. 5. 8.
the same Commission as extraordinarily raised up for the Gentiles. And to
them, both he, and the former Apostles, and many others, performed this
function [By Christ (says S. Paul to the Rom.) we have received grace, and
Apostleship for obedience of the faith in all Nations] where he congratulateth
with them by the way, that their faith (the Romans faith) was renowned in the
whole world. And to certify, that not in Jerusalem only, nor in Ilyricum, nor
only in Antioch, in Corinth, or in Rome but [certes into all the earth, has the
sound of the Apostles gone forth, and into the ends of the whole Romans 10. v.
18. Ps. 18. v. 5. Romans 15. v. 8. 9.
world their words.] In the same Epistle also he shows by the holy
Scriptures, the privilege of the Church in the Gentiles above the old Sinagogue
of the Jews [Christ Jesus (says he) has been minister of the circumcision
(that is of the Jews) for the verity of God to confirm the promises of the
Fathers. But the Gentiles to honor God for his mercy, as it is written:
therefore will I confess to thee 10.
in the Gentiles o Lord, and will sing to thy name: 11.
Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. Praise our Lord al ye Gentiles, and
magnify him al ye peoples. 12.
there shall be the root of Iesse: and he that shall rise up to rule the
Gentiles, in him the Gentiles shall Romans 16. v. 26.
hope.] After which he concluding says: [the mystery of the Gospel, is opened
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Precept of the eternal God,
to the obedience of faith, known in all Gentiles.] Being at Rome, and finding
many Jews obstinate; he finally denounced unto them, this mystery of the
Gentiles vocation, and great fruict of preaching amongst them saying: [Be it
known therefore Act. 28. v. 20.
to you, that this salvation of God, is sent to the Gentiles: and they will
hear.] Yea the conversion of this plenitude of Gentiles, was so hidden a
Mystery, that [it was notified to the Princes and Potestates in celestials
(that is to angelical powers) Ephesians. 3. v. 10. Colos. 1. v. 6. 23.
by the Chrurch] as the same Apostle writes to the Ephesians; and to the
Colossians, with thanks to God for their happiness in receiving the Gospel,
signifies that it is also [in the whole world, and fructifyeth, and grows
which is preached among al creatures that are under heaven.]

The true Church of Christ is Apostolic. ARTICLE. 39.
COncerning the fourth principal Mark of Protestants and we agree that
Antiquity is a true mark of the Church.
the true Christian Church, which is Antiquity: the English Protestants agree
with us, that the same is an assured note, acknowleging with the N^c^ne Creed,
which they recite in their public service, that the true Church is
Apostolical, as being planted in the world by Christ's Apostles. And so they
pretend, that them selves are of the same ancient Church and right successors
thereof, and charge the Roman (commonly called Catholic) Church, to be
degenerate from the Apostles Church, about some thousand years ago; whereby
they would prove their Church more Ancient then ours, by five or six hundred
years. For better discussing of which controversy, being of singular
importance; we not only accept in very good part, that which they grant, but
also shall here prove it to be true by holy Scriptures, that Antiquity is an
infallible note of the true Church. And withal, that the Christian Church, is
rightly called Apostolical. And then in a several Article show, by this Mark
of Apostolical Antiquity, that the commonly called Catholic (which they now
call the Popish Church) is the Apostolic true Church of Christ. And that their
Protestant church, nor any other dissenting from the Roman, is not, The true
Church was before al Infidelity.
neither can be, the true christian Church.

2 Touching therefore the former point, it is clear there was a true Church in
this world, before Cain began the first malignant church, else it could not have
been said, that [he went forth from the face of our Genesis 4. v. 16.
Lord, and dwelt as a fugitive on the earth] the true Church also continuing,
not only to Noe, but also to Abraham, to Moses, and so to Christ. Whereas other
broken companies rose and changed, and multiplied into innumerable sects of
infidels, newer and newer, none in special becoming ancient without notable
mutation, no nor infidelity in general, had any show of succession, like to
true Religion; which still remained, where al Infidels were drowned in the Al
Infidels were destroyed in Noes flood.
diluge, and some good time passed before new rose. In the New Testament our
Savior teaches plainly, that Mat. 13. v. 25.
the good seed is first sown, and afterward co^^e is ouersowne by the enemy
the devil. As for Iudaisme, which some may object to be more ancient then
Christianity, the contrary is true. For all those Iudaisme which confesses
Christ, is more ancient then Iudaisme which denies him.
holy Patriarchs, and Prophets, and other godly Jews, believed in Christ,
before he came in flesh, though when he came, many obstinate Jews opposed
against him: and more afterward, til this day, such as S. John writes of to
the Churches of Smirna and Philadelphia [which say them selves to be Apoc. 2.
v. 9. Chapter 3. v. 9. Io. 5. v. 39. Luc. 24. v. 25.
Jews, and are not, but are the Sinagogue of Satan] which Jews, with their
corrupted Iudaisme, are much younger then the true Jews, which confessed Christ
to come in manner as he did, to whose testimony our Savior remitted the
incredulous, willing them to search the Scriptures; because all the Prophets did
write of him. So it is certain that the Catholic Church, and the Catholic
Religion, is not only [built upon the fundation of the Apostles] which may
satisfiie Christians; but also [of the Ephesians. 2. v. 20.
Prophets] which confounds the Jews [Iesus Christ him self being the highest
corner stone. who is the eternal Son of God.] As therefore antiquity is a
sure mark of the true Church and Religion: so is the rising after of any new
contrary opnion Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1. 2. 3.
an assured proof of heresy in Christian countries, Which note, whosoever will
avoid, must needs appeal as the Protestants do, unto the ancient faith of
the Apostes, and plead to be more ancient then we. But how well they can
mantaine this plea, rests to be tried.

3 In the mean time that the true Church is rightly Apostolical, or missiue
power remains still in the Church.
called Apostolical which they also acknowledge, is further confirmed by all
those holy Scriptures, that teach the necessity of vocation, and mission of
Ecclesiastical persons, to preach christian doctrine, and to administer the
holy Sacraments; with other sacred Rites. And by the very same also is
clearly proved, that protestants do not succeed to the Apostles, as they
pretend. For the true Church is not only Apostolical, because the Apostles did
first plant it, which is one principal reason as we have already said, and is
allowed by Protestants: but also because al Ecclesiastical power is derived
from Apostolical authority, which ceased not by the temporal death of the
Apostles, but still reside^h in the milita^t Church. And because the Clergy of
the true Church, more peculiarly participateth of the name Apostolical; which
signifies sent, if they were not so sent they were not Clerks at al, nor
Gods spiritual Messengers.

4 As neither in the old Law, could any be a Priest True mission is either
ordinary, or extraordinary.
or a Prophet, except he were sent by Gods ordinance. Whereupon God by his
Prophet Jeremy, denounced them to be no Prophets, which pretended that office
without Mission saying [The Prophets Iere. 14. v. 14.
prophecy falsely in my name: I sent them not, and I commanded them not,
neither have I spoken unto them. Lying vision, and deceiptful divination,
guilf^lnes, and the seduction of their own heart, they prophecy unto you.]
This therefore, is an especial mark to be observed in all preachers, whether they
be sent or no. And so God again and again warned his people not to hear them
at al, that are not sent, for the very first word which they speak saying [the
Lord has spoken] is false, because our Iere. 23. v. 17. 21. 31.
Lord has not spoben to them [they take their tongues and say, our Lord says
it] that is, they unjustly take that authority which is not delivered unto
them. And therefore God always made it manifest, who were his true preachers,
by one of these two means. Either by miracles, as when he sends
extraordinary, or by visible ordination, when he sends ordinary Pastors. So
Moses being extraordinary, to Exo. 3. v. 2. Chapter 4. v. 2. Leuit. 8. v. 2. etc.
prove his mission, had power to work miracles. Aaron being to be made
ordinary high Priest, was consecrated by Moses, and al his sons,
consecrated Preistes. Likewise other Prophets, and other Preistes. Yea our
Savior besides other proofs, and testimonies, proved him self to be Messiah
by many most clear miracles. And sent his Apostles and other Disciples at
first with power to work miracles: But established their function, by the
ordinary course Mat. 10. v. 1.
of Mission [Hauing called his twelve Disciples (says S. Matthew) he gave them
power over unclean spirits, that they should cast them out, and should cure
al manner of diseases, and al manner of infirmity.] Christ at first limited his
Apostles Jurisdiction to certain places, and persons.


5 At which time he limited their mission in respect v. 5. 6.
of place, and persons; commanding them thus: [Into the way of the Gentiles;
and into the cities of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the
sheep that are perished of the house of Israel.] And [after this (says S.
Luke) our Lord designed also Luc. 10. v. 1. 2.
other seanentie two, and sent them two and two into every City and place
whether him self would come.] In which two Missions, appears the Pattern and
order of sending, both the higher degree of Bishopes, and of the lower clergy
other Preistes. with special instruction, that albe^t [the haru^st be much, and
the workmen few] yet must none pass their assigned limits, but [pray to our
Lord to send more workmen into his harvest.] Afterward the Apostles
Afterward extended it into all the earth.
jurisdiction, was extended into all the world. [Al power (says our Savior to
them) is given unto me in heaven and in earth: going therefore, teach ye al
Nations. (And as S. Mark relates this commission) going into the whole world,
preach the Mar. 16. v. 15. 20.
Gospel to al cr^atures. And they going forth, preached euerie-where, our Lord
working with-al and confirming the word, with signs that followed.] In like
sort S. Paul was extraordinarily sent to al Act. 9. v. 1. 15. Gal. 1. v. 1.
Act. 13. v. 2. 3.
Gentiles whosoever; being made also an Apostle, [not of m^n* nei^^er by men,
but by Jesus Christ] touching his first ca^ling; yet took orders [by
imposition of hands of other Apostles, by Gods express commandment.] And
further avouched his calling [by the signs of Apostl^ship done amongst 2. Cor.
12. v. 12.
the Corinthians] and in m^^ne other places [In s^gnes (says he) and wonders,
and migh^^e de^des.]

6 By the ordinary way S. Mathias was choser, and S. Mathias was ordained an
Apostle by election.
Act. 1. v. 15. 21.
ordained an Apostle, when S. Peter in the ^^llege of Apostles, and presence of
the faithful people, declaring [that one of the other Disciples must be elected
to supply the place from whence Iu^as was fallen] two by Judgment of voices
were found fit, and after [the public prayer, the lotte falling to Mathias,
he was adjoined to the other eleven Apostles] and the number of twelve made
again complete. Shortly after as the Church increased, other Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, and al clergy men were ordained by Apostolical authority. The first
were Deacons were ordained by election, position of hands, and mission.
the seven Deacons chosen by the faithful people giving testimony of their
virtues, and so they were consecrated by the Apostles imposition of hands:
Act. 6. v. 3. 6. 8. Act. 7. v. 1. 2. etc. Act. 8. v. 5. 26. 37. Act. 13. v. 2.
3.
which Deacons were not only the keepers, and ditributers of the Churches
temporal goods, which was the occasion that these were then ordered; but also
their more principal functions were to preach, and to baptize, as apeareth in
S. Steven, S. Philippe and the rest. Again besides the twelve Apostles, by the
express commandment of the holy Ghost. S. Paul, and S. Barnabas, were
adjoined above S. Paul, and S. Barnabas adjoined to the Apostles, by imposition
of hands, and mission.
their number, and made Apostles. [Seperate me Saul, and Barnabas (said the
holy Ghost) unto the work whereto I have taken them] whereupon [the other
Apostles fasting, and praying, and imposing hands upon them, dismissed them.]
They also preaching and converting many [ordained Preistes in every Act. 14.
v. 22.
Church with fasting, praying, and imposing of hands.] Many of them were also
Bishopes, for so S. Paul calls them in his Sermom to the Clergy, made at
Miletum, where he exhorted them to be careful of their Pastoral charge saying:
[Take head Act. 20. v. 28.
to your selves and to the whole ^locke wherein the holy Ghost has placed you
Bishopes, to rule the Church of God, which he purchased with his own blood.]
Such also of the Bishopes as first converted any city, Particular Apostles of
those nations which they first converted to Christ.
or country to Christianity, were in a secundarie degree called the Apostles
of the same places. So was [Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians.] Phil.
2. v. 25. Colos. 1. v. 7.
And [Epaphras the Apostle of the Collossians.] By which examples S. Gregory
the great, and S. Augustine sent by him, are called the proper Apostles of our
English nation. And so others of other nations. S. Timothee likewise and S.
Titus, were Bishopes, Other Bishopes, and Preistes, were also ordained by the
Apostles, and other Bishopes.
1. Tim. 3. v. 2. 8. Tit. 1. v. 5. 6. 7.
ordained by S. Paul, and they ordained other Bishopes, Priests, and Deacons:
As is clear by S. Paul's Epistles instructing them, and in them al other
Bishopes, what qualities are required in all Clergy men. Namely in the three
greatest orders of Bishopes, Priests, and Deacons. To which the inferior orders
are presupposed in every one that is to ascend to the higher. Whereof we shall
say more in Part 2. Art.
the proper place. But of al conditions requisite in Clergy men, due vocation
and mission is most essential.

7 As the same Apostle manfestly teaceth in his Epistles to the Romans, and
Hebrews: declaring how much men's salvation depends upon the lawful mission
of pastors by this deduction. For that [none can Romans 10. v. 14. 15.
invoke God to salvation, vales they believe in God whom they in^ocate. And
how shall they believe in him whom they never heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher? But how shall they preach unless they be sent?] Again
touching Mission, he teaches that [Euerie High Priest (and so every Heb. 5.
v. 1. 4.
Clergy man) being taken from amongst men (that is, from the state o^ ^ay-men
whe^in al are borne) is appointed for men in those things that perteine to
God. Neither does ^nie man take the honor to him self, but he that is called
of God as Aaron,] Wherein is proved not only, that they sin most enormiously,
that without due ordination exercise spiritual functions: but also that al such
as take Ecclesiastical power to them selves or take it of them that cannot give
it, are in deed mere laimen, being not ordained by power descending from
Christ's Apostles. And so are no more Preistes, then those 3. Reg. 12. v. 31.
whom Ie^oboam made of the abiectes of the people Chapter 13. v. 33.
which were not of the childeen of Leui.

The true Militant Church is perpetual, from the beginning of the world to the
end. ARTICLE. 40.
Against these four principal Marks now declared, Though Protestants can not
de^^e the (...) some Marks of the Church, ^et they decline from trial by them.
which are Unity, Sanctity, Universality, and Antiquity: our Adversaries
do rather seek euasions, then make direct opposition. For whereas they can not
deny them to be very special proprieties, of the true Church being so clearly
proved by holy Scriptures: yet are they unwilling to try by them which is the
true Church; fores^ing that they agree wholly to the Roman, commonly called
Catholic Church; and not so well to their own congregation, which they pretend
to be the true Christian Church. And therefore they flee so much as they can
from this kind of trial; and when they are pressed therewith, they commonly
answer; that albeit the true Church, is one, holy, Catholic, and
Apostolipue Church; yet is it not (say they) always extant in this world, but
fails some times; or at the least is so hidden, that the world does not see
it nor knows where or in whom it is. To these shifts did the Donatistes flee
in Africa about twelve hundred years ago: and al Protestants use the same
plea now, in these parts of Europe, when they are urged to tell, where or in
whom their pretended Church was, before Luther broke from the Roman Religion,
wherein he lived til he was about forty years old: was also a friar; and
fiftene years being a Priest, daily said Mass. And so to our just demand,
they generally make this dooble doubtful answer, that either the true Church
was for many hundred Therefore we also prove other two Marks.
years wholly decayed, which they say is possible; or else it was often times
so small, that it could not be seen; except perhaps there were some few, that
knew one an other; though no man knows now who they were, nor where they were
hidden. But that the reader may more fully see, how false these imaginations
are, we will here show by many plain textes of holy Scripture, touching the
former part of their answer, that the true Church is perpetual: and then
concerning the later part, that it is also perpetually visible. The perpetuity
of the Church, is declared by Moses, from the beginning of the world til his
time.


2 First therefore that the Church continued without interruption from the
beginning, til the written Law was given, is manifest by the sacred History,
where Moses most exactly declares, the continual succession Genesis 5. Genesis 10.
Genesis 5. v. 10. 26.
of Patriarchs, with the times of their birthes, and terms of their lives.
Whereby we see that each of them saw their own progenies multiplied by many
generations, al of them living many years before they came to the supreme
government of the whole Church. So far was the Church from interruption that
it contained many particular families, as it were Dioses and Parishes,
subordinate to one supreme head of al. For Adam the origin of mankind, lived
to see Mathusale in the eight Generation; yea and Lamech in the ninth.
M^thusale lived to see Sem the Son of Noe nere an hundred years old. Sem
lived, til Jacob the Nephew of Abraham was borne. So that these three
Patriarchs, Adam, Mathusale, and Three Patriarchs comprehended in their times,
above two thousand years.
11.
Sem, comprehend all the time from the beginning, til the birth of Jacob,
otherwise called Israel, father of twelve sons, which were the heads of the
12 Tribes. In all above two thousand years. Al which time, the same faith and
Religion, continued in these and the other Patriarchs, and in their proper
families notwithstanding the breaches which were made from them by collateral
Generations of Chain, Cham, Iaphet, Lot, Ismael, Esau, and others whose
progenies fell into innumerable sects of infidelity. And the same Church
remained entire, more and more increasing, for all the cruel persecution of the
Egiptians; as Moses records saying: [The children of Israel Exo. 1. v. 7. 8.
9.
increased, and as it were springing up, did multiply; and growing strong
excedingly, filled the land. In the mean time, there arose a new king over
Egypt that knew not Joseph, and he said to his people. Behold the people of the
children of Israel, is much: and stronger then we: Come let us wisely oppress
10.
the same, lest perhaps it multiply. Therefore he 11.
set over them masters of the works to afflict them with burdens. And the
more they did oppress them; 12.
so much the more they multiplied and increased. And the king of Egypt said to
the mid-wiues commanding them: when you shall be mid-wiues to the Hebrew 15. 16.
women, and the time of d^liuerie is come, if it be a man child, k^l it; If a
woman, reserve her. He after this commanded al his people saying: whatsoever
shall be borne of the male sex, cast it into the river. 22.
But God heard the cry of the children of Israel, and their groaning, and
remembered the covenant which he made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Exo. 2. v.
23. 24. Nu. 22. v. 2. Nu. 2^. v. 19. 20. Ios. 24. v. 10.


3 In the desert, after their delivery out of Egypt, God also conserved his
Church all the time of the Judges, and Kings.
Balac, king of Moab, hired Balaam the sorcerer to curse them: But he
contrariwise was forced, by Gods ordinance, to speak good things of them,
yea and God by him, blessed them, and delivered them out of his hand: which he,
in his excuse to Balac, confessed plainly saying: [God is not as man that he
may lie, nor as the son of man, that he may be changed. But God (says he)
has brought Israel out of Egypt, whose strength is like to the Vnicorne]
signifying that God whose will is immutable, having chosen them to be his
people, and delivered them from Egypt, will conserve and protect them, til he
have performed his promise in them. The very same thing Moses assured them
saying [Our Lord has taken Deuteronomy. 4. v. 20. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43.
you, and brought you out of the iron furnace of Egypt, to have you his people
by inheritance.] And albeit he punish them for their sins, yet [he will repay
vegeance upon their enemies; and will be propitious to the land of his people.]

4 Gods promise also made concerning the son The same Church also continued
without interruption, in, and after the captivity in (...), ^^l Christ.
of David saying: [I will establish his kingdom, and 2. Reg. 7. v. 12. 13.
he shall build a house to my name; and I will establish the throne of his
kingdom for euer] is especially understood of Christ, and his Kingdom the
Church. For otherwise Salomons kingdom was shortly diminished after his death,
and afterward ouerthrown. Yet was the Church also of the old Testament
conserved, though the temporal kingdom, with the City of Jerusalem, and the
material ^emple were destroyed. For many Prophets, namely Jeremy, very Iere.
4. v. 27. Chapter 5. v. 10. 18. Chapter 12. v. 14. Chapter 33. v. 3. Chapter 30. v. 11. Chapter 32.
v. 37. Chapter 33. v. 17. 18. Ezech. 6. v. 8. Ps. 136. 1. Esd. ^. v. 5. Chapter 2. v. 1.
often foretold the faithful peoples conservation in captivity, and
relaxation, with restoration of the Temple. And Esdras, and N^henias, writ
the History Not withstanding extreme persecution the^^^.
how the same was al accomplished. Neither did the Church perish by the fu^ious
persecution of Antiochus the Grecian king, and other persecuters and
Apostataes; but was made more illustrious by the most Heroical (...) of the
M^chabees, and many other constant P^stes, and people, even to Christ's time.
Seeing then the Church of God in the old Testament, was continual without
interruption: it follows necessarily, that the Christian Church must needs be
perpetual and invincible, as having more grace, greater promises, and more
excellent privileges, which might suffice, though there were none other proof.

5 Much more this truth is confirmed by other irresragable Much less is it
possible that the Church of Christ in the new Testament should ever perish.
testimonies of the holy Prophets, and Apostles, and by Christ him self. Of
many we will recite some competent number. The Royal Psalmist prophesying of
our Saviors victory against his raging enemies says: [he shall be king over
Sion his Ps. 2. v. 6. 8.
holy hil] that is the holy Church. And therein [receiue Proved by the Psalms.
the Gentiles for his inheritance.] If therefore the Church of Gentiles could
fail Christ could loose his inheritance, which were absurd and impossible. In
respect also of the Church it self, especially of the more holy members
thereof, the same Prophet speaks thus to God [thou Lord will preserve us; Ps.
11. v. 8. Ps. 44. v. 18. Ps. 45. v. 4. 5. 6.
and keep us from this generation for ever* Peoples (not one people only but
peoples) of many nations (which is the Christian Church) shall confess to thee
for ever, and for ever and ever.] And that also in persecution, though some
fall, others shall be so much the more constant ^ The violence of the river
makes the city of God joyful; God is in the midest thereof, it shall not be
moved: God will help it in the morning early. thou o God have given inheritance
Ps. 60. v. 7.
to those that fear thy name. Thou will add days upon the days of the king;
his years even unto the day of generation, and generation: Because God Ps. 68.
v. 36. 37. Ps. 71. v. 7.
will save Sion, and the cities of Judah shall be built up, and the seed of his
servants shall possese it, and they that love his name shall dwell in it* there
shall rise in his days (in the days of Christ) justice, and abundance of
peace, until the moon be taken away.] Neither shall sins, which are more
dangerous then any persecution, destroy the Church: for [God is Ps. 77. v. 36.
69.
merciful, and will be propitious to their sins, and he will not destroy them.
He built his sanctuary as of Unicorns in the land, which he has founded for
ever. We thy people (say true penitents in affliction) Ps. 78. v. 13.
and the sheep of thy pasture, will confess to thee for ever. Unto generation
and generation we will show forth thy praise.] In an other Psalm God says Ps.
88. v. 4. 5.
of his Church [I have ordained a Testament with mine elect: I have sworn to
David my servant; for ever will I prepare thy seed. And I will build thy seat
unto generation and generation. I will keep my mercy 29.
unto him for ever; and my Testament faithful unto 30.
him. I will put his seed for ever and ever; and his 31.
throne as the days of heaven. But if his children shall forsake my Law, and
will not walk in my judgments. If they shall profane my justices and not 32.
33. 34.
keep my commandementes: I will visit their iniquities with a rod, and their
sins with stripes. But my mercy I will not take away from him: neither will I
hurt in my truth. Neither will I profane my Testament: and the words that
proceed from my mouth, I will not make frustrate. Once I have sworn in my
holy, I will not lie to David: his seed shall continue for ever. And his throne
as the sun in my sight, and as the Moon perfect for ever, and a faithful
witness in heaven.] All this in one passage, of the permanent stabilitie of the
Church; notwithstanding it may some to the weak, in affliction, to 39. 48. 50.
51.
be in danger of failing; yet does God still respect man's infirmity, his own
promise, and the reproach of the enemies; and so conserueth it. As the same
Prophet very often inculcateth [Because (says he) our Lord Ps. 93. v. 14. Ps.
101. v. 29. Ps. 128. v. 1. 2. Ps. 131. v. 13. 14. 15. 16.
will not reject his people, and his inheritan^e he will not forsake. The sons
of thy servants shall inhabit: and their seed shall be directed for ever.
Often have they impugned me from my youth, let Israel now say, often have they
impugned me from my youth: but they have not prevailed against me. Because our
Lord has chosen Sion: he has chosen it for an habitation to him self. This is
my rest (says he) for ever and ever: here will I dwell because I have chosen it.
Blessing, I will bless her widow: her poor I will fill with breades. Her
Preistes I will cloth with salvation: and her Saints (al faithful good
children) shall rejoice with ioyfulnes.] The same is confirmed by other Prophets.


6 Thus therefore the beloved spouse of Christ rejoices in Canticle, for her
perpetual conjunction with him saying: [My beloved to me, and I to him: Cant.
2. v. 16. 17. Is. 60. v. 11.
who feeds among the lillies til the day break, and the shadows decline.]
Isaias says to the Christian Church [Thy gates shall be open continually: day
and night they shall not be shut. that the strength of the Gentiles may be
brought to thee; and their kings may be brought.] Ierem^e amongst his
prophecies concerning the Jews captivity, and relaxation, with continual
conservation of their Church until the coming of Christ; interposeth-often the
perpetual stabilitie of the Christian Church. For example let one place serve
our present purpose [Behold (says he) Iere. 31. v. 31. 32.
the days shall come says our Lord, and I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and the house of Judah; not according to the covenant which I
made with their fathers, in the day that I took their hand to bring them out
of the land of Egypt, the covenant which they made void. But this shall be the
covenant 33.
which I will make with the house of Israel, after those days says our Lord. I
will give my law in their books, and in their heart I will write it: and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. If 36.
the laws (which are given to the Sun, Moon, and Sea) shall fail before me,
says our Lord, the seed of Israel shall also fail thee, that it be not a
nation before me for ever. Thus says our Lord: If the heavens 37.
above shall be able to be measured, and the fundation of the earth beneath to
be searched out; I also will cast away all the seed of Israel, for all things
that they have done, says our Lord.] But the proposed suppositions being
impossible to be done, it is also impossible that God will suffer the seed of
Israel, the Chirstian Church, to fail. Ezechiel prophesying of Antichrist
under the name of Gog, shows that the whole Church shall not be destroyed by
him, much less by any other means, but shall prevail against him [I will call
in against him (says our Lord Ezech. 38. v. 21. 22.
God) in all my mou^tains, the sword; every man's sword shall be directed against
his brother. And I will judge him with pestilence, and blood, and vehement
shoure, and mighty great stones; fire and brimstone will I rain upon him, and
upon his army, and upon the many peoples that are with him. And I will be
magnified, and I will be sanctified, and I will be known* 23.
in the eyes of maine Nations: and they shall know that I am the Lord. Behold I
upon thee Gog, the Chapter 39. v. 2. 3.
Prince of the head of M^soch and Thubal. And I will strike thy bow in thy left
hand, and thine arowes I will cast down ou^ of thy right hand. Upon the
mountains 4.
of Israel shall thou fall, and al thy troops, and thy peoples that are with
thee.] Daniel interpreting Nabuchodonosers dream, of the four great temporal
Monarchies of the world; prefers the Church of Christ far above them al,
as the only kingdom Dan. 2. v. 44.
that can never be destroyed saying [In the days of those kingdoms, the God
of heaven will raise up a Kingdom that shall not be dissipated for ever, and his
Kingdom shall not be delivered to an other people; and it shall break in pieces
and shall consume, al these kingdoms, and it self shall stand for ever.] Dan. 7.
v. 2. 13. 14.
The same four Monarchies being represented in a vision, to the same Daniel he
saw last of al, that God gave to Christ, as the son of man [power, and
honor, and kingdom, and that al peoples, tribes, and tongues shall serve him:
His power, is an eternal power that shall not be taken away, and his Kingdom
shall not be corrupted] no not in the persecution Dan. 11. v. 32.
of Antichrist, as is already noted in Ezechiel; for then also [there shall be
a people that knows their God, and shall obtain, and shall be saved.] So by
the other Prophets, God foretells, that he will perpetually conserve his
Church [I have been Zach. 1. v. 14. Zach. 2. v. 5. Mat. 2. v. 4.
zealous for Jerusalem, and Sion with great zele. I will be to it (says our
Lord) a wall of fireround about. I will be in glory in the midst thereof. And
you shall know that I sent you this commandment, that my covenant might be with
Leui, says the Lord of hosts.]

7 Our Savior and his Apostles, teach the very same often The perpetual
stabilitie of the Church, is yet more expressly avouched by our Savior, and his
Apostles.
admonishing, that the Church shall be tossed as the sea with great storms; but
shall never perish. In sign whereof, when the Disciples feared drowning, our
Savior encoraging them said [why are ye fear Mat. 8. v. 24. 26. Mat. 3. v. 12.
Mat. 13. v. 49. Joan. 16. v. 33. Io. 14. v. 16. Mat. 28. v. 20. Mat. 7. v. 24.
26. Mat. 16. v. 18.
full, o ye of little faith.] In this spiritual Kingdom, the Church [shal be
corn and chafe, good and badde sishes, even to the consummation of the
world.] In the world [the faithful shall have distress, but have confidence
(says our Savior) I have overcome the world. I will give you an other
Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, that he may abide with you for ever. I am with you
(not for an hundred, or five hundred, or for a thousand years, not sometimes
with you, sometimes forsake you, but) I am with you al days, even to the end of
the world.] It is [not built upon sand, but upon a Rock; hell gates shall never
prevail against it.] Every [counsel and work that is of men (said wise
Gamaliel) will be dissolved: but if it be of God, you are not able to dissolve
it.] Many have resisted and impugned, but al in vain [Saul breathing forth
threats and slaughter against the Disciples of our Lord, assisted those that
stoned S. Stephen; Act. 5. v. 38. Act. 9. v. 1. 2. 23. Act. 13. v. 14. etc.
Ephesians. 4. v. 13.
got Letters of commission to persecute those that confessed Christ] but he
being converted, innumerable others persecuted him, and the whole Church three
hundred years together, but could not overthrow it; still it increased, and is
continually [builded, until we shall meet al in unity of faith, and knowledge
of the Son of God.] If it were at al possible, that the Church could be for
any time extinguished, that should doubtless especially happen in the
persecution of Antichrist. But besides the Prophecies of Ezcehiel and Daniel
above recited; it is yet more clear in the Apocalips of S. John, that also all that time of Antichrists reign, it shall continue, Apoc. 12. v. 14.
as is declared in these plain words [there were given to the woman two
wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the desert, unto her place
where she is norished, for a time, and times, and 15.
half a time, from the face of the serpent. And the serpent cast water out of
his mouth after the woman 16.
as it were a flood, that he might make her to be carried away with the flood.
And the earth helping the woman, opened her mouth, and swalowed up the flood
which the Dragon cast out of his month.] Where we see, that the Church shall
flee, but not perish; not the Church, but the furious flood of persecution,
Apoc. 13. v. 10.
shall be swalowed up. [Here is the patience and faith of Saints.] By the
blood of Martyrs, the Church is norished, conserved, and strengthened.

The true Church ever has been, and will be visible. ARTICLE. 41.
ALbeit the same places of holy Scripture Some Protestants acknowledge the
Church to be perpetual, yet deny it to be always visible.
which show the Church to be perpetual, do for the most part, prove also that
it is always visible: nevertheless, because these two qualities are in them
selves distinct, and many things are perpetual, which are not visible, and
many things visible, and not perpetual: and especially, because our
adversaries, supposing the Church may be perpetual, yet deny it to be always
visible: we shall here recite some more places of holy Scriptures which
particularly prove this point of the Churches continual visibilitie, even from
the beginning to the end of the world. As for the first age before the general
flood, it is so clear by the Catalogue of the Patriarchs, Genesis 5. Chapter 6. v. 2.
with their many families, and by the famous title of the sons of God, that
no learned protestant does deny it.

2 The first doubt which they make, is for the time The first objection is, of
the time between Noe, and Abraham, Our answer. Sem, Heber, Abraham, and many
others were inuiolate in faith.
between the death of Noe, and the parting of Abraham from Chaldea, into
Chanaan, which time, by true calculation, was no more then the space of forty
and eight years. And as certain it is, that the Church of God was there also
visible, and well known in the world, not only to the members thereof, among them
selves, but also to infidels which persecuted them for professing one God, and
refusing to serve Idols. For Abraham who was never corrupted Genesis 11. v. 10.
etc. Chapter 12. v. 1.
in faith nor religion, was twenty seven years of age when Noe dyed.
Moreover at the time of Abraham's parting from his Country of Chaldea, where he
had suffered persecution for his faith, there were many of his progenitors the
faithful servants of God yet living. Namely Sem (the first son of Noe) and
Arphaxad, Sale, Heber, Reu, Sarug, and Their, the father of Abraham.
Melchizedech was then also living in Chanaan, a Priest of God, and (as it is
most probable) a Chananite; for that S. Paul says [his Heb. 7. v. 6.
generation is not numbered among Abraham's children.] By all which it is
manifest, that the Church was then also visible in these Patriarchs, and their
families. From which time it increased still in Abraham's family, which was not
small: As it appears Genesis 14. v. 14.
by his sudden arming of three hundred eightene men of his own household, for
an exploite when he rescued his Nephew Lot, with others out of their enemies
hands. Neither can it be doubted but al these, besides women and children,
believed rightly in one God, for that shortly after, all the men of his house
as well the homebred, as the bought servants, and strangers, were circumcised
together. 27.
After which time, the Church was more and more conspicuous according to Gods
promise to Abraham saying [I will make thy seed, as the dust of the Genesis 13. v.
16.
earth: if any man be able to number the dust of the earth, thy seed also he
shall be able to number.] Which though S. Paul teaches to be more perfectly
performed in Christians, then in the Jews; more Romans 9. v. 7.
in the spiritual, then in the natural children of Abraham, yet it is also
clear, that many of Abraham's issue, and their families, rightly believed in
God.

3 An other objection is made by Protestants touching An other more common
objection is, of the time of Elias the Prophet.
the time when Elias lamented the decay of Gods faithful children saying
[With zele have I 3. Reg. 9. v. 10. 14.
been zealous for our Lord the God of hosts, because the children of Israel
have forsaken thy ceuenant: thine altars they have destroyed, and have slain
thy Prophets with the sword, and I alone am left, and they seek my life to
take it away] Ergo (say they) the Church was then invisible. But we deny their
consequence, for this Argument proves nothing for their purpose, but shows
their penury of proofs. And it either bewraieth their ignorance, or detecteth
a malicious intention to deceive the people with Answered by the next words,
and other textes.
show of words. For notwithstanding the persecution made by Achab and Iezabel
in the kingdom of Chapter 13. v. 11. 12. 15. Chapter 22. v. 43. 2. Par. 14. v. 2. Chapter
15. v. 8. Chapter 17. v. 6. Chapter 19. v. 11. 3. Reg. 19. v. 18. To. 11. v. 4. 4. Reg.
17 v. 27. 28. Tob. 1. v. 2. Chapter 2. v. 2. Chapter 3. v. 7. Chapter 4. v. 21.
Israel (the ten schismatical Tribes) the whole kingdom of Judah remained
intyre in Religion. where king Asa then reigned; and after him king Iosophat
both good kings, Amarias the High Priest governing in things which perteine
to God. Yea also in Israel the Church was visible, though Elias being then in
mount Horeb, saw not who were constant in Religion. For God answered his
lamentation, telling him that seven thousand were left, which had not bowed
their knees before Baal. And, when the People of those ten Tribes, were
afterward carried captives into Asiria, yet there remained some faith sul
known servants of God, as [Tobias, Raguel, Gabelus, and their families, with
others that feared God] Much more the Church continued visible among those of
the kingdom of Judah in their captivity in Babylon all the time of their
seauentie years aboade there, besides many remaining in the land of Judah: As
is most clear in the Prophecies of Jeremy, Baruch, Fzechiel, Daniel, Aggeus,
Zacharias, Malachias, and books of Esdras. Preoccupation of other objections.


4 Neither could the cruelty of King Antiochus, 1. Mac. 1. v. 22. etc. Chapter 2.
v. 1. 17. 19. etc.
with other heathen Princes, and Captains, nor the Apostasy of Manasses, and
other usurpers of the high Preisthood, overthrow the Church, or make it
invisible, but by those persecutions it became more known, and famous in the
world, through the constancy and valiant correge of many Martyrs, and other
most zealous obseruers of Gods laws. Namely by the Chapter 14. v. 41.
fortitude of Matthathias, and his two sons, in who^ resided the office of
high Priests, by right and continual succession, from whose time the Church
still continued visible, and Christ so finding it, observed the laws thereof,
and approved customs.

5 Now that the Christian Church always was and Manifest sacred textes, that
the Church ever was, and shall be visible.
must be visible, is most assured by the more special providence of God, as
both the Prophets and Christ Ps. 18. v. 6. 7.
him self and his Apostles do plainly teach. He put his Tabernacle in the
sun (says the Royal Prophet) and him self as a bridegroom, coming forth of
his bridechamber. That his tabernacle is his Church, is manifest by all the
proprieties of the figurative tabernacle, described by God, and framed by
Moses Exo. 26.
direction, Bridegroom, and Bride, being perfect correlatiues, can not possibly
be separated, but if one cease to be bride, the other should cease to be the
Io. 3. v. 29.
bridegroom. By which terms S. John Baptist also shows that [Christ is the
bridegroom, because he Ps. 21. v. 26. Ps. 28. v. 2. Ps. 44. v. 18. Ps. 47. v.
9. Ps. 67. v. 16. Ps. 71. v. 16. Ps. 97. v. 3. 4.
has the bride.] Nothing is more frequent with the same Psalmist then such
terms, applied to the Church, as necessarily import it to be always visible;
calling it the great Church; inuiting al to adore our Lord in his holy court:
[therfore shall peoples confess to thee for ever, and for ever and ever. As we
have heard, so have we seen in the city of our Lord of hosts, in the city of
our God. the mountain of God a fat mountain. there shall be a firmament in
the earth in the tops of mountains, the fruict thereof shall be extolled far
above libanus. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Make ye iubilation to God, all the earth chaunt and Ps. 131. v. 17. 18.
rejoice, and sing: I have prepared a lamp to my Christ: upon him shall my
sanctification fllorish.] Likewise Solomon signifying, that wisdom shall inuit
al to hear her voice, presupposes preachers in the visible Church. [Doth not
wisdom ^arie (says he) and Prou. 8. v. 1. 2. Chapter 9. v. 3* Chapter 31. v. 18.
Cant. 6. v. 8. 9.
prudence give her voice, standing in the high and lofty tops, over the way,
in the midst of the paths? She has sent her hand-maides to call to the
tower, and the wales of the City. Her lamp shall not be extinguished in the
night. The daughters have seen her, and declared her to be most blessed. What
is she that comes forth as the morning rising? fair as the moon, elect as
the Sun, ter^ible as the army of a ^ampe set in array? What shall thou see in
Chapter 7. v. 1.
the Sunamitesse, but the companies of camps?] So likewise the other Prophets
testify Gods providence in conseruing his perpetual visible Church. Isa. 1.
v. 9.
[Vnlesse the Lord of hosts had left us seed (says Isaias) we had been as
Sodom, and we should be like to Gomorha] which sentence S. Paul applies Romans
9. v. 29.
to the time when the Law, and form of the Church was changed by Christ,
showing that even in that case, there was seed, and visible seed left. For all
the Apostles, and many other Disciples, still believed the Law and the Prophets,
though not actually that our Savior should rise, or was risen so sone as
indeed he was, being a matter of fact; or if they were defective, in some
other particular points, not fully reveled: yet they believed in general the
omnipotency, omniscience, absolute goodness, and other attributes of God. So
that these visible reliq^es of the Jewish Nation, were never insidels: nor the
Church made invisible nor unknown. According to that the same Prophet adds
in an other place, and the same Apostle alleges to this purpose; that [the
remnant Is. 10. v. 22. Romans 9. v. 27.
shall be converted, the remnant to the strongest God.] And of this remnant, the
Christian Church began, and most visibly increased [In the latter days (says
he) the Mountain (mark Christian reader, that the Church is so often called a
Mountain) Isa. 2. v. 2. Chapter 54. v. 9.
of the House of our Lord shall be prepared in the top of mountains, and it
shall be elevated above the little hills, and al Nations shall flow unto it.]
Again God says [As in the days of Noe, is this thing to me, to whom I swear,
that I would no more bring in the waters of Noe upon the earth: so have I sworn
not to be angry with thee, and not to rebuke thee. For the mountains
(particular Churches) 10.
shall be moved, and the little hills shall tremble; but my mercy shall not depart
from thee, and the covenant of my peace (made to the whole Church) Chapter 62. v. 6.
shall not be moved. Upon thy wales Jerusalem I have appointed watchmen; all the
day and all the night, for ever they shall not hold their peace.] That we may
better observe the greater priu^leges of the Christian Church, above that of
the old Testament: God says by diverse Prophets [I will establish unto them,
Bar. 2. v. 35. Ezech. 17. v. 22. 23.
an other Testament everlasting, that I be their God, and they shall be my
people. I will plant a bough of Cedar upon a mountain l^gh and eminent. On the
high mountains of Israel will I plant it, and it shall shoot forth into a
badde, and shall yield fruict, and it Mat. 1^. v. 32. Much. 5. v. 9. Zach. 4. v.
2. Chapter 6. v. 13.
shall be into a great Cedar: and al birds, and every foul shall dwell under
the shadow of the boughs thereof, and shall there make their nest. Thy hand shall
be exalted over thine enemies, and al thine enemies shall perish.] In a vision
[Zacharie saw a candlestick al of gold, and the lamp thereof, upon the head of
it: and the seven lights thereof upon it.] Prophesying of Cyrist, he says:
that [he shall build a Temple to our Lord; and shall bear glory; and shall sit
and rule upon his Throne.]

6 Al agreeable to the Law and Prophtes, our Savior Our Savior in diverse
parables, and in other more express doctrine describes his Church to be
always visible.
him self describes his Church to be [the light Mat. 5. v. 15. 16.
of the world: a City cituated upon a mountain: candel not put under a
bushel, but upon a candelsticke that it may shine to all that are in the house.]
whereas some Protestants would rather expound these properties, of the Apostles,
or of the Doctors, and Pastors of the Church, or of the Clergy; then of the
universal Church; so much the more it proves our purpose. For seeing some
special parts, are so eminent, Protestants ^u^tion is s^^^elous.
and visible, it is not imaginable that the whole body should be hidden, or
obscu^e. Again our Savior necessarily supposed, that the Church is known and
the gouerners thereof, are both visible, and accessible, when he prescribed, as
a perpetual remedy against obstinate offe^ders, to inform the Church of their
demeanor, saying: [If they will not hear Mat. 18. v. 17.
two or three (private friends) tell the Church] For if the Church were not
visible, or her Prelates unknown persons, this remedy should fail, and there
should be no means to correct the greatest perturbers of common peace. Also
foreseing that false prophets would say: [Loe here is Christ, or there: Chapter 24.
v. 23. 26.
(not in the public known Church, but in secret corners of the world) Behold
he is in the desert, go ye not out (says our Savior) behold in the closets
(say heretics) believe it not says our Lord.] At the coming of the holy Ghost
this Church was established in visible persons, and by visible signs, [the
Act. 1. v. 15. Chapter 2. v. 2. 3. 4. 14. 47. Chapter 4. v. 4. Chapter 5. v. 14. Chapter 10. v.
11. Chapter 11. v. 21. 24.
multitude gathered in one house in Jerusalem, was almost a hundred and
twentie] the s^nsible signs were [a sound from heaven as of a vehement wind,
appearing of parted and fyrie tongues] speaking upon the sudden diverse
languages. By and by their number increased to three thousand; shortly after to
five thousand; and daily more were added to the same visible Church. [S. Peter
being admonished by a vision, received Gentiles into the Church.] then [at
Cypres, Cyrena, and Antioch, a great number was converted to our Lord.] S.
Barnabas being sent from Jerusalem to Antioch [exhorted the faithful to Act. 2.
3. 4. 5. etc.
continue in our Lord: And a great multitude was added] their preaching was
open, ministration of Sacraments visible: Discipline visible; heads and
gouernoures visible, the provision for their mantenance visible; the
persecution visible, their dispersio^ visible; Chapter 7. Chapter 21.
S. Steuens, and S. James, their Martyrdomes visible; S. Peter's imprisonment by
Herod, as also his and others imprisoning by the Jews, visible; the Churches
prayer for S. Peter's delivery, was known to many: the Apostles council was
visible: miracles wrought visibly, the name of Christians public; Chapter 11. v.
26. Chapter 8. v. 20. Apoc. 2. v. 6.
the going out of heretics visible: Simon the magician publicly reproved,
and punished for offering to buy spiritual power with money. the Nicola^tes
noted for heretics. But of an invisible Church we have not one word.

7 If any will say (as needs they must say, which An other frivolous evasion
of some Protestants, conuin* ceth their principal late Ministers to have hued
in damnable state.
will mantaine this paradox of an invisible Church) that Luther being a ftier,
and a Priest, and saying Mass daily fiftene years, was a secret protestant:
Likewise Ecolampadius, Carolostadius, Zuinglius, Bucer, Cranmer, Calvin, and
others, were secret Protestants, whiles they said Masses, and lived in the
Roman Church, and were members of their invisible Church: then must their
Church consist of many heritikes mixed with true Christians; for that by the
doctrine of these named, most of them were heritikes, they so condemning one an
other of horrible heresies. Yea if any of these, or other sectaries, were true
Christians knowing the truth as their Advocates plead that they did; yet
because [they denied Christ before men; he will deny them Mat. 10. v. 33.
before the face of his Father in heaven.] If their invisible Church consisted
then, and many hundred years before of such members: it was indeed of
repropate persons, dissemblers, fearful worldlinges, liars, and (as modern
Protestants judge) Idolaters, [whose part is in the pit of hell, burning with
Apoc. 21. v. 8.
fire and brimstone] for one of these two must necessarily be granted; that
either none did believe as protestants do, and then by their doctrine, there
was merely no Church in the world, visible, nor invisible, but al were
incredulous and Idolareas: or else those which did believe, (as these Doctors
imagine) and did not profess their faith before men, Luc. 12. v. 47.
were dissembling hipocrites, and so are damned to more stripes, and greater
torments in hell, then if they had been infidels, and not known the truth at
al.

The Church can not err in doctrine of faith, nor of meners. ARTICLE. 42.
BEing now sufficiently proved, by the holy Whosoever knows the true Church,
and that it can not err, may by relying thereupon be secure from error in
Religion.
Scriptures, that the true militant Church of Christ, is One, Holy,
Catholic, Apostolic, Perpetual, and Visible company of Christians
confessing the same faith in union of one supreme visible head: By which
proprieties, and special marks, every one may easily perceive, that neither
the protestants, nor any other like pretending congregation; but only the
commonly called Catholics, are the true Christian Church: it remains to be
showed, by the same divine authority, of holy Scriptures, that this perpetual
visibe known Church, has never erred, nor can err, in doctrine of faith, nor
of manners, declared by definitive sentence in her supreme Tribunal seat: that
these two principal points being made clear, and that by the written word of
God, whereto alone, many will needs appeal: al reasonable persons that doubt
in any part of true Religion, may both know where to be resolved of their
doubts, and securely rest upon the resolution so given: not as upon only
probable and common opinion, of many good, wise, and learned men; but upon most
certain divine infallibl^ Judgment; for this singular privilege ueuer to err
in public Judgment, comes not to the Church by natural power, nor power of
a^ie mere creature; but by the omnipotent power of God; by divine ordinance,
and perpetual assistance of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of truth preserving her
from error, wherinto every private man may ^al, but not the universal Church.

2 As we shall here make manifest, beginning with True Religion was consetued by
the Patriarchs before the written law.
the Church of the old Testament; which albeit was inferior to the Christian
Church in many respects, yet wanted not the means of infallible judgment in all doubtful cases. To this purpose, God provided Genesis 4. v. 25. 26. Chapter 5. v.
3. 9. 12. etc.
first in the Law of nature special Patriarchs from Adam to Noe, end so to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from whom descended the twelve Tribes. Then did God
raise the extraordinary Prophet Moses; supreme head, Judge, and governor of
the visible Church. By all which, the true faith and Religion was continually
conserved; as is already declared Art. 34. 38. 40. 41. Exo. 25. v. 8. 10. 17.
18. 20. 22.
in diverse precedent Articles.

3 In the written law God expressly [commanded An especial Cha^e of infallible
Judgment, was instituted by the written law.
Moses to make a special Tabernacle, or Sanctuarie] with appurtinances. Namely
to make [an Arc of testimony of the (durable) wood setim] signifying the
Church: and over the Arc [to make a Propiciatorie (or Oracle) and two
Cherubimes] which covered the Oracle with their wings. Thence (said God to
Moses) will I command, and will speak to thee over the propiciatorie, and from
the midst of the two Cherubimes, which shall be upon the Arc of testimony,
al things which I will command the children of Israel by thee.] So it pleased
God in such manner to reucile his divine will to Moses, and by him to assure the
people of the certantie thereof. In like sort when God would ordain Aaron his
ordinary Chapter 28. v. 2. 4. 12. 23. 29.
high Priest, and in him a continual s^ccession of Preist-hood [he commanded
Moses to make special sacred vestiments and ornaments for Aaron:] amongst
which are first named [the Rationale of Judgment, which he should carry on the
breast, and the Ephod on his shoulders: linked together above with ringes,
books, and chains, of gold; and beneath with ^ace of hyacinth: both were
adorned with precious stones, and in the Rationale were engraven the names of
the twelve tribes of Israel. And [in the same Rationale of Judgment, were also
engraven the two words: DOCTRINE, and VERITY, Exo. 28. v. 30. Lenit. 8. v. 8.
which shall be on Aarons breast when he shall go before the Lord; and he shall
bear the Judgment of the children of Israel on his breast in the sight of the
Lord alwayes] signifying that the high Priest observing this prescribed form
in consulting God, should for the conservation of truth, and justice, be
inspired to know, and judge equity in all doubtful causes. Conformably to this
divine ordinance is Gods precept, expressly commanding his people to repair to
this high tribunal in difficult causes, and under the pain of death, to accept
the sentence that should there be given saying: [If thou perce^ue that Deuteronomy.
17. v. 8.
the judgment with thee be hard, and doubtful, between blood, and blood,
cause, and cause, leprosy, and not leprosy: (in causes criminal, civil, and
religious) and thou see that the words of the Judges within the gates (of the
inferior Judges) do vary: arise and go to the place which the Lord thy God
shall choose. And thou shall come to the Priests of v. 9.
the Leuitical s^ocke, and to the Judge that shall be at that time; and thou
shall ask of them: who shall 10.
show thee the truth of the Judgment. And thou shall do whatsoever they that
are presidents of the place (which our Lord shall choose) shall say, and teach 11.
thee according to his law; and thou shall follow their sentence: neither shall
thou decline to the right hand, not to the left hand. But he that shall be
proud, refusing to obey the commandment of the Priest, 12.
which at that time ministers to the Lord thy God, by the decrie of the Judge,
that man shall dye; and thou shall take away the evil out of Israel. And the 13.
whole people hearing shall fear, that none afterward swel in pride.] By
these holy Scriptures we see that a supreme infallible tribunal, was
instituted in the old Law, for decision of al controversies, and doubts, with
assurance of true sentence, not by humane, but by divine Judgment: God himself
speaking over the Propitiatory, from the midst of the two Cherubins, and
promising that this consisto^ie of Preistes shall show the truth of judgment.

4 Generally also in the greater affairs of the temporal The temporal was
bound to take direction of the high Priest, in all greater affayers.
9. Nu. 27. v. 21.
Princes [the High Priest was to consult God, and at his direction and word,
the Prince must go out, or go in] that is, undertake, or not undertake, an^e
business proposed [and all the children of Israel 1. Reg. 23. v. 9. 10. 11. 12.
with him.] So did [Abiathar the High Priest, consult our Lord for David, by
applying the Ephod (and consequently also the Rationale) and by him David
received answeare] that Saul purposed to come into the City of Ce^la where
David then was: and that the Citizens, would deliver him into Saules hands.
And therefore David with all his men, parted from thence, and so avoided the
danger. Upon Chapter 30. v. 7. 8. 9. etc.
an other occasion, he consulted again by Abiathar in the same manner [applying
the Ephod] and by divine direction, pursued certain thieves his enemies, took
them, and recovered the pray which they had taken. Neither was this privilege
lost at any time, by the defectes or faults of the Preistes, as not being
given of God, for their sakes only, but for the stabilitie of the universal
Church. And therefore the Prophet Malachie, reprehending the Preistes for their
Mal. 1. v. 7. 8.
covetousness, and other sins, yet says plainly [the lips of the Preistes
shall keep knowledge, and the Law they shall require of his mouth; because he is
the Angel (that is to say) the messenger of the Lord of hosts.]

5 Our Savior also confirms the same warrant in Our Savior testified the
infallibility of Moses Chair.
the Scribes and Pharisees notwithstanding their personal vices, and actual
transgressions of the Law, saying to the multitudes, and to his Disciples [vpon
Mat. 23. v. 1. 2. 3.
the Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes, and the Pharisees; therefore
whatsoever they shall say to you, obserne ye, and do ye: but according to their
works do ye not; for they say and do not] Which is understood, not of their
private enormous doctrines, and humane traditions of their own inventions, for
4. 5. etc. Chapter 15. v. 5. 6. etc.
which our Savior by and by taxes them, as also at other times, but of their
doctrine, when they spoke difinitiuely in their Councels, and in the chair of
Moses. For so even wicked Caiphas pronounced true sentence in the council of
the chief Preistes, and Io. 11. v. 47. 50.
the Pharisees [that it was expedient, one man should dye for the people, and
the whole Nation perish not] Where the holy Evangelist observes, that neither
any other of that Council, nor this man of him self, uttered this true
sentence; but [being the high Priest 49. 51.
of that year, he prophesied, that JESUS should dye for the Nation.]

6 Seeing therefore Moses Chair was so established God promised an infallible
Judgment seat in the new Testament.
in true Judgment; it necessarily follows, that Christ our Lord, who came,
not to break the Law Mat. 5. v. 18.
but to fulfill it, has most firmly placed, an other chair of infallible
Judgment in his Church, not with less, but with more authority, and more
assured stabilitie then was in the old law, which is now abrogated. For so [God
promised to give a better Law, and a Iere. 31. v. 31. Heb. 8. v. 6.
better covenant.] And that particularly in this point of the infallible
stabilitie of his Church in all truth; whereof are abundant testimonies both in
the old and new Testament. When King David in his seruent 2. Reg. 7. v. 2. 12.
13. 16.
devotion, determined to build a glorious Temple to Gods more honor, and
service; it pleased God, accepting his so good a purpose, in stead of the fact,
for M^sterie sake, signifying the excellency of the house which Christ the
Son of God, and Son of David should build; to promise the same should be 1.
Par. 17. v. 1.
an everlasting spiritual Kingdom [Thou shall not build me an House to dwell in
(said our Lord to David) but when thy days shall be accomplished, and thou
shall sleep with thy fathers; I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall
come forth of thy womb, and I will establish his kingdom: He shall build a house
to my name, and I will establish the Throne of his kingdom for ever. And thy
house shall be faithful and thy kingdom for ever before thy face; and thy
Throne shall be firm continually] verified in the chair wherein our Savior
placed his Apostle S. Peter, and in his successors, Christ's Vicars in the Sea
Apostolic. For none other Throne, but that Chair only, is continued and
conserved since the Apostles time.

7 Which great promise, the same Royal Prophet Promises made to King David,
Petteined especially
well foreseing, not to be fulfilled in a temporal kingdom, but in the Church
of Christ, rejoicing therein, inuiteth the same Church, to congratulate with to
the Church of Christ.
him her happy state [Let Mount Sion (says he) be Ps. 47. v. 12. 13. 14.
glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoice, because of thy Judgments o Lord.]
Again to all the faithful he says [Compasse ye Sion, and embrace her, tell ye
in her towers. Set your hearts on her strength] But because this strength is
not of her self, but of God, she confesses [From tribulation I inuocated Ps.
117. v. 5. 6.
our Lord: and our Lord heard me in largenes. Our Lord is my helper: I will not
fear what man can 21.
do to me. I will confess to thee because thou have heard me, and art become
my salvation.] With this Ps. 118. v. 43.
confidence she still pra^eth saying: [Lord take not away out of my mouth, the
word of truth in any wise.] And with the same confidence, doubts not Cant.
8. v. 10. 11.
to say [I am a wall, and my breasts are as a tower, (or castle) since I was
made before him, as one finding peace. The peacemaker Christ, had a vine yard
in that which has peoples, he delivered the same to kepers] his Pastors,
Prophets, Apostles, and their successors. And above al other kepers, Christ him
self holds the principal care, and therefore says: [My vine yard is before
me] in his continual protection. 12.
Wherefore it is wonderful blindness to think as some do, that the whole Church
has at any time erred, or can err; and in the more learned, it must needs
be extreme malice, so to charge the Spouse of Christ; and so likewise to rob
Christ him self of his inheritance, if there had been none other visible Church
in the world, for many hundred years, but such a one, as they say, both
taught, and committed abominable Idolatry, quite contrary to the doctrine of
the holy Prophets.

8 For they say plainly, that in the Church of Christ, The Prophets foretold
that there should be no Idolatry in the Christian
[al Idols shall be utterly destroyed] So says Isaias Is. 2. v. 2. 6. 18. 20,
prophesying of the Church, that should be gathered of al Nations, and of the
reiection of the Jews. The Church.
same thing says our Lord by his Prophet Micheas unto the Gentiles that shall
be converted [I will make Mich. 5. v. 12.
thy sculptiles to perish, and thy statues out of the midst of thee; and thou
shall no more adore the works of thy hands.] Thus also writes the Prophet
Zacharias [It shall be in that day, says the Lord of Zach. 13. v. 2.
hosts, I will destroy the names of Idols out of the earth, and they shall be
remembered no more.] So clearly did the Prophets foreshew, that the Church of the
new Testament, should be free from al Idolatry, with which error, our
Adversaries especially charge the visible Church before their time. From al
other erroures also, it is most free, by the same divine providence, as the
Prophets yet further testify [Behould, (says Isaias) the king shall reign in
justice, Is. 32. v. 1.
and the Princes shall rule in iudgement] for^shewing that Christ our King
should perform all that was decreed by the Blessed ^rinitie, concerning the
Redemption, Justification, and salvation of men: And that his Apostles and
other Pastors, Prelates, and spiritual Princes of his Church, should rule, not
in falsehood and error, but in judgment, discerning and iudgeing what is
right, good, and profitable, for the health of souls. Again he says [Looke
upon Sion, Chapter 33. v. 20.
the City of our solemnity; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem, a rich habitation
a Tabernacle that can not be transferred; neither shall the nails thereof be
taken away for ever, and all the cords thereof shall not be broken] Nails in
buildinges, and cords in tents and Tabernacles, join and keep the parts, in
one total body: so do hol^e Sacraments, Rites and ordinances, hold together
the members of the universal Church, and shall neu^r be taken away, nor broken.
Because only [there, our Lord is magnifical. This is 21. Chapter 59. v. 21.
my covenant with them (says our Lord): my Spiti^ that is in thee; and my
words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out
of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says our
Lord, from this present, and for ever.] Ezechiel concludes his large and
mistical description of the whole Church, as well Militant as Triumphant, with
the inseparable conjunction of Christ and her; in regard whereof he says [The
name Ezech. 48. v. 35.
of the City from that day (shall be called) Our Lord there.] And where our
Lord is, there is al truth, and none error, because he is truth it self.

9 Al which our Lord has accordingly avouched Christ built his Church upon a
rock: not upon sand.
with his own mouth, and published by his Apostles [A wise man (says he)
built his house upon a Rock, Mat. 7. v. 24. 25.
and the rain fell, and the sloudes came, and the winds blew, and they beat
against that house* and it fell not; for it was founded upon a Rock.] This was
his own house his Church, which he the eternal wisdom promised to build, upon
such a Rock as him self had made, and ordained for this purpose, and thereupon
expressly auerred, that [the gates of hell (that is Chapter 16. v. 18.
no forces of all the devils of hell) should prevail against it] the reason of
which invincible strength, is his own perpetual presence in spirit. For where
his Apostles, and their Successors [are gathered in his Chapter 18. v. 20. Chapter 28.
v. 20.
name (in the unity of his Church) he is in the midst of them] and that [al
days, even to the consummation of the world.] For though near the end of the
world, there shall be fewer faithful, then at other time, whereupon he says:
[the Son of Luc. 18. v. 8.
Man coming, shall he find, trow you, faith in the earth?] signifying then,
faith shall be most scarce, Neither in Antichrists time shall the Church fail.
but not altogether wanting. For if there should be no faithful Christians at
al visible; how should Antichrist persecute so furiously, as then he shall? An
example of which great Apostasy and revolt of many but not of al, happened in
Capharnaum, where when our Savior preached of the high mystery of his own B.
body and blood to be given in the most holy Sacrament, many of his Disciples
hearing him say [My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink Io. 6. v. 31.
51. 55. 60. 66. 68. 10. 67. 7. 71.
indeede] they said, this saying is hard, and who can hear it? And many went
back, and walked not with him. A little before, there were five thousand men,
besides women and children, which might well be so many more, and now there
remained but twelve, and one of those twelve (Judas the traitor) was also
revolted in heart, and the other eleven were indeed sincere. And S. Peter, in
the name of the twelve, answered, that they meant not to depart: saying [Lord,
to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life] thereby professing,
that whatsoever our Savior said, the same he could and would perform: that
his words are operative, effectually working that, which they signify,
howsoever they seemed hard to the incredulous carnal Capharnaites; Io. 14. v. 6.
Christ's words dye not, nor fail not; but give life, and have their effect.

10 After this when our Savior was (according to This infallibility of the
Church is the work of the Hol^e Ghost. And therefore the Churches Judgment is
not ^^mane, but d^uine.
his visible presence) to part from the world, he promised an other comforter
[I will ask the Father, and Io. 14. v. 16. 17.
he will give you an other Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever: the
Spirit of truth: whom the world can not receive: because it sees him not;
neither knows him. but you shall know him because he shall abide with you, and
shall be in you. He 26.
shall teach you al things: and suggest to you al things whatsoever I shall say
to you. when the Spirit Act. 2. v.
of truth comes (who came on whitsunday following 3.
^iftie days after his Sermon) he shall teach Io. 16. v. 13.
you al truth.] Ponder these words which exclude al error, and al falshoode.
For this so necessary, and important a benefit, our B. Savior in the
conclusion of his divine Sermon, prayed particularly for his Apostles and their
succestors, saying: [Hol^e Father Chapter 17. v. 11. 12. 15.
keep them in thy name whom thou have given me: that they may be one as also
we. those whom thou gave me, have I kept: and none of them perished but the
son of perdition: that the Scripture may be fulfilled. I pray not that thou
take the^ away out of the world.] Lo our Savior would not have his Pastors
taken away out of the world, as Protestants imagine, that a long time together
there were no true Pastors, [but that thou preserve them from euil] to wit
from error, which is a most pestilent infectious evil. Against which he
expressly prayed that they might be continually protected, adding thus in his
prayer. [Sanctifie them in truth: thy word is truth. As thou v. 17. 18. 19. 20.
21. 22. 23.
did send me into the world, I also have sent them into the world, and for
them I do sanctify my self (offer my self in Sacrifice by death) that they
also may be sanctified in truth. yea lest any think he prayed only for the
Apostles, or for some small time, mark what follows. [And not for them only
do I pray, but for them also that by their word shall believe in me, that they
al may be one. as thou (Father) in me and I in thee, that they also in us may
be one, that the world may believe that thou have sent me.] See here the union
of the Church without interruption is a motive, and special reason for the
world to believe in Christ, that he is sent from God.

11 His Pastors therefore being thus firmly established Al Christians are bound
to rely upon the Judgment of the Church.
in perpetual succession, with warrant of true doctrine, our Savior also
ordained that all the slocke should here and follow them, even as himself. For
as he said [the sheep hear their sheapheard and Io. 10. v. 4. 14.
follow him, because they know his voice, and my sheep know me.] so he says
to his Pastors [He [He that hears you, hears me; and he that despiceth Luc.
10. v. 16.
you, despiceth me; and he that despiceth me, (whether it be in himself, or in
his Pastors) despiceth him that sent me.] And in an other place says: [He that
will not hear the Church, let him be to thee Mat. 18. v. 17.
as the heathen and the publicane.] In vigor of this power given to the
Apostles, with this warrant to be directed by the Holy Ghost; when a
controversy was risen, they gathered them selves into a public Council, and
after mature discussion, decided and decreed, what should be done, with this
solemn Preface [ Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis. It has Act. 15. v. 18.
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to vs] so conioyning the Invisible, and
visible Judges, as one Judge, that by the one, we may see the divine authority
of General Councels: and by the other, be assured what is so defined; and
withal know whither to repair when difficulties occur, about the true sense
of any words or sentence. Wherefore S. John tries by this Rule, who knows
God and his truth, and who does not know him, saying [He that knows God,
hears us: he that is not of God, hears 1. Io. 4. v. 6.
us not. In this we know the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of errour] For to
this end, as S. Paul also teaches [Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, that we be not as children, wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, in the wickedness of men, in
craftines, to the circumuention of errour] And so exhorts the Ephesians, whom
he had converted from Paganism, to Christianity, that they should persevere in
unity of the Church, and obedience of the Pastors thereof. But with the
Corinthians, whom he had also converted, and some of them were afterward
seduced by false prophets; he reasons the case, with expostulation, why they
should prefer the new masters before him saying [I have despoused 2. Cor.
11. v. 2. 3.
you to one man, to present you a chaste virgin unto Christ] and so presses
them not to harken to subtle seducers, that teach otherwise then he had done.
Where it is to be well observed, that in every Nation, when it was first
converted to Christ, it was despoused in purity of Religion, wholly undefiled,
and void of error in all points [subiect to Christ] as Ephesians. 5. v. 24. 25.
29. 30.
the Apostle affirms again of the whole Church, adding that [Christ loves
(and consequently protecteth) his Church as his own flesh and body, because
(says he) we be members of his body.]

12 Finally this stabilitie of the Church is confirmed Christ never cease to
protect his Church, therefore it can never e^^e.
by Christ's continual protection [For he walks in the midst of the seven
candlestickes (which are many Apoc. 1. v. 13. 16. 20. Chapter ^. v. 1.
particular Churches) and houldeth seven stars (the Bishops called the
Angels of the same Churches) in his right hand] as was showed in a vision to S.
John, with the interpretation that the candlestickes are the Churches, and the
stars the Angels that guide, and govern the Churches. Whereas therefore
particular Churches are so visible, as so many candlestickes, and so guided as
by Angels, and holden up in Christ's own right hand, it is most certain that
the universal Church is both visible, and securely guided in truth. Again S.
Paul in few words compriseth the assured infallibility of the Church.
describing it to be [the house of God; the Church of 1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
the living God: the pillar and ground of truth] The Church is truly called the
pillar, and ground of truth.
whereas all the world is Gods, both heaven, and earth, yet the Church is
properly called his house. yea the house of the living God, who is life, and
gives life, and so can and will ever preserve his house. the pillar, and the
ground of truth, pure from error, as well from being deceived, as from
deceiving. For that is the use of groudworke to bear the whole edifice and the
use of a pillar not alone to stand firm, but to bear and vphould the flore,
the wales, the roof, and cover, and whatsoever depends thereon. And so I will
add no more proofs for this point, not doubting to conclude upon every one
of the sacred textes of divine Scriptures here recited, as well of the old, as
new Testament, much more upon them al, that the known perpetual visible
Church, commonly called Holy Catholic, and Apostolic, never did err, nor
can err definitiuely deciding an^e point of faith, or of manners, by sentence
in tribunal seat.

In the whole Church, is communion of Sacrifice, Sacraments, Prayers, and
other good works. ARTICLE. 43.
FOr our further instruction of the Churches excellency, Al spiritual good
things in the Church, are profitable to all the members.
it pleased the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of the Apostles, besides the
proprieties and priuilegies before recited, to signify the special benefiite
redounding to the members thereof by the Communion of Saints, that is
communication and participation of spiritual fruict, which proceeded principally
from Christ the Head: secundarily also, from one member to an other. For here
the word Saints, or Holies, sig^ifieth not only holy persons, as Christ him
self, al holy Angels, with other Saints in heaven, and all the faithful in
earth; but also holy things, as Sacrifice, Sacraments, with other holy
Rites, and al good works which are made common to the universal Church,
through the perfect union of the head, and members, and consequently of the
fellow members each to others. For first the conjunction Io. 15. v. 15. Mat. 25.
v. 50.
of Christ with his faithful servants, is such, that he not only calls them
his friends, and which is more, his brethren, sisters, and his mother: but also
accounts whatsoever is done, or left undone, to Mat. 25. v. 40. 45. Act. 9.
v. 4.
one of his least brethren, as done or not done to him self. Yea he calls
them him self saying to Saul, [why persecutest thou me] whereas he persecuted
him not in his own person, but in those that believed in him. The conjunction
of the members among them selves is such, that [being many, they are al one
body To. 12. v. 5. 1. Cor. 12. v. 19.
in Christ, and each one an others members. there are many members indeed,
but one body.] By means of which union, what good work soever is done, by
Christ is profitable to all the Church, and to all the members whereto it is
applied, according to the measure of his gra^e imperted to every one. For he
died for all, he redeemed al, his ransom is sufficient for all; So bountiful is
his mercy, so abundant is the price which he has paid for all mankind, whereof
all that will, may be participant, as S. Paul teaches, [Christ being consummate,
was made to all that obey Heb. 5. v. 9.
him, cause of eternal salvation.] And by this community also of the members;
one does profitably pray for an other yea and suffer for others, as the same
Apostle did for the Colossians [accomplishing those Col. 1. v. 24. 2. Cor. 1.
v. 5.
things that wanted of the passions of Christ] that is of Christ's members;
where again his members are called him self, for the strict union of him and
them, for otherwise it is most certain, that nothing was wanting of Christ's
passions in him self, for it was superabundant for all. But both his Passion,
and his members passions, and other good works, are effectual only to those
that are co^members of the Church, or to make them members thereof, or to become
capable, and participant. which is clearly showed both in the old and new Law.

2 For in Moses Law, none were to be admitted to In the old law none could ^^^
of the Paschal lamb,
eat the Paschal Lamb, nor were capable of the spiritual grace which God
imperted to them, that did but the members of the Church.
rigdtly eat thereof, except they were first made members of the Church [This
is the Religion of the Phase Exo. 12. v. 43. 44. 45.
(said God to Moses) No aliene (or stranger in Religion) shall eat of it.
Every bought servant, shall be circumcised, and so shall eat of it; the
stranger, and hireling, shall not eat thereof. All the assembly 47. 48.
of the children of Israel, shall make it. And if any of the soiournours be
willing to dwell among you, and make the Phase of the Lord; first all the male
that he has, shall be circumcised, and then shall he celebrate it according to
the rite. And he shall be as he that is borne in the land: but if there be any
man uncircumcised, he shall not eat thereof. Al one Law shall be 49.
to him that is borne in the land, and to the Proselite (a gentile converted)
that soiourneth with you.] Even So none are capable of spiritual graces in the
Church of Christ, but the members thereof.
so in the Christian Church, none are capable of others spiritual benefits,
til they be baptized, and thereby incorporated in this mistical body: otherwise
this communion of Saints and participation of holy things, with faithful
persons, pertains not to them: Which is proved by many holy Scriptures
already recited, showing that the true Church, is one whole body. namely by
S. Paul's doctrine saying to the Christian Corinthians [As the body (that is
1. Cor. 12. v. 12. 13.
to say, a man's natural body) is one, and has many members; and all the
members of the body, whereas they be many, yet are one body: so likewise
Christ (that is to say, the mistical body of Christ) having many members, is
one bodie] ordinarily called the Church, but in this place called Christ,
because the Church being his body [is the fulness of Ephesians. 1. v. 23.
him] as the same Apostle writes to the Ephesians. And in the place now
alleged, he teaches, that al faithful members of the Church, and of Christ
[are 13.
one body, by the means of babtisme, in one Holy Ghost] for (says he) [in
one Spirit, were we al baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, or
bond men, or free.]

3 Of this union therefore, proceeds the communion Union of the members, is the
cause of mutual profiting each others.
of holy things, that the good work of one member, may profit an other.
Which thing, holy Job. 1. v. 5.
Job well knew and considered, when he offered Holocaustes for every one of his
Sons. And in reguard of this great benefit by communicating of holy works
in the Church of God, the Royal Psalmist said [One thing have I asked of our
Lord, this Ps. 26. v. 4. Ps. 83. v. 5.
will I seek for: that I may dwell in the house of our Lord, all the days of my
life. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house o Lord: for ever and ever, they
shall praise thee] And expressing the reason of this happiness by remaining in
the holy fellowship of the Church, he says in his thanks for the same to God
[I am partaker of all that fear thee: and that keep thy Ps. 118. v. 63.
commandementes. [Againe congratulating this singular benefit, in the whole
Church, under the name of Jerusalem, he says [Ierusalem which is built as a
City, whose participation is together in it self.] For this cause of mutual
communicating, and participating each with other in good works; our B. Savior
taught and commanded us, to pray in common for our selves, together with all our
fellow members of the militant Church, calling upon God for his grace to al in
this manner [Our Father (not only my Mat. 6. v. 9. 11. 12. 13.
Father) give us: forgive us: let us not be lead: deliver vs] which is the
ordinary form of praying. Nevertheless, singular prayer for ones self, or
for some one, is also lawful and good in particular cases. For so S. Paul
requested the prayers of the faithful for him self, which also proves our
present purpose of mutual assistance amomgst the members of Christ [I beseech
Romans 15. v. 30.
you brethren (says he to Christian Romans) by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
the Charity of the Holy Ghost, that you help me in your prayers for me to
God.] So likewise he requested the Corinthians to [ioine with him in prayer,
and in thankesgeuing] 2. Cor. 1. v. 11.
wherein he reposed special confidence [to be delivered from danger, and
comforted in affliction, by their help in prayer, that by many, (says he)
thanks may be given in our behalf, for that gift which is in vs] So did this
great Apostle esteem of the peoples prayers and fellowship in the service of
God. And so does he teach al Christians, to esteem and be glad each of others
help [Seing Christ, who only needs Ps. 15. v. 2. 1. Cor. 1. v. 9. 1.
no man's helpe] has so joined us to him self, that we may be helped by him [al
being called by God, into the society of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord] And
seeing al are so disposed in place, to assist each other, for he has set the
members of his Church with exceeding great distinction, of gifts, orders, and
offices [euerie one in the body, as he would Io. 1. v. 3. Chapter 12. v. 18. 24.
25.
that there might be no schism in the bodie] but the members together might be
careful one for an other. [And if one member suffer any thing, all the members
suffer with it: or if one member do glory, all the members rejoice with it.]
This indeed is the worthy fruict of the Gospel, not that which libertines
talk of, making schisms, breaking from the Churches community, and raising
daily more and more new sects, always dividing those that are joined, never
gathering Pagane Gentiles unto Christianity, as the true Apostles do
[bringing the Gentiles to be coheires and concorporate, and comparticipant of
God his promise in Christ Jesus, by the Gospel, bringing al living members of
the militant Church, to participate [with Mount Sion, the City of the Ephesians.
3. v. 6. Heb. 12. v. 22. 23. 24.
living God; heavenly Jerusalem, and the assembly of many thousand Angels:
and the Church of the first borne, which are written in the heavens; and the
Judge of al, God, and the spirits of the just made perfect, and the Mediator
of the new Testament Jesus.

4 Such are the endeavors, and fructful labors of The different endeavors of
Catholic Pastors, to unite the dispersed, and of Sectaries to disperse the
united.
the true Church, wherein is the community of Sinctes. Whereas other
congregations, false pretending Churches, neither perform nor commonly attempt
any such thing: but quite contrary employ their travails to draw Christians
to their own new devised opinions, contend against unity, and community of
the whole body, and by pretense of reforming imagined errors, or of correcting
other men's, either real, or surmised faults, open the gappe to innumerable
absurd heresies, (for there is but one only true religion) and into most
detestable, beastly, yea and devilish crimes, whereunto the world is fallen
since Martin Luther with his folowers brake from that only known Church, which
was then and many hundred years before in the world: and so lost the
communion of Saints, and al holiness. For at that An. Dom. 1517.
time of Luthers breach which is now an hundred years since, al Christians
publicly porfessed the same faith, acknowleged one visible head, served God
in one universal Church, at least outwardly by confessing al one and the same
communion of Saints.

Souls in Purgatory, do participate of the Communion of Saints, receiving
releife by the holy Sacrifice, and other Suffrages. ARTICLE. 44.
AS the glorified Saints in heaven, and the Souls departed in state of
grace, are members of the Church.
faithful in earth, are members of the universal Church: so likewise are the
pen^tent souls remaining for some time in purgatory, which parted from their
bodies in state of grace, not having made sufficient satisfaction for their
sins; and they also pertain to the Militant part of the Church as being in
the way, but not in possession of eternal glory. And so being members of the
same body, are releued by the holy Sacrifices, and other suffrages offered
for them by their fellow members That there is a place of purgatory, is proved
in the second part. Article 31. 35.
in earth. As for the point of Catholic doctrine, that many souls be in
state to need such releife, and consequently, that there is a place of
temporal punishment after this life called Purgatory: it pertains to the
third part of the Sacrament of Penance which is satisfaction, and shall there by
Gods assistance, be further declared. Prayer for the dead is here proved by
diverse holy Scriptures, to he lawful, and profitable.


2 Here in the mean season it shall be briefly showed by the holy Scriptures,
that prayer for the dead is both lawful and profitable. whereby the other two
points are also proved, that some souls departed from their bodies, have
need, and also are capable of such spiritual help. For otherwise it were in
vain to pray, or to do other good works for them. That therefore it is not
vain but behooful for them, is first proved by these authentical examples.
Abraham the holy great Patriarch, when his wife Sara was dead, performed an
other office for her, Funeral Exequies is a distinct spiritual office from
burial.
distinct from burial, called her obsequies. For so Moses relates that [after
Abraham was risen up Genesis 23. v. 3.
from the funeral obsequies, he spoke to the children of Heth, concerning a
place of burial] where it is manifest that funeral obsequies was an other
distinct thing from the office of burying the body, and done before he dealt
for the place of sepulcher. It is also manifest that Abraham did not then a new
thing, but observed the accustomed rite, as appears by the manner of Moses
narration of a thing known, and usually practiced saying: [after that Abraham
was risen up from the funeral obsequies etc.] So this text confirms the
tradition of the Jews, who to this day have a solemn office, and prayer for
the dead. Genesis 50. v. 4. Nu. 20. v. 30. Deuteronomy. 38. v. 8.
Likewise when Jacob died in Egypt [his son Joseph dealt not for his burial
til the time of morning was expired.] In like manner [Al the people mourned upon
Aaron. Also for Moses.] And though there be no mention of prayer (for that it
seemed not needful for any of these) yet this mourning imports a solemn
religious office. And for King Saul and Fasting, and Alms deeds for the dead.
his three sons [the inhabitants of Iabes Galaad, Reg. 31. v. 13. ^. Reg. 1.
v. 12.
fasted seven days. And King David and his men, not only mourned, and wept,
but also fasted until evening upon them, and upon the people of our Lord, and
upon the house of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword] which pe^al
work of fasting, pertains to satisfaction for sins; and was done for the
dead. Holy Tobias exhorted his son to give alms for the dead saying [Set
thy bread and Tob. 4. v. 18.
thy wine, upon the burial of a just man] which work of alms bestowed on the
poor, could not otherwise profit the just man's soul departed, but by way of
satisfaction for his sins. Jesus the son of Sirach, amongst many most
godly aduises, says, [From the dead, stay not grace.] When certain Eccle. 7.
v. 38.
sonldiers of the Jews were slain, and were found to have committed especial
sin, in keeping unlawful spoils; [the rest of the army turning unto prayers,
2. Mac. 12. v. 40. 42. Ios. 6. v. 18. 43. 45.
besought God, that the same offense which was committed, might be forgotten.]
And Judas their gen^ral captain, and High Priest, making a gathering, sent
twelve thousand drachemes of silver to Jerusalem, for Sacrifice to be offered
for sin, because he considered, that they which had taken their sleep with
godliness (that is, thinking that they died penitent) had very good grace laid
up for them] whereupon the auctour concludes, that [it is a holy and healthful
cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from sinnes] which is
the very point we believe, and hold against Protestants. And it is not so much
as half a good answer, to deny these three last cited auctorities, of Tobias,
Ecclesiasticus, See Art. 3.
and Machabees, to be Canonical Scriptures; seeing they are declared to be
Canonical even as sufficiently as diverse other parts of the holy Bible which
Protestants acknowledge. And seeing also this present point is proved by other
places as you see, against which they do not pretend this euation. whereunto
may be added many places which show that some souls departed from this life,
are neither in hell, nor as yet in heaven. As the souls of those which were
raised from death. Prayer for the dead is approved by S. John the Apostle.


3 But here one place shall suffice touching prayer for the dead. S. John in his
Epistle distinguishing two ^ortes of sinners, some sinning to death, some not
to death, which must needs be understood of persons departed from this world,
for til their death it can not be known who continue in sin to death, who
not; he exhorteh, and encorregeth us to pray for him that sinned before his
death, and continued not ther^^ to death: but not for him that persisted
sinning even to death saying: [He that knows his 1. Io. 5. v. 16.
brother to sin a sin not to death, let him ask, and life shall be given
him, sinning not to death. there is a sin to death: for that I say not that
any man aske] thus he. Agreeable whereto is the continual practice of the
Catholic Church; praying for those sinners that dye ^enitent, or give signs
of true sorrow at their death. As when they confess their sins before they
dye; and not praying for others that persist obstinate in error of faith as
heretics do; or dye desperate killing them selves, or blaspheming God; or
holy things and the like. For such are incapable of this benefit. And
therefore it were in vain to pray for them. And so this place proves that it
is behooful, and profitable, to pray for saithful souls departed from this
life with true repentance: and good also to pray even for the most wicked, and
desperate, so long as they are in this life; but not after that they are dead
in so miserable, and wretched estate.

Noe infidels do participate of the Communion of Saints: neither is it
lawful to communicate with them in practice of Religion. ARTICLE. 45.
IN this especially, the Ark of Noah was a figure No i^stificatio^, nor
salvation is possible but in the Church.
of the Church, that as the living creatures therein were saved from drowning,
and all that s^aied without were drowned in the flood: so spiritual salvation is
only within the Church, and none without Genesis 7. v. 21. 22.
can be eternally saved. For as then al flesh was consumed that moved upon the
earth, of foul, of ca^le, of beasts, and of al creepers that creep upon the
earth, al men, and al things wherein was breath of 23. 1. Pet. 3. v. 20.
life, dyed, but only Noe remained, and they that were with him in the Arke] In
[which few (says S. Peter) that is, eight souls, were saved, by water:] so
now by faith and Baptism, which is the gate of other Sacraments and entrance
into the Church* the worthei receivers thereof, are ingraffed in Christ and made
his members [Baptis^e being (as the same Apostle there says) of the like form
unto the water] 21.
that carried Noe his ship, with him, and al therein from death [now saves us
also from perishing with the incredulous] that do not believe. An other figure
was showed by the fact of Abraham, when [he Genesis 25. v. 5. 6.
gave al his possessions to Isaac his son, borne of Sara by Gods promise;
and to the children of Agar and Cetura, he gave giftes] that is to say,
moveable temporal goods: signifying that only the spiritual children of the
Church, are heirs of the everlasting kingdom of heaven, and all the carnal
children, representing al sorts of infidels, which are Moral good works, done
out of the Church, are only rewarded temporally.
Painimes, Jews, Turks, and Heritikes, have none other goods, but the
transitory riches and pleasures of this world, for reward of their best
deeds, and for their evil [according to the measure of the sin Deuteronomy. 25. v.
2.
shall the measure of the stripes be inflicted.] And as it is prophesied of the
whole society of the damned [So much as she has glorified her self, and has
Apoc. 18. v. 8.
been in delicacies; so much give her torments and mourning.] The same
exclu^ion from the Church, is signified by the similitude of [the blind, and
the 2. Reg. 5. v. 8.
lame, which were prohibited to enter into the Temple.] All that want true
faith, are spiritually blind; and not doing good works, are also lame.

2 Gods grace and mercy, is sufficient for all mankind, Gods grace being
sufficient for all, is only effectual to salvation, within the Church. Proved by
many textes of the Psalms.
and is offered to al, but is received only in his Church: As the Psalmist
professes saying: [We Ps. 47. v. 10.
have received thy mercy o God; in the midst of thy Temple] Neither are
prayers or praises grateful to God, but only in his Church; and therefore the
same Psalmist says: [An Himne o God becomes Ps. 64. v. 2. Ps. 83. v. 8. 11.
12.
thee in Sion; and a vow shall be rendered to thee in Jerusalem. The God of
Gods shall be seen in Sion. Because better is one day in thy courts (o God)
above thousands. (elsewhere) I have chosen to bean abject in the house of my
God, rather then to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners. Because God loves
mercy and truth; our Lord will give grace and glory.] By which aduertismentes
we see, that it is in vain to flatter our selves with Gods mercy, unless
we do also receive his truth, which is only in his Church; or to expect glory
in the next life, except we receive grace in this: For [mercie and truth Ps.
84. v. 11. Ps. 113. v. 2. Ps. 118. v. 164. Ps. 121. v. 2. 3. Ps. 136. v. 4. Ps.
147. v. 8. 9.
have met each other; justice and peace have kissed. Jury was made his
sanctification, Israel his dominion. Seven times in the day, I have said
praise to thee for the Judgments of thy Justice. Our feet were standing in
thy courts o Jerusalem. Jerusalem which is built as a city; whose
participation is together in it self. How shall we sing the song of our Lord,
in a strange land? Our Lord the God of Sion, declares his word to Jacob: his
justices and Judgments to Israel. He has not done in like manner to any
Nation: and his Judgments he has not made manifest unto them.] Nothing is
more frequent in this and other Prophets, then the special graces, and
spiritual benefits bestowed by God upon his Church, and not upon other
kingdoms nor Nations.

3 Isaias has recorded how God advanced some te^porally, Is. 13. 45.
Proved by other Prophets.
and punished others for his Church sake. And prophesied namely of Cyrus, king
of Medes and Persians, about two hundred years before he was borne, that he
should overcome the Assirians, possess Babylon, and deliver the Jews from
captivity saying: [thus says our Lord to my Christ Cyrus, Is. 45. v. 1.
whose right hand I have taken to subdue the Gentiles before his face, and to
turn the backs of kings and to open the doares before him, and the gates
shall not be shut.] And so it came to pass, that after seauentie years
captivity, this Cyrus released 2. Par. 36. v. 22.
them, and gave them both leave and assistance, to build again their Temple in
Jerusalem. But for all this, he not believing rightly in God, nor daily serving
him, was frustrate of spiritual benefit, as the Prophet also foreshewed
^al^ing: [for my servant 1. Esd. 1. v. 1.
Jacob and Israel mine elect, I have called thee by etc. Ibid. v. 4.
thy name: I have resembled thee, and thou have not known me. (for this king
still served false gods, and therefore God by his Prophet said) I the Lord and
there is none else; befides me, there is no God: I girded thee, and thou have
not known me.] Again 5. Chapter 60. v. 1. 2.
the same Prophet says to the Christian Church under the figure of Jerusalem
[Ari^e, be illuminated Jerusalem, because thy light is come; and the glory of
our Lord is risen upon thee. Because lo darkness shall cover the earth, and a
miste, the peoples, but upon thee shall our Lord arise, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee.] Ezechiel most fitly compares the Church to a vine-tree which
yeldeth much fruict by her branches, remaining in the body; but none at al by
any separated members, God thus speaking to him [Sonne of man, what shall be
made of Ezech. 15. v. 2. 3.
the wood of the vine, of all the trees of the woods, that are among the trees
of the forestes? Shall there be taken wood of it, that a work may be made, or
shall a pin be made thereof that any vessel may hang thero^. Behold it is
given to the fire for soode; 4.
the fire has consumed both parts thereof, and the midst thereof is brought
into ashes; why shall it be profitable for a work?.] Even so fruictles were the
Jews refusing Christ the true vine; and so fruictles Joan. 15. v. 1.
are al men remaining out of his Church: neither rightly understanding divine
Mysteries, nor reaping spiritual fruict of any thing they do.

4 Al which is yet more clear in the new Testament, The same is confirmed by
Christ and his Apostles.
our Savior often and plainly affirming, that men can, know nothing, nor do
any thing without him, nor out of his Church [To you (says he to his Mat. 13.
v. 11.
Disciples) it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven: but to
them it is not geuen] To them that are without, al things are done in Mar. 4.
v. 11.
parables] so alluding to the Parable in Ezechiel [As Io. 15. v. 4.
the branch (says he) can not bear fruict of it lelf, unless it abide in the
vine: so you neither unless you abide in me. I am the vine, you the branches: he
that abides in me, and I in him, the same bears much fruict: for without me
you can do nothing] At other times he said [He that is not with me, is Mat.
12. v. 30.
against me; and he that gathers not with me, scatereth.] Speaking of the
schismatical Samaritanes, said plainly [Saluation is of the Jews part] And in
Joan. 4. v. 9. Mar. 16. v. 16.
general of all the world [He that believes not (and consequently is none of the
Church) shall be condemned. [And therefore all that shall be saved, are first
adjoined unto the Church, they that received (and believed) S. Peter's word, were
baptized] and so Act. 2. v. 41. 47. 1. Joan. 2. v. 2. Ephesians. 5. v. 23.
were added to the Church [And our Lord increased them that should be saved
daily together.] Christ the Redemer of al, and the propitiation for all sins,
even of all the world] yet is properly [the head of the Church, the Savior of
his bodie] which manifestly shows, that out of the Church there is no
salvation. And the words of S. John declare the same, saying in the beginning
of his Epistle [That which we have seen, and have heard, we declare unto you,
1. Io. 1. v. 3.
that you also may have society with us, and our society may be with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ] where we see, that whosoever will have
society with God, and Jesus Christ, must have society with the Apostles, and
with that Church which is derived by succession from the Apostles. Because
those that have society with the Apostles, and none other: they have society
with Christ, and with God the B. Trinity.

5 Now seeing none out of the Church can participate That it is not lawful to
yield conformity to the practice of heresy, or other infidelity, by personal
presence, at their service or sermons, is proved by many holy Scriptures.
of the communion of Saints, it follows by right sequel, that no true
member of the Church can lawfully communicate with Paganes, Jews, Turks,
Heretics; nor any other Infidels, in practice of their Infidelity, or
pretended religion. As by personal presence at their service, or Sermons. which
we shall further declare by the holy Scriptures. God expressly forbideth al
Idolatry, and service of false gods, in his first commandment of the ten
fundamental divine precepts, saying to his people: [thou Ex. 20. v. 3. 4. 5.
shall not have strange gods before me. thou shall not make to thee a
sculptile, (or graven thing) nor any similitude that is in heaven above, and
that is in earth beneath, neither of those things which are in the waters
under the earth. thou shall not adore them, nor serve them.] After this,
further explicating this commandment, he also forbids communication with
Idolaters, either in any practice thereof, or in such occasions as may
dangerously tempt them thereunto saying: [Myne Angel shall go before Chapter 23. v.
23. 24.
thee, and shall bring thee in unto the Amorrhite, and Hetheite, and Pherezite,
and Chananite, and Heueite, and Iebuzite, whom I will destroy, thou shall not
adore their gods, nor serve them. thou shall not do their works, but shall
destroy them, and break their statues. thou shall not enter league 32.
with them, nor with their gods. Beware thou never join amity with the
inhabitants of that land, which may be thy ruin. Enter no traffic with the
Chapter 34. v. 12. 15. 16.
men of those regions; lest when they have fornicated with their gods, and
have adored their Idols, some man call thee to eat of the things immolated.
Neither shall thou take wife for thy sons of their daughters: lest after them
selves have fornicated they make thy sons also to fornicate with their
gods.] Further touching Marriages, not only to avoid Idolatry, but also to
shun other execrable sins, our Lord commanded his people saying: [According
to the custom of the land of Egypt, Leuit. 18. v. 3.
wherein you have dwelt, you shall not do. and according to the manner of the
country of Chanaan, into the which I will bring you; you shall not do, Chapter 20.
v. 26.
nor walk in their ordinances. I the Lord your God that have separated you
from other peoples, that you should be mine.] Upon occasion of schism raised
by wicked men, our Lord by miracles, and by the ministry of his Preistes, and
Prophets, Moses, and Aaron, declared the truth, confounded the rebels, and
strictly commanded the people [to depart, and separate them selves from the
sedicious.] Moses thus admonishing the chief rebel Core, and his accomplices:
[In the morning our Lord will make it Nu. 16. v. 5.
known, who perteyne to him, and the holy he will join to him self, and whom
he shall choose, they shall approach to him.] Again our Lord said to Moses, and
Aaron: [Seperate your selves from the midest 20. 21. 23. 24.
of this congregation, that I may suddenly destroy them.] And then to Moses:
[Command the whole people that they separate them selves from the tabernacles
of Core, Dathan, and Abiron. Whereupon Moses said to the multitude: [departe
from the 26.
tabernacles of the impious, and touch not the things that perteine to them,
lest you be wrapped in their sins.] Again Moses a little before his death,
amongst most principal commandments repeteth the prohibition of league, and
Marriages with Infidels, saying [Thou shall not make league with them, nor Deuteronomy.
7. v. 2. 3.
pity them, nor make Marriages with them. thy daughter thou shall not give to
his son, nor take his daughter for thy son.] Likewise not to hear new
doctrines, nor false Prophets. If there rise (says Chapter 13. v. 1. 2. 3.
the Law) in the midest of thee a Prophet, or one that says he has seen a
dream, and foret^^ a sign, and a wonder, and it come to pass which he spoke;
and he say to thee: Let us go and follow strange gods which thou know
not, and let us serve them, thou shall not hear the words of that Prophet, or
dreamer: for the Lord your God tempts (or proves) you, that it may appear
whether you love him or not, with all your heart, and with all your soul.

6 Such was the true zele of the people of Israel, True zele of good people
against schism, and heresy.
Ios. 22. v. 10. 11. 12. etc.
in the time of Iosue, that when the children of Ruben and Gad, and half Tribe
of Manasses, had built an Altat by the banks of Jordan; the other Tribes
suspecting that they would make a schism, asse^bling together in Silo (where
the Tabernacle, with the Arc then was) determined to fight against them. Of
this so important danger of schism and infidelity, Iosue inlike manner,
earnestly warned the whole Ios. 23. v. 12. 13.
people saying: [If you will cleave to the error of these Nations that dwell
among you, and make marriages with them, and join amity: Even now know you,
that our Lord your God will not destroy them before your face; but they shall be
a pit and a snare, for you, and a st^^bling block at your side, and stakes in
your eyes, til he take you away, and destroy you from this excellent land,
which he has delivered unto you.]

7 When Jeroboam made the schism of the ten Al true servants of God,
refrained from Ie^obo^ms schism.
3. Reg. 12. v. 28. 2. Par. 11. v. 13. 14. 15. 16.
Tribes of Israel [al the Preistes and Levites that were in those parts, came
to Roboam king of Judah, out of al their seats, leaving their suburbs and
their possessions, and passing to Judah and Jerusalem, remained in the unity of
the Church: and many other of those Tribes, ge^ing their hearts to seek our
Lord God of Israel, came into Ierusal^m to immolate their victimes before our
Lord the God of their fathers] because Ierobo^m ^^^ting la^^^l Preistes, m^de
unto him self new ministers, of the excelces of devils, and of the calves which
he had made.] King Iosaphat 3. Reg. 22. v. 7. 2. Par. 18. v. 6. 13. 16.
justly suspecting schismatical false Prophets, sought to be instructed by some
true Prophet of our Lord. So Micheas was consulted, and prophesied the truth.
Nevertheless the same king Iosaphat was reprehended for joining with king Achab
in unlawful actions by the Prophet Iehu saying to him: [To 2. Par. 19. v. 2.
the impious man thou geuest aid, and to them that hate our Lord, thou art
joined in frendshippe: and therefore thou did deserve indeed the wrath of
our Lord; but Good works are found in thee; for that thou have taken away the
groves out of the land of Judah, and have prepared thy heart to seek our Lord
the God of thy fathers] So that civil conversation, and lawful temporal
affairs, are permitted with Infidels, but no communication in Religious cases,
nor cooperation in sin.

8 For whereas the Prophet Elizeus allowed Naaman 4. Reg. 5. v. 18. 19.
Wherein Naamans case differs from personal presence in heretical conuenticles.
a Sirian, to do his accustomed temporal service to an infidel king within the
Temple of an Idol; that case differs much, from the question of personal
presence in heretical conuenticles, at service or sermons. First because
Naamans fact was neither a revolt from true Religion, nor profession of
falsehood, as now it is in England by showing conformity to the wicked law, by
which Catholic Religion is abandoned, and heretical abomination, brought in
place thereof. Secondly this noble man's fact, was not scandalous to 1. Esd. 4.
v. 2. 3. Chapter 9. v. 1. Chapter 10. v. 2. 2. Esd. 13. v. 3.
any man, because in that place, true Religion was not known, nor any
controversy concerning the public profession thereof moved, as now there is
amongst us. Lastly Naaman took direction of Elizeus in his particular case:
and so must Christians do now in our case, not following the judgment of
private men, but of the chief Pastor of Gods Church, or of such an approved
Prophet of God, as Elizeus was.

9 But for Examples like unto our case, we have Examples more like to our case
in England, touching conformity to heretical procedinges.
many in holy Scriptures, as Daniel, and the other Dan. 1. v. 8. Chapter 3. v. 6.
16. Judith. 11. v. 14. Chapter 12. v. 2. 19. 1. Mac. 1. v. 45. 65. 66. 2. Mac. 5.
v. 11. 12. 14.
children in the captivity, [who would by no means be polluted by eating of
the kings table: nor would adore his statua.] Judith being in Holofernes house
[professed the true God, and abstained from unlawful meats.] After the
captivity [those that builded the Temple, would not admit the schismatical
Samaritanes to join with them in that work.] Esdras and Nehemias were very
diligent [in correcting the fault of many Jews, making marriages with
infidels.] In the persecution of Antiochus, when [manie consented to leave
Gods Law, and to obey him: Many also were most constant, determining not to
eat the unclean things, but chose rather to dye, then to be defiled with
unclean meates] And [they would not break the holy Law of God, and so were
murdered] For Antiochus suspecting, that the Jews would refuse to obey his
wicked laws [tooke the City of Jerusalem by force of arms, and bade the
soldiers kill, and not spare them that came in their way; and there were slain
in three days, fourscore thousand, and forty thousand imprisoned, and no
less number sold] And [manie retired 27.
into a desert place, living amongst wild beasts eating herbs, that they
might not be partakers of the contamination.] With no less wickedness, but with
more politic pretense of just proceeding, as by form of law [manie were
brought to trial; accused, and condemned for transgressing the new wicked
laws. Amongst which, [two women were accused 2. Mac. 6. v. 1. 10.
to have circumcised their children, whom when they openly led through the
City, with their infants hanging at their breasts, they threw them down
headlong by the wales, others coming together to the next caves, and secretly
keeping the day of the Sabbath; when they were discovered, were burnt with 11.
fire, because they feared for Religion and observance, to help them selves
with their hand.] Renowned 2. Mac. 6. v. 18.
Eleazarus, chief man of the Scribes; at the age of nintie years, being
commanded to eat swines flesh, contrary to Gods Law, would neither do it, nor
suffer his worldly friends to say that he had done it [lest 25.
others through his dissimulation, might be deceived: And so sustained glorious
death, to the honor of God, and memorable example to al men of virtue, and
fortitude.] After him, others also [especially 31. Chapter 7. v. 1. 2. 8. ad 41.
seven brethren, and their mother (with admirable courage) suffered exquisite
torments, and by their deaths finished their noble martyrdom. Seeing therefore
it was necessary rather to suffer death, then to omit circumcision of
infantes, or celebration of the Sabbath, or to eat swines flesh, or to make
show so to do against Gods Laws, and with scandalous example to others: it
is no less, but more necessary, in these times of heresies, and of
persecution for the Catholic faith, to suffer temporal losses, torments, and
death; then to yield conformity unto wicked laws, made in derogation of
Catholic Religion, and for practice of heresy, by personal presence at their
service or Sermons. Neither can it be lawful to break Ecclesiastical fastes,
or abstinence, or other Catholic Obseruances, when thereby trial is made of
our faith and Religion. For then such Christian Laws, are to be sincerely
observed, not only as ceremonial sacred Rites, which ordinarily Ceremonial
Rites, become moral precepts, when breach thereof is exacted for trial of our
Faith, and Religion.
bind al Christians, but also, because in this case, they become moral divine
Precepts, pertaining to Religion, and therefore the transgression thereof, is a
reuolting from God, a participation with Infidels, and a breach of the first
Commandment, concerning the serving of God, and not serving false Gods, And
so is absolutely and strictly forbidden; and al such conformity to Paganism,
Idolatry, Heresi^e, or other infidelity, is very often condemned in holy
Scriptures: As both wicked in it self; dangerous to the transgressors, of more
and more corruption, and scandalous to others by pernicious example: and
therefore to be avoided by all the true servants of God.

10 So does the Royal Propet admonish us to flee, Many evident textes of the
Psalms, and other Prophets, do condemn al show of conformity to the
practice of heresy or other infidelity.
and abhor al participation, and association with the wicked, saying: [with
the holy thou shall be holy: Ps. 17. v. 26. 27. Ps. 25. v. 5. Ps. 118. v.
163. Ps. 124. v. 5. Ps. 138. v. 21. 22. Ps. 140. v. 4. 5.
and with the innocent thou shall be innocent: with the elect thou shall be
elect; and with the perverse thou shall be perverted. I have hated (says he)
the Church of the Malignant: and with the impious I will not ^itte. I have hated
iniquity, and aborred it: but thy law I have loved. But those that decline
into obligations, our Lord will bring with them that work iniquity. Did not I
hate them that has thee o Lord, and pyned away because of thine enemies? with
perfect hatred did I hate them: they are become enemies to me: I will not
communicate with the chief of them. the just shall rebuke me in mercy, and
shall reprehend me: but let not the oil of a sinner fat me.] Wise Solomon
teaches the same necessity of avoiding fellowship with the wicked, in
exercise of Religion, saying: [the hosts of Prou. 21. v. 27. Chapter 29. v. 24.
25.
the impious are abominable; because they are offered of wickedness. He that is
partaker with a thief, hates his own soul. He hears one adiuring, and
tells not. He that seareth man, shall soon fall: he that trusts in our Lord,
shall be lifted up.] Under the name of Babylon, Isaias admonishes al
Christians, to flee from communicating with infidels [Depart, depart, go ye out
from thence: touch not a Is. 52. v. 11.
polluted thing; go out of the midst of her: be cleansed ye that carry the
vessels of our Lord] Which S. Paul applies to the shunning of false Apostles,
[Thus says the Lord of hosts (by the mouth of Jeremy) 2. Cor. 6. v. 17.
Iere. 23. v. 16. 21.
Hear not the words of the Prophets, that Prophecy unto you and deceive you:
they speak the vision of their own heart, not from the mouth of the Lord. I
sent not the Prophets, and they ran: I spoke not to them, and they
prophesied.] Ezechiel Ezech. 23. v. 16.
instructs those that will learn the truth, first to depart from Idolatry
and false doctrine of such as preach without right mission [Conuert (says he)
and depart from your Idols, and from al your contaminations, turn away your
faces.] Our Lord threatening al vain temporisers by his Prophet Sophonias
says: [I will destroy them that swear by the Soph. 1. v. 5. 6.
Lord, and by Melchom, and them that turn away from after the back of our
Lord, and have not sought our Lord, nor searched after him.]

11 Al which admonitions and threats, our Savior The same is much inculcated
in the new Testament.
and his Apostles often confirm by their doctrine. [No man can serve two
Masters (says Christ) God Mat. 6. v. 24. Chapter 10. v. 33. 33.
and Mammon] that is, God, and this world, truth and falsitie, the spirit and
the flesh. [Euerie one that shall confess me before men, I also will confess
him before my Father which is in heaven: but he that shall deny me before men,
I also will deny him before my Father which is in heaven. Do not you think
that I came to send peace into the earth: I came not to send peace, but the
sword] meaning, that he will not have peace, between faith, and infidelity,
between opposite enemies [He that takes 38. Luc. 12. v. 8. 51. Mar. 1. v. 25.
not his Cross, and follows me, is not worthy of me.] Our Lord [would not
suffer the devil to speak the truth, but compelled him to hold his peace, and
to go out of the man] whom he possessed and vexed. S. Paul likewise [commanded
silence to a Pithonical Luc. 4. v. 35. Act. 6. v. 18. 1. Cor. 10. v. 21. 2.
Cor. 6. v. 14. 15. 16. 17.
spirit, and expelled him out of the person whom he possessed.] He taught the
Corinthians that [they could not drink the chalice of our Lord, and the
chalice of devils: you can not (says he) be partakers of the Table of our
Lord, and of the table of devils. Bear not the yoke with Infidels; for what
participation has justice with iniquity? or what society is there between
light and darkness? and what agreement between Christ and Belial? or what part
has the faithful with the Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God
with Idols? For you are the Temple of the living God. For the which cause go
out of the midst of them, and separate your selves says our Lord, and touch
not the vncleane] the same which was recited even now out of Isaias. In the
very same manner S. Paul admonishes the Thessalonians saying: [we denounce unto
you brethren 2. These. 3. v. 6.
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from
every brother walking inordinately, and not according to the tradition which
they have received of us.] He instructs Timothee a Bishop that [there will
be many heretikes] in 2. Tim. 3. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
this time of the new Testament, describing their wickedness, and notes some
even then seducing whom they could [hauing an appearance in deed of piety,
but denying the verity thereof. and these (says he) avoid. For of these be
they that craftily enter into houses: and lead captive seely women laden
with sins; which are led with diverse desires, always learning and never
attaining to the knowledge of the truth.] In likesort instructing Titus an other
Bishop, how to preach and converse converse with all the faithful especially
warns him, and in him al others to have no fellowship with heretics saying:
[A Tit. 3. v. 10. 11.
man that is an heretic, after the first, and second admonition, avoid:
knowing that he that is such an one (persisting obstinate after two admonitions
by the spiritual Superior) is subverted, and sins, being condemned by his
own iudgement] in that he knows his error, is condemned by the Church, and
rather runs out of the Church, then he will submit his judgment. S. John
in his second Epistle which he writ to a Lady, and her sons, wills them
to hold fast the faith which they had learned, and to have no socictie with an
heretic; saying: [If 2. Joan. v. 10. 11.
any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, (once taught and received in
the whole Church) receive him not into the house, nor say God save you unto
him. For he that says unto him: God save you, communicates with his wicked
workes] when it is done in favor of his heresy. For otherwise in diverse
cases civil conversation is permitted with heretics, but never in religious
causes. And therefore our Savior by the pen of the same Apostle S. John in
the Epistles to several Bishops of Asia, commends or taxes them for their
more or less proceeding against heretics. where noting some defect in one of
them, yet commends him for his hatred of heresy saying: [this (good thing)
thou have: Apoc. 2. v. 4. 6.
that thou hate the factes of the Nicolaites, which I also hate.] Commending
an other for his own constant fortitude, yet blames him for his couldnes in
suppressing heretics, saying: [I have against thee 13. 14.
a few things, because thou have there, them that hold the doctrine of Balaam;
who taught Balac to cast ascandal before the children of Israel, to eat, and
commit fornication: so have thou also that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaites.] He also highly commends 15. 19.
an other Bishop saying: [I know thy works, and faith, and thy charity, and
ministry, and thy patience, and thy last works, more then the former, yet
reprehendeth his toleration of some heresy saying: [I have against thee a few
things: because 20.
thou permittest the woman Iezabel, who calls herself a prophetess, to
teach, and to seduce my servants, to fornicate, and to eat, of things
sacrificed to Idols.] An other he rebukes, admonishing him to be more vigilant
[For I find not (says he) thy Chapter 3. v. 2. 4.
works full before my God] and commends some of his flock for their
constancy in confessing their faith saying: [But thou have a few names in
Sardis, (which was his province) which have not defiled their garments: and
they shall walk with me in whites, because they are worthy.] But of al most
sharply reproves an other Bishop for his want of zele in cause of religion
saying: [I know thy works that 15. 16.
thou art neither cold, nor hot; I would thou were could, or hot. But because
thou art luke warm, and neither could, nor hot, I will begin to vomit thee
out of my mouth. Because thou say: I am rich, and 17.
enriched, and lack nothing: and know not that thou art a miser, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Be zealous therefore and do
penance.] 19. Chapter 2. v. 11. 17. 29. etc.


12 After these admonitions to al Pastors, (for so Our Savior foreshewing that
Christians shall be strongly tempted, and tried for professing their faith;
forewarneth al to be constant, and zealous.
our Savior concludes al his seven Epistles, that al Churches should take
them as written to them selves) he foretells many great troubles, and
persecutions by Infidels, especially by Antichrist, warning al true Christians
by no means to yield consent by word, nor deed, unto the practice of heresy,
and in regard that al conformity to heretical proceedinges is honor, and
adoration of the great beast Antichrist, and the devil; he deuouncing by the
lo^d voice of an Angel, Chapter 14. v. 9. 10.
that if any man ^ore the beast, and his image, and receive the character in
his forehead, or in his hand, he also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is mingled with pure wine in the cu^pe of his wrath; and shall be
tormented with fire, and brimstone, in the sight of the holy Angels, and
before the sight of the lamb.] For prevention of which so intolerable eternal
torments, our loving Savior eftsonnes, and often warns his children to flee
out of wicked Babylon, by an other voice from heaven saying: [Goe out from her
my people: that you Chapter 18. v. 4.
be not pertakers of her sins; and receive not of her plagues.]

From the Church and Communion of Saints, are excluded excommunicate persons.
ARTICLE. 46.
SVch is the enormitie of some sins, together Some sins are justly punished
with death, by temporal Magistrates.
with the danger of infecting others with like contagion: and so noisome they
are to the whole body whereof the malefactors are members, that God by his law
ordained to punish them with corporal death. And so [take away evil from
amiddest Exo. 21. v. 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. 23. Chapter 22. v. 18. 19. 20. Leuit. 20.
v. 9. 10. 13. Deuteronomy. 13. v. 5. 9. 15. Chapter 17. v. 12.
the good.] Namely for wilful murder, for striking, or cursing their parents;
for sorcerie; bestialitie; idolatry; adultery; incest; sodomie; heresy;
disobedience to the chief Judge; and the like. Which course of Justice al
temporal Princes do imitate, for the saiftie of the common wealths. But in
place Christ has given his Church a spiritual sword, of excommunication, and
of other censures.
thereof, Christ our Savior has established in his Church a spiritual
punishment of enormious offenders, that as well they may be corrected, as the
rest preserved, and the whole body purged of pestiferous humors, by
excommunication, and separation of unworthy members, from participating with
the Church in holy Sacraments, public prayers, and other spiritual
fellowship.

2 A figure of this Ecclesiastical discipline, was in the Which Ecclesiastical
power*
anctoritie of Preistes in Moses Law, to whom it (...) prefigured ^^ the old
Law.
perteyned not only to judge of leprosies, but also to separate the lepers
from the society of other people: [The man in whose skin, and flesh, shall
arise the Leuit. 13. v. 2. 3. 44. 45. 46.
plauge of leprosy, shall be brought to Aaron the high Priest, or to one of his
sons: at his arbitriment (says the Law) he shall be separated, he shall have
his clothes hanging loose, his head ba^e, his mouth covered with a cloth, he
shall cry him self polluted and unclean. All the time that he is a leper and
unclean, he shall dwell alone without the camp.] And this was done though the
leprosy came of natural infirmity without sin. And for execution thereof,
the people were bound [to bring the suspected to the Priests, and being judged
to be leprosy, to cast out of the camp every leper, as well man, as Nu. 5. v.
2. 3.
woman, lest they contaminate it.]

3 No marvel therefore if it were exactly observed Diverse offenders were
punished by God with leprosy, and so excluded from conversation with others.
when it happened for punishment of sin. As when Marie (the sister to Moses,
and of Aaron) for murmuring Nu. 12. v. 2. 10. 13. 14.
against Moses, was stricken with leprosy, though meek Moses prayed our Lord
to heal her: yet our Lord commanded to punish her for a time saying: [Let her
be separated seven days without the camp^, and afterward she shall be called
again.] More severely was Ozias King of Judah, punished for 2. Par. 26. v. 16.
17. 18. 19. 20.
his sacrilegious pride. who usurping preistlie function to offer incense, and
persisting in his purpose, and threatening the high Priest, and others that
resisted him [forthwith there rose a leprosy in his foreheade, before the
Preistes, in the house of our Lord, upon the Alter of incense. And when Azarias
the high Priest had beheld him and all the rest of the Preistes, they saw the
leprosy in his foreheade, and in have they thrust him out: yea and himself
being sore afraid 21.
made have to go out: because he felt by and by the plague of our Lord. Ozias
therefore the king was a leper until the day of his death: and full of leprosy
(for the which he had been cast out of the house of our Lord) he dwelt in a
house a part; and his son Ioathan governed the kings house, and judged the
people of the land. And dying they buried him (not in the proper sepulcher of
kings, but) in the kings sepurchres field: because he was a leper.] How
grievous 23.
punishment this separation from society of the faithful was esteemed, does
further appear by continual practice among the people of God. As when all the
people returning from Babylon were called to Jerusalem, it was proclaimed with
this comminatorie 1. Esd. 10. v. 7. 8.
warning [Euerie one that shall not come within three days, according to the
council of the Princes, and the Ancients, al his substance shall be taken away,
and him self shall be cast out of the company of the transmigration.] And the
parents of the blind man, whose sight Christ restored [durst not confess who
Io. 9. v. 2^.
had opened their sons eyes, for fear lest they should be put out of the
Sinagogue.]

4 Our Savior miraculously clensing diverse lepers Christ fulfilled the old
Law: and gave greater power to his Church, of binding, and ^ loosing sins, by
Judicial sentence.
[sent them to the Preistes that they might restore Mat. 8. v. 4. Leuit. 14. v.
2. 3. Luc. 18. v. 14.
them into their former conversation with the people, finding them clean from
leprosy, according to the Law] which law being shortly to cease, he instituted
in the mean time the thing thereby prefigured, which is Apostolical power of
spiritual binding and loosing in earth, as the same should be ratified in
heaven, saying to S. Peter [I will give to thee the keys Mat. 18. v. 19.
of the kingdom of heaven; And whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, it shall
be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, it shall be
loosed also in heaven.] Which power our Savior afterward declares to have
this effect in earth, Chapter 18. v. 7.
that he which will not hear the Church is (for that resistance to be excluded
from the faithful) as the Heathen, and Publicans] For that by the word Church,
in this place, he means neither the universal militant Church, consisting of
the Clergy, and Laity, nor the supreme visible head only in whom this
authority principally resideth: but all the Prelates of the Church is manifest
by the next words saying to al his Apostles, and in them, to their successors,
al Ecclesiastical Prelates, as yelding the reason why such disobedient persons
are to be avoided as the Heathen, and Publicans, [Amen I say to you, whatsoever
you v. 18.
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven.] A clear example of
authority in Prelates to excommunicate, and absolve, by S. Paul's practice.


5 Again it is clear by S. Paul's practice, that he (being an Apostle yet
none of the twelve to whom Christ then spoke) had this power of Jurisdiction to
separate obstinate offenders from the fellowship of other Christians, where he
both threatens, and punishes certain Corinthians saying: [I will come to 1.
Cor. 4. v. 19. 20.
you quickly if our Lord will, and will know, not the words of them that be
puffed up, but the power. For the kingdom of God is not in words, but in
power] (not only in preaching, but also in governing) and so expostulating with
them, that either committed, or carelessly tolerated scandalous sins,
concludes his fatherly admonition saying: [what 21.
will you? that I come to you in rod: or in charity, and the spirit of
mildnes?] premonishing that as they should deserve, so he would deal, either
with severity, or with mildnes. And even then being absent proceeded against
one notorious malefactor, by rigor of Excommunication, blaming, and correcting
others slaknes and want of zele, in not seeking the offenders punishment, that
was otherwise incorrigible [There is heard (says he) among you such Chapter 5. v.
1. 2.
fornication, as the like is not among the Heathen: that one has his fathers
wife. And you (his friends, and neighbors) are puffed up: and have not mourned
rather, that he might be taken away from among you, that has done this deed.]
Then supposing by his own just zele, that which others ought to have
solicited, but did not, the holy Apostle denounced sentence of Excommunication
in this manner [I indeed 3. 4. 5.
absent in body, but present in spirit, have already judged as present, him
that has so done; in S. Paul's sentence of excommunication against an
incestious person.
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together, and my spirit
with the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one to Satan, for
the destruction of the flesh, that, the spirit may be saved in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ.] Again by the same power of Jurisdiction, after the
delinquents humble penance, he loosed that which he had formerly bound;
absoluing the penitent from excommunication, and withal imperting unto him by
way of indulgence, the r^st of satisfaction not performed; and that upon the
good testimony, and suit of others; writing thus to them; and to such also as
seemed over severe [To him that is such a one (him that is excommunicated 2.
Cor. 2. v. 6.
for incest) this rebuke suffices that is given of many: so that contrariwise
you should rather pardon, and comfort him, lest perpaps he be swalowed up with
over great sorrow. For the which cause 8.
I beseech you, that you confirm charity toward him. For therefore also have I
written, that I may know the 9.
experiment of you: whether in all things you be obedient. And whom you have
pardoned (or wish to be 10.
pardoned) I also (do pardon) For that which my self pardoned, if I pardoned
any thing, for you (for your sakes) I did it.] And to signify to what power
he did it he adds [in the person of Christ] and 11.
what cause moved him [that we be not circumuented of Satan.]

6 Thus we see by S. Paul's fact, and doctrine, as well The excommunicate are
his, as other Prelates authority, to excommunicate, deprived of the communion
of the faithful, til they be absolved.
and to absolve; and that the effect of excommunication, is an exclusion from
the Church, and from the Communion of Saints. Because whiles a person
remains excommunicated, he is in the power of the devil, as being for his
fault, and for his correction, delivered to him for the good of his soul [that
the spirit may be saued] by his repentance. [For the Chapter 10. v. 4. 8.
weapons of our warfare (says the same Apostle) are not carnal, for our power,
which our Lord has given us, is unto edification, and not to destruction.] To
the end therefore that the offenders might do penance before hand he still
inculcateth, that unless they so did, he would assuredly lay this rod of
excommunication upon them [I foretold (said he) and do foretell Chapter 13. v. 2.
10.
as present, and now absent, to them that sinned, and all the rest, that if I
come again I will not spare. therefore these things I write absent: that being
present I may not deal hardly according to the power which our Lord has given
me unto edification, and not unto destruction.] To the same purpose he
admonished the Thessalonians; both to inform him of such as were disobedient,
and to avoid their company, writing thus to them [If any obey not our Lord,
note 2. These. 3. v. 14. 15.
him by an Epistle. And do not company with him, that he may be confounded:
and do not esteem him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.]

7 As he exercised his power for the spiritual good S. Paul willed S. Timothee
to practice Epilcopal authority in punishing where need required.
of al: so he willed S. Timo^hie being also a Bishop with courage and according
to good conscience, to use his anctoritie in punishing, proposing unto him for
example [some that repelling good conscience, 1. Tim. 1. v. 20.
had made shipwreck about the faith, of whom (said he) is Himenaeus, and
Alexander, whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to
blaspheme.] Even the same instruction he gave to S. Titus an other Bishop, to
use severity where it was needeful saying: [There be many disobedient vain
Tit. 1. v. 10. 11.
speakers and seducers, especially they that are of the Circumcision, who must
be controuled, who subvert whole houses, teaching the things they ought not
for filthy lucre; for the which cause, rebuke them 13.
sharply; that they may be sound in faith, not attending to the Jewish fables
(that was then the fault whereto the Cretensians much inclined) and
comma^dements of men, auerting them selves from the truth.] Now the dangerous
crime wherewith many are tempted, is worldly fear, or filthy lucre [wherby
their 15. 16.
minds, and conc^ence are polluted, (as the same Apostle there speaks) that
albeit they confess they know God: yet in their works they deny him: whereas
they be abominable, and incredulous, and to every good work reprobate.]

Whosoever falls into mortal sin, loses the participatio^ of good works
until he be truly penitent. ARTICLE. 47.
NOt only those which never entered into the Catholic Church, or by heresy,
or schism are gone forth, or for any crimes are cast out; but also al those
that fall into mortal sin, though they remain within the Church, yet they do
loose the benfite which all the living members reciue by mutual communication,
and participation of good As the body is dead without the soul: so the soul
is dead without sanctifying grace.
works, each one with others. For as the body and every member thereof lives
by the vital spirit of the soul; and as that member is dead, which wants
the influence of the soul: even so the soul, and every good action thereof,
lives spiritually by grace; and without grace the soul is spiritually dead.
In which state we were al borne: as S. Paul teaches Ephesians. 2. v. 3.
saying: that [we were by nature the children of wrath.] And being regenerate
by Christ in Baptism, whosoever falls again by breach of Gods commandment,
into mortal sin, so dies spiritually, that he can neither merit by any
work, though morally good, nor participate of the meritorious works of
others, until he be restored by new grace, to spiritual life. Wherefore that
sacrifice might be more available, it was commanded in the old Law that
[neither leaven, nor honey should be burnt in Sacrifice] Leuit. 2. v. 1. ^
signifying that the sin, and earnal delectation, hinder the furict of good
works. The same was prefigured Sampson lost his strength when his hair was
cut, contrary to the Nazarites rule.
in Sampson: from whom supernatural strength departed, when the rule of his
profession was violated [If my head shall be shaven (said he to Dalila) my
Iudi^. 16. v. 17. Nu. 6. v. 5. 19. 27. 30.
strength shall depart* from me, and I shall fail, and shall be as other men.]
And being shaven (contrary to the Nazarites rule) immediately his strength
departed from him, and the P^illistians prevailed against him. But receiving
again his former strength [he killed more of his enemies dying, then before he
had killed living.]

2 The Psalmist in the person of a sinner destitute of Holy Scriptures
testify that tfie soul without quickening grace, is fruictlesse.
grace, says [My days have vanished as smoke, and Ps. 101. v. 4. 5.
my bones are withered as a dry burnt fire brand. I am stricken as gras and my
heart is withered. My days have declined as a shadow; and I am withered as
gras] Confessing that so long as he is in the state of mortal sin, al his
works are fructles, and vanish as smoke: fit for no better use then to
kindle the fire. Because being separated from God, by sin they wanting the
radical moisturre of Gods grace, do wither as grass that is cut from the
root. To the same purpose Eccle. 10. v. 1. Eccle. 34. v. 23.
faith the wise man [Flies dying do mar the sweet* uesse of ointment.] For
so deadly sins in man's soul make his works (otherwise virtuous) to be
unsavory in the sight of God, because he that remains in affection of sin,
can not please God [for the Highest allows not the gifts of the wicked,
neither haith he regard to the oblations of the unjust: neither will he be made
propitious for sins by the multitude of their sacrisices] It is impossible to
be the servant of God, and the servant of sin [no man Mat. 6. v. 24.
can serve two masters (faith our Savior) you can not serve God and Mommon.]
Yet are not al great sinners also separated from the Church, but many do
remain therein as dead members, do stick to the living body, and may be more
easelie revived, then the separated members can be reunited.

3 For that there be such dead members in the Church, Two sorts of members in
Christ's mystical body: some spiritually living, some dead.
is clearly proved by our Saviors discourse in an other place saying: [Euerie
branch in me not bearing Io. 15. v. 2.
fruict, shall be taken awat, But every one that bears fruict, shall be purged
that it may bring more fruict] So distinguishing two sorts of branches, in him
self as head, both members of his Church; the one sort fruictles, which if
they so continue, and be not revived, shall be sooner, or later, cut of; the
other sort fruictful, which are purged or pruned, and so shall bring forth more
fruict. But neither the one can be revived, nor the other increase in grace,
except they abide in him. For [as the branch (of a vinetree) 4. 5.
can not bear fruict of it self, unless it abide in the vine: so you neither
unless you abide in me; For without me you can do nothing] Those therefore that
are in Christ, and in his Church, and yet be fruictles; are such as have only
faith, and not good works but live in mortal sin: and those which are in
Christ and in his Church, and be fruictful, are such as have both faith and
good works; being united to Christ, and to al his holy members by Charity
void of al mortal sin, keeping al gods commandementes [for he that
offends in one, is guilty Iac. 2. v. 10.
of al] that is to say, keeps none fruictfully, but he that keeps al,
brings forth fruict, and has his part of al good works in the holy
society of the Church: Otherwise, neither bears fruict, nor participateth
with others, but deceives himself: As S. John teaches saying [If we shall say
that we have 1. Io. 1. v. 6. 7.
society with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But if
we walk in the light, as he also is in the light; we have society one
toward an other (and so the good that any does, is profitable to all that are
living members of the same society) and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from al sinne] to wit, from al sin that does frustrate the
fruict of good works, that seperateth from the holy society, that hinders
the participation of others good works. which is briefly to say: it cleanses
all the justified living members, from al mortal sin: though in this
transitory life, even the just, and holy, are not void of al venial sins.

4 Which distinction of greater and less sins, called A plain distinction
of mortal, and venial sins by S. John's doctrine.
mortal, and venial, is here by the way manifestly proved, by conference of the
words now cited, with the words next following. For here the Apostle speaking
of him self, and others of the holy society, and having said [that the blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses 7. 8.
us from al sin:] he immediately adds [If we shall say we have no sin, we
seduce our selves, and the truth is not in vs] which two speeches so joined
together, might seem to be contrary, and except there were distinction of
diverse kinds of sins, it might seem that the holy Apostle (which were
horrible blasphemy to say) did contradict him self, saying: [Christes blood
cleanses us from al sinne] and yet [we can not truly say that we have no sinne]
For certanly they that are cleansed from sins, have not those sins from
which they are cleansed. How then does the Apostle say, that they were cleansed
from al sin: and yet confesses that they have sins? The answer and clear
solution is. They were cleansed from al sin that separated from God, and from
the godly society of the living fruictful members; from al sin, that
spiritually kills the soul; for which it is called mortal sin: yet he
truly confesses, that himself and others of his society had sins, to wit,
which divide not from God, nor from the godly society; which only wound, and
blemish the soul, Every sin does blemish, and wound the soul: but every
one does not kill the soul.
but kill not: and therefore are not mortal sins, but are called venial,
because they are more easily remitted, and pardoned. But of this point more is
to be said in the holy Sacrament of Penance. Here thus much may suffice to
verify the distinction of mortal, and venial sins: for better declaration
that only mortal, not venial sin, does hinder the merit of other works, and
the participation of the good works of others.

5 As for moral good works done in the state of Good works done in state of
mortal sin, not meriting eternal glory, yet are rewarded temporally.
deadly sin, though they do not merit an eternal reward, yet does God of
his bountiful goodness, reward the^ temporally, as with bodily health, strength,
riches, dominion, power, humane wisdom, honor, and other commodities of this
world. Of which sorts of temporal blessings, the Jews had particular
promises, and received singular benefits. As multiplication of children, and
servants; long and prosperous life, possession of a land flowing with milk and
honey, abundance of wine, oil, and other fruictes Exo. 3. v. 8. 17. Leuit. 26.
v. 5. etc.
of the earth. In particular I^h^ king of Israel, for his zealous exploites
against certain Idolaters for destroying the house of Achab, and Iezabel, with
the temple of Baal, and those that worshipped him; was temporally rewarded both
in him self and in his progeny: though he persisted in the state of mortal
sin, holding Ieroboams schism, and mantaining his golden calves. For thus
says the holy Scripture: [Iehu 4. Reg. 10. v. 17. 28. 29. 30. 3. Reg. 21. v.
21. 20.
destroyed all that were left of Achab in Samaria, til there was not one:
according to the word of our Lord, which he spoke by Elias: he destroed the
Idol Baal, out of Israel. But yet departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, the
son of Nabat, who made Israel to sin: neither forsook he the golden calves
that were in Bethel, and Dan. Whereas therefore our Lord said to Iehu [Because
thou have deligently done that which was right, and that pleased in mine eyes;
and done al things that were in my heart against the house of Achab: thy
children shall sit upon the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.] And
whereas Iehu neither after this promise, reigning prosperously, twenty eight
years, did not serve God rightly [nor walked in the Law of our Lord the God 31.
of Israel in all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam who
made Israel to sin.] Nevertheless 4. Reg. 13. v. 1. 10. Chapter 14. v. 23.
God performing his word [Ioachaz Iehu his son reigned for him seuentene
years. His son Ioas sextene years. Then his son Jeroboam one and forty
years. Lastly his son Zacharias, being in the fourth generation after Iehu,
reigned in Israel] But he and the rest before him followed the bad steps of
the first Jeroboam. And this king Chapter 15. v. 8. 9. 10. 12.
[Zacharias having reigned only six months, was slain by Sellum, the son
of Iabes] of an other race, others conspiring with him. Thus was king Iehu
temporally rewarded for his moral good works, not being in the state of grace,
to merit eternal reward.

6 And likewise many others, yea al heathen men Pagane Insidels were also
received temporal rewards at Gods hand for their temporally rewarded for
moral good works, done without faith.
moral good works. As Syrus king of Persians (as Art. 45. parag. 3.
we touched once before) was advanced temporally for his singular favors
showed to Gods people, ^eleasing them from the captivity of Babylon, and yet
he neither duly served God, nor rightly knew God, which was so prophesied by
Isaias long before Cyrus was borne, well near two hundred years before it came
to pass saying: [Thus says the Lord Is. 45. v. 1. 2. Iere. 25. v. 11. 12.
to my Christ Cyrus, whose right hand I have taken to subdue the Gentiles
before his face, and to turn the backs of kings, and to open the doares
before him, and the Gates shall not be shut. I will go before thee, and will
humble the glorious of the earth. I will break the brazen gates, and will burst
the iron bars.] When therefore king Cyrus possessed Babylon, and all the
kingdoms of the Chaldees, Assirians, Medes, and Pe^sians etc. [Our Lord raised
up 2. Par. 36. v. 20. 22. 1. Esd. 1. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc.
the spirit of Cyrus king of the Persians, and he made proclamation in all his
kingdoms, yea by writing saying: [Thus says Cyrus king of the Persians: All the kingdoms of the earth, has the Lord the God of heaven given me; and he
has commanded me that I should build him a house in Jerusalem which is in
Jury. Who is there among you, of al his people? His God be with him. Let him
go up into Jerusalem which is in Jury, and build the house of the Lord the
God of Israel. He is the God that is in Ierusalem] So he confessed one God, the
Lord God of heaven, and favored his peculiar people, the children of Israel,
and was for the same advanced in temporal power; yet was he not converted in all
points of Religion, neither served God according to that general knowledge that
he had. For which defect, God by the same Prophet Isaias, thus taxes him
saying: [For my servant Jacob and Israel mine elect, I have called thee by thy
name: I have resembled thee, and thou Isa. 45. v. 4.
have not known me.] By these and many other examples, as well of the Jews as
Gentiles, especially of Philosophers which lived morally well, it is clear,
that they received great gifts of God, but temporal only, not eternal; because
they neither knew God rightly, by faith, nor served him according to that
knowledge which they had of him, as S. Paul teaches in his Epistle to the
Romans. And therefore these Romans 1. v. 20. 21.
are works which he excludes, as not auailable to justification, no^
salvation, being without faith. For that is the scope of his doctrine, to show,
that neither works without faith, nor faith without works, Chapter 11. v. 6.
do justify; neither can any have faith, or do good but by grace, that is,
by Gods free gift, before any works ca^ be meritorious; neither yet are
works with faith meritorious, that are done in state of mortal ^^nne, but
necessarily it is required to believe rightly, to decline from deadly sin,
and to do good works [So shall every one receive, according as he 2. Cor. 5.
v. 10.
has done, either good or evil.]

In the Catholic Church is remission of sins, and Justification by Grace.
ARTICLE. 48.
IN the former Articles is showed, that neither any Seeing no sin can enter
into heaven, the way for sinners to be saved is by remission of sins.
Act. 45. 46. 47.
can be saved out of the true Church, nor in the Church, dying in mortal sin,
neither can any defiled with venial sin, enter into heaven, until al his
sins be remitted, and his soul purged. For [there shall not enter into the
celestial City, any Apoc. 21. v. 27.
polluted thing] how then shall any sinners be saved? Tru^ie ^one as sinners,
can possess life everlasting, no^ be saved. For all sins pollute the soul,
and so long as the sin remains, it hinders the soul from entrance into
heaven. But the remedy of this impediment, is the remission of sins, with
justification of sinners, and sanctification of their souls. which most
bountiful benefits, God imparteth unto mankind through his grace offered to
al, sufficient for all, and effectual in many, as the holy Scriptures do
copiously witness, both in the old and new Testament. Our mother Eve was the
first of mankind Genesis 3. v. 6. 12. 13.
that sinned, and Adam the second. They both incurred, and we al in Adam,
contracted, the guilt of death temporal, and eternal.

2 Yet our Lord God by his grace reduced them to God gave grace of repentance,
and remission of sins to Adam, and Eve.
repentance, which is proved by the text. For whereas before in their
innocence, being then also [naked Genesis 2. v. 2. 5. Chapter 3. v. 7. 8. 9. 10. 12.
they were not ashamed] but after that they had sinned [they made them selves
aprones of leaves to cover their nakedness, and hid the^ selves (for shame)
amidst the trees of Paradise. And our Lord God called Adam saying: where art
thou? I heard thy voice (said he) and I feared] so was he through Gods grace,
neither obdurate in sin, nor desperate of mercy, as all the devils were. But
consessing the truth, [our Lord said to the woman; why have thou 13.
Proved by the sacred text.
done this?] She likewise confessing the truth, God without more examining,
condemned the devil (in the serpent) that had maliciously tempted, and overcome
1. 2.
them. And secondly, by enioyning temporal penance to Adam and Eve, signified
the remission of their sin, which otherwise des^rued eternal death. Thirdly
[God put also enmities from that time forward, 3.
between the devil and the woman, between his seed, and her seede] which
shows that she was no longer the devils servant, but his perpetual enemy;
and consequently also Adam was the devils enemy, not his servant. Fourthly our
Lord declared 4.
that the woman by her seed, should bruife the serpents head in pieces.
Fifthly of Adam, the wisema^ ^.
says, that [wisdome brought him out of his sin.] Sap. 10. v. 2. Genesis 4. v.
4. 26. Chapter 5. v. 22. 24. Chapter 6. v. 9. Chapter 12. v. 1. etc.


3 Some others also were the true servants of God, Other examples of Gods
servants.
which presupposes remission of sin. For Abel so [offered Sacrifice, that
our Lord had respect thereto. Enos inuocated the name of our Lord. Enoch walked
with God, and God took him.] from the conversation of other mortal men. [Noe
was just and perfect in his generation] so [Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, were such
servants of God, that he vouchsaifed to be called their God] Al which
presupposes the remission of their sins, as well original, as actual.

4 The Sacrament of Circumcision was directly instituted External signs of
remission of sins, and of in^rease of grace.
Exo. 3. v. 6. Genesis 17. v. 10. Romans 4. v. 11. Leuit. 2. v. 3. 1^. 22. 27. Heb.
10. v. 1. Col. ^. v. 17.
as a sign, of the remission of sin; not as the cause, for that is the
difference between the Sacraments, of the old Law, and of Christ. For the same
purpos were the old Sacrifices also instituted, for signs of remission of
sins and of sanctification: which yet they wrought not, but only signified;
as a shadow of things to come. And as the Sacraments of Circumcision, of
diverse sorts of washinges, and purifications, of legal uncleanness, with sundry
Sacrifices for sin, were then instituted to signify remission of sin, and
justification of sinners: So the Paschal lamb; Loaves Genesis 17. v. 10. Leuit.
4. 5. 6. 7. 14. 15. 16. 17. Exo. 12. 16. 25. v. 30. Leuit. 8.
of Proposition, Ordination of Preistes, and Levites, and the like figures of
Christian Sacraments, and Sacrifice, did signify increase of grace, and more
sanctification of the just. Real remission of sins, and inhere^t grace,
proved by holy Scriptures.


5 For so much therefore as Protestants deny that any sin can be really
taken away, holding opinion that they are only covered, or not imputed; denying
also tha^ sinners can be purged from mortal sin, and made just and holy; but
only that believing in our Redemer they are re^^^ed just, not by justice (say
they) inherent in their souls, but only by the justice of Christ imputed unto
them. we shall here show the contrary Catholic doctrine, that sins are
indeed remitted, taken away, destroyed; and sinners in very deed cleansed from
al mortal sin, made just, and sanctified by grace, and justice inherent, in
their souls. Which our belief and doctrine besides the places already here
alleged, is more abundantly proved by many other holy Scriptures. yea even
by those sacred textes, by which Calvin, and other Protestants especially
impugn, and endeavor to disprove the Genesis 15. v. 6. To. 4. v. 3. Gal. 3. v. 6.
Example in Abraham*
same doctrine. Of Abraham it is written in the book of Genesis, that [he
believed God, and it was reputed to him unto iustice] which words S. Paul
cites in his Epistles to the Romans, and the Gallatians: proving thereby that
Abraham had no justice, nor estimation of justice before God, by any works
done, that proceeded not of faith and Gods grace. For if Abraham did
commendable works before he believed in Christ (as many Philosophets did) men
might account him just therefore; but in Gods sight he should not have had the
reputation of a just man for those works. And therefore whosoever presumes of
his own works as done of him self without faith* without the grace and help
of God, imagining that grace and justification were given him for such works,
and so challenge his justification as debt, imputing the reward as debt; does
grossly err. For God does not esteem or repute him just. But believing as Genesis
22. v. 10. Iac. ^. v. 22. 23.
Abraham did, and thereupon doing good works [it is reputed to him unto
justice, and he is made the friend of God] as S. James teaches by the example
of Abraham, and S. Paul confirms this doctrine, by the Royal Prophet David,
calling it [the blessedness Romans 4. v. 6. 7. 8. Ps 31. v. 1. ^.
of a man, to whom God reputeth iustice] without works (done before) because
David says *Blessed are they whose iniquities be forgeuen, and whose sins
are covered. Blessed is the man to whom ou^ Lord has not imputed sinne] making
it al one to repute a man just, and not to impute sin unto him. But in this
whole passage, Protestants replying, urge the words reputed, imputed, and
covered, arguing against Catholics, that by these terms, is signified the
continuance of sins, not indeed taken away, but only covered and not
imputed, and that a man is not really made just, but only reputed just,
remaining wicked after his sorrow or contrition, receiving of any holy
Sacrament, or any thing else that he can do, adding withal, that there is no
inherent justice in any faithful soul; but that the most faithful and best
man, is only reputed just by the justice of Christ imputed unto him.

6 For clearing of which Controversy, consisting That the words: INPVTED,
REPVTED, COVERED: prove not the Protestants opinion. but the Catholic
doctrine is declared.
especially in the signification of the words, and terms even now recited;
First it is to be observed, that these terms reputed, and imputed, do no more
diminish the verity of Justice inherent in the soul, then the word esteem,
(being the same word in greek) diminishes the ministry of S. Paul, and the
other Apostles, 1. Cor. 4. v. 1.
where he wills the Corinthians [so to esteem of them, as the ministers of
Christ] Neither does the word covered, any more prove, that the 1. By examples
of like terms.
sins remain in him whom God reputeth just, then where S. Peter says
[Charitie covers the multitude 1. Pet. 4. v. 8.
of sinnes] which must needs signify, that the sins are taken away; for
mortal sin can not consist with Charity, the one being the spiritual death,
the other the spiritual life, of the soul. As it is impossible, 2. By clear
te^mes, concerning the same point of doctrine.
that the same soul, should be at the same time, both dead and alive. Secondly
observe the Romans 6. v. 6. 11.
word forgeuen in the same sentence, which being of a clear signification,
does explain the word covered rather then contrariwise the same plain term
forgeuen, can be explicated or wrested by the more ambiguous word covered.
Thirdly consider the like phrase ^. By the like ^^ner of speech in other cases.
in any other affairs. As when it is said. A prince or Father, has forgeuen,
covered, and not imputed the former offenses of his subject or child, al men
truly understand, that these offenses are quite taken away, and remain no
longer. When our Savior said Joan. 8. v. 11.
to the woman accused of adultrie [neither will I condemn thee] it was easily
and clearly understood, that by not condemning, or not imputing, he did
forgive her, and so took away her sin, that it was not now remaining. And so
our Lord then admonished her as one void of sin saying: [goe, and now 4. By
the absurd^tie of Protestants doctrine: which is injurious to God, to Christ,
to glorified Saints, and to al honest people.
sin no more.] Fourthly let the indifferent reader judge, whether the
docttrine that sins be taken away, or that they remain only covered and not
imputed, be more to Gods honor, and glory of his name; Nay let a Protestant
declare, how his doctrine is not injurious to Gods power, if he say that God
can not quite take away sins; or to his mercy if he will not; or to his
justice, if he never punish them, and yet they always remain; or to his
truth, if he repute a man just, who indeed is not just. Let a Protestant
Doctor also tell you, how his doctrine is not injurious to Christ our Redemer,
if his blood and death be not effectual to wash away the sins of the
penitent. And how it is not injurious to the glorified Saints in heaven,
arguing them as still infected with sins. For if their sins were not taken
away before they entered into heaven, they should Ps. 33. v. 22. Ps. 36. v. 20.
still remain therein, which is most absurd, for the death of sinners is most
badde, Mors peccatorum pessima. Finally this doctrine of Protestants drawn as
they 5. By conferenc^ of other textes, far more in number which plainly teach
the Catholic doctrine.
suppose from the places before recited, or some few others, is indeed
contra^y, to very many express, and plain textes of holy Scriptures,
testifying that God by his grace, does take away sins, wash them, wipe them
away, heal the infirmity or sickness, create a clean heart, renew a right
spirit, make the dead soul to live, make it white, justify, sanctife, that
is, make just, and holy, and the like.

7 So the Prophet Nathan denounced to king David 2. Reg. 12. v. 13.
Example of David; who speaking of him self, and others, testifies the
Catholic doctrine.
confessing his sin, that [God took away his sinne] which the same David
thankfully acknowleged in a Psalm saying: [Our Lord has heard the Ps. 6. v.
9. 10.
voice of my weeping: our Lord has heard my petition, our Lord has received
my prayer.] And he prayed in these terms [Haue mercy on me o God: Ps. 50. v.
3. 4. 9. 11. 12.
take away mine iniquity, wash me more amply from mine iniquity, cleanse me
ftom my sin. thou shall sprinckle me with hyssope, and I shall be cleansed,
thou shall wash me, and I shall be made whiter then snow. Turn away thy face
from my sins, and wipe away al mine iniquities. Create a clean heart in me o
God; and renew a right spirit in my bowels.] The Ps. 67. v. 15. Ps. 83. v. 13.
Ps. 101. v. 19. Gal. 6. v. 15. Eccle. 15. v. 9. Ps. 102. v. 3. 4. 12. Ps. 104.
v. 45. Ps. 118. v. 5. 8. 12. 16. 20. 23. etc.
same Royal Psalmist teaches that sinners are made white and innocent [with
snow (says he) they shall be made white in selmon: our Lord will not deprive
them of good things that walk in innocence; the people that shall be created
(that is, made a new creature) shall praise our Lord (but praise is not glorious
in the mouth of a sinner) who heals al thine infirmities, who redemeth thy
life from deadly falling. As far as the East is distant from the West, has
he made our iniquities far from us.] God selected a peculiar people, placed
them in a plentiful land, bestowed on them many special benefits, spiritual,
and temporal, al to this end, that they might keep his iustifications. Wherefore
every faithful servant of God knowing his own insufficiency, prays, that
God by his grace, will direct and strengthen him. [Would God (says he) my ways
may be directed to keep thy iustifications] because the Law of God makes just;
which word Iustifications, is nere thirty times in the same psalm, with other
Synonima names of Gods Law, as Testimonies, Judgments, Justice, Equity,
and Verity, likewise very often recited: Al signifying an absolute taking
away of sins, and a Ps. 142. v. 11. 12.
real inherent Justice. So does Gods [good Spirit conduct a penitent sinner
[into the right way, for his owue names sake quicken him] that before was dead;
and that neither in sole imputation, nor imagination, but as the psalmist
confidently says of him self [in equity destroying al enemies that afflict
the soul of his servant.]

8 Yet let us see more testimonies of other prophets. The same is confirmed by
other Prophets.
Is. 6. v. 6. 7. Chapter 33. v. 24. Chapter 43. v. 25.
An Angel of the high order [of Seraphims, touching Isaias his mouth with a
burning cole, said unto him, thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sin
shall be cleansed.] Isaias says of other sinners in the Church of Christ
[Iniquitie shall be taken away from them.] By the pen of the same Prophet,
Christ our Lord says, to his elect of mankind [I am he, I am he that take
clean away thine iniquities for mine own sake: and I will not remember thy
sinnes] So perfectly does our Savior forgive, and as it were forgeate. Iere.
2. v. 22. Chapter 33. v. 6. 8.
God by his Prophet Jeremy, recalling his people from sin, says: [returne
ye reuolting children, and I will heal your reuoltinges. Behold I will bring to
them a star, and health, and will cure them; and I will cleanse them from al
their iniquity wherein Ezech. 18. v. 21.
they have sinned to me.] In like manner by Ezechiel our Lord promises [If the
impious shall do penance from al his sins, which he has wrought, and shall
keep al my precepts, and do Judgment and Justice; living he shall live, and
shall not die: al his iniquities which he ^ath wrougt, I will not remember 22.
them; in his justice which he has wrought, he shall live: He shall vi^ificate
his soule] make his soul to line, which by mortal sin was spiritually dead.
[Make your selves a new heart and a new spirit; and 31.
why will you die o house of Israel? Because I will 32.
not the death of him that dies, says our Lord God, return ye and live. Our
Lord will return (says Micheas the Prophet) and will have mercy on us. He will
lay away our iniquities: and he will cast al Mich. 7. v. 19. Soph. 2. v. 1.
our sins, into the botome of the sea. Come together (says the Prophet
Sophonias) be ye gathered o nation not beloved: ye that deserve to be
reiectted, repent, and God will receive you.] An Angel said to the Prophet
Zacharias [Take away Zach. 3. v. 4.
the filthy garment from the High Priest (defiled with sin) And the Angel
said, Behold I have taken away thine iniquity, and have clothed thee with
change of garmentes] signifying remission of sin, with grace of faith, and
good works. For all is done not by man's power, but by divine grace, and
merits of Christ, whom all the Prophets foretold, and S. John Baptist showed
with his finger saying: [Behold Joan. 1. v. 29.
the Lamb of God, behold him that takes away the sins of the world] he
says not, behold him that only covers, dissembleth, winketh at, imputes
not, but simply and directly [taketh away the 8. 9. 12. Io. 5. v. ^1.
sin of the world] He gave testimony of the light: Christ our Savior [who
is the true light, which lightneth every man; who gives power to be made the
sons of God.] who quickneth the dead in soul.

9 In sign of true taking away of sins, and perfect Our Savior did
perfectly, and wholly cure, body and soul.
curing of the soul, our Savior so perfectly healed the man sick of the
palsy, that immediately rising he carried away his bed, wherein he was before
Mat. 9. v. 2.
carried by others, him self not able neither to go, nor stand, and withal said
to the man so cured [thy sins are forgeuen thee] which was the far greater
work, and benefit, and doubtless no less perfect. yea and our Lord did the
corporal cure [that the Scribes, and Pharesees] and al other incredulous, both
then and ever after, even our Protestant adversaries [might ^.
know that the son of man has power in earth to remitte sinne] not
imaginary, as not to impute them, and yet they remain, or to impute a man
just, that has no justice, but as our Lords manner was [to cure the whole man]
wholly body, and soul perfectly: which the good [people then believing
glorified God Io. 7. v. 23. Mat. 9. v. 7.
(as the Evangelist writes) that gave such power to men] well and rightly
considering, that Christ the son of man, would also communicate this power of
remitting sins to some other [men.]

10 Which indeed he performed after his Resurrection; He gave power to men to
remitte sin, by their ministry.
when breathing upon his Apostles, he said: [Receiue ye the holy Ghost: whose
sins you shall Ioa. 20. v. 23.
forgive they are forgeuen] And that forgeuing imports abolishing and taking
away of sins; S. Peter's words do plainly testify, exhorting the people [to
repent, and to be baptized: that your sins (says Act. 3. v. 19.
The effect whereof, is justification, and sanctification.
he) may be put out] S. Paul teaching that no man can be justified by his
works without faith, adds that some are justified [ gratis, by grace, by the
Redemption Romans 3. v. 24. 25. Chapter 4. v. 5. 25. Chapter 5. 19. Chapter 6. v. 19. 22. 1.
Cor. 6. v. 9. 10. 11.
that is in Christ Iesus] and so their former sins are remitted: for it is an
unjust, and untrue thing, to account a wicked man just. Therefore Christ
justifying the impious, does indeed make him just. Be cause Christ [being
delivered for our sins, rose again for our iustification] For [as by
disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so likewise by the obedience
of one man, many shall be made iust] even as really the one as the other. [Doe
not err (says he in an other Epistle) neither fornicators, nor seruers of
Idols, nor adulterers (nor such other malefactors) shall possess the kingdom
of God. And Gal. 6. v. 16.
such certes you were: but you are washed, you are sanctified, you are
iustified] A most real change from sins, to justice, and sanctity, [made a
new creature, Ephesians. 1. v. 4. Chapter 2. v. 5. Chapter 6. v. 14. Phil. 3. v. 9. Col. 3.
v. 9.
holy and immaculate in Gods sight, in charity: when we were dead by sin,
God quickened us in Christ: clothed us with the breast plate of justice. Not
justice in the law (of Moses) but that which is of faith in Christ, spoiling
your selves of the old man, with his acts; and doing on the new heart.] Christ
so sanctifies his faithful children, that [they are sanctified, they are dead
to sin, and live to justice.] Again that al are not wicked but some holy,
Christ calls some just, and holy.
Christ by his Angel signifies saying: [He that is in Heb. 2. v. 11. 1. Pet.
2. v. 24. Apoc. 22. v. 11.
filth, let him be fi^thie yet: and he that is just, let him be justified yet:
and he that is holy, let him be sanctified yet] made more just, made more
holy.

Al mankind shall rise from death, at the day of general judgment. ARTICLE. 49.
GOd, whose works are perfect, whose judgments Al men's souls, and bodies,
must be parted by death, and reun^ed by the Resurrection of the bodies.
Deuteronomy. 32. v. 4.
are right: creating man of body, and soul, which for just punishment of sin,
are to be parted by death, has ordain^d by his divine providence, and
omnipotent power, that our souls being immortal and naturally requiring union
with our bodies, shall receive again each one their proper bodies: and so al
mankind shall be conserved, and every one receive in soul and body together,
according as 2. Cor. 6. v. 10.
they have done, either good or evil. A point of faith to sense, and natural
reason, so hard, that no other Article of Christian belief may seem more
strange. Nevertheless is made credible by the ineffable power Luc. 1. v. ^7.
of God, to whom nothing is impossible. And is reveled to the Church, by his
infallible word: believed by all true Christians, and not denied by Jews,
Turks, nor Heretics at this day; but only by some Paganes, and Atheistes.

2 Against which Miscreants, this truth is first proved The Resurrection is
proved to be convenient by natural reason.
by the nature of man's soul which is immortal, and having natural
inclination to the body, man's natural perfection requires the conjunction
of soul and body; for that neither the soul, nor the body separated, but
both joined in one subsista^t person, is a man; so that mankind should perish,
and the immortal soul should lack his natural perfection if the body should
not rise from death. But in confirmation It is proved to be certainly true by
holy Scriptures. It is prefigured in Enoch, and Elias.
of this truth, we have first figurative examples in Enoch a Patriarch, and
Elias a Prophet, conserved without corruption in their corruptible mortal
bodies, above the course of nature [Enoch walked Genesis 5. v. 24. 4. Reg. 2. v.
11.
with God, and was seen no more, because God took him. he was translated,
that he should not see death. Elias ascended in a f^rie chariot by a whirlewind
into the air; of whose return before the day of Judgment, God haith
foretold, by his Prophet Malachie saying [Behold I will send you Elias the Mal.
4. v. 5.
Prophet, before the day of our Lord come, great and dreadful. These two being
as yet preserved alive and are to dye in the end, may here suffice for example
of Gods power in this behalf. Other examples of 3. Reg. 17. v. 22. 4. Reg.
4. v. 35. Chapter 13. v. 21. Mat. 9. v. 25.
It is showed to be possible, by the raising of some from death.
Gods will and power in this kind, we have in diverse raised from death: A
poor widows son raised by Elias; And an other poor widows son, by
Elizeus; an other dead man revived by touching Elizeus his bones. Our Savior
raised an Archisinagogues daughter being newly dead; a widows son being
carried toward the sepulcher; and Lazarus being four days dead, and already
buried. S, Peter raised a devout woman called Tabitha from death. Luc. 7. v.
13. Io. 11. v. 39. Act. 9. v. 40. Chapter 20. v. 9. 12. Io. 20. v. 30. Genesis 4. v. 9.
S. Paul restoared a young man to life that was dead by a fall from an high
place; besides others, for all are In reguard of the Resurrection, this life is
called a pilgrimage.
not written. Moreover in reguard of Resurrection, the Patriarch Jacob called
this transitory life, a pilgrimage saying to Pharao king of Egypt [the days
of the Pilgrimage of my life, are an hundred and thirty years, and they are
not come to the days of my fathers, in which they were pilgrims.] The same
thing did king David often meditate, and utter in his prayers to God saying: [I
am a stranger with thee Ps. 38. v. 13. Ps. 118. v. 54.
(o Lord) and a pilgrim as my Fathers. Thy iustifications were song by me, in
the place of my peregrination. Woe to me, that my seiorning is prolonged: my
soul has been a seiorner.] Lastly on his deathbed [We are pilgrims before
thee, and strangers as Ps. 119. v. 5. 1. Par. 29. v. 15. 2. Cor. 5. v. 8. Ps.
102. v. 5. Job. 19. v. 25. 26. 27
al our fathers] which he spoke as well of the soul as body, rejoicing that at
last, man shall be wholly restoared in the Resurrection, being as it were made
young: as the youth of an Eagle seems to be renewed; so shall men be indeed
from thenceforth immortal. Holy Job in his great affliction, was singularly
Job professed his belief of the Resurrection.
comforted, considering that at last his flesh and body shall rise again from
death saying: [I know that my Redemer lives, and in the last day, I shall rise
out of the earth. And I shall be compassed again with my skin, and in my
flesh I shall see God: whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold and
none other: this my hope is laid up in my bosom.

3 God by his Prophet Isaias, denou^ceth to the Church, The Prophets teach the
Resurrection of al mankind.
that al me^ shall rise from death, some in glory; others in misery saying [Thy
dead shall live, my slain shall rise again: a vake, an^ praise ye that dwell in
the dust Is. 26. v. 19.
because the dew of the light, is thy dew, and the land of the Gi^ntes, thou
halt pluck down into ruin.] Of the glorious in particular [Al flesh shall come
to Chapter 66. v. 29.
adore before my face: says our Lord.] Ezechiel Ezech. 37. v. 3.
together with other Mysteries of the reduction of the Jews from the
captivity of Babylon, and of the Gentiles from Idolatry; prophecieth the
general Resurrection of al mankind, the Spirit of our Lord saying thus to him
concerning dead bones presented in a vision [Sonne of man, think thou these
bones shall 4. 5.
live? Prophecy of these bones; and thou shall say to them; Dry bones, hear
ye the word of our Lord. Thus says our Lord God to these bones: Behold I will
put spirit unto you, and you shall live. And I prophesied as he had commanded
me; and there was made a sound, and behold a co^motion, and bones came to
bones, every one to his iuncture. And I saw, and behold 7. 8.
upon them sinews and flesh was grown up, and a skin was stretched out in
them above. And spirit 20.
entered into them, and they lived: and they stood upon their feet, an army
passing great.] Daniel prophecieth also of the Resurrection [of some unto Dan.
12. v. 2. 2. Mac. 12. v. 43.
life everlasting, of others unto reproach.] Judas Machabeus [Religiously
thinking of the Resurrection, considered that they which had taken their slope
with godliness, had very good grace laid up for them.

4 Our Savior proved this Article of faith against Christ preached, and proved
the Resurrection.
the Sadduces by such Scripture as they acknowleged, (for they denied greatest
part of the old Testament) [Haue you not read (said he) that which was spoken
Mat. 22. v. 31. 32. 33. Exo. 3. v. 6.
of God saying to you: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob? He is not God of the dead, but of the liuing] So auouching that
the holy Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, though dead in body, yet are
living, in that their souls being immortal, do still serve God, no less then
they did, when they were in their bodies. And that by the power of God (which
the Sadduces Mat. 22. v. 29. 33.
did not know, nor understand the holy Scriptures) they should receive, and
reuificate their bodies again. For all live to God. And not only the multitudes
Luc. 20. v. 38. 39. 40.
hearing it, merueled at his doctrine, but also certain of the Scribes
answearing, said to him [Maister, thou have said wel] And further the Sadduces
durst not then ask him any thing more. At an other time our Savior avouched,
that [the hour comes Joan. 5. v. 25.
and now it is (for this time of grace is come) when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live.] In confirmation
whereof All the Evangelists testify Christ's Resurrection.
[he rose him self from death the third day, the first fruictes of them that
sleepe] as all the Apostles and Eua^gelistes do abundantly testify.

5 Which S. Paul preaching among the learned Athenians, As well Christ's
Resurrection, as the future general Resurrection of al men, is promulgated as a
principal point of faith.
they wondered, thinking [that he preached Act. 17. v. 18. 24. 31.
new gods; because he preached to them Jesus, and the Resurrection] But [he
preached God omnipotent that made the world, and al things that are in it. The
Lord of heaven and earth; and that he will judge the world in equity, by a man
whom he has appointed, giving al men faith, raising him up from the dead. And
when they had heard the Resurrection of the dead, 32.
certain indeed mocked; but certain said; we will hear thee again
concerning this point.] By occasion also of this doctrine [the Phareses
defended him Act. 23. v. 8. Chapter 24. v. 15. 21. Chapter 26. v. 8.
against the Sadduces.] Especially and at large, the same Apostle confirms
this doctrine of the general Resurrection, in his Epistle to the Corinthians,
by Christ's Resurrection, showing that [al men shall rise] but with great
difference in their states, of the just, and unjust* al shall have their bodies
immortal and incorruptible, The bodies of the wicked shall be immortal, but most
miserable. The bodies of the blessed shall be glorious, and endued with
excellent qualities. Impassibilitie.
1. Cor. 15. v. 1^. 51.
but the wicked subject to unspeakable torments, deformities, and al kind of
miseries.

6 Contrariwise the blessed shall have their bodies endued with most excellent
qualities, as dowries of eternal glory, described by the Apostle in the same
place, which are especially these four. First Impassibilitie, 42.
signified by these words [the body is sown in corruption (and so is
corrupted in the earth) but shall rise in incorruption] not only inconsump
tible, for so likewise the bodies of the damned shall never be consumed; but
also impassible of any grief, hurt, or deformation [no mourning nor crying;
neither Apoc. 21. v. 4.
shall there be sorrow any more.] The second ls Claritie Claritie.
or shyning brightness, signified by the next words [It is sown in dishonor;
it shall rise in glory.] 43.
The body dying, is pale, dark, obscure, but shall rise most fair, clear,
and glistering, the glory of the soul redounding into the body, as Moses
face shined like to an excellent lamp, or candle through a bright Lantern;
and shall so shine, that it shall not Exo. 34. v. 29. 30. 33. 35.
need Sun nor Moon to shine in it [they shall not need the light of lamp
(says Christ in his Apocalipse) nor the light of the Sun, because our Lord
God does illuminate them.] The third is Agilitie, Agilitie.
signified by the Apostle saying [It is sown in infirmity; Apoc. 21. v. 23.
Chapter 22. v. 5. 43. Sap. 3. v. 7.
it shall rise in power] Mortal Bodies, are weak, heavy, vnwealdie; but rising
from death, shall be strong, nimble, ready to move in a moment whether, and how
far soever, at the will of the glorified souls [The just shall shine, and as
sparks in a place of reeds, they shall run abroad.] The fourth, is
Penetrabilitie, expressed by these words, Penetrabilitie,
[It is sown a natural body; it shall rise a spiritual bodie] Not that the
body shall be changed in substance, from a corporal, into a spiritual
substance, but the same substance rising to glory, shall be changed in
quality, and have the power of a spirit, to penetrate an other body. As our
Savior rising from Mat. 28. v. 2. Io. 20. v. 19. 26.
death, penetrated [the monument wherein he was buried. And entered into the
house, the doares being shut, where his Disciples were gathered] so likewise
other glorified bodies of Saints, shall penetrate and pass through the solid
firmament or any other bodies, by the power of this spiritual quality. Yea
Some shall both dye, and rise again the very last day.
their bodies also that shall be found alive, when our Lord comes to judge,
shall presently dye, and revive again [and be taken up with the rest into the
clouds 1. These. 4. v. 17*
to meet Christ in the air: and so shall the blessed always be with our Lord.]

The blessed shall enjoy eternal Glory; according to their Merits. ARTICLE. 50.
Men's intentions do proceed to execution, Men's purposes often fail, but
Gods never.
if they be not hindered by mutabilitie of will, nor imbecilitie of power. Gods
purposes are infallibly performed, because his will is immutable, and his power
is almighty. But how then does it happen, that many men do perish and are
eternally damned, seeing, as S. Paul writes, [God will al men to be saved?] For
answer to this 1. Tim. 2. v. 4.
demand, and for explication of this, and other Scriptures, which may seem, but
indeed are not, contrary one to an other; we must distinguish this ambiguous
word, Gods will; which is somwhere understood Gods will is either absolute, or
conditional.
absolutely, as when Job says [God is alone, and no Job. 23. v. 13. Ps. 113.
v. 11. Ps. 134. v. 6.
man can turn away his cogitation; and whatsoever his soul would, that has
he done.] The same says the Royal Prophet [Our Lord is in heaven: he has done
al things whatsoever he would.] God him self says by his Prophet Isaias [My
counsel shall stand, and al my will shall be done.] Likewise S. Paul says: [On
whom he will he has mercy; for Isa. 46. v. 10. Romans 9. v. 18. 19.
who resists his will?] signifying that none can resist it. And in many other
places, the holy Scriptures show, that Gods will is always performed, that
is to say, his absolute will. Nevertheless Gods will, is somewhere
conditional; so him self speaks by his Prophet Ezechiel [Is the death of a
sinner my Ezech. 18. v. 23. Chapter 33. v. 11.
will says our Lord God, and not that he convert from his ways and live?]
Again in an other place [Liue I says our Lord God, I will not the death of the
impious, but that the impious convert from his way and live: convert convert
ye from your most evil ways: and why will you dye o house of Israel?] It is
therefore Gods conditional, and antecedent will, that al men should be saved: but
his absolute and consequent will, that just men living and dying his true
servants shall be saved: wicked men, living and dying in mortal sin, shall be
damned. Even as a good Prince, and other just Judges, would have al subjects
to live so long as they can by nature, but will have traitors, murderers, and
other egregious malefactors, put to death: so God would have al men to flee
from sin, do good works, and be eternally saved; but will nevertheless
condemn al obstinate and impenitent sinners to everlasting pain for their
sins. Both which are manifestly testified by innumerable holy Scriptures. We
shall first recite some places concerning the blessed which shall be glorified,
and then touching the wicked which must be damned.

2 In the old Testament, this doctrine is plainly signified, God has many
ways signified, that al shall be eternally saved: which will cooperate with his
grace.
first by Gods merciful procedinges toward mankind, by whose sin, though
heaven was shut that none could enter; and [Adam and Eve were cast out of
Paradise] yet was not that place destroyed, Genesis 2. v. 8. Chapter 3. v. 23. 24. Chapter
3. v. 15. Chapter 4. v. 9.
but the gate thereof kept by Angels] And [a Redemer was promised] by whom men
should be ransomed, and have new access unto life everlasting in the kingdom
of heaven. Gods special care of Abel to revenge his innocent [bloud, which
cried to him out of the earth] gave us to understand, that he would reward the
same holy Martyr, with an eternal crown of glory. And as the conservation of
Enoch Chapter 5. ^. 24.
in flesh without corruption, signifies the Resurrection: So his present
estate wherein he contemplateth God and divine Mysteries; represents the joys
of heaven, which he, and al other Saints shall possess, in perfect fruition
of God. To other holy Chapter 15. v. 18. Chapter 26. v. 3. Chapter 28. v. 13.
Patriarchs our Lord promised an especial inheritance, a land flowing with
milk and honey; in figure of the true land of the living. To Moses he
promised the thing it self more expressly saying: [I will show thee al good] But
that he might understand, that it should be performed in the life to come, not
in this present world, he added saying: [Man Ex^. 33. v. 19. 20.
shall not see my face and live.] To his whole people in general our Lord
promised many temporal and earthly blessings, as to a carnal people, in
figure of spiritual and heavenly rewards, to his perfect servants. Yet with
express conditions [If you walk in my Leuit. 26. v. 3. 4. 5.
precepts, and keep my commandementes and do them; I will give you rain in
their seasons, and the earth shall bring forth her spring: and the trees shall be
replenished with fruictes: the threshing of your harvest, shall reach unto
vintage; and the vintage, shall reach unto sowing time; and you shall eat your
bread to your fill, and without fear shall you dwell in your land. Thou shall
know (says Moses to the Deuteronomy. 7. v. 9.
same peoble) that the Lord thy God, is a strong and faithful God; keeping his
covenant and mercy, to them that love him, and to them that k^pe his
Precepts, unto a thousand generations. Benediction if Chapter 11. v. 27.
you obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day]
and many the like in the Law of Moses.

3 To these profes we may further add predictions The same is proved by the
Prophets.
of the Prophets: who speak more directly of eternal rewards for good works.
Esdras has prefixed this title to a certain Psalm [vnto the end] which
signifies Ps. 5. v. 1. Romans 10. v. 4. Apoc. 21. v. 7.
that the Psalm perteyneth to the^ that believe in Christ, who is in the end of
the law [for her that obteyneth the inheritance] that is, the faithful just
soul, that ouercometh her spiritual enemies, and gains the inheritance of
eternal glory in heaven. And the Psalmist inuiteth all the faithful to rejoice
in Christ's just Judgments saying: [Let al be glad that hope in Ps. 5. v. 13.
thee; they shall rejoice for ever: and thou (o^ Christ) shall dwell in them. And
all that love thy name shall glory in thee, because thou will bless the iust]
when our Savior shall say [Come ye blessed of my Father Mat. 25. v. 34.
possess you the kingdom prepared for you, from the fundation of the world.]
In an other Psalm after description of the means to attain eternal life,
which are comprised in these two points, to slay from evil, and to do good;
he concludes saying: [He Ps. 14. v. 1. ^. 5.
that does these things shall not be moved for euer] he shall not dwell in a
transitory tabernacle, which is purposely made to be removed from place, to
place; but in the everlasting firm [habitation of God, worlds without end]
where God him self is the inheritance. [Our Lord (says he) the portion of mine
Ps. 15. v. 5. Ps. 16. v. 15. Ps. 41. v. 5. Ps. 57. v. 12. Ps. 61. v. 13. Ps.
83. v. 12.
inheritance; and of my cuppe] the reward of suffering, and of drinking the
cup of tribulations for justice sake. [I, in justice, shall appear in thy
sight: I shall be filled when thy glory shall appeare] this is [to pass into a
marvelous Tabernacle, even to the house of God. Man shall say: If certes there
be fruict to the just; there is a God certes iudgeing them on the earth.] If
God punish sin, as assuredly he will; then will he also reward the just, though
justice be likewise Gods free gift, without merit. For [our Lord will give
both grace and glorie] grace, whereby to merit, and glory for merit [Our Lord
became Ps. 93. v. 22.
my refuge: and my God, the help of my hope.] The faithful by Gods special
grace, pass through many tribulations [of the torrent in the way he shall Ps.
109. v. 7.
drink: therefore shall he exalt the head] for suffering persecution in a just
cause, shall be highly exalted in glory [they that sow in tears, shall reap in
Ps. 125. v. 5. Ps. 138. v. 17.
ioyfulnes. Going, they went and wept casting their seeds: but coming, they
shall come with exultation carrying their sheaues] To me [to my conceit (saih
the same Royal Psalmist) thy friends (o God) are become excedingly honorable;
their principality is excedingly Ps. 139. v. 14.
strengthened. the righteous shall dwell with thy countena^ce] signifying that
beatitude consists in seeing God, being made clean in heart [al fair with
Cant. 4. v. 8. Pro. 8. v. 35. Sap. 5. v. 16. 17.
out spotte.] For [he that finds me (says eternal wisdom) shall find life]
which is everlasting [For the just shall live for ever; and their reward is with
our Lord, and cogitation of them, with the highest: therefore shall they receive
a kingdom of honor, and a crown of beauty, at the hand of our Lord] As also
an other divine writer concludes his book, aduising al men to labor for this
crown [work your Eccle. 51. v. 39.
work (says he) before the time: and our Lord will give you your reward in his
time.] God by his other Prophets, does likewise much inculcate the future
punishment of the wicked: and reward of the just. Let one place serve for
example of many, where by Isaias, he expostulateth with the Jews for their
wilful obstinacy, contemning his frequent admonitions; and preferring their
own wills before his. For which he denounces their temporal ruin, with
loss of his grace; and withal foresheweth the calling of the Gentiles; therein
signifying the eternal damnation, and salvation, of his enemies, and servants,
according to their diverse deserts [Because Isa. 65. v. 12. 13. 14.
(says he) I called, and you have not answered; I Just retributio^ shall be in
the end, both to Gods servants, and his enemies.
spoke, and you have not heard, and you did evil in mine eyes; and you have
chose^ the things that I would not. For this cause, thus says our Lord God:
Behold my servants shall eat, and you shall be hungry; behold my servants
shall drink, and you shall be thirsty. Behold my servants shall rejoice, and
you shall be confounded: behold my servants shall praise for ioyfulnes of heart,
and you shall cry for sorrow of heart, and Mal. 3. v. 17. 18.
for contrition of spirit, you shall howl. But all that (are truly penitent and)
convert to God, he will spare as a man spares his son, serving him. then you
shall see (says our Lord) what is between him that serves God, and serves him
not. And there shall Chapter 4. v. 2. 3.
rise to you that fear my name, the Sun of Justice, and health in his
wings. And you shall tread the impious, when they shall be ashes under the sole
of your feet, in the day that I do, says the Lord of hostes] meaning the day
of general Judgment, which will be the day, doing all that, whereof in the mean
time he premonisheth al men.

4 In this mean while also, since Christ redeemed Since Christ's Ascension al
purified souls ascend into heaven.
mankind, he has opened the gates of heaven, that just and purified souls,
do enter in, and receive the reward of eternal glory. And therefore, as well his
Mat. 3. v. 2. Chapter 4. v. 17.
Precursor, as him self [preached, that the kingdom of heaven was at hand] And
our Savior taught the way and means to obtain it, by the perfection of
virtues, of which, the kingdom of heaven is the reward [Blessed (says he) are
the poor in spirit, for Chapter 5. v. 3. etc. 10. 11. 12.
theires is the kingdom of heauen] And for great virtues, very great rewards
[Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all that naught is against you, untruly for my sake: be glad and rejoice, for your
reward is very great in heaven.] Exhorts expressly to do almes-deedes, to
pray and fast, and that in perfect manner, sincere intention, Chapter 6. v. 2. 9.
16. 20. 1. Tim. 6. v. 19. Chapter 10. v. 41. 42. Mar. 9. v. 41.
without al hypocrisy [so to heap up to your selves treasures in heauen] Our
Lord also teaches in particular, that [he which receives a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall receive the reward of a Prophet: and he that receives
a just man, in the name of a just man; shall receive the reward of a just man.
And whosoever shall give drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water, only in the name of a Disciple, Amen I say to you, he shall not loose his
reward. When thou make a feast, call the poor, feeble, Luc. 14. v. 13. 14.
Mat. 16. v. 27. 2. Cor. 5. v. 10. Chapter 20. v. 2. 8. Chapter 25. v. 35. 46. Luc. 6.
v. 38. Mat. 13. v. 8. 23. Io. 14. v. 2. Mat. 19. v. 29. Mar. 10. v. 30.
lame, and blind; and thou shall be blessed, because they have not to
recompense thee: for recompense shall be made thee in the resurrection of the
just. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels; and then will he render to every man according to his works.] And by
vigor of a covenant made with the faithful workme^: they shall receive their
hire, the Judge also declaring the reason why they receive it saying: [for I
was an hungered, and you gave me to eat; I was a thirst, and you gave me to
drink. Give and it shall be given to you; good measure, and pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, they shall give into your bosom. Some
yeldeth fruict an hundred fold; Heaven shall be given for good works, done
with true faith, by Gods grace.
some three-scoare, some thirty. In my Fathers house (says our Savior) there
be many mansions. And every one that has left house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name
sake, shall receive an hundred fold in this time (that is increase of grace,
spiritual comfort and strength, which infinitely counterposeth al worldly
commodities) and in the world to come, life everlasting.] So was poor Lazarus,
made strong in Luc. 16. v. 22. Chapter 20. v. 35. 36.
patience, and [dying, was carried by Angels into Abraha^s bosom.] They [that
shall be counted worthy of that world and glorious Resurrection, can dye
no more, Joan. 5. v. 29. Chapter 16. v. 22.
for they are equal to Angels; and they are the Sons of God, seeing they are
the sons of the Resurrection. For they that have done good things, shall come
forth into the Resurrection of life. Now indeed you have sorrow, but I will see
you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from
you.] These and many like speeches did our B. Savior utter, which his holy
Apostles have diligently promulgated by their preaching and writing [God Romans
2. v. 6. 7. 8.
in his just iudgemenets (says S. Paul) will render to every one according to
his works. To them truly that according to patience in good work, seek
glory, and honor, and incorruption, life eternal. But to them that are of
contention, and that obey not the truth, but give credit to iniquity; wrath,
and indignation. Tribulation and anguish upon every 9. 10.
soul of man that works evil: but glory, and honor, and peace, to every
one that works good. Now being made free from sin, you were made servants
Chapter 6. v. 18. 19.
to justice. I speak an humane thing because of the infirmity of your flesh:
For as you have exhibited your members to serve uncleanness and iniquity unto
iniquity: so now exhibit your members to serve justice unto sanctification.
Now being 22.
made free from sin, and become servants to God, you have your fruict unto
sanctification: but the end life everlasting. If you live according to the
flesh, Chapter 8. v. 13. 14.
you shall dye: but if by the spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you
shall live. For whosoever are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God. And if the sons, heirs also; heirs truly of God, and coheires of
Christ: yet if we suffer with him, that 17. 18.
we may also be glorified with him. For I think that the passions of this
time, are not condign to the glory to come that shall be reveled in us. For
that our 2. Cor. 4. v. 17. 18.
tribulation which presently is momentanie and light, Chapter 5. v. 1.
works above measure excedingly, an eternal weight of glory in us, we not
considering the things that are seen, but that are not seen. For the things
1. Cor. 2. v. 9. Is. 64. v. 4.
that are seen, are temporal, but those that be not seen, are eternal. For we
know that if our earthly house of this habitation be dissolved, we have a
building of God, a house not made with hand, eternal in heaven; that which eye
has not seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of
man, what things God has prepared for them that love him. Every one shall
receive his own reward, Chapter 3. v. 8. Chapter 9. v. 23. 24. 25. Chapter 15. v. 41. 42.
according to his own labor. I do al things (says S. Paul did good works;
and exhorted all the faithful to do good works, for the g^n^ng of eternal
reward.
the same Apostle) for the Gospel, that I may be made partaker thereof. So
run, that ye may obtain a crown incorruptible. As there is one glory of
the Sun, an other glory of the Moon, and an other glory of the Stars;
and star^e differs from star in glory: so likewise the Resurrection of the
dead. Therefore 58.
my beloved brethren, be stable and immovable, abounding in the work of our
Lord; always knowing that your labor is not in vain in our Lord. He that
sows sparingly, sparingly also shall reap: 2. Cor. 9. v. 6. Gal. 6. v. 8.
Ephesians. 6. v. 8.
and he that sows in blessings, of blessings also shall reap. He that
sows in his flesh, of the flesh also shall reap corruption: but he that
sows in the spirit, of the spirit shall reap life everlasting. serving with a
good will as to our Lord, and not to men, knowing that every one, what good
soever he shall do, that shall he receive of our Lord: The ^^tribution Colos. 3.
v. 24.
of inheritance; that you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God; for
the which also you suffer.] Of him self he says [There is laid up for me 2.
These. 1. v. 5. 2. Tim. 4. v. 8.
a crown of Justice, which our Lord will render to me in that day a just Judge.
(where he adds touching al other blessed servants of God saying) And not
only to me, but to them also that love his coming. For Heb. 6. v. 10.
God is not unjust, that he should forgeat your work and love which you have
showed in his name; which have ministered to the Saints, and do minister.] So
this great Apostle teaches in all his Epistles, these fundamental points of
faith, that [God will justly v. 2. Chapter 11. v. 6. 26. Chapter 12. v. 1. 2.
judge all this world: that he is a rewarder to them that seek him] And that
his servants may confide^tly in their good works and sufferinges [loke unto
the remuneration] And therefore [we having so great abundance of witnesses,
laying away al sin, that compasses us; by patience let us run to the fight
proposed, looking on the auctour of faith, and the consummator Jesus Christ,
who (joy being proposed unto him) sustained the Cross, contemning confusion;
and sits on the right hand of the seat of God.]

5 Likewise the other Apostles preached this Other Apostles often teach the
same.
Article of everlasting life; encoraging the faithful, in regard thereof, to do
good works, and patiently to suffer tribulations for justice sake [Bless^d is
the Iac. 1. v. 12.
man (says S. James) that suffers tentation: for when he has been proved,
he shall receive the crown of life, which God has promised to them that love
him.] S. Peter praises God [for his inestimable 1. Pet. 1. v. 3. 4.
mercy in regenerating us, unto this lively hope, unto an inheritance
incorruptible, incontaminate, and that can not fade. That the probation of
faith, much more pretions then gold (which is proved by the fire) 7.
may be found unto praise, and glory, and honor, in the revelation of Jesus
Christ. Communicating with Chapter 4. v. 13. Chapter 15. v. 4. 2. Pet. 1. v. 10. 11.
the passions of Christ, be glad: that in the revelation also of his glory,
you may be glad rejoicing. And when the Prince of Pastors shall appear, you
also may receive the incorruptible crown of glory. Wherefore brethren labor
the more, that by good works you may make sure your vocation and election. for
doing these things, you shall not sin at any time. For so there shall be
ministered to you abu^dantly, an entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.] S. John exhorts al to admire with him,
considering [what manner of Charity 1. Tim. 3. v. 1. 2.
the heavenly Father has vouchsaifed us, that we should be named, and be (by
grace and adoption) the sons of God [My dearest (says he) now we are the
Sons of God, and it has not yet appeared what we shall be, we know, that when
he shall appear, we shall be like to him, because we shall see him as he is.] For
this is al in all, the very essen^ial and perfect Beatitude, to see God. And
therefore he advises by all means, to persevere in this grace [Looke 2. Joan. v.
8.
to your selves (says he to a christian Lady, and her sons, and in them to
all the just in this life) that you loose not the things which you have
wrought, but that you may receive a full reward.] The very same Jude. v. 21.
does S. Jude the Apostle also inculcate saying; [Keepe your s^lues in the love
of God, expecting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto life everlasting.]

6 Our B. Savior again in his revelation to S. Christ our Lord again
confirms his promise of eternal glory to the just.
Apoc. 2. v. 5. etc.
John, wills him to write to the Bishops of the seven Churches of Azia,
admonishing them, and in them all the faithful, to fight manfully in spiritual
warfare against sin: promising in diverse forms of speech, but al in one
sense that they shall receive for their reward in heaven every one everlasting
life. [To him that ouercometh (says he) I will give to 7.
eat of the tree of life, that is in the paradise of my God. He that shall
overcome, shall not be hurt of the 11. 17. 26. Chapter 3. v. 5.
second death. To him that ouercometh I will give the hidden Manna. He that shall
overcome, and keep my works unto the end; I will give him power over the
nations. He that shall overcome, shall be vested in white garments, and I will not
put his name out of the book of life. He that shall overcome, I 12.
will make him a pillar in the temple of my God: and he shall go out no more. He
that shall overcome I will 21.
give unto him, to sit with me in my throne: as I also have overcome, and
have sitten with my Father in his Throne.] After this he signifies in like
vision, Chapter 7. v. 4. 5. etc. 9.
that certain are signed which shall be saved of the Tribes of Israel. But
incomparably many more of the Gentiles, which no man can number, of al Nations
and Tribes, and peoples, and tongues, clothed with white Robes, and Palm in
their hands. In Chapter 11. v. 3. 7. 11. 12.
particular, amongst many other mysteries, pertaining to the Churches
spiritual warfare, and victory, our Lord has foreshewed, that his two special
witnesses which shall be slain by Antichrist, shall rise from death, be called
into heaven, and ascend thither in sight of their enemies. Finally all the
elect, shall be prepared Chapter 19. v. 7. 8. 9. Chapter 20. v. 12. 13. Chapter 21. v. 4. 5.
and called to the marriage feast of Christ, and his glorious Spouse the Church.
[Bookes shall be opened, al men's works made known, and al indeed of those
things which are written in the books, according to their works.] Then will
our B. Savior [wipe away al tears from the eyes of his Saints; and death
shall be no more, nor mourning, nor crying; neither shall there be sorrow any
more; which first things are gone, and he that sat in the Throne said [Behold
I make al things new. He that shall overcome, 7. Chapter 22. v. 14.
shall possess these things: I will be his God, and he shall be my son.
Blessed are they that wash their s^oales, that their power may be in the tree
of life, and they may enter by the gate into the City.

The wicked shall be eternally punished for their sins. ARTICLE. 51.
NOw we are declare in like manner, the second Al penitent sinners are punished
temporally. and al which are finally impenitent, are damned eternally.
part of the general Judgment. For as [Eternal life is the fruict of grace,
and the Romans 6. v. 23.
reward of good works (by virtue of the same grace) so [the stipend of sin
is death] And the same ^o general, that for the first sin of Adam, he, and al
his progeny, became subject thereto. Yea though God gave him grace of
repentance, with remission of sin; yet temporal death remained a just debt
for the sin 1. Cor. 6. v. 11. Apoc. 21. v. 8 1. Cor. 15. v. 22. Ps. 113. v.
25. Isa. 9. v. 12. 17. 21. Chapter 10. v. 14.
remitted, and that in all mankind. Seeing therefore even those which through
grace are truly penitent, [washed, sanctified, and iustified] and so made free
from eternal damnation, which is the second death; must nevertheless, by the
justice of God, dye temporally: by the same divine justice, those which dye
impen^tent, must needs be eternally punished, because they persist obstinate in
their sin, for ever inconuertible from the guilte thereof, and incorrigible in
mind.

2 Of which just punishment of obstinate and impenitent Examples of punishment
for sins.
sinners, we have very many memorable examples, and express testimonies in
holy Scriptures. For enormious sins, the whole world was drowned, Genesis 7. v.
23. Chapter 11. v. 7. Chapter 19. v. 24.
only just Noe, and his family, in all but eight persons, excepted. The
presumptuous builders of a Tower in Babel were confounded in their tongues and
dispersed upon the face of the earth, to (...) new habitations. The Cities of
Sodom and ^omorrha, with other three towns adjoining, were sudenly burned
with fire and brimstone rayning from heaven. The Egiptians were plagued ten
times, Ex^. 7. v. 20. Chapter 8. v. 6. 16. 24. Chapter 9. v. 6. 10. 23. Chapter 10. v. 13.
22. Chapter 14. v. 27. 28. Nu. 1. v. 46. Chapter 3. v. 39. Chapter 11. v. 2. 33. Chapter 14. v.
23. 24. 30. 38.
in the space of few days; and at last, Pharao their king, with all his army,
not one escaping, were drowned in the red sea. Many of the children of
Israel, for murmuring, for gluttony, and adultrie, and other sins, were
punished with fire, with serpents, and other plagues, that al above the age of
twenty, which came out of Egypt, in number above six hundred, and three
thousand men, able to bear arms, and twenty two thousand Levites, died in
the desert, except two only persons, Iosue, and Caleb. Amongst the rest, Core,
Dathan, and Abiron, with their accomplices and folowers, for their rebellious
schism, were partly swalowed up in the gaping earth and so descended quick
into ^el, partly were burnt to death by fire from heaven, fourtene thousand,
seven hundred of the vulgar sort, besides the capital schismatikes. The seven
Nations that inhabited the Chapter 16. v. 30. 31. etc. 49. Leuit. 18. v. 24. 25.
Deuteronomy. 7. v. 10. Chapter 8. v. 19. 20. Iosue. Iudic. Reg. 4. Reg. 17. 4. Reg. 25.
Job. 21. v. 13. Ps. 1. v. 5. 7. Ps. 48. v. ^5. Ps. 93. v. 1. 23.
land of Chanaan, were destroyed for their abominable Idolatry, and other
execrable sins.

3 Neither did God omit, to punish the sins of Punishment is sometime as a
medicine bringing to repentance: sometime a begin* ning of hell.
his peculiar chosen people, but often suffered them to be oppressed by their
enemies, and be carried into captiu^^e, by the Assirians, and Babilonians. which
temporal punishments by Gods mercy, are wholesome medicines to many
persons, and some peoples bringing them to repentance; to others, a beginning
of their damnation. And such as lived wickedly and yet prospered in this world;
escaped not the just Worldings, not punished in this world, dying, descend into
hell.
hand of God, but as holy Job writes of careless worldlinges, and carnal
Epicures [they lead their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to
hell.] The same does the Royal Prophet David tea^h saying [The impious shall be
as the dust, which the wind drives from the face of the earth. the way of the
impious shall perish. As sheep (that can not help them selves) they are put in
hell; death shall feed upon them. The God of reuenges, will repay Ps. 128. v. 4.
Ps. 139. v. 10. 11.
them their iniquity* In their malice he will destroy them; the Lord our God
will destroy them. Our just Lord will cu^te the necks of sinners. The head of
their compass (the sum of their wicked devises) the labor of their lips
(their sweet. words of subtle persuasions) shall cover them (ouerwhelme them
with perdition) Coals shall fai upon them, thou shall cast them down into fire
of hell.] Then at last shall the wicked [know, that by what things a man Sap.
11. v. 17.
sins; by the same also he is tormented.] In reguard of which miserable and
eternal perdition, the wise man says: that [the wicked in all their subt^lties,
Prou. 1. v. 11. 12. 13. 14. 18. Chapter 5. v. 22.
and sweet inticementes wherewith they flatter them selves, and allure others
to si^ne, do nothing else in effect, but lie in wait against their own blood,
and practice deceit against their own souls. His own iniquities do take
the impious; and he is fast bound with the ropes of his sins. He shall dye.
because 23.
he has not had discipline, and in the multitude of his folly he shall be
deceived. He that shall sin against Chapter 8. v. 39.
me (says wisdom) shall hurt his own soul. All that hate me love death.] So
the Prophets call eternal damnation, death, because it is an everlasting death:
wherein the damned are as if they were always Ezech. 18. v. 23. etc.
dying in extreme torments, and never find end thereof. the soul being
immortal, the malice of the damned perpetual, and Gods justice eternal.
[Topheth Isa. 30. v. 33.
(enlargement, signifying hell) is prepared (says Isaias) since yesterday (from
the beginning of sin for the devil and his Angels) prepared of the King, Mat.
25. v. 41.
deep and wide. the norishmentes thereof, fire, and much wood: the breath of
our Lord, as a torrent of brimstone kindling it.] Al [that hold the Law, Bar.
4. v. 1.
(saitg the Prophet Baruch) shall come to life; but they that have forsaken it,
into death. I will come to Mal. 3. v. 5. 16. 18.
you (says our Lord) in judgment, and will be a swift witness to sorcerers, and
adulterers, and to the periured] and other wicked sinners. As for the penitent,
he says to them [You shall see what is between the just and the impious;
between him that serves God, and serves him not.]

4 Of this Judge, and general Judgment, S. John Mat. 3. v. 12. Luc. 3. v. 17.
S. John Baptist, and also Christ, admonished to flee from sin for fear of
hell.
Baptist preached to al sinners saying: [His fan is in his hand, and he shall
clean purge his s^oore, and will gather his wheat into his barn, but the
chafe he will burn with unquenchable fire.] Our Savior also admonished al
[not to fear them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but
fear him that can destroy both soul, and body into hel] For an example
decla^eth that when [poore Lazarus for Luc. 16. v. 22.
his patience was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom; the rich glutton was
bu^ied in hel] most expressly Mat. 25. v. 31. 41. 46.
foretold us that [the son of man (him self) will, at the last day, come in
Majesty with his Angels, and then will separate one from an other, as the
Pastor seperateth the sheep from the goats; on his right hand, and left]
where after he shall have called the just unto eternal glory; he will judge the
wicked saying [Get ye away from me ye cursed into Mat. 13. v. 42. 50.
fire everlasting; and these shall go into torment everlasting. then shall the
Angels cast them into the fournace of fire; there shall be weping, and gnashing
of teeth.]

5 S. Paul delivered the same doctrine to the Gentiles The Apostles often
admonished the same.
saying: [Our Lord Jesus will come in flame of 2. These. 1. v. 8. 9. Iac. 1. v.
15.
fire, giving revenge to them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel,
who shall suffer eternal pains in destruction.] S. James teaches, that [sinne,
when it is consummate (committed by deliberate consent of the will) engenders
death.] If the just man (says S. Peter) shall scarcely be saved; 1. Pet. 4. v.
17. 18.
where shall the impious and sinner appear? For judgment begins at the
house of God] signifying that punishment is also due for sins remitted. And
that wicked men shall not escape; he further shows by Gods justice toward
Angels, and first sinners. [for (says he) if God spared not Angels 2. Pet. 2.
v. 4. 5. 9.
sinning, nor the original world, nor Sodom and Gomorrha, delivering
nevertheless the just, but reserueth the unjust unto the day of Judgment to
be tormented.] By the same example of Sodom and other Cities, S. Jude also
confirms the doctrine Jude. v. 7.
of eternal fire ordained for the wicked. Finally the whole troop of the
wicked, signified by Babylon deprived Apoc. 18. v. 21. 22. Chapter 20. v. ^3.
of al manner of joy, consolation, or contentment [shal be thrown into the
bottomless pit of hell with such violence, as if a millstone were thrown into
the sea, and shall be found no more: So shall their Chapter 21. v. 8.
portion be for ever and ever, in the poole burning with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death.] Contrariwise, the portion of the blessed, is God
him self, whose eternal fruition they shall enjoy, through Chapter 22. v. 2. 12.
[Christ his Son, the tree of life] who thus concludes the vision showed to
S. John [Behold I come quikly, and my reward is with me, to render to every
man according to his works.]

It was foreshewed, and there have been, are, and will be, Heresies against the
true Faith. ARTICLE. 52.
WArning beforehand of mischief to come Notice of evil, is a warning to seek
remedy.
is a good kind of arming: Likewise the record of evils past, is a good
document to be watchful, lest the same return unawares; but most especially
present irruption of any pestilent malady, is a singular admonition to flee
from it, to use preservatives against it, strongly to resist it, and never by
consent of mind to give entrance nor way unto it. For so much therefore as to
eternal salvation which al desire, the true faith is absolutely necessary, as
is declared in the first Article of this Christian doctrine, and particularly
confirmed in the rest of this first part: it remains consequently to be
considered, that whereas Heresy is the poison of true faith.
heresy is most rank poisen of christian souls, [the worst kind of al
infidelitie] it has pleased God 2. Pet. 2. v. 21.
of his singular providence, not only to foreshew by holy Scriptures, that
there should come heresies, false and perverse opinions against the true faith;
but also to note certain such, which have been raised, both in the time of the
old Testament; and in the Apostles time, before all the New Testament was
written; and withal so to describe heresies and heretics, most strictly
forbidding al participation with them: that al which will, may sufficiently know
them to be false, and are bound under pain of damnation, to avoid al
spiritual communication with them.

2 The first figures, or rather examples of heretics, Genesis 4. v. 16. Chapter 10.
v. 10.
There were heresies, or errors, against true faith, before N^es flood. And
more after it,
were Cain before Noes flood, and Nemrod after. But the whole race and
accomplices of the former, were utterly destroyed by the flood, and the others
were dispersed when their tongues were confounded, and presently divided into
many sects of Infidels; multiplying false gods, and imaginary religions;
the Chapter 5. v. 3. ad. 31. Chapter 11. v. 10. ad, 1. Exo. 3. v. 2. 6. Chapter 6. v. 16.
26.
true Church of God continuing without interruption, or change of faith, even
unto Abraham; and so to Moses; and to Christ: sundry sorts of schismatikes,
heretics, and other infidels in that long time, breaking from it; still more
and more devising and holding many, no less absurd, then execrable, errors.

3 God therefore, nere two thousand and five hundred years Heresies, and al
other Infidelities, are condemned by the law of Moses.
Deuteronomy. 12. v. 31. Chapter 18. v. 10. Exo. 20. etc. Leuit. ^ Deuteronomy. 12. v. 32. Chapter
13. v. 1. ad 12.
from the beginning of the world, giving his people a written Law, most
especially commanded them, neither to make, nor admit, any false god, nor
false Religion; but to serve and adore him, the only true God; and that in
prescript manner, as he then instructed them by particular precepts. Often
inculcating, that they should never harken to false prophets, nor follow new
doctrine in matter of Religion [If there rise in the midest of thee (says our
Lord to his people) a prophet, or one that says, he has seen a dream, and
foretell a sign and wonder, and it come to pass which he spoke; and he say to
thee, let us go and follow strange gods which thou know not, and let us
serve them; thou shall not hear the words of that prophet or dreamer. For the
Lord your God tempts you, that it may appear whether you love him or not,
with all your heart, and with all your soul. And that prophet or forge^ of
dreams shall be slain, because he spoke, that he mgiht auert you from the Lord
your God, that he might make thee to err from the way that the Lord thy God
commanded thee; and thou shall take away the evil out of the midest of thee.
with sto^es shall he be stoned to death, because he would have withdrawn thee
from the Lord thy God.] And as particular men Cities, or cou^t^ies were
punishable for heresy, by the same law of Moses.
being false prophets, heretics, or sowers of new doctrine, were punished by
the Law: so likewise 12. 13. etc. Chapter 18. v. 20.
whole Cities, that mantained false religion amidest the people of God, were
either to be corrected, or destroyed. Which divine ordinances, did presuppose,
and forewarne, that both private persons, and tumultuous people, would sometimes
revolt from the true faith; and make separation from the faithful: some
auouching false things in the name of the true Heretics falsely pretended Gods
word.
God, which are properly heretics; and some preaching the like falsitie in the
name of strange gods, which are plain Apostataes. As Moses relates,
Apostataes pretend false gods, or false Christ's.
that some [prouoked God in strange gods, and in Chapter 22. v. 18. 19.
abominations stirred him to anger. they immolated to devils, and not to God;
to gods which they knew not.] Yea they invented new, and newer gods, as
Sectaries do now daily come new heresies [There came new and fresh gods,
whom their fathers worshipped not] even so do Puritanes hold new conceiptes,
which neither Luther, Zuinglius, Cranmer, nor Iuel, ever knew, or allowed. They
Eliu, Jobs last adversary, much resembles a Puritan.
were herein very lively represented, by the young and last disputer against
holy Job, vaunting [Elin, whose Job. 32. v. 18. 19.
belie, (as him self protested) was as new wine without a vent, which breaks
new vessels] who roundly condemned both Job, and his other three adversaries
[For I see (said he) here is none of you that 12.
can reprove Job, and answer to his wordes] And so he talks at random
calumniating Iobes words, falsely charging him with things that he did not
say: But Job having co^^inced the former three with solid reasons; overcame
this last, and most arrogant, with silence* which their error, was not for all
this an heresy, nor they heretics for defending it, before God him self
resolved the case; but they were Chapter 42. v. 7. 9. 10.
figures resembling heretics, in holding and mantaining erroneous opinions,
touching gods judgment, in suffering the just to be temporally afflicted.

4 Diverse other persons, and peoples, were also figures Under the name of
Idolaters, king David prophesied of Heretics in this time of the new testament.
of heretics: especially such as descended of Abraham and his nere kindred,
and neighbors, and dissented religion, and persecuted the true Church^ under
whose names the Royal Psalmist David, prophesied of heretics, and other
persecuters of Christians; speaking thus in his prayer to God [O God Ps. 82. v.
2. 3. 4.
who shall be like to thee? Hold not thy peace, neither be thou appeased o God.
for behold thine enemies have made a sound: they that hate thee have lifted up
their head. they have taken malignant counsel upon thy people: and they have
devised against thy Saints. they have said: Come and let us destroy them out
of the nation (that they be no more accounted a nation of God) and let the name
of Israel be remembered no more. Because they have devised with one consent,
they have together made a covenant against thee.] The [Idumians, Ismahelites,
7. 8. 9.
Moabites, Agarenes, Gebalites, Ammonites, Amalacites, Philistians, Tyrians,
and Assirians] As if you will now say; Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptists,
Caluenistes, Protestants, Puritans, Hugonets, Brownistes, Atheistes, Turks,
al Sectaries, and other Infidels, combine in one to persecute Catholics.

5 Solomon does also at large describe such perverse Solomon describes
heretics by the resemblance of enticing strumpettes.
Prou. 2. v. 13. 14. 15.
sinners, as reuolte from virtue, and verity; prophetically heretics, who
leave the right way, and walk by dark ways [who are glad when they have done
evil, rejoice in most wicked things; whose ways are perverse, and their
steps infamous] Al which, are very proper to heresy, and so the rest of his
discourse; calling this inuiting strumpet [the strange 16. 17. 18. 19.
woman the forener which mollifieth her words; forsakes the guide of her
youth, and has forgotten the covenant of her God. For her house is bowed down
to death and her paths to hell. All that go in unto her, shall not return,
neither shall they apprehe^d the paths of life] The reason of which
difficulty, to return from heretical error, is, because heretics do
witingly adhere to a private opinion, else they were not heretics: and so
chosing to follow either their own, or some other private spirits; exclude the
means from them selves, whereby they might be reduced to the truth, refusing to
be taught, or judged by any other, but according to their own understanding
and judgment. Again the same wise Solomon, describes Chapter 7. v. 10. 11. 12.
ad 26.
the manner of this woman's enticing, by carnal and worldly allurementes, both to
carnal and spiritual fornication (very proper to the sectaries of this time)
with the destruction of those which are seduced by her. But more briefly, he
compriseth al Chapter 14. v. 12. Chapter 16. v. 25. Chapter 21. v. 2. Chapter 30. v. 21. 22. 23.
in this pithie sentence, which he thrice recites in his divine proverbs
[There is a way (says he) which seems to a man just, but the later ends
thereof lead to death.] He admonishes also that [By three things the earth (or
man in earth) is moved, yet susteineth them. By a servant when he shall reign:
by a fool when he shall be filled with meat,: by an odious woman, when she shall
be taken in matrimony. But the fourth is intolerable, and can not be
sustained; A bond woman, when she shall be heir to her Mistris] most properly
spoken of heresy, where it does dominire over Catholic Religion. We have the
very like description of heresy under the figure of a wicked woman, in the
book of Ecclesiasticus [There is no head worse, then the head of a Eccl. 25.
v. 22. etc.
serpent: and there is no anger, above the anger of a woman.]

6 All that the Prophets preached or writ concerning The great resemblance
betwixt Idolatry, and Heresy, is further declared by holy Scriptures.
Idols; is mystically understood of heresies in the new Testament. For as
Idolaters are very foolish, in that [the^ selves making an Idol do imagine
Isa. 44. v. 9. 11. 12. 13. etc.
that the thing which they made, is their god; them selves being witnesses,
that those things which they made, do not see nor understand, because they
were made of iron, or wood, or silver, or gold] or of other metal or matter
which has no sense at al, much less no understanding, much less divine
power: even so heretics devise new doctrines and adore their own inventions,
which they know were imagined, and framed by them selves, and so draw their
simple folowers, to admit and esteem the same fictions, for divine doctrines,
being nothing else, but fantasies of men's brains, and abominable blasphemies,
under the false title of Gods word.

7 But besides figures and Prophesies, there were Examples of heresies in the
old Testament.
also formal heresies in the old Testament. As Caines negative opinion, that
there was no reward for virtue, nor punishment for sin; whereupon he offered
the worse fruictes to God, keeping the best to him self, and envying his
brothers good works, slew him, and afterward [went out from the face of our
Genesis 4. v. 5.
Lord.] Also the like impious persuation of Nemrod that men were not beholding
to God, but to them selves, and their own strength for temporal prosperity;
and so became [a valiant hunter against beastes] Genesis 10. v. 8.
and a vioient tirant over men. And as then such errors descended into plain
Idolatry: so in this time of the new Testament, heresies commonly proceed to
Turcisme, and paganism, and sooner or later, into Atheism. An other particular
example of the faithful degenerating into infidelity, is recorded in the time
of the Judges, of one [ Michas, of the Tribe of Ephraim, who together Iudic.
17. v. 4. 5.
with his mother, made an Idol of silver, and called it his god. For which he
furnished a separated rowme as a chapel or little temple, within his own house.
So he made an Ephod, and Teruphim, that is A right pattern of Protestants
Ministers.
to say, a Preistly vestiment; and Idols [and filled the hand of one of his
sons (after an apish imitation of anointing his hands with oil, but
profane for lack of sacred) and he became his Preist] such a god, such a
priest. Yet to amend the matter, with an other gross sacrilege (for one
absurdity admitted, a thousand will follow) This Michas, a new maker of a god,
and of a Priest, knowing al was not right, [hired also a Leuite, and in the
same manner filled 7. 10. 12.
(that is anointed) his hand and head, and held him for a priest; glorying and
presuming, that God our Lord would bless him for his fact saying: Now I 13.
know that God will do me good, having a priest of the Leuitical kind] though
indeed no priest, but an Apostata Leuite. Very like to this, but much more
King Jeroboam made gods, Preistes, feasts, and mantained false Prophets, like
to his new religion.
general was the schism of Jeroboam king of Israel, with the heresies and
Idolatries thereupon ensuing. Who in his wicked policy [fearing that if his
people 3. Reg. 12. v. 27.
should go up to make Sacrifices in the house of our Lord, into Jerusalem;
their heart would be turned to their Lord Roboa^ king of Judah; finding out a
devise, he made two golden calves, and said to his people; Go 28.
up no more into Jerusalem; behold thy gods which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt. And he made 31.
Temples in the excelses; and preistes of the abiectes of the people, which
were not of the children of Leui] And in that respect, more absurd then the
Leuite that served Michas, and his false god; whereas none Nu. 3. v. 10.
were at that time lawful Preistes, but only of the stock of Aaron. For the
honor also of these new made gods, dedication of their temples, and exercise
of their imaginary preistes, this king the proper head of such a church
[instituted a solemn feast after the 32.
similitude of the solemnity that was celebrated in Iuda] lest forsooth such
men might forgeate to be apes, yet were they fondly ouerseene, their great
master the devil blinding their hearts, in that being one kingdom, and one
only supreme king and visible head, they One schismatical kingdom had two gods.
had two gods, that is to say, two golden calves, 29. Chapter 18. v. 19. Chapter 22.
v. 11.
the one in Bethel, the other in Dan; neither did there want great store of
false prophets in that schismatical kingdom. Amongst which, one Sedecias, that
he might seem like to true prophets (which prophesied both by factes and words
[made him self horns A ridiculous false Prophet made him self horns of Iron.
3. Reg. 11. v. 30. Is. 20. v. 3. Iere. 13. v. 11. Ib. v. 6. 8. 17. 21. 22. 24.
2. Par. 18. v. 5. 10. 11. 20. 21. 23.
of iron, and said to Achab king of Israel, thus says our Lord: with these
shall thou strike Syria til thou destroy it. and all the other false prophets
above four hundred, said the same] not knowing the truth, because they would
not believe the true Prophet Micheas; and so God suffered them to be deceived,
and to deceive Achab by a lying spirit, who offered his service saying: [I will
go forth (said the devil) and be a lying spirit in the mouth of al his
prophets] Al which when Micheas plainly reveled to the king; the furious horned
false prophet Sedecias, to revenge him self, further proceeding, a verbis,
adverbera, together with calumnious words, struck him on the face.] The of
spring of heresy, is the multiplication of innumerable heresies.


8 Moreover this king Achab, and his wife Iezabel, 3. Reg. 12. v. 33. Chapter 16.
v. 31. 32. 4. Reg. 17. v. 29.
not satisfied with the heresy that Jeroboam had forged out of his own heart,
teaching that golden calves were gods: worshipped Baal for god, building a
temple and an altar to him in Samaria. After this when the Assirians had made
the kingdom of ten Tribes captive and had placed there peoples of diverse
Nations, who mixing the Israclites Religion, with many sorts of paganism;
many new herefies rose up amongst them, every Nation together with the
Israelites that dwelt with them, having in several co^uenticles, their
particular gods, to wit, of [the v. 30. 31. 32. 33.
Babilonians, Cutheites, Ematheites, Heueites, Sepharuehemites] and the rest,
who al nevertheless (as they pretended) worshipped our Lord. Of the Mat. 3. v.
7. Chapter 5. v. 21. Chapter 22. v. 15. 16.
Pharisees frivolous Traditions, and of the plain heresies of Sadduces, and
Herodians, we have no testimonies in the old Testament. But Christ our Savior,
and his Apostles, make clear mention of them. Christ and his Apostles
forewarned that


9 And more amply foretell of other heresies to come Act. 5. v. 17. Chapter 23.
giving some notes whereby to know them, and most v. 6. 7. 8. Mat. 7. v. 15. 16.
heresies would molest the Church.
diligently admonishing all the faithful to avoid them [Take ye great heed
(says our Savior) of false prophets which come to you in the clothing of
sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves: by their fruictes you shall know them.
Look well and beware of the Chapter 16. v. 6. 12. Chapter 24. v. 4. 5. 11. Mar. 13. v.
^3. Luc. 21. v. 8.
leaven of the pharisees, and Sadduces, not of the leaven of bread, but of the
doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces. Beware that no man seduce you. for
many shall come in my name. Many false prophets shall rise, and shall seduce
many. Take therefore heed; behold I have foretold you al things, and the time
is at hand; go not therefore after them] As it came to pass shortly after
Christ's Ascension, and so will the like hapen til the end of the world.

10 For first [there arose the Synagogue of the Libertines, Act. 6. v. 9.
Some heresies rose very shortly after Christ's Ascension.
and of the Cyrenians, of the Allexandrians, and of them that were in Cilicia,
and Asia, disputing whith Stephen] against Christ. Not long Act. 15. v. 1.
after certain Jews which had been converted to Christ, and were baptized,
coming down from Jury (to Antioch, where Christ's disciples were first called
Chapter 11. v. 16. 5.
Christians) taught the brethren that unless you be circumcised according to the
manner of Moses you cannot be saued] with whom the Pharesees in this agreed,
that Christians must be crircumcised, and keep the law of Moses. In like manner
S. Paul forewarned Chapter 20. v. 29. 30.
the clergy, and Christian people of Ephesus, and other parts adjoining,
that false teachers should arise amongst them [I know (said he) that after my
departure, there will ravening wolves enter in among you not sparing the flock,
and out of your own selves shall arise men speaking perverse things, to draw
away 1. Cor. 11. v. 18. 19.
disciples after them selves.] To the Corinthians he writes thus. [I hear
that there are schisms among you, and in part I believe it. For there must be
heresies also, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among you.]
In particular he instructs S. Timothy in both his Epistles, that [in 1. Tim.
4. v. 1. 2. 3. 2. Tim. 3. v. 1.
the last days, shall approach perilous times, that certain shall depart from
the faith, attending to spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, speaking
lies in hypocrisy, and having their conscience seared; forbidding to marie (as
did the Manichees, Encratites, Marcionistes, Ebionites, and Patritians) and
teaching to abstain from meats which God created] as did the same Maniches,
the Tatians, and other heritikes, saying, that they were not made of God, but
of an evil God. S. Peter also fore tells us, that [as 2. Pet. 2. v. 1. 2.
there were false prophets in the people (of the Jews) so among Christians,
there shall be lying masters, which shall bring in sects of perdition. and
many shall follow their riotousnesses, by whom the way of truth shall be
blasphemed.] S. John not only shows, that heretics should come in this time
of the new Testament, which he calls the last hour (or last time and state of
this world) especially that most enormious enemy of Christ, thereof called
Antichrist, that is contrary to Christ: but also says [as you have 1. Joan.
2. v. 18.
heard that Antichrist comes, and now (even in the Apostles ^ime) many are
become Antichristes] plainly teaching* that al such Christians, as departing
from the Church, hold new opinions against the same Church, are the forerunners
of the singular man of sin, the infamous Antichrist; and so they become
Antichrists. Of which singular great Antichrist, more is to be said in the
next Article. For that S. John distinguishes between him and other heritikes
is manifest, in that he calls this one [the Antichrist] and none other the
Antichrist, but [an Ant^christ] saying [there were then many such, and that
many false prophets are gone out into the world] of Chapter 4. v. 1.
which sort were [those that said them selves to be Apoc. 2. v. 2.
Apostles and were not.] And besides the principal beast which appeared with
seven heads and ten horns [he saw an other beast (a notorious wicked Apoc.
13. v. 1. 11. 12.
persecuter) coming up from the earth, with two horns, who made the
inhabitants of the earth, to adore the first beast.]

11 Now to know who are heretics, and so to avoid Marks of Hetikes.
them, it behooves to consider such marks as we find them to be branded
withal in holy Scriptures. Of which it may suffice here to note some few,
which more peculiarly discipher the Sectaries of this time; for the exact trial
thereof requires the discussing Doctrine tending to neglecting Gods
commandments, and to corruption of life.
of al matters of faith controuersed. Of false Prophets ingeneral our Savior
says [that by their Mat. 7. v. 16. 20.
fruictes you shall know them] explicating the same to be badde fruictes, for
that the tree and the fruict are of the same quality, both naught. whereupon we
1. Tim. ^. v. 19.
may rightly observe that as those [which repel good conscience, commonly make
ship-wrakke of faith] even so such doctrines are false, and being obstinatly
ma^tained are heretical, as tending to loosenes of life, have little care to
keep Gods commandments, less desire of Euangelical councels, of contempt
of this world, of mortification of the flesh, and the like. It is recorded in
the history of the Machabes, that when 2. Mac. 4. v. 14. 15.
true Religion was oppressed [the Preistes were not now occupied about the
offices of the Altar: but the Temple being contemned, and the Sacrifices
neglected, they hastened to be partakers of the gamme of wrestling, and of the
unjust mantenance thereof, and in the exercise of the coyte. And setting nougt
by the honors of their fathers, they esteemed the Greek glories for the best]
so does the devil ouersow his Mat. 13. v. 25.
cocle upon the wheat which was first sowed. And so do evil men and seducers
rise after and [prosper to Rising after.
the worse.] An other certain mark of false prophets, Not sent.
2. Tim. 3. v. 13. Iere. 23. v.
is their coming not being rightly sent, which God condemns saying [I sent
not the prophets, and they ran; I spoke not to them, and they prophesied. 21.
Heb. 5. v.
For neither does any man take the honor to him self, but he that is called.
He that enters not 4. Io. 10. v. 1. 2. 12.
by the doare into the fold of the sheep, but climeth up an other way, is a
thief and a robber, he is a wolf not a pastor.] By this mark the Apostles
declared them to be seducers, which preached that Christians must be
circumcised, writing thus to the brethren at Antioch [We have heard, that
certain going forth Act. 15. v. 24.
from us, have troubled you with words, subuerting your souls, to whom we
gave no commandment.] Wilful. Disobedient.
False Apostles are also discovered by their disobedience to the lawful
prelates. For our Savior counts it al one, to disobey those whom he sends,
as to disobey him self saying: [he that despiceth you, Luc. 10. v. 16. Io 15.
v. 20. Tit. 1. v. 10. Gal. 1. v. 6. 1. Tim. 1. v. 3. Chapter 6. v. 3. 2. Io. v. 10.
^ud. v. 8. 10. 11. 12. 13. 16.
despiceth me. If they have kept my word; yours also will they keep. But there
be many disobedient Teaching novelties.
(says S. Paul) vain speakers, and seducers.] Again they are to be known,
by teaching otherwise then the doctrine, to which Christians were first
converted [For there is not an other Gospel, but false preachers do inuert the
Gospel.] S. Jude in brief Replenished with bad qualities.
describes heretics by sundry badde properties, that [they defile the flesh,
despice dominion, blaspheme maie^^ie: These (indeed believing nothing at al for
the testimony of the Church, but) what things soever naturally as dumme
beaftes they know, in those they are corrupted (they are envious) like Cain,
(covetous) like Balaam (rebellious against ordinary superiors, and intruders
into spiritual functions whereto they are not called) as Core. These are in
their bankets, sportes, festing together without fear, seding them selves,
clouds witthout water which are carried about with winds, trees of autumn,
vnfruictful, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, raging waves of the sea,
foming out their own confusion, wandering stars, to whom the storm of
darkness is reserved for ever.] Thus sharply does this holy Apostle inueigh
against teachers of new doctrines, [beseching al Christians to stand fast, yea
to contend 3. 17. 18.
for the faith once delivered to the faithful, and to be mindful of the words
which have been spoken before by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
told you, that in the last time shall come mockers, walking according to their
own desires, in impieties.

12 For conservation of which first and only true The proper remedy against al
heresy, is to hold the Religion first received, and to follow the ordinary
Pastors.
faith, S. Paul testifies, that Christ has given his Church, ordinary
Pastors and Doctors [that (says he) Ephesians. 4. v. 11. 14.
we be not children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, in
the wickedness of men, in craftines, to circu^uention of error.] Accordingly he
exhorted the Bishops in Asia [to be vigilant as Act. 20. v. 28. 31. 2. Tim. 4.
v. 2. 3. Iac. 3. v. 1. Apoc. 2. v. 6. 15.
him self was.] And particularly S. Timothee [to preach the word, urging in all
patience and doctrine. For there shall be a time, when they will not hear sound
doctrine; but having itching ears, will, according to their own desires, heap
to them selves masters.] And this time even then beginning, has often
returned. As we see in some Christians, called after the names of their new
pleasing masters, Nicolaites; Manichees; Arrians; Pelagians; Donatistes;
Lolardes; Lutherans; Zuinglians; Caluenistes.

Antichrist, the head of al Heritikes, is to come: nere the end of this world.
ARTICLE. 53.
It is necessary to know that some time there shall be a most wicked enemy of
Christ, called Antichrist.
IF it be profitable, as al men will easily grant, to be forewarned, that
heresies should come into the world, to the end Christians may be prepared to
avoid them: more nedeful it is to know also beforehand, that once there will
come, the head of al heretics, the capital enemy of al faithful Christians,
the professed adversary of our Lord Jesus Christ. who is therefore in the holy
Scripture called Antichrist, that is, Contrary to Christ. Even as the Apostata
Angel, which first opposed him self against God, the Creator of al, was aptly
called Satan, which signifies Adversary. Job. 1. v. 6. Zach. 3. v. 1. 2. Luc.
10. v. 18.
For albeit, all the other wicked spirits, which took part, and fell from heaven
with their ringleader, formally called Lucifer, are also adversaries to God,
and to al good persons, and so are commonly and by a general name called
adversary spirits, and devils; yet is the prince and head of them al,
properly, or Antonomastically, eminently called Satan, 3. Reg. 5. v. 4. 1. Pet.
5. v. 8.
and Diabolus, the adversary, the devil, the Calumniator: As where S. Peter
admonishing al Christians says [Be sober and watchful; because your Adversary
the devil, as a roaring Lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour.] And as
our Redemer, the Son of God, and Son of man, is properly called Christ, the
anointed, notwithstanding by participation of ointment; Prophets also, and
kings, and Preistes, are called Christ's: So in like sense of Al heretics are
Antichrists in a general sense: but more properly the head of them is called
Antichrist.
contrary persons, though, al notorious persecuters of Christ, and his
Religion, and especially Heretics, or false prophets: are by the general name,
called Antichrists, yet is the same name peculiarly appropriated to the eminent
adversary of Christ in all mankind; who is designed and understood, when we
say the Antichrist, to be a distinct person from al other generally called
Antichrists.

2 But because there is at this time, a most notable What points are
principally to be decided touching Antichrist.
Controversy raised about this important point of Religion; whether this
Antichrist, taken in the particular sense, be one singular determinate man, or
some special denomination of diverse men, succeding one to, or after an other,
in some seat of authority, and office? Likewise whether he be as yet to come
into the world; or be come already? And diverse other questions, concerning his
doctrine, life, death, time, place, and other circumstances thereto pertaining.
For more clear declaration whereof, distinguishing things certain, from
uncertain; we shall show by the holy Scriptures, first, that Antichrist
properly taken for the eminent adversary, head of al other visible adversaries
of Christ; must be one certain singular man, not any company, nor diverse
persons succeding in place of power, or dignity, lawful, or unlawful.
Secondly, that he is not yet come, but shall come hereafter, and that nere the
end of this world. Then also we shall declare, some special, and assured things
touching his doctrine, Idolatry, tirannie, death, and destruction: with
Christ's, and his Churches victory: the conversion of the Jews to Christ; and
that shortly after (which no man can punctually know) the end of this world
shall follow.

3 To proceed therefore in order, that Antichrist That Antichrist shall be one
singular man is proved by the Prophecy of Dani^l.
must be one determinate singular man, is proved by the prophecy of Daniel,
who having [seene in a vision four beasts, coming up out of the sea; the
fourth of which, had ten horns; amidest those ten, he see an other little
horn sprang up: and three Dan. 7. v. 2. 3.
of the first horns were plucked of, at the presence of 7. 8. 17.
the last: and lo eyes as it were the eyes of man, were in this horn, and a
mouth speaking great wordes] which vision an Angel interpreted thus to the
Prophet [These four great beasts (said the Angel) are four kingdoms which
shall rise up out of the earth] A little after touching the fourth beast, in
particular 23.
he said [The fourth beast, shall be the fourth kingdom in the earth, which
shall be greater then all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and
shall conculcate and break it in pieces. Moreover the 24.
ten horns of that same kingdom, shall be ten kings, and an other shall
rise up after them, and he shall be mightier then the former; and he shall bring
down three kings.] That this eleventh horn, and eleventh king, shall be the
great Antichrist, is clear by this description, foreshewing, that [he shall be
at first a little one, but shall become mightier then the former.] And that he
shall be one singular man is evident by this singular act of [bringing down
(or killing) three kinges] of the ten: which being once done, can by no
means be the act of his successor, or predecessor; and so this description,
can not be verified, of more then of one man only. The same is also confirmed,
by diverse other his singular acts of [ouercoming and subduing the other seven
Apoc. 17. v. 13. Dan. 11. v. 21. Chapter 12. v. 11.
kinges] the which can not be truly ascribed to any other but to the real
conqueror, and the like of many other actions, whereof mention is here to be
made for a proof also of other points.

4 In the mean season, this present doctrine is further The same is proved by
Christ's speech to the Jews, and by his Apostles writings.
there proved, and that most inuincibly by our Savior his own speech saying to
the Jews [I am come in Joan. 5. v. 43.
the name of my Father, and you receive me not; if an other shall come in his
own name, him you will receiue] where our Lord expostulating with the blind and
wilful Jews, for not receiving him as their true Messiah, by way of comparing
himself with an other, urges the different manner of their coming, and
different effect, through their, as absurd, as malicious, preferring an other
before him; so clearly opposing one person to an other, that it can not be
understood but of one singular man, contrary to an other; saying on the one
part [I] on the contrary part [An other] Again on the one part [In the name
of my Father] on the other part [in his own name] thirdly on the one part [you
receive not me] on the other part [you will receive him] most plainlly
signifying him self to be Christ, the other to be Antichrist. him self one
Person [I:] Antichrist also one person saying: [An other] to wit an other man,
not diverse other men in order of succession. Likewise [my Fathers name] and
[his own name] not their own name, or names, lastly [me] and [him] not them.
Wherefore seeing Christ is one Person, Antichrist also must be one Person. Reason
also conu^nceth, that the Jews will not receive many, no not successively, but
one only singular man, for their Messiah. S. Paul likewise speaking of this
greatest Adversary of Christ, shows that he shall be one singular man;
calling him, not by his place where he shall reign, or have power, nor by the
office which he shall bear, but by his singular wickedness, above al 2. These. 2.
v. 3
other men, before him, or after him [the man of sinne] and [the son of
perdition] so designing him by this article [the] that al may understand one
certain man, distinct from al other men. In the same manner S. John
distinguishes this one notorious adversary, from others also called
Antichrists saying 1. Io. 2. v. 18.
[You have heard that Antichrist cometh] which he also expresses with this
Article [the] (in the greek text) and without Article tells of other
aduersarie^ his members and forerunners saying [Now there are many become
Antichristes] proving thereby that the last hour, (the last age, and state of
this world) was then already begun, because many Antichrists, forerunners
of the great Antichrist, who must come in the last time, were then come. From
which proof is firmly deduced, that the eminent Antichrist must be a singular
man, distinct from al other Antichrists, and that he is the head of them al,
and all the rest his members. Again the proper name which Antichrist shall have,
shows that he shall be a singular man. For albeit the same is marvelous
mistical, and no mortal man can as yet tell, what this name shall be, yet S. John
has plainly written, that it is comprehended [in the number of six hundred,
Apoc. 13. v. 18.
sixty, sixe] and that [it is the number (and name) of a man] not of an
office, nor of many men, but of one man. And withal has foretold, that [no
man 17.
shall be suffered to buy, or to sell, but that has the character, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name.] By which it will also appear, (when
this prophecy shall be fulfilled) both what his name is, and by the same name,
amongst many other signs concurring, Antichrist shall be known, to all that
shall not be wilfully blind.

5 Now for proof, and explication of the next point, That Antichrist is not
yet come, is proved by the signs that shall come before him, with him, and
shortly after him.
that Antichrist is not hitherto come, we may observe, that as his coming, and
extreme persecution, shall be a sign that the end of the world shall then be
nere at hand: for our Savior says [Immediatly after the Mat. 24. v. 29. 33.
tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened etc] and concluding
faith: [when ye shall see these things, know ye that it is nigh, even at the
doares.] So our experience that the end of the world is not yet come, is a
demonstratiue sign that Antichrist is not come many hundred years since:
according to the common opinion of Protestants, who generally say, that he was
revealed above a thousand years ago, either in the time of S. Gregory the
great, or straight after: about the six hundred year of Christ. But let us
also consider of other signs, as This world shall end shortly after Antichrist.
well coming before Antichrist, as occurring together with him: which are also
for most part, signs of the 2. These. 2. v. 7.
nere approaching consummation of the world. One The Roman Empire shall be
utterly destroyed before Antichrist come.
sign of them both, is by S. Paul's doctrine, the destruction of the Roman
Empire, which, though much decayed, is not hitherto destroyed [nor (as the
Apostle speaks) taken away.] For the plain sense of which mistical words,
seeing S. Paul remitted the Thessalonians [to that which he had told them before
when he was with them] we also remitte the reader to other larger discourses
written of this matter. The Gospel shall be preached in all the earth.
An other sign which must come before the end Mat. 24. v. 14.
of the world, our Savior foretells, that [his Gospel of the kingdom, shall
be preached to the whole world, for a testimony to al Nations. and then shall
come the consummation.] And in the very next words Abomination of desolation
shall be in Antichrists time.
interposeth an other sign, nearer adjoined to the 15. 21.
end of the world: which is [ the Abomination of desolation] and extreme
persecution [such as never was before, nor shall be after] which can be none
other, then that which Antichrist shall make. Whereupon is clearly gathered, that
the preaching of Christ's Gospel to al Nations, in the whole world, must be
fulfilled before Antichrist come. Whereas therefore it is certain, that in a
great part of the world, now called by the general name of America; Christ's
Gospel is but very lately within these last hundred years first preached;
neither is yet to this day preached in many great kingdoms thereof; it is
hereby manifest that Antichrist did neither come long since, nor is as yet
come, at least is not yet renealed. But when the holy Gospel shall be
propagated in all the nations, in which hitherto it never yet was preached; then
may the great Antichrist be expected; and with him assuredly co^eth the
horrible great persecution, described by the Prophets, by Christ him self, and
his Apostles. 6 In the same time also of Antichrists tyranical Enoch, and
Elias, shall preach in the time of Antichrist.
reign; Enoch and Elias shall come again amongst mortal men, resist his most
wicked doctrine, and mantaine the truth of Christ's Gospel. As the holy
Scriptures do clearly witness of Enoch. Moses Genesis 5. v. 24.
(writing that the other first Patriarchs dyed) says that [he walked with
God, and was seen no more, because God took him.] Agreeable whereto the Auctor
of Ecclesiasticus writes, that [Enoch pleased Eccle. 44. v. 16. Heb. 11. v. 5.
God and was translated into Paradise, that he may give repentance to Nations.]
S. Paul also says more plainly [Enoch was translated, that he should not see
death: and he was not found, because God translated him.] Of Elias it is
likewise written, 4. Reg. 2. v. 11. 1^.
that [When he and Elizeus going, talked together, behold a fyrie chariot, and
fyrie horses, parted them two asunder; and ^lias ascended by a whirlwind into
heaven. And Eliseus saw him and cried: My father, my father, the chariot of
Israel, and the guider thereof. And he saw him no more. And [their Disciples 16.
17.
sent fifty men, who, when they had sought three days found him not.] Of him
also it is written in Ecclesiasticus, Eccle. 48. v. 9. 10.
that [he was received in a whirlwind of fire, in a chariot of fyrie horses:
who is written in the Judgments of times, to appease the wrath of our Lord;
to reconcile the heart of the father to the son, and to restoare the Tribes of
Israel.] Likewise God him self says by the pen of Malachias [I will send Mal.
4. v. 5. 6.
you Elias the Prophet, before the great and dredful day of our Lord come; and
he shall convert the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the
children to their fathers, lest perhaps I come and strike the earth with
Anathema] By which prophecy it is certain, that Elias shall come before the
day of Judgment, called there [the great and dreadful day] Not at our Saviors
first coming, whereof the Disciples Mat. 17. v. 10. 11.
demanded; and our Savior answered [ Elias indeed shall come, and restoare al
things.] But concerning their expectation of Elias at Christ's first coming,
he answered them further, that [Elias is already 12.
come (mening S. John Baptist) who came in the Luc. 1. v. 17. Mat. 11. v. 14.
spirit and virtue of Elias (as S. Luke explaneth it) and they did not know
him, but wrought on him what soever they would] which the disciples then well
understood to be spoken of S. John Baptist. And so it is clear, that Elias
was not to come in his own person, but in spirit, at our Saviors first
coming; and that he is indeed to come in his own person before the second
coming of our Lord. And that this shall be performed in the time of Antichrist,
is further proved by the testimony of S. John, writing our Saviors Apoc. 11.
v. 3.
revelation made thus unto him [It is given to the Gentiles (that is to say, it
is permitted to the persecuters, Antichrist and his ministers) that they shall
tread under foot the holy City, forty two months: and I will give to my
two witnesses; and they shall prophecy, a thousand two hundred sixty days,
clothed in sacke-cloathes] what other two witneses can these be, but Enoch,
and Elias? who are so plainly recorded in the above recited holy Scriptures,
to be extraordinarily reserved alive, which must needs be for such an
important purpose: for that the necessity of the Church, in that most desolate
hard time, requires such preachers. Gods providence is never wanting; and al
these divine Scriptures are written, for the consolation of the elect, to
assure us of his divine protection in all distresses. Whiles therefore, these two
so special witnesses, are not come into the world; neither is it possible that
Antichrist should be come.

7 More proof of so clear a thing, may indeed to reasonable men seem
needelesse: but because our adversaries are so peremptory in auouching the
contrary fiction, that he is come long since, and yet reigns, we press them
yet further to tell us, and that by the authority of holy Scriptures, by which
only they pretend to try, and decide al doubted in religion, how long he shall
reign, and what manner of end Antichrist shall reign but a short time.
he shall have? The holy Scriptures to us are plain in this point, that he
shall reign a very short time: but three years and a half, and then shall come
to a most miserable destruction in the sight of the whole world. Christ our
Lord who is truth it self, has plainly foretold us, that his persecution will
be so extreme [that unless those days had been shortened Mat. 24. v. 21. 22.
Apoc. 17. v. 10.
(by Gods sweet providence) no flesh should be saved: but for the elect the
days shall be shortened.] which words alone, though they be spoken in general,
do clearly convince their folly that dare avouch Antichrists persecution, to
have already continued a thousand years; neither know they how long it It
shall be only three years and a half.
may endure. Moreover other sacred textes in particular, describe the space of
his persecution, to be but three years and a half. In the prophecy of Daniel,
it is foreshewed, that [the last springing Dan. 7. v. 25.
horn of the fourth beast] to wit, that king which shall subdue ten kings,
shall be suffered [to speak words against the high one; and to destroy the
Saints of the Highest (persecute the faithful) even to a time, and times, and
half atime] for that by one time, he signifies one year, is gathered by his
like prophecy, concerning the transfiguring of Nabuchodonosor into the shape
of a beast, the space of seven years, which he expressed by the term of
[seauen Chapter 4. v. 13. Chapter 12. v. 7. 22.
times] and by the same words, he also describes the continuance of Antiochus
his persecution, who was a figure of Antichrist saying [it should be unto a
time, and times, and half a time.] So likewise the Apoc. 1^. v. 14.
Angel signified to S. John, that [the woman (the Church of Christ) shall be
nourished in the desert, for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face
of the serpent] which is yet more plainly expressed by the Chapter 11. v. 2. Chapter
13. v. 5. Dan. 12. v. 11.
number of [fourtie two monethes] which are just three years and a half. And
by the number of days, the Prophet Daniel saying: that [from the time, when
the continual Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination of desolation
set up, a thousand two hundred, ninety daies] which make very nere three
years and a half. Our Lord also saying, that his Apoc. 11. v. 3. Chapter 12. v. 6.
[two witnesses, whom he will send, shall prophecy a thousand two hundred sixty
daies] And S. John saw in his vision, that the woman, whom the dragon would
devour, shall be fed in the wilderness, (the Church in her most distressed
state) a thousand two hundred sixty days.] Which so exact agreement, in number
of days shows well that the afflicted Church shall especially be comforted and
strengthened against Antichrist, by these two extraordinary servants of God,
the Patriarch Euoch, and the Prophet Elias. As for the other thirty days of
Antichrists reign, longer then their preaching, no man may need to doubt,
but the Church shall also be protected, conserved, and more and more sanctified,
by her Spouse our Savior, whose hand is never weakened.

8 These being the principal things, necessary for It is probable that
Antichrist shall be a Jew borne.
al Christians to know concerning Antichrist, that he shall be one singular man,
and that he is not come into the world: it may suffice our present purpose,
as well for more ample declaration of the same, as for further notice of his
badde qualities, and al circumstances of his person; to observe also, that it
is very probable, but not certain, he shall be a Jew borne, which will make the
Jews more ready to receine him; probable also, that he shall be of the Tribe
of Dan; as it may seem by the prophecy of Jacob saying: [Be Genesis 49. v. 17.
Dan a snake in the way, a serpent in the path* biting the hoofes of the horse,
that his rider may fall backward.] And for that in the recital of the Tribes of
Israel in the Apocalipse, where, of every one of the Apoc. 7. v. 4. etc.
other Tribes, S. John had heard [that twelve thousand were signed] the Tribe
of Dan is omitted. what soever is the meaning of the former prophecy, and of
this Mystery; it is certain by the holy Scriptures It is certain that the
Jews will receive him.
that the Jews will receive him for their Christ, in Hebrew called Messiah.
Daniel calls Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 11. v. 22.
or rather him that was prefigured which is Antichrist [Prince of the league]
For this Antiochus was their utter enemy, and had not any league with the
Jews. Most expressly our Savior said to the Jews, that [they will receive that
other man (his Joan. 5. v. 43.
opposite) which will come in his own name] S. Paul testifying the same thing,
yeldeth the reason, that God in punishment of their sin, in refusing, and
impugning Christ our Savior, who came in the name of his Father, will suffer
them [to believe lying 2. These. 2. v. 11. 12.
that al may be judged which have not believed the truth, but have consented to
iniquitie] As when they cried with open mouth before Pilate [Crucifie him, Mat.
27. v. 22. 23. 25. Io. 19. v. 12. 15.
crucify him: his blood be upon us, and upon our children; If thou release
this man, thou art not Cesars friend: we have no king but Caesar:] And for their
in^eterate malice against Christ and Christians. Which just punishment, the
Royal Prophet foreseing, in form of prayer, prophesied thus of them saying:
[Appoint Ps. 9. v. 11.
o Lord a Law* geuer over them, that the Gentiles may know that they are men.]
The same thing also Zacharias foretells saying: [I will raise up a Pastor
Zach. 1^. v. 16.
says our Lord in the land, which shall not visit things forsaken, the thing
dispersed he shall not seek, and the broken he shall not heal, and that which
stands he shall not nourish; and he shall eat the flesh of the fat ones, and
their hoofes he shall dissolve.]

9 It is also certain that he shall have a proper name, Apoc. 13. v. 18. Ibid.
v. 16. 17.
He shall have a proper name And a special character.
which is comprised [in the number six hundred sixty six:] But very
uncertain what that name shall be. Likewise it is certain, that he shall have a
special [ character, (badge, or coigniscence) which he will make al, little and
great, rich and poor, free men and bond men to have in their hand, or in their
forheades. And that no man may buy or sell, but he that has the character, or
the name of the beast, or the number of his name] but very uncertain it is,
what this character shall be, until it shall come in practice. He shall rise from
base state.


10 He shall rise from very base state, to exceeding great temporal dominions,
and power, and that through wonderful craft, and deceit: wherein he shall be
most cunning by the devils art, and instruction, so that he shall be a notorious
Oedipus, a Ridle reader, [Impudent of face (says Daniel) and understanding
Dan. 8. v. 23. Chapter 7. v. 8.
propositions] (hard obscure speeches.) His vile condition at first, the same
Prophet shows saying: [I considered the horns (the ten horns of the
fourth beast) and behold an other little horn sprang out of the midest of
them.] And having described the ruin of a certain king he says: [there Chapter
11. v. 21.
shall stand in his place one despised, and kingly honor shall not be given him:
and he shall come secretly, and shall obtain the kingdom by fraud.] The same
Prophet further says that [three of the first horns Chapter 7. v. 8.
were plucked of at the presence of this last little horn: and lo eyes, as it
were the eyes of a man were in this horn, and a mouth speaking great wordes]
which is afterward thus explicated [the ten horns shall 24.
be ten kings: and an other shall rise up after them, and shall be mightier
then the former, and he shall bring down three kings. And he shall speak
words 25.
against the high one] Further explaning his progress in enlarging his
dominion, the Prophet adds that [he shall lay his hand upon the lands, and
the land Chapter 12. v. 42. 43.
of Egypt shall not escape. And he shall rule over the treasures of gold, and of
silver, and in all the precious things of Egypt. Through Lybia also, and
Ethiopia he shall pass.] When therefore Antichrist shall have overcome, pulled
down, and slain, these three kings of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia, and have
conquered their kingdoms; then will the other seven kings, submit them
selves with their kingdoms, to his dominions As may appear by that which S.
John prophecieth of all the ten saying: [These have Apoc. 17. v. 13.
one counsel and force, and their power they shall deliver to the beast.] Thus
shall he be made the greatest Monarch that ever was or shall be in this world.

11 Where his chief Imperial seat shall be, is uncertain; It is probable that
his cheese residence shall be in Jerusalem.
though it seem more probable that it shall be in Jerusalem. Because the holy
Scripture says that [he shall sit in the Temple of God] By which may well be
understood, that he will in some sort repair Salomons Temple to please the
Jews, as king Herod did: And because it is expressly written in the
Apocalipse, that [he shall kill the two especial witnesses of Christ, in the
great City, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt. where their Lord
also Apoc. 11. v. 8.
was crucified.]

12 But whersoeuer his principal seat shall be, he He will reign tyrannically
in all the earth.
will dominire in all parts of the earth; and most tyrannically persecute, al
Catholic Christians: urging them by all manner of subtlety, and (...), to
renounce their faith; and to become conformable to his most impious heresies,
and Apostasy against al Christian Religion. Whereof also he shall be called He
will auouc^ four capital errors against the Church.
Abaddon, Appollyon, Exterminans, a destroyer, especially in these four capital
points. First that our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, is not Christ, wherein he had
some forerunners in the Apostles time, of whom S. 1. That our Lord Jesus is not
Christ.
John makes mention, and calls them Antichrists, Apoc. 9. v. 11.
and preparers of of the way to the Antichrist which comes, but was not yet
come saying: [you have heard that Antichrist cometh] And in confirmation that
he will come indeed, he adds [now many are become Joan. 2. v. 18. 22.
Antichristes] And a little after he expresses this special point saying: [who
is a liar, but he which denies that Jesus is Christ? this is Antichrist.] And
for this cause he will impugn, and also abolish all the ordinances of our B.
Savior; namely his Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance,
and the rest, especially the most holy Sacrifice: and will bring in place
thereof, Circumcision, with some other Iudaical Rites, keep the Sabbath day,
not our Lords day, nor any feast of our Lord, nor of any Saint. Secondly he
will avouch himself, to be the promised That him self is the promised Messiah:
Christ, the Anointed.
Messiah: And not only the Jews, but also the whole troops of the sinful
people, Turks heritikes, worldly and fearful christians, will receive him;
making that general re^olt whereof S. Paul speaks saying: that [euen then in
his time, the mystery of the iniquity 2. These. 2. v. 7.
did worke] that is, iniquity did then work in secret; as when heritikes
preach false doctrine in the name of Christ: But when Antichrist shall come and
shall be reveled, he and his ministers will teach iniquity and falsehood, openly
and pubikly preaching an other Christ [him that shall come in his own name] 3.
That him self is God.
Thirdly therefore, he will proclaim him self to be God, as S. Paul foretells
us [He will sit in the Temple of God, showing him self as though he were God.
^ Ibid. v. 4.
And fourthly he will arrogate, to be the only God; 4. ^e will deny the true God
the B. Trinity.
denying and rejecting, not only the true God almighty, creator of al things:
but also al false gods besides him self. For he will be the singular [man of
Ibidem.
sin; the son of perdition; the adversary which is extolled above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped] Fulfilling that thing, whereof king
Nabuchodonozor was but a figure [when he commanded his captain Holofernes, to
destroy the Gods of the earth, that he alone might be called God of those
Nations which could be subdued. And that every Judith. 3. v. 13. Chapter 5. v. 29.
Nation might know, that Nabuchodonozor is God of the earth; and that besides
him, there is no other.] But Antichrist will surpass all this so far, as
heaven is above earth. For that Pagan king was content to be called the only
God of the earth: but Antichrist will be accounted the only God both of heaven
and earth. For as Daniel nath prophesied [He will Dan. 11. v. 37. 38.
not account of the God of his fathers: and he shall be in the concupiscences of
women (carnally, and spiritually) neither shall he care for a^ie of the Gods,
because he shall rise up against al things, but god Maozim Yet secretly he will
adore the devil. by whose power he shall reign, and do al his vilanies.
he shall worship in his place] that is (according to the probable coherence of
this whole prophecy) he will glorify his own strength, as paganes honor
Jupiter their imagined greatest only omnipote^t God. For so Maozim signifies,
fortified strengthes and refuges. which sense is confirmed by this reason. For
that Antichrist publikly contemning both the only true God, and al false
gods; must and will secretly adore the devil, the great dragon, of whom he
learneth all this craft, and receives his force; for which he must needs do
him correspondent service. And so it appears by the next words of Daniels
prophecy saying [And he shall do it to fense Maozim 39.
(to fortify him self) with a strange god (to wit with the devil) whom he
acknowledges, and he shall multiply glory.]

13 By which means, he shall become the most devilish He shall be a most
devilish sorcerer.
sorcerer, that can be imagined, having all the devils skill and power; which
shall also be communicated Apoc. 13. v. 12. Mat. 24. v. 24.
to his chief ministets, according as our Savior has forewarned saying [there
shall rise false Christ's and false prophets, and shall give signs and wonders,
so that the elect also (if it be possible) may be induced into error.] And S.
Paul says particularly 2. These. 2. v. 9. Apoc. 13. v. 2.
of Antichrist, that [his coming is according to the operation of Satan, in all
power and lying signs and wonders, and in all seducing of iniquity.] S. John
also says: that [the Dragon will give him his own force, and great power.] And
foretells three special examples of lying miracles. The first, that [one of
the ^2.
dragons heads (most like the great Antichrist him self) shall be as it were
slain to death; and the wound of his death cured. And all the earth was in
admiration after the beast. The second, that he, or rather his chief servant (a
great nigromancer) shall make fire to* come down from heaven unto the earth, in
the sight of men.] The third, that [he shall make the Image 13.
of the beast to speak.]

14 Thus therefore being armed with all worldly, and And the most execrable
tyrant that ever was, or afterward shall be.
devilish power, he shall become a most execrable Tyrant [For his strength
(says Daniel) shall be made Dan. 8. v. 24. 25.
strong, but not in his own strength: and more then can be believed shall he
wast al things, and shall prosper and do. And he shall kill the strong, and the
people of the Saints (holy people) according as he will; and craft shall be
directed in his hand: and he shall magnify his heart, and in the abundance of
al things he shall murder very many: and against the Prince of princes he shall
arise: but without hand he shall be destroyed.] In the mean while to this his
savage most cruel purpose, [the devil having great wrath, knowing that he has
but little time] and Antichrist Apoc. 12. v. 12.
seeing some to stand constant against al his impiety, notwithstanding the
worlds applause, and multitudes serving him, he will leauie in all parts of the
world, and send abroad many huge armies [For Apoc. 20. v. 7. 8.
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go forth and seduce the
nations, that are upon the four corners of the earth: God, and Magog, shall
gather them into battle; the number of whom, is as the sand of the sea. And
they ascended upon the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the
Saints, and the beloved City.] In this prophecy we may observe diverse
things. First, that Antichrists armies shall consist of al sorts of men, and
diverse Nations, especially of such as are most cruel, described by [ Gog Genesis
10. v. 2.
and Magog] as the barbarous Saytirs descended from Magog the son of Iapheth,
and the like, with their Princes or Captains signified by Gog. Secondly, that
these armies shall be in all parts of the world [vpon the four corners of the
earth, ascending upon the breadth of the earth.] Thirdly, that [they shall
compass the camp of the Sainctes] that is of faithful holy Christians.
Fourthly of this it necessarily follows, that there shall be even in that
hottest and most general persecution, many visible good Christians, known
Confessors of Christ. Else they could not be compassed by many armies. but are
called [one campe] because they are al united by one faith, one Baptism, in
one Christ, and one God. therefore also here called [the beloved City.] Further
we may observe, that for the time permitted, Antichrist and his wicked princes
and peoples shall outwardly prevail against the bodies and persons of the
godly. Yet so, that the proud and insolenc pe^secuters, shall be excedingly
vexed, by the constancy of the good.

15 And namely by the most diligent, zealous, and True Christians shall still
resist him.
powerable preaching of Enoch and Elias. So Dani^l Dan. 7. v. 21. 22.
beheld in his vision [Loe (says he) that horn, (the eleventh horn which
sprange after the ten, and overcame them) made war against the Saints,
and prevailed over them, til the Ancient of days came, and gave judgment to
the Saints on high; and the time came, and the Saints obtained the
kingdom.] More amply S. John writes this very thing, rather as an history,
then a prophcie [It is given (that is Apoc. 11. v. 2. 3. 4.
to say permitted) to the Gentiles (the troops of the wicked) that they shall
tread under foot the holy City forty two months. And I will give (says
Enoch, and Elias, shall confirm their doctrine by miracles.
our Lord by the pen of S. John) to my two witnesses; and they shall prophecy
a thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sack-cloathes. these Zach. 4.
v. 3. 14. Cant. 3. v. 5. Chapter 8. v. 4. 3. Reg. 17. v. 1.
are the two olive trees, and the two candle-stickes, that stand in the sight
of the Lord of the earth. And if any man will hurt them, fire shall come forth
of their mouth and shall devour their enemies: And if any man will hurt them,
so must he be slain. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in
the days of their prophecy: and they have power over waters, to turn them
into blood; and to strike the earth with all plagues as often as they will.] And
when 7.
they have finished their testimony, the beast which In the end he shall kill
them.
ascends from the depth, shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great
City, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt; where 8. 9.
their Lord also was crucified* And there shall of ^ribes and peoples, and
tongues, and Gentiles, see their bodies for three days and a half; and they
shall not suffer their bodies to be laid in monumentes. And the inhabitants of
the earth, shall be glad upon them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
an other, because 10.
these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt upon the earth. And after three
days and a half, the spirit But they shall rise again after three days and a
half, and ascend into heaven
11.
of life from God, entered into them; and they stood upon their feet: and
great fear fell upon those that saw them. And they heard a loud voice 12.
from heaven saying unto them: Come up hither. And they went up into heaven in
a cloud; and their enemies saw them; and in that hour there was made 13.
a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, and there were slain
in the earthquake names of men, seven thonsand, and the rest were cast into a
fear, and gave glory to the God of heaven.] Thus writes the Apostle S. John,
and concludes this pagent thus; 14.
[The second woe is gone, and behold the third woe will come quickly] which may
be thus understood. It wll be a miserable grief and torment unto Antichrist,
and his adherents, that so many blessed Confessors, especially these potent
Prophets, Enoch and Elias, shall resist them. Secondly, that these two visibly,
shall gain the victory against them al, and against the devil and death* The
third woe will be, when Antichrist him self, shall quickly after be slain, and
sodanly destroyed.

16 Of which his final ruin, diverse Prophets have Antichrist shall then be
sudenly destroyed.
foretold. Isaias describing Christ's excellency, and Is. 11. v. 4.
victorious power against al enemies, particularly against Antichrist, says
[He shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth; and with the spirit of
his lips, he shall kill the impious.] Ezechiel says thus Ezech. 39. v. 3. 4. 5.
to Gog and his army [I will strike thy bow in thy left hand; and thine arowes
will I cast down out of thy right hand says our Lord; upon the mouncaines of
Israel shall thou fall, and al thy troops, and thy peoples that are with thee,
to the wild beasts, to the birds, and to every foul; and to the beasts of
the earth have I given thee to be devoured; thou shall fall upon the face of the
field, because I have spoken says our Lord.] To this just Judge Christ our
Redemer, thus says the Prophet Abacue, congratulating Abac. 3. v. 13.
his victory [Thou wentst forth, the salvation of thy people; salvation with
thy Christ: thou strokest the head out of the house of the impious.] To al
which accords the aduertisment of S. Paul saying, that [he which shall be
reveled, shall be destroyed, 2. These. 2. v. 3. 8.
the man of sin, that wicked one, whom our Lord Jesus shall kill with the
spirit of his mouth; and shall destroy with the manifestation of his Aduent.]
The same thing did the Angel reuele unto S. John saying [The beast which thou
saw, was, and is not; Apoc. 17. v. 8.
and shall come up out of the bottomless depth, and go into destruction. And
the inhabitants of the earth, shall meruel, seeing the beast that was and is
not.] 17 But whiles they shall meruel at the sudaine destruction Al his a^mies,
and folowers, shall presently fall to nothing.
of the great Antichrist, his whole armies, shall in like sudaine manner,
miserably, and most strangely perish. As is signified in the same vision [when
Chapter 20. v. 8. 9. 10.
they compassed the camp of Saints, and the holy City (says the Angel)
there came down fire from God out of heaven and devoured them, and the devil
which seduced them, was cast into the poole of fire and brimstone.

18 Finally, an other most certain and clear sign, Then shall the Jews
generally be converted to Christ.
not of Antichrists coming, but when he shall be come and gone, is the general
conversion of the Jews, who as many holy Scriptures do witness, shall at
last be converted to Christ our Savior. So Moses said to that Nation [In the
later time, thou shall return Deuteronomy. 4. v. 30. Is. 10. v. 22.
to the Lord thy God; and shall hear his voice. [The remnant (says Isaias)
shall be converted, the remnant, I say, of Jacob, to the strong God. For if thy
people o Israel, shall be as the sand of the sea; the remnant thereof shall be
converted; consummation abbridged, shall make justice ouerflow.] Likewise says
Ezechiel: [Thou and thy daughters, shall return Ezech. 16. v. 55. Mich. 4. v.
6. 7.
to your antiquity.] Also Micheas foretells the same saying: [In that day,
says our Lord, I will gather her that halteth, and her that I had cast out, I
will gather up; and her whom I had afflicted. And I will make her that halted,
into a remnant, and her that had labored, into a mighty Nation. And our Lord
will reign over them in mount Sion, from this time now and for ever.] Again
says our Lord (by his prophet Zacharias) [I will strengthen the house of Judah,
Zach. 10. v. 6.
and the house of Joseph I will save; and I will convert them, because I will have
mercy on them, and they shall be as they were when I had not cast them of, for
I am the Lord their God, and will hear them. These are the remains of the
Jews, that shall be again ingrafted in their own oliue] as S. Paul expounds
Romans 9. v. 27. 28. Chapter 11. v. 24. 25. Isa. 59. v. 20.
the Prophets, adding for the instruction of the Roman Christians saying: [I
will not have you ignorant brethren of this Mystery, that blindness in part has
chaused in Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles might enter, and so al
Israel might be saved: as it is written: there shall come out of Sion, he that
shall deliver; and shall auert impiety from Jacob.]

19 Which Mystery when it shall be accomplished, After al these signs the end
of this world shall be nere. But the hour, nor day, none can know.
then assuredly the end of this world will aproach. But of the very day albeit
some do conjecture by the prophecy of Daniel, that it will be [fourtie five
Dan. 12. v. 12.
days after Antichrists destruction] yet certain it is that no man, nor
Angel can certainly know it. Daniel him self says [I have heard, and
understood 8.
not. And I said (to the Angel) my Lord what shall be after these things? And
he said: Go Daniel 9. 13.
because the words are shut up, and sealed until the prefixed time.] The
Apostles also demanding to Mat. 24. v. 37. 38.
know this day our Savior answered, that [neither 39. Mar. 13. v. 32. 33. 35.
36. 37.
man, nor Angel can know it. But as in the days of Noe, so likewise shall the
coming of the Son of man be. For as they were in the days before the flood,
eating, and drinking, marying, and giving to marriage, even unto that day in
which Noe entered into the arcke, and knew not til the flood came, and took
them: so also shall the coming of the Son of man be. Take heed (says our
Lord) watch, and pray, for you know not when the time is. Watch ye therefore
(for you know not when the Lord of the house comes, at even, or at midnight,
or cock crowing, or in the morning) lest coming upon a soden, he find you
sleeping. And that which I say to you, I say to al, watch.]

20 Wherefore S. Paul admonished the Thessalonians, It is in vain to be
inquisitiue when the day of Judgment shall be.
not to be ouerm^ch inquisitiue, when the day of general Judgment, and
Resurrection shall be, saying to them: [Of the times and moments, you need not
1. These. 5. v. 1. 2. 3.
brethren that we write to you, for your selves know perfectly, that the day of
our Lord shall so come, as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, peace
and security, then shall soden destruction come upon them, as the pains to her
that is with child, and they shall not escape. But you brethren are not in
darkness, But necssarie for all to watch.
that the same day may, as a thief, overtake you.] Even so do I confidently
exhort you that shall read this Treatise, not to be curious to know, when your
own death and particular Judgment shall be. For your selves assuredly know,
that as death is most certain: so the day of our death is uncertain. Therefore
be you al ready [because at what hour you know Mat. 24. v. 44.
not, the Son of man will come] first in particular to every one; and at last
to al in general.

The end of the first Part.
DEO GRATIAS.
You may please, courteous Reader, to correct the faults with your pen, by
making it thus:
Page. 36. lin 14. conserved. 39. lin. 4. Lutherans reject. 40. lin. vlt. And
the last. 48. lin. 16. persons and cases. 56. lin. 8. this hardness consists.
59. lin. 33. part: especially. 73. lin. 12. their hearers. 76. lin. 31. he drew
nigh to. 77. lin. 31. conformable. 85. lin. 20. in the. 88. lin. 31. How long
halt. 128. lin. 21. inuiteth. 139. lin. 5. of pleasure. 142. lin. 11. actually.
145. in margin; al mankind. 161. lin. 28. Dele 4. 166. in marg. of his coming.
167. lin. 7. accept him. In margin; The same. 179. lin. 19. three Divine
Persons. 189. lin. 30. any other name. 193. lin. vlt. last night. 197. lin. 5.
Dele, natures. lin. 6. is most truly and prop. 208. lin. 24. his use. 210. lin.
4. hears him. lin. vlt. in margin, of squadron. 212. lin. 21. only. 213.
lin. 3. carrying. 229. lin, 11. of the word. 230. lin. 32. to true. 235. lin.
22. waters. 242. lin. 16. of things infinitely. 265. lin. 2. sinners thereof.
lin. 26. folded. 267. lin. 34. shall be. 282. lin. vlt. array. 295. lin. 13. He
saluted also. 301. li. 33. Phaleg, Reu, Sarug. 302. lin. 1. Aran. 303. lin. ^6^
presidents. 304. lin. 21. all the princes. 305. lin. 34. of Judah; causing. 326.
lin. 9. greater pleasure. 327. lin. 35. upon any one. 330. lin. 5. To him.
314. lin. 14. Generally in all. 350. lin. 1. yea that. 358. in margin. Art. 42.
369. lin. 25. then also. 372. lin. 2. and his sons. 373. lin. 2. wisdom cry.
379. lin. 12. his breast. 380. in marg. temporal prince 385. lin. 32. signifying
that the 386. lin. 12. but the other. 390. lin. 22. proceeds. 398. lin. 14.
life were. 408. lin 34. they had. 409. lin. 5. a chief man. 419. lin. 3. then
supplying. lin. 17. releasing unto him. lin. 32. by what power. 431. lin. 26.
reputing. 442. lin 31. bodies in a sort* 455. lin. 21. al judged. 480. lin.
10. witness. Of Enoch.
FINIS.

