A TRIAL OF THE ROMISH CLERGIES TITLE TO THE CHVRCH: By way of answer to a
Popish Pamphlet written by one A. D. and entitled A Treatise of Faith, wherein
is briefly and plainly showed a direct way, by which every man may resolve and
settle his mind in all doubts, questions and controversies, concerning matters
of Faith.

By ANTONIE WOTTON.

In the end you have three Tables: one of the texts of Scripture expounded or
alleged in this book: another of the Testimonies of ancient and later
Writers, with a Chronology of the times in which they lived: a third of the
chief matters contained in the Treatise and Answer.

A. D. Esai. 30. Haec est via, ambulate in ea. This is the way, walk in it.

A. W. 2. Tim. 3. 15. The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise to
salvation.

LONDON* Printed for Elizabeth Burby Widow, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Swan in Paul's Churchyard, 1608.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IT stands not either with my occasions or my liking, to make a long preface
to that discourse, which of it self seems to me ouerlong. Only give me
leave to inform the unlearned of some few things, which may further him in the
understanding of it. The manner of my answer is such, as I have used in my
former writings. First I set down the Papists Treatise word forword: then I
draw it into a right form of reasoning, that the truth may more evidently
appear: Lastly, I frame as direct and plain an answer to it, as conveniently
I can with shortness. If thou desire fully to conceive the whole course of
this kind of answering, I must entreat thee to have recourse to the Preface,
which I set before my answer to the 12 Articles; where the matter is delivered
largely and plainly enough. For the understanding of this present answer, it
may suffice thee to know what is the meaning of certain words of Art, as we
call them, which I am enforced to use very often. First then, a Syllogism is a
certain form of reasoning, which consists of three sentences, whereof the
second is drawn out of the first, and the third arises as a conclusion from
them both. The first of these three, is called the Proposition or Mayor: the
second the Assumption or Minor; both of them jointly together are named the
Antecedent: the third is termed the Consequent or Conclusion. Therefore if I
deny the Antecedent of a Syllogism, I mean to signify that both the
Proposition and the Assumption are false: so must you conceive severally, that
which soever of the three sentences I deny, that I take to be false. The
consequence is the dependence of one upon another: so that when I say, I deny
the Consequence, my meaning is, that the latter part does not follow upon the
former: for example, page 47. you have this Syllogism: Antecedent. Propos. If
faith cannot be one unless it be entire, then it must be entire. Antecedent.
Assu^p. But faith cannot be one, unless it be entire. Consequent. Concl.
Therefore it must be entire.


My answer to this Syllogism is, I deny the consequence of your Proposition,
that is, I say, it does not follow that faith must be entire, if it cannot be
one, unless it be entire.

There is also another form of reasoning, called an Enthymeme, which indeed is
nothing else but an imperfect Syllogism, consisting of either part of the
Antecedent, and of the Consequent. To this I answer, by denying either the
Antecedent or the Consequence. For example, page 177. Our Savior himself
cites some words out of that Chapter, and expounds them to be fulfilled in
himself. Therefore that Chapter is to be understood of our Savior Christ and
his Church.
To this Enthymeme I answer thus: this Consequent does not follow upon that
Antecedent, which is all one, as if I should have said, I deny the Consequence,
that is, I say, that Chapter is not therefore to be understood of our Savior
Christ and his Church, because our Savior cites some words out of it, and
expounds them to be fulfilled in himself. An example where the Antecedent is
denied, though the Enthymeme be not plainly set down, you have page 327. The
Pope is Peter's successor: Therefore he cannot err.
Here I deny the Antecedent, that is, I say it is false, that the Pope is
Peter's successor. And this may serve for sufficient instruction to the
unlearned, that they may be able to understand and judge both of the reasons
and the answers to them. It remains that I commend thee Christian Reader,
whosoever thou art, that unfeignedly desire the advancing of Gods glory by
thine own salvation, to the gracious direction of the holy Spirit, that he may
teach thee to understand and believe to the praise of his name, and thy present
and everlasting comfort, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

From my house on the Tower hill. January 20. 1607. Thine assured in the Lord
Jesus, Antony Wotton.

A. D.. 1.
A TREATISE OF FAITH, WHEREIN IS BRIEFLY AND PLAINLY SHOWED, A DIRECT WAY, by
which every man may resolve, and settle his mind, in all doubts, questions, or
controversies, concerning matters of Faith.

A. W.
THis Title is like the Apothecaries boxes and pots; which promise goodly
matters by the inscriptions, but within have either nothing, or some ordinary
drugs. A treatise of faith, showing a direct way, by which every man may
resolve, and settle his mind, in all doubts, questions, or controversies,
concerning matters of faith: makes show of instructing him, that shall read
it, what faith is, what kinds of faith there are; and (above all) what a
justifying faith is; how to be attained unto; how used, to the obtaining of
everlasting life. These principally, and many more like these are required in a
Treatise of faith; of never a one whereof there is any one Chapter, or piece of
a Chapter, in this whole Discourse.

Neither has he done that little he has done, either briefly; as the heaping
up of unnecessary testimonies, in matters not doubtful, in the very first
Chapter, evidently proves; or plainly; because, though in his Preface he sets
down what he means to prove, yet it is very hard for a man to apply his
several Chapters to the general matter propounded by him, as the handling of
them will show.

A. D.. 2.
A Table or brief summary of the whole treatise.

Chap. 1. That faith is absolutely necessary to salvation. Chap. 2. That this
faith is but one. Chap. 3. That this one faith must be infallible. Chap. 4.
That this one infallible faith must be entire. Chap. 5. That Almighty God has
provided some sufficient means whereby all sorts of men, may at all times,
learn this one infallible, and entire faith. Chap. 6. What conditions or
properties are requisite, in this rule or means, provided by Almighty God.
Chap. 7. That Scripture alone, cannot be this rule or means. Chap. 8. That no
natural wit of man, or humane learning, either by interpreting Scripture or
otherwise, can be this rule of faith. Chap. 9. That private spirit cannot be
this rule. Chap. 10. That the doctrine or teaching of the true Church of
Christ, is the rule or means, whereby all men must learn the true faith. Chap.
11. That this true Church of Christ, of which we must learn the true faith, is
always to continue, without interruption, until the worlds end. Chap. 12.
That this same Church must always be visible. Chap. 13. How we should discern
or know, which company of men is this true visible Church, of which we must
learn true faith. Chap. 14. That those Notes or marks which heretics
assign: to wit, true doctrine of faith, and right use of Sacraments, be not
sufficient. Chap. 15. That these four, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica,
One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, be good marks, whereby men may discern,
which is the true Church. Chap. 16. That these four marks, agree only to the
Roman Church. That is to say, to that company of men, which agrees in
profession of faith, with the Church of Rome.. 1. That the Roman Church only
is One.. 2. That the Roman Church only is Holy.. 3. That the Roman Church is
only Catholic.. 4. That the Roman Church is only Apostolic.
Chap. 17. The conclusion of the whole discourse: viz. That the Roman Church
is the only true Church of Christ, of which, all men must learn, the one,
infallible, entire faith, which is necessary to salvation. And that the
Protestants Congregations cannot be this true Church.
THE PREFACE.

BEing moved by some friends, to confer with one of indifferent good
judgment, and of no ill disposition of nature; though very earnest in thaet
religion which he did profess: I was desirous to do my best endeavors, to let
him plainly see, that the Catholic Roman faith was the only right.

A. W.
Being requested by some friends to maintain the truth of Christian religion
professed amongst us, against the antichristian cauils of this popish proctor;
I thought it my best course, first to answer in general to the whole substance
of his book; and then to examine every particular Chapter. In the former, I
first consider his drift and scope: then how he proves that which he intends.
His drift is to show, That the Catholic Roman faith is the only right:
wherein he craftily begs that which is in question; That the Roman faith is
the Catholic faith; and which himself propounds, as the second thing to be
proved by him: That those only which profess the Roman faith, are the true
Catholic Church. Neither can it be avouched by the authority of any ancient
writer, or by any good reason, that it is lawful or fit to join the term
Catholic (as Papists take it) to any particular Church whatsoever. There was
great strife about the Catholic Church upon earth in Austins time, which the
Donatists August. ad Bonif. Epist. 50. ad Honor. Ep. 161. de Agone Christian.
c. 29.
would have confined to Africa: but the true Christians freed it from that
bondage, and bounded it with no other limits then the compass of the whole
world. Let the Papists show, if they can, that in this whole controversy, the
Catholic Church was ever restrained or coupled to any one City, Dioces,
Province, or Nation, as it is now by them to Rome. If they cannot, let them
acknowledge, and renounce this their novelty.

A. D.. 3.
For which purpose, I did choose to let pass disputes about particular points,
and in general to show; First, that it is necessary to admit an infallible
authority in the true Catholic Church: by reason whereof, every one is to
learn of it only, which is the true faith of Christ. Secondly, that those
only which profess the Roman faith, are the true Catholic Church. The
which having proved, I did consequently conclude; that the faith and belief
which the authority of the Roman Church does commend unto us, ought, without
doubt, to be holden for the true faith.

A. W.
Indeed the best, and only way to auow the doctrine of the Romish Church, is
to lead men hoodwinckt in ignorance of the particular points it holds, many
whereof are so palpably false, that he that knows them, will easily be
persuaded to abhor them. But let us see what you show in general.

Thus you dispute: The general syllogism.
The faith, which the authority of the true Catholic Church commends unto
us, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith. But the faith, which
the authority of the Church of Rome commends unto us, is the faith which the
authority of the true Catholic Church commends unto us. Therefore the faith,
which the authority of the Church of Rome commends unto us, ought, without
doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
The conclusion of this syllogism is set down by you in plain words, there;
The which having proved, I did consequently conclude, that the faith, etc. The
proposition, or major is not expressed; no more is the assumption or minor; but
instead of them you have delivered the proofs of them, thus to be concluded.
First for the proposition; at those words: That it is necessary to admit an
infallible, etc. Proof of the proposition.
If it be necessary to admit an infallible authority in the true Catholic
Church, by reason whereof every one is to learn of it only, which is the true
faith of Christ: then the faith, which the authority of the true Catholic
Church commends unto us, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
But it is necessary to admit such an authority in the true Catholic Church.
Therefore the faith, which the authority of the true Catholic Church commends
unto us, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith.
Only the assumption of this syllogism is propounded, the rest omitted. The
proof of your principal assumption is at those words: That those only which
profess the Roman, etc. And (as in the former syllogism) the assumption
only is expressed, the rest understood. Thus: Proof of the Assumption.
If those only which profess the Roman faith, are the true Catholic Church,
then the faith which the authority of the Church of Rome commends unto us, is
the faith which the authority of the true Catholic Church commends unto us.
But those only which profess the Roman faith, are the true Catholic
Church. Therefore the faith which the authority of the Church of Rome commends
unto us, is the faith, which the authority of the true Catholic Church
commends unto us.
We see now what his drift is; how he proves that he intends: and by what
reason he confirms his proof. It remains that we consider in general, to
what part of his proof, or confirmation thereof, every Chapter in his
Discourse appertains.

In the 4. first Chapters he lays certain grounds concerning faith: in the
13. following he disputes the matter propounded.

First he shows the necessity of faith, Chap. 1. then he delivers three
properties required to true faith. That it is one, Chapter 2. That it is
infallible, Chap. 3. That it is entire, Chap. 4. In his dispute, the twelve
former Chapters, from the beginning of the fifth to the end of the sixteenth,
contain the antecedent, or first part of his reason, and the proofs thereof.
The seventeenth adds and enforces the maine conclusion.

The assumption of the second syllogism: That it is necessary to admit, etc.
is handled from the fourth Chapter to the tenth.

The proposition of the first syllogism: That the faith which the authority
of the true Catholic Church commends to us, ought, without doubt, to be
holden for the true faith: is proved by another reason, from the ninth Chapter
to the thirteenth.

The assumption of the third syllogism: That those only which profess the
Roman faith; are the true Catholic Church: is debated from the twelfth
Chapter to the seventeenth.

This is the general frame of the whole Treatise, as far as I am able to
conceive of it. Now let us examine the truth thereof. Wherein that I may proceed
the more orderly and plainly, I will first speak a word or 2. of some matters
that seem fit to be understood, ere I answer particularly to the several
propositio^s.

What the diverse significations of this word faith are, and how many sorts of
faith there be, I will inquire (as far as it is needful for this Treatise)
in my answer to the first Chapter: only we are now to know, that by faith and
belief, this Papist understands the matter or doctrine which is to be
believed. This appears in the rest of this Preface, and namely at these words:
Fourthly because these few plain points, etc, as also every where in his
Treatise; though sometimes (as I will show in due place) he take it otherwise.
The like I say of the word Church: which being diversely taken in Scripture, is
here to be restrained to a certain company of men upon earth, as this Author
himself shows in this Preface, at the place aforenamed.

Now then to answer directly to his principal syllogism; I deny the whole
antecedent thereof. Because it takes some things To the principal syllogism.
for a known truth, which are either false, or, at least, full of doubt. As
for example, that the true Catholic Church is a company of men upon earth:
whereas who knows not, that the saints, that have been, are, and shall be in all
ages, are members of the true Catholic Church, which consists of them all
jointly? That all the several congregations, which hold the true doctrine of
the Gospel, are one and the same Church. A doctrine (in his meaning) without
any warrant of Scripture, as it shall be showed hereafter. That there is
authority in a certain company of men upon earth, to require, that whatsoever
they deliver, be held for an undoubted truth, under pain of damnation to all
that will not so believe them: whereas God uses not the authority of men, but
their ministry, to the begetting of faith in them that shall be saved.

In particular I deny the proposition; because all the Churches To the
proposition.
in the world may err, either in some one point not fundamental; or some in
one, some in another. And therefore some things may be propounded by the true
Church of Christ, which notwithstanding are not, upon any authority of theirs,
to be held for true.

To the proof of the proposition set down in the second syllogism I answer,
by denying the assumption: That it is necessary To the proof of the proposition.
to admit such authority in the Church. The reasons of my denial are: 1: That
God has given no such authority to any company of men, since the Apostles,
or besides them; who had it severally, every one in his own person. 2. That
there is no necessity of any such authority, for the salvation of the elect,
or damnation of the reprobate. 3. That the Scriptures are left unto us for an
absolute rule, whereby all things that are to be believed must be tried.

I deny also the assumption of the first principal syllogism; To the
Assumption, and the proof thereof.
and to the proof of it, contained in the third syllogism, I say further,
that they which profess the doctrine that the Church of Rome now teaches in
many points, are members of the Church of Antichrist, under the Pope the head
thereof. But if, as you say, Those that profess the Roman faith, are the true
Catholic Church, how ignorantly and absurdly do your Monks In fidei profess.
anno 1585. art. 60.
of Bourdeaux write, in their solemn profession of religion; where they say,
that the holy, visible, catholic, and Apostolic Church dispersed over the
whole world, has communion in faith and manners with the Church of Rome? If
the Catholic Church have communion with the Church of Rome, sure the
Catholic Church and the Church of Rome are not all one.

A. D.. 4.
Upon which points, when he had heard my discourse, he desired me, for his
better remembrance, to set down in writing, what I had said. The which I had
first thought to have done briefly, and to have imparted it only to him: but
by some other friends it was wished, that I should handle the matter more at
large; they intending (as it seemed) that it might not only do good to him, but
to others also, that should have need of it, as well as he. Of which sort of
men standing in this need, as I could not (considering their miserable case)
but take great pity: so I was easily moved, especially at my friends request,
to be willing to do my endeavor, which might be for their relief and succor:
and to take any course which might turn to their help and profit.

A. W.
The title of your book professes brevity; here you say, that you had
thought to set down your discourse briefly, but have handled the matter more
at large. Either your Title or your Preface is to blame. Your Title is
justified afterward, where you say, that your course of writing is very brief
and compendious.

Papists talk of pity, who, without mercy or conscience would have murdered so
many thousa^ds by treason, and (as they thought) have sent them almost quick
to hell, souls and bodies together? It is not any pity of us, but your
slavery to the Pope, and proud conceit of (I know not what) merit, with hope
of making your part strong for rebellion or massacre, that draw from you these
goodly treatises.

A. D.. 5.
Now of all other courses, which have been, and might be undertaken; that,
which in my speech I did choose as most expedient for him with whom I did
confer, seemed best also for me to prosequute in this my writing, for the
benefit of him and others, and this for four reasons.

A. W.
I know not what he was, with whom (as you say) you did confer, but I am sure
his judgment was (at the most) but indifferent good, if such a course as begs
the question, would be any way liked of him. You undertake to show, That it is
necessary to admit an infallible authority in the true Catholic Church: which
you expound to be, A company of men upon earth. What Protestant is there of
any knowledge, but understands, that by Catholic Church we mean ordinarily,
not any company in this world, but the whole society of the faithful, from
time to time? But these gay shows of Catholic Church, Universality,
antiquity, unity, succession, and such like, are fit to deceive the ignorant;
for which purpose your discourses are written, and with who^ they prevail, by
the just judgment of God, who sends them 2. These. 2. 9. 10
strong delusions, that they may believe lies, because they have not embraced
the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

A. D.. 6.
First, because it is very brief, and compendious; and consequently such, as
every one might have leisure, and should not be much weary to read it.

A. W.
You deal in your corrupt writings, as lewd men do in slanderous reports: who
speak any thing, at adventure, though never so untrue, or unlikely. It is
hard but some men will either believe, or make doubt of it, at the least. So
all men read your writings, you care not. Though they, that are of knowledge,
and judgment, discern your falsehood: yet it is twenty to one, but some
ignorant fellow will light on them, that may be seduced. And this practice you
follow the rather, because you are, for the most part, out of fear of being
shamed by confutation; for that you are unknown, and know well enough, that
our answers to you, are commonly, and many times must be so large, that one
amongst many can hardly find leisure to read them. Whereas if the authors of
your treatises were known amongst us, and our answers applied shortly, and
plainly to the very point of the argument, that being disrobed of the idle
ornaments you cloth it withal, and laid naked to the view of true reason, we
should have as few of your discourses, as we have now of your replies, to our
refutations of your treatises; which are so few, that, in many years, it is
rare to have any second charge by you; unless it be in such a fight, as
requires no more but a brauado, without coming to handie blows.

A. D.. 7.
Secondly, because, it, standing only upon few, but most certain conclusions,
and grounds; is free from many cauils of the captious, which more ample
discourses are subject unto.

A. W.
To speak truly, and properly, there is but one conclusion in your whole
Treatise, as I have showed out of this your Preface. Against which we also
oppose one as brief, and more certain then yours. Your conclusion is, That
the faith, and belief, which the authority of the Roman Church does commend
unto us, ought, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith. Ours, That the
faith which the Scripture teaches us, is the only true faith. If you speak
of the several co^clusions belonging to the proof of the general, there are
(at the least) as many as there are Chapters. But if you mean the three
grounds, which you signify before, and repeat afterward, they are so far
from being certain, that there is never a one of them true, as you understand
them.

A. D.. 8.
Thirdly, because, the matter handled in it, is not very high nor hard, but
common, easy, and plain: and such, as may be understood of any, who, having
but a reasonable wit, or understanding, will carefully read it (as the
importance of the matter requires) with judgment, deliberation, and (which is
chief) with prayer to God, and a resolute good will to follow that, which he
shall find to be right.

A. W.
The matter is as hard, by your handling of it, as sophistry can well make it;
as high, as the deep foundation of religion. Yet I deny not, but it may be
understood by a man of such parts, and pains, as you require: and add
farther, that the like may be auowed of the true grounds of religion, as they
are contained in the Scripture: to the reading, and meditation whereof the Lord
himself has promised such a blessing, as your treatises, Psalm. 1. 1. 2. Joan.
5. 39.
if they were never so true, could not look for. Is not the fountain better
then the channel?

A. D.. 9.
Fourthly, because, these few plain points, which are here set down, include
all other: and whosoever shall, by the help of Gods grace, and the force of
these, or other reasons, yield assent to the points proved in this discourse:
must by consequence, without further disputing or difficulty, yield to all
particular points, which the aforesaid Church commends for points of faith,
and will be moved to settle himself in the steadfast belief of all. For if he
once admit, that there is a Church, or company of men, on earth, infallibly
taught by the holy Ghost, what is the true faith in all points: and that this
Church is, by Gods appointment, to teach all men in all matters of faith, which
is the infallible truth: and further, that this Church, which is thus taught,
and must teach us, is no other but that visible company, which professes the
Roman faith: then he shall not need to strain his wits in studying, or to
wast words in wrangling, about particular points of controversies, or to use
any such troublesome and uncertain means to find out the truth: but may
easily, and most certainly be instructed in all, by only enquiring and finding
out (which all sorts of men may easily do) what is generally holde^ by the
Church, for truth, in all particular points, whereof they doubt.

A. W.
If these few points be so convenient, because in the^ all other are included;
why should not our doctrine of the Scripture be as convenient, by the same
reason? Let us compare our assertions together. The first of yours is, That a
man must admit, that there is a company of men on earth, infallibly taught by
the holy Ghost, what is the true faith, in all points. The first of ours, That
a man must believe, that there is a written word of God, wherein the holy Ghost
has certainly taught, whatsoever is needful to be known to salvation. Your
second is: That this company of men is, by Gods appointment to teach all men,
in all matters of faith, which is the infallible truth. Our second: That this
written word of God is appointed by him to teach all men in all matters of
faith, what is true, what false. Your third: That this company of men is no
other, but the visible company, which professes the Roman faith. Our third:
That this written word is no other, but the books of the old and new
Testament. The proof of your positions, and the exceptions, you take against
ours, shall be handled (if it please God) in their due places; in the mean time,
if any man be troubled with those ordinary doubts, which you have buzzed into
the common peoples ears, concerning the uncertainty and hardness of the
Scriptures, let me entreat him to stay himself a while upon these
considerations. First that the books of the old and new Testament acknowledged
by us, are also confessed by you to be the very word of God; in the penning
whereof Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 12.. Dicuntur.
the penners were so directed by the holy Ghost, that they could not err.
Therefore whatsoever the means be, whereby we come to assurance, that these
books are the word of God, let it suffice all men, that both we, and you
agree, they are so. But I pray tell me: Are the determinations of the Church
any more certain? What ground have I, but the word of some men, that the
Church has so determined? It is not a matter so agreed upon betwixt us, as the
books of Scripture are. Out of question the ods is on our side. It is
doubtful, whether you Romanistes are the Church or no: it is out of doubt,
these books are the infallible word of God. But you will say, the Scriptures
are hard to be understood; as well because they are written in Hebrew, and
Greek, as also for the kind of writing. Are not all the Decrees of your
Councels, and determinations of your Popes Consistory, written either in
Greek, or Latin, or in the Italian language; in none of which one man among
ten thousand has any skill? And is there not as great reason to think, the
Scriptures are rightly translated, as your Decrees, Decretals, and
Determinations? Especially when as we (commonly) allege the interpretations of
the ancient Fathers, and learned Papists for the auowing of our translations.
But the Scriptures are hard to be understood, though a man be skillful in the
tongues. And are the Decrees of your Councels so easy, that every man may
understand them, who knows the language they are written in? Does not Bellar.
tom. 3 de Sacram. passim: and vbique.
Bellarmine condemn, and confute our writers, Calvin, Chemnitius, and other,
for not understanding the Decrees of your Council of Trent written in Latin;
which language they were as skillful in, as himself? If they be so easy, how
chance Dominic. Sotus in Apol. contra Cathar. cap. 2.
Bishop Catharin and Friar Soto, that were both present at the Council, and
heard the debating of matters, can not agree about the doctrine of it,
concerning assurance of salvation? which (as Vbi supra.
Soto affirms) was the longest and most troublesome disputation of all in the
Council: and therefore should have been best understood, and plainliest
delivered. Yet is it so propounded by the holy fathers, the authors of it, that
Vbi supra.
Catharin says boldly, Ambros. Catharin. tract. 1. Verba decreti aliter
plerosque accepturos, qua^ fuerat men's sancte Synodi.
he foresaw, that most men would understand the words of the Decree otherwise
then the holy Synod meant them. Was there not great contention within these
very few years, betwixt Christophor. de Cap sont, archiepisc. Caesariens^ de
necessat. correct. theology scholast.
Archbishop Christophor. de Capite fontium and many other Divines, about the
means of transsubstantiating the bread, though in his judgment the Council of
Trent makes manifestly for him? I forbear to say, that some points seem to
have been craftily set down of purpose, like the oracles of Apollo, that which
way soever they be taken, the Church may not seem to have erred. Neither will
I add, that Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. c. 12.. Quartum.
diverse matters are delivered by Councels, not as points of faith, but as
probable conjectures: which yet may be, and are taken by some of your own
Clement. Vnic. de summa Trinit. and fide catholica.
learned writers, as if they were resolutely determined for certain truth.
These things considered, I see no sufficient reason, why it should not be as
fit, and safe to learn of the Scripture, Canus loc. com. lib. 5. q. 4. cap. 5.
which is the infallible truth, as of any company of men whatsoever.

But you labor to commend to us this resting on the authority of the Romish
Church by some especial commodities, that shall ensue thereupon. The first
whereof is ease: the 2. certainty of knowledge. He shall not need (say you) to
strain his wits in studying etc. If ease were not too much delighted in by men
of your profession, there would not be such swarms of idle Monks, Friars, Nuns,
nonresident Bishops and Priests amongst you. But true Christians understand,
that it was not Gods purpose to provide so much for their ease, by giving them
leave to believe at adventure, hand over head, whatsoever it should please men
to enjoin the^; but that it is his good pleasure, that Psalm. 1. 2. ^ 119. per
tot.
all men should carefully and painfully exercise themselves, night and day, in
reading and meditating of the Scriptures. He is too nice and dainty a professor
of religion, that is loath to strain his wits to the uttermost, in the study of
any thing revealed by God in Scripture. What shall I say of him, that calls
conference and disputation about, even the greatest points of faith and
justification, wasting of words in wrangling: Ovid. Metamor. lib. 13.
Nec se magnanimo maledicere sentit Achilli? It is strange you should not have
the wit to perceive, that, by this censure, you condemn Lombard, Thomas, and
all your school men: yea the Pope, and general councels, Bellar de pontif.
Romans lib. 4. cap. 7. ad object. 2.
who are bound to use such means, for the finding out of the truth: and (as
Sotus. Apol. contra. Cathar. cap. 2.
Sotus says) did use them in a long and troublesome disputation, yet forsooth
neither the one, nor the other, at Cap. 16. sect 1. post. med.
least both together cannot err. No man then ought to refuse study, or
disputation of controversies in divinity, because they are troublesome.
Therefore, to mend the matter, you add that they are also uncertain: what can
be certain, but only revelation, if the true use of reason can breed nothing
but uncertainty? How idly and vainly did your schoolmen employ themselves: if
all their study and labor must end in uncertainty? What use is there of
Councels for finding out of the truth, since the help to be had of them, is
debating of matters by reasoning? Do we not find in daily experience, that as
flint and steel stricken together bring forth fire: so truth is, as it were,
beaten out by disputation? It is reported you make great shows of desiring a
disputation. I marvel to what end: If, when all comes to all, your auditors
shall still remain uncertain what is true. Shall I go yet farther? You tell
us the Church cannot err; we believe you not: you allege some places of
Scripture to prove it to us: we say they prove no such matter: what course will
you take? It is in vain to dispute of it: that is, (as you say) to wast words
in wrangling about it. See 12. Art. part. 1. art. 5.
For that is but an uncertain means to findout the truth. Have you not
brought matters to a good pass, think you, when you profess that there is no
means to discern certainly whether the Church can err or no, but only to
take her own word for it? Yea no means left to know that she is the Church.
For if you will again fly to the Scriptures; you run into the former
difficulties, and end as before in uncertainty. Who would have to do with such
unreasonable men?

But that you may not seem to leave us in uncertainty; you tell us, that we may
most certainly be instructed in all particular points of controversies, by
only enquiring and finding out what is holden generally by the Church for
truth, etc. You send us to the faith of the Church, and namely of the Church of
Rome. Which (say we) is only so far forth to be yielded unto, as it is
agreeable to the Scriptures. Neither do we say so only, but Ambros. in Lucam.
lib. 6. cap. 9.
Ambrose, long before our time, has said the like. We are commanded (says
Ambrose) to enquire after the faith of the Church, and that In primis quaerenda.
especially: in which Church if Christ be a dweller, Haud dubie legenda.
it is doubtless to be made choice of. But if the people be unfaithful, if an
heretical teacher deforme the dwelling; the communion of heretics is to be
avoided, the congregation must be shunned. And a little after: If there be any
Church that refuses the faith, and Possideat.
holds not the foundation of the Apostles preaching, it is to be left, lest it
taint us with some spot of Perfidiae.
unbelief, or unfaithfulness. Neither will it serve the turn; that you
refer us to that which is generally holden by the Church: for both the
general faith depends upon the particular belief of the Church, or Pope of
Rome; and is not to be taken for truth, because it is generally received, but
because it agrees with the Roman faith; as we learned before of your Profess
fidei art. 60.
Monks of Bourdeaux, who make the Catholic Church to have communion with the
Church of Rome, as the fountain of truth; and of greater authority, in their
judgment, then the Catholic Church. But let us admit that you desire, of
believing whatsoever is generally holden by the Church: I am half afraid, this
conceit, be it never so strong, will not procure the quietness you promise us.
The causes of my fear are these two. First, I may doubt of such a point, as is
not yet determined by the Church; for example, I make question of the Popes
authority above Councels, or theirs above him. How shall I most certainly be
instructed in the truth of this question? Enquire (say you) and find what is
generally holden by the Church. What if the Doctors of your Church cannot agree
about this point? That they cannot, it appears by your own doubting; Chap.
16. Sect. 1.
where you make it questionable, whether the Pope alone or the Pope with a
general Council be free from error. And Bellar. de Council. author. lib. 2. c.
13. 14. 15 16. 17.
Bellarmine is feign to take a great deal of pains, in answering the
arguments of diverse Papists, Nicol. Cusan. Concor. cathol. li 2. cap. 4. 12.
Panorm. in c. significasti. extra. de electio.
some of them equal to himself for learning, judgment, and authority, who
make the Pope subject to general Councels. But of this in due place. Say it
were generally agreed on: Could I thereby be most certainly instructed what is
truth in this point? May not all save the Pope be deceived? and perhaps he to;
without the advice and assent of a general Council: at least, if he have not
in his consistory, upon good deliberation, Abulens. in Math. 18. q. 108 and
alij apud Bellar. vbi supra. Christop. de Capite fontium de necessar. correct
theol. schol. fol. 53. b.
resolved of the matter? What shall it avail me then to know, that (generally)
it is thought the Pope is above any Council? Supposing this point were
generally held to be true, though indeed, as I said before, it is denied both
by private men and by 2. councels; that of Council. Basil. sess 2. and
Basil, and the other of Council. Constant. sess. 4.
Constance which deposed two Popes, John the three and twentieth and Benedict
the thirteenth. And Bellar. de Council. author. l. 2. ca. 13.. Deinde.
Bellarmine says, that to this day it remains in question, even among the
Catholics. Well, put case all men thought, as Bellarmine, and all such Popish
parasites would have it, what were I the nearer, as long as there can be no
certainty of truth, (in your opinion) where nothing is iudicially determined by
a Pope, and Counsel? The second reso^ of my doubt is, that I know not how to
find out, either easily, as you say every man may, or certainly, though with
some pains, what is generally holde^ by the Church for truth, in all particular
points, whereof I doubt. Shall I look into the confessions of several
Churches? Where are they to be found? Shall I trauail into every particular
country, to learn what they hold of this, or that point? What assurance can I
get hereby, but from some special men? And it is a venture, but they will not
all agree in every point. What remains? Forsooth that which is all in all; I
must believe, Watso^, or Clarke, or Blackwel the archpriest, or if al these
will not content me, Gerrard, Tesmond, Hall, or, without all doubting, Garnet
the superior of the Jesuits, who questionless is as void of error, as the
Pope himself. Have I not, trow you, a sound foundation, to build my faith
upon, when I have the word of these equiuocating traitors, Priests and
Jesuits? And yet this is the most I can have in this case, if I be a man
unlearned, especially unable to read. Is it possible, any man should be so
senseless as to hazard his everlasting salvation, upon such an uncertainty, to
believe he knows not what, because a Priest, or a Jesuit tells him, that the
Church generally does so believe? But what if it fall out, as it may do, that
the Priests persuade him the Church holds one thing; and the Jesuits affirm
it maintains the contrary; how shall a poor soul either settle his
judgment, or quiet his conscience? Quid sequar, aut quem? Were it not a
directer, and certainer course, to hold nothing for truth in religion, but that
which is proved to us by plain testimonies of Scripture, or certain
consequence of reason, drawn from principles evidently expressed, or appare^tly
contained in the known word of God? The difficulties of translation and
interpretation shall be handled in their places; See 12. Art. part. 1. Art. 3.
and 5.
which also, as I showed ere while, accompany al your writings of private men,
Popes or Councels. Now then if their be many particular points of
controversies, whereof I may doubt, which are not resolved of by any judgment
of the Church, nor agreed upon by the learned of your own side; if I cannot
certainly know what is generally held for truth, by the Church, but as I give
credit to the report of a Priest, or Jesuit, whom I know to be partial in the
matter, because he is one of the Popes vassals; subject to err, because he is
a private man; likely enough to lie because he maintains equivocation; what
madness were it for me to forbear searching and studying of the Scriptures,
where I am sure the truth of God is to be found, and to lose my time, and
labor in seeking what the Church generally holds, and that of those men who
perhaps understand not what is held, but as they have been informed by others,
who may themselves have mistaken the true meaning of the Church in that it
holds?

A. D.. 10.
Of which points also, (If they be desirous) they may have sufficient authority
and reason yielded, by the learned of the same Church; though they should not
so desire reason to be yielded, that without reason be given, they would not
believe at all, or as grounding their faith upon the reason given: since
Christian belief ought only to be grounded, upon the authority of God,
speaking by the mouth of the Church, who ought to be believed in all matters,
without giving any reason.

A. W.
There is no sufficient authority for a man to ground his faith upon, but the
truth of God revealed. Hieron. ad Math. cap. 23.
Whatsoever is taught without that authority, is as easily conte^ned as
alleged. Therefore Justin. contra Trypho. p. 207.
Iustine wills him, that would be settled in the truth, to fly to the
Scriptures. And Tertullian de carne Christi. cap. 7.
Tertullian reiects that which is brought, if it be not in the Scriptures.
Origin in Cantic. hom. 3.
Origin says, Christ is no where to be sought, but in the mountains of the
law and the Prophets. Yea Hieron. in Mich. lib. 1. c. 1.
Jerome makes the Scriptures the bounds of the church beyond which she may not
go. Are you able to show this authority in all particular points of
Controversy, whereof a man may doubt? Are you not feign in many particulars,
to deny the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and to run a madding after
traditions? What talk you then of showing sufficient authority? The
bestauthority you can allege for many matters, is the Popes will, who cannot
err, as you ridiculously imagine. And this authority is all the reason you
have in diverse points; except such stuff as Durandus in Ration. Diuinor.
officior. passim.
Dura^d brings in his Rationale diuinorum officiorum; whereof many of your own
men are ashamed.

I had thought your Friars vow of obedience to their superiors, or, at least,
the Constitut. Jesuit. par. 3. cap. 1. Maffae. lib. 3. cap. 7. Jesuit. Catech.
lib. 2, cap. 17.
Jesuits special vow of blind fold obedience, head been the height of all
perfection in this life: but I perceive now, that there is a greater opinion of
holiness in these vows, then there is cause why. For you tie the obedience of
every Christian in such sort to the authority of the Church, and indeed, of
his particular pastor, yea of every Priest, or Jesuit, that comes licenced by
Blackwell, or some new Garnet, that be must believe, without enquiring any
reason, whatsoever such a fellow shall deliver to him for truth. This is the
obedience, one of your Cardinals speaks of. Obedience without reason (says
Nicol. Cusanus. excitat. lib. 6. vbi ecclesia.
Cusan) is full and perfect obedience, namely when a man yields obedience,
without requiring any reason; as Iumentum.
a beast (horse or other) obeies his master. So does your Popish Clergy use
the people, as men do their Asses; make them bear, and do what they list, yea
even to the attempting of most horrible and incredible treasons against their
Sovereign and country. I will not now dispute what agreement there is betwixt
faith and reason; nor whether of them is the former; nor, in what case, a man
may require reason; only that no man may conceive amiss of our doctrine,
concerning our demanding of proof for that we are enjoined to believe; he is
to understand, that we ask no farther proof, but to be persuaded that the
point delivered to us, is warranted by Scripture. Let it be never so much in
(seeming) contrary to reason, if it be agreeable to Scripture, we hold our
selves bound in conscience to take it for truth, though we be no way able to
answer such reasons, as we know are brought against it. Neither yet do we rest
satisfied, as soon as some place of Scripture is alleged in a doubtful
matter; but, here indeed we hearken after reason. Yet not to prove that true,
which we find affirmed in Scripture; but to make us perceive, that such, and
such is the meaning of the Scripture. Whatsoever the Scripture says, we
acknowledge to be absolutely true, so far as it is delivered for true by the
holy Ghost. But what the sense of the Scripture is, we think it must be
proved by the true use of reason, according to the certain principles of
divinity, and such helps, as observation of circumstances, understanding of
the tongs, conference of like places, and logical discourse, with such other
helps, reasonably afford us. But why should you find fault with demanding
reason, or not be most willing and ready to join it to your authority, since
(as Nicol. Cusan. Excitat. lib. 3. Sermon. perfectus omnis eris.
Cusan says) faith is not abased by reason, but exalted: even as water in a
vessel supports and lifts up oil. As for your proof, that therefore we may
not demand a reason, nor so much as enquire, whether the points that are taught
us, be suitable to the Scripture or no, because Christian belief must only be
grounded upon the authority of God speaking by the mouth of the Church: we say
that you avouch that which is not true. For Christian faith must be grounded
upon the authority of God, speaking by the pens of his Apostles, and Prophets
in the Scripture; not upon the authority of any company of men living, from
time to time, in the world. The Church you dream of, will, I doubt not, in
another part of my answer be showed to be nothing, but a fancy, and a gay word
to deceive the simple; when as by it you mean no more, but your clergy, or
perhaps your Bb. only assembled in a Council, or the Pope himself alone, who
can with no more reason be called the Church, then See 12. Art. part. 1. art.
5. page 63.
the head may be termed the body, or the whole man, if I should grant you,
that he is the head, which is both Reynald. confer. with Heart. Clamierus de
Oecumen. Pontif. lib. 2. arg. 1.
false and absurd. The Lord uses not the authority of men, to enjoin what
they list for a matter of faith, but their ministry, to beget faith (by
declaring what he has revealed in the Scripture) through evidence of truth,
and power of exhortation, testified and made effectual by the mighty grace of
the holy Ghost in the hearts of them that shall be saved.

A. D.. 11
The which brief and compendious resolution of faith, whosoever will (as every
one may securely, and (as in the discourse following shall be declared) must
necessarily embrace: beside the ease, he shall also reap this commodity,
that, cutting off all occasions of needless and fruitless doubts, questions
and disputes, concerning matters of faith: wherein unsettled minds spend their
time and spirit, he shall have good leisure, and better liking, then ordinarily
such unquiet minds can have, to employ his endeavors more fruitfully
otherwise; to wit, in building upon the firm foundation of steadfast faith,
the gold and precious stones, of Gods love, and other virtues, in practice
whereof consists that good life, which makes a man become the living temple
of almighty God: the which temple, Gods spirit will not only visit, with
holy inspirations and blessings oftentimes, in this life, but he will also
inhabit and dwell continually in it, both by grace, here, and by glory, in the
other most happy, and everlasting life.

A. W.
The security, that arises from resting upon the authority of the Church, is
freeness, not from danger, but from care. This latter, I confess, will easily
be wrought by this persuasion in the heart of a careless worldling, or a man
superstitiously ignorant, if he can be senslesly obstinate enough, in keeping
his eyes and ears from seeing and hearing the truth of God, in the Scripture:
for to such men 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10.
God sends strong delusions to believe lies, that they may be damned which have
not received the love of the truth, that they might be saved. But alas! what
shall this ease advantage them, but only that they may Prou. 7. 22.
go laughing to destruction, as a fool does to the stocks and whip? What
necessity can there then be, of embracing such a dangerous resolution?

Besides the ease, you tell us now of another commodity, that may be reapt by
embracing that compendious resolution of faith. Which before I examine, let me
here again put you in mind, that you condemn the greatest part of all your
Schoolemens writings, as needless and fruitless doubts, questions and
disputes; and call them unsettled minds, that spend their time, and spirits in
such matters. And surely such were many of the points they handled, having
nothing in them but vanity and vexation of spirit: as may appear (to name one
for all) by their articles and questions upon In 4. senten. did. 8.
Lombard and In 3. Thom. q. 73. etc. Vide Christop. de cap fontium vbi supra.
Thomas, about the Mass. But is any man to be found so shameless, as that he
dare call it a needless and fruitless labor, Joan. 5. 39.
to search the Scripture, for the finding out of the truth, in such matters as
are necessarily to be believed for the attaining to salvation? Does the neglect
of this duty bring a man good leisure and liking, to build himself up in the
love of God? What love of God can there be, where there is no delight in his
word? Psalm. 1. 2. and 119. 103. 127.
David makes it his meditation day and night: and preferres the sweetness he
finds in it, and the account he makes of it, before honey and the honey comb,
fine gold and all manner of riches. But what should I heap up unnecessary
testimonies, in a case not doubtful? Is it possible they should be Christians,
that make so small reckoning of the testament of Jesus Christ? Can he be said
truly to love his father, that never cares to see what his fathers love to him
is; but contents himself with so much knowledge of it, as men list to impart
to him; yea that knows not whether he had such a father or no, but only, as
other men have told him? We say not, that every man is bound upon hazard of
his salvation, to know every point of difference betwixt you and us, or to
understand the sense of every place of Scripture; but that all true Christians
must labor for as much knowledge, as, by diligent hearing, reading and
meditating of the Scirptures, they can attain to. Neither shall they, by this
study and endeavor, either abate their love to God, or deprive themselves of
the sense of his love to them. Nay rather both the one and the other shall be
increased when a man shall feel the work of Gods spirit in his heart, kindling
in him a desire to understand the mystery of his redemption by Jesus Christ, to
comprehend the infiniteness of the love of God the Father, and enlightening him
to conceive that, which, by his own skill, he never were able to discern. But
they that follow your resolution, never come rightly to vnderstant what the
love of God to them is: but if they will consider things advisedly, must needs
think God has dealt hardly with them, as with servants, not with sons; whom
he shuts out from the knowledge of his will, and view of his wisdom and
majesty, manifested in the writings of the old and new Testament; affoording
them no more of that heavenly Manna, but such chippings and parings, as their
idle and proud prelates will vouchsafe to cast them. He, that finds the love of
God toward him, in opening to him the true sense of the Scripture, in matters
concerning his everlasting salvation, does bear more true love to God for it,
then any Papist can do, that glories in his blind obedience to men, and makes
the end of his loving God the deserving of everlasting life, by his ignorance
of the Scriptures. As for true holiness of life, whence does it arise, but
from the feeling of Gods love to us; whereby the spirit of God which dwells in
us, inflames our hearts with the affections of kind children to so loving a
father? Can you imagine, that he, who has at most, but a kind of persuasion,
of I know not what holy inspirations and blessings of Gods spirit, upon some
Priests or Jesuits word, can love God as truly, and fervently, as he, that
knows by the truth of God in the Scripture, Romans 8. 9. Gal 4. 6.
that the spirit of God dwells in all Gods children, Romans 8. 16.
one of whom the same spirit assures him he is? Your Papist must live holily,
that he may become the temple of God; a true Christian knows he cannot live
holily, but by the holy Ghosts dwelling in him, and making him the temple of
God. And can it be a question, whether of these two loves God more deatly? But
I have been too long in your Preface. Now to the Treatise it self.

A. D.
A TREATISE OF FAITH, CHAP. I.

That true faith is absolutely necessary to salvation.

A. W.
TRue faith, whether we take it for an assent to the truth of that which God
has revealed, or for believing in God, is absolutely necessary only for those
which are come to years of discretion, not for them that die in their
infancy. Which I deliver, not by way of confutation, but of explication,
because I am persuaded you and I agree in this point.

A. D.. 1.
Whosoever has a true desire to please God, and an earnest care to save his
own soul, (the which should be the chiefest desire, and care of every
Christian man) must first resolve, and settle himself in a sound belief of
matters of faith: holding it for a most assured ground, That there is a faith,
which, whosoever wants, cannot possibly please God (nor consequently be
saved, since none are saved that do not please God.)

A. W.
Faith being so diversely taken, both in Scripture and other writings, it had
bin fit for him, that professes plainness, either to have set down the
several significations of the word, or to have showed in what sense, he
himself uses it, in this treatise. Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 1. cap. 4.. Iam
vero.
Bellarmine gives it four significations. Sander. de Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 2.
page 174.
Sanders, six. Andr. Vega qq. 15. q. 1.
Vega nine. Yea this author himself (as it shall appear) takes it not
always in one and the same sense, but diversely, as it best fitteth his present
purpose: especially in one of these two significatio^s, either for the habit,
or quality of faith, whereby we are enabled to believe; or for the object of
the same faith, that is, for the things that are to be believed. Example we
have of both in this first Chapter. Matters of faith, are such points as we are
bound to believe. That faith, which, whosoever wants, cannot please God, is
the quality of faith in the soul. And these diverse uses of the word, are
within the compass of three lines. To which I may add a third sense out of
this same chapter: where by faith, actual believing is understood; as in the
places of Scripture alleged. For i. is not the having, but the using of faith,
that justifies. So the^ where he says, that Chap. 3. e Basilio. cap. 15. p.
85.
true faith is absolutely necessary to salvation, his meaning is, that no man
can be saved, unless he do assent to the truth of those matters which God has
enjoined all men to believe: or, that there are certain points to be believed,
without assent to the truth whereof, no man can be saved. But what need was
there of this discourse, since both parties that were to confer, agreed about
this point without any doubting? Or if there were any doubt, it was on the
Papists side, rather then on ours, because Bellar. de Eccles. milit. lib. 3
cap. 10. ad object. 1.
they require not true faith to make a man a member of the Church, but only
the outward profession of belief. Yea Melchior Canus. loc. com. lib. 6. cap.
8. page 418.
the Pope may be head of the Church, though he believe not with his heart. And
therefore it may not seem strange to us, that a Iesuited Priest in Wisbich
castle should affirm, Declar. mot. inter Jesuit. and sacerdot. page 29.
That Homo non Christianin.
one that was no Christian, might be Pope of Rome. But such a glorious title of
the necessity of faith, makes a goodly show to the ignorant; yet let no man
deceive himself herewithall. For this faith, which the Papists in words so
magnify, is not that belief in Jesus Christ, whereby a Christian man, resting
on him for pardon of his sin, is justified: but only an agreeing to the
truth of Scripture. So that a man may be full of this their, faith, and Bellar
de Sacr. Bap. lib. 1 cap. 14.. Quod antem.
yet be everlastingly damned.

A. D.. 2.
This ground is set down by S. Paul himself, who says, Sine fide impossible
est placere Deo: without faith it is impossible to Heb. 11. Ser. 38. de Tempore.
please God. The same is confirmed by S. Augustine who says, Constat, neminem
ad veram posse peruenire beatitudinem, nisi Deo placeat: and Deo neminem
placere posse, nisi per sidem. Fides namque est bonorum omnium fundamentum.
Fides est humanae salutis initium. Sine hac, nemo ad filiorum Dei consortium
peruenire potest; quia sine ipfa, nec in hoc seculo, quis quam iustificationis
consequitur gratiam, nec in futuro, vitam posside bit aeternam. It is certain,
that none can come to true hap pinesse, unless he please God: and that none
can please God, but by faith. For faith is the foundation of all good things.
Faith is the beginning of man's salvation. Without this, none can come to the
fellowship of the children of God: because without this, neither does any, in
this world, obtain the grace of justification, neither shall ^e, in the next,
possess eternal life. Thus says S. Austen.

A. W.
Well might this whole chapter have been spared; especially since your proof
is no more direct for your purpose. For Heb. 11. 6.
Saint Paul, in that place, speaks of Defense of Refor. Catho. page 202.
a true justifying faith, which presupposes a belief of all things, known to
be revealed by God, and requires, that a man should not only acknowledge God
to be a rewarder of them, that come unto him, that is, Joan. 6. 35.
believe in him, but also, that he should rest upon him, as upon such a one:
without which, questionless no man can please God, though he assent never so
steadfastly to the truth of those, and such like points. But if you will needs
expound the Apostle of assent only, I must put you in mind, that by this place
you can prove necessity of faith no farther, then for the believing of those
two points he specifieth, That God is, and That he is a rewarder of them, that
come unto him. Indeed whosoever doubts of these particulars thus declared in
Scripture, can neither be saved, nor please God: but it does not follow
hereupon, that therefore there is a necessity of faith, to the believing of
other matters, many whereof have no dependence upon either of these.

A. D.. 3.
And the same might be confirmed out of other Romans 2. Gal. 3. Ephesians. 2.
Scriptures and Conc. Milev. Can. 4. Council. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 7. 8. Iren. l.
5. cap. 29. Chrysostom. hom. 32. in Joan. and sermon. de Fide and Char. Cyril.
Alex. in Joan. lib. 4.
Fathers, but that the matter is clear enough.

A. W.
The first of these places Romans 3. 22.
Romans 2. is (I take it) misquoted by the Printer, 2. for 3. In the second there
is not one word of faith: the Apostle there laboring to convince both Gentiles
and Jews of sin against God, by the breach of the law of nature, and Moses.
Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8.
The other two are to be understood of true justifying faith, which must needs
be more then assenting to the truth of that which God speaks; as the very
phrase of believing in Jesus Christ proves: which cannot with any likelihood
of reason, be taken for giving credit to those things which are spoken by, or
of our Savior Christ. It is one thing to believe that God is, Credere Deum,
(...): another thing to believe in God, Credere in Deu^, (...): though the
latter always imply the former, and the former sometimes the latter. Iren.
lib. 5. cap. 29.
Irenaeus has not a syllable of the necessity of faith, in the place which
you quote: and Lib. 4. cap. 10. 14.
where he speaks of it, he only shows, it was necessary that God should
reveal his truth by his Word, which was his Son; because, by the light of
natural reason, all things necessary to salvation could not be found out. This
knowledge Irenaeus tyeth to the Scriptures. Had it not been better for you to
have spared these needless allegations, in a matter that was out of question?

A. D.. 4.
Only this I will add, that when the Scriptures do require faith, as a thing
absolutely necessary to salvation; the common tradition of Councels and Fathers
do interpret, not only that there is a positive precept of faith, (for if it
were but a positive precept, ignorance might excuse in some case) but that at
least some kind of faith is necessaria necessitate medij, that is to say, is
ordained as a necessary means, without which, no man can attain salvation in
any case: and that in this matter, si quis ignorant, ignorabitur, if any man by
ignorance do not know, he shall not be known, as S. Paul speaks. 1. Cor. 14.


A. W.
This interpretation of the Scriptures meaning, in requiring faith as a thing
absolutely necessary to salvation, is altogether unnecessary. For who knows
not, that there can be no salvation without that which is absolutely necessary
thereunto? Therefore it was more then enough to name the common tradition of
Councels and Fathers. But such gay terms make a goodly show in the eyes of the
simple. But I pray tell me, what have you got by this learned interpretation? Is
there any Christian man so ignorant, as to deny, that some kind of faith is
ordained as a necessary means, without which men cannot attain to salvation
in any case? Sure, this can neither hurt us, who acknowledge faith to be
necessary, and (if you speak of justifying faith) altogether sufficient to
justification: nor help you, who allow no faith, but that which depends upon
the authority of the Church. But the Councels and Fathers say, that kind of
faith is necessary. What of that? Do they therefore hold it necessary to
salvation for a man to believe whatsoever the Church shall teach, though
without the warrant of Scripture? Can a man in no case attain to salvation,
without this faith? May not the very reading of Scripture, without any
ministry of man, be a means, by the work of Gods spirit in his heart, to
breed true faith to justification and salvation? The necessity of faith is
double. First concerning faith, as you take it, for an assent; it is not
possible for any man to be saved, that does not certainly believe, that Act. 4,
12.
there is no name under heaven, by which he may be saved, but the name of
Jesus; and that in him there is salvation: yet may a man attain to salvation,
that is not resolved of many points, which are determined by the Church, that
is, by any company of men whatsoever. Secondly, faith is necessary to
salvation, because no man can be saved that does not believe in Jesus Christ:
that is, that does not wholly renounce himself, and rest upon Jesus Christ to
be justified by his obedience and sacrifice. But the Lord has not so tied his
own hands, that he cannot work both these in the heart of who^ he will,
without some man to tell him by word of mouth, that he must thus believe. 1.
Cor. 14. 38.
The proof you bring out of the Apostle, is utterly false, both for the
translation and application. (...).
The word used by the Apostle, is no where to be found either in the passive or
middle voice, as it must needs be, if it should signify shall not be known;
but is merely active, the first present tense of the Imperative mood, or (as
Ramus calls it) the first future infect: and is as much in English, as let him
be ignorant: so do the learned of your own side translate it, Ignoret.
Vatablus.
Vatablus, Ignarus esto Pagnin.
Pagninus, Ignorabitur: pro ignoret. Caietan.
Caietan, Alions. Salm. comment. in Euang. proseg: 10 quinquag. 2. can. 17.
Salmero; so do they expound it: as if he should say (quoth Vatablus. ad 1.
Cor. 14.
Vatablus) If any man will not know these things, and will be ignorant, let him
be ignorant, at his own peril. I will not strive (says Cardinal Caietan. ibid.
Caietan, with the^ that know not these to be the Lords co^mandeme^ts: but if
any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. The same sense give Chrysostom. ad 1.
Cor. hom. 37.
Chrysostom, Theoph. ibid.
Theophylact and Oecumen ibi.
Oecumenius. As if the Apostle by a kind of ironicall concession should (as it
were) leave every man to himself, to think and do in those matters as should
please him. And therefore Chrysostom expounds it by that, 1. Cor. 11. 16
If any man list to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of
God. As if he should say, let him that will, refuse to be ruled by me, in these
cases: it is enough for us, that the Churches of God and we Apostles have no
such custom. It is further to be observed, that the Apostle speaks not of such
points, as by their being unknown, might endanger a man's salvation, but of
matters of less moment, concerning the orderly and decent carriage of things in
the public congregation. This Chrysostom. vbi sup.
Chrysostom notes, saying that the Apostle does not use thus kind of reproof
every where, but Quoties no^ magna peccata sunt.
when the faults are not great. But it is an exceeding great fault for a man
not to acknowledge the truth of those points, without belief whereof he cannot
be saved. Therefore in Chrysostom his judgment, the Apostle speaks not in
that place of the want of such a faith, as is so necessary a means to
salvation, as that without it, a man cannot attain thereunto.

A. D.
CHAP. II. That this faith necessary to salvation, is but one.

A. W.
If the plainness, pretended in the title of this book, had been truly
intended, and performed, we should not have had the contents of this chapter so
obscurely delivered. This faith necessary to salvation is but one. What
should a man make of these words? An ordinary Reader would think, you meant,
that there is but one kind of faith necessary to salvation; how easy had it
been for you to have said so plainly, to the capacity of the simplest? But it
is a humor in men (commonly) to wonder at the depth of that, they understand
not; and these great scholars may not abase themselves, to speak like us of
the meaner sort: and yet Aristot. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 2.
a wise Philosopher said, That a man should think as the wise do, but speak
as the people do. But we must remember, that in popery there is most
devotion, where there is least understanding. Well, let us take the words as
they are; once his meaning is, as himself afterward expresses it, that
Bellar. de Roman. Pont. lib. 1. ca. 9.. 8.
the belief of one man differs not from the belief of another: and that
Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 1. ca. 5.. Sed ista.
every faithful man believes every point, for one and the same reason.

A. D.. 1.
This faith (which I have showed to be absolutely necessary to salvation) is
but One only. This is plainly proved out of Saint Paul, who says, Vnus
Dominus, vna fides, vnum baptisma, signifying, that, like as there is but one
Lord and one Baptism: so there is but One faith.

A. W.
Faith (as I showed before) is taken sometimes for the habit, virtue, gift,
grace, quality, (call it what you will) whereby we have power to believe:
sometimes for the points that are to be believed. Here the question is of the
former, as any man would gather, both by the title, and by some of the proofs.
The first whereof is a place of Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 5.
There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism: of which I say first, as of the
whole Chapter, that it might well have been spared, considering that we
acknowledge the truth of the matter in the same sense, in which himself
propou^ds it: Secondly, I think it had bin a point of good judgment to have
forborne the allegation of a text so insufficient for the purpose: for the
Apostle has no meaning to show by those words one faith, that one man's belief
(taking faith for the inward quality) differs not from another man's; but that
all the believing Ephesians, and so all true Christians, profess one and the
same religion, as they worship the same Lord, and receive the same baptism:
and therefore ought to agree in peace one with another, and not Hieron. ad Ephesians.
4.
to make the gifts of God diversely bestowed upon diverse men, an occasion of
schism and division. This might you have learned of Salmer. in Euang.
prolegom. 14. formul. 8.
Alphonsus Salmero a Jesuit, who brings this place to prove, that nownes, that
signify qualities or habits, are taken also for the objects to which they
appertain: as faith signifies (says he) the articles which are believed by
faith, according to that of Paul: There is one faith. The like has Bellar. de
Justice lib. 1. ca. 4.. Iam vero.
Bellarmine. By the name of faith (says he, speaking of this place) the object
of faith seems to be noted out. So that the sense is, we all believe the same
thing, as we have been all baptized after the same manner. One faith (says
Catharin. ad Ephesians. 4. 5.
Catharin) because we believe one thing. And this interpretation is
acknowledged for good, by Lombard, Thomas, Caiet. ad Ephesians. 4.
Lombard, Thomas, and Caietane; though they allow of the other also: which
notwithstanding I am the bolder to refuse, because the places you bring out of
the fathers, agree better to the former exposition.

A. D.. 2.
The same is confirmed, with the authority of the ancient Fathers. Ser. 4. in
natiu. Dom.
Nisi vna est (says S. Leo) Fides non est, dicente Apostolo, Vnus Dominus, vna
fides, vnum baptisma. Unless it be one, it is not faith, since the Apostle
says, one Lord one faith, one Baptism.

A. W.
Eides integra magnit praesidium.
Faith that is sound (says Leo 1. ser. 4. in N^ti^. ca. 5. In qua nec quicquam
augeri potest.
Leo) faith that is true, is a strong bulwark; to which faith nothing may be
added by any man, from which nothing may be taken; because unless it be one,
it is not faith: since the Apostle says, one Lord, one faith, one baptism. Is
it not evident, that he speaks of the points of faith that are to be believed?
For to them may a man add, (I speak of power, not of lawfulness) from them
may he take; whereas the quality of faith seated in the soul, is free from all
such danger. The learned father had found by experience, that heretics from
time to time took upon them to diminish and augment the faith of the Church:
that is, the articles of religion; and therefore denies them to have any
faith, that hold not firmly and only the truth of doctrine, according to the
faith of the Church, agreeable to Scripture.

A. D.. 3.
Omni studio (says S. Hierome) Laborandum est, primum In cap 4 ad Ephesians.
ocurrere in fidei vnitatem. We must labor with all diligence, first to meet,
in the unity of faith.

A. W.
Hieron. ad Ephesians. 4. 13.
Ieroms testimony (wherein either the printer, or you read vnitatem for
vnitate, which is also the word in the text) is to the same purpose, that Leos
was. There are (says Jerome) many winds of doctrine, and by their blast, when
the waves are raised, men are carried hither and thither in an uncertain
course, and with Vario errore.
diverse errors; then follow the words you allege. Therefore we must labor
with all diligence, first to meet In vnitate.
in the unity of faith then in the same unity to have the knowledge of the
son of God. Which last point is added; because Vide Hieron. ibi ad v. 5. 11.
of Sabellius, who denied the distinction of the persons, and against whom
Jerome speaks professedly in that chapter, as also against Arius, Macedonius,
and Eunomius about the holy Ghost, and our Savior Christ.

A. D.. 4.
Hanc fidem (says Irenaeus) ecclesia in vniuersum mundum disseminata
diligenter custodit, quasi vnam domum inhabitans: and similiter credit ijs,
quasi vnam animam habens and vnum cor: and consonanter haec praedicat, and
docet, and cradit, quasi vnum possidens os. Nam quamuis in mundo dissimiles
sint loquelae, tamen virtus traditionis vna and eadem est. This faith, the
Church spread over the whole world, does diligently keep, as dwelling in one
house: and does believe in one like manner those things, (to wit, which are
proposed for points of faith) as having one soul and one heart: and does
preach, and teach, and deliver by tradition those things, after one uniform
manner, as possessing one mouth. For although there be diverse and different
languages in the world, yet the virtue of tradition is One and the same. Thus
says this Father. By whose words we may understand, not only, that there is
but one faith, but also, how it is said to be one; which might seem not to be
one, considering there are so many points or articles, which we believe by our
faith; and so many several men, who have in them this faith; yet One (says
this Father) it is, because the whole Church does believe those points in one
like manner. That is to say, because the belief of one man, is in all points
like, and nothing different from the belief of another: or, because every
faithful man believes every point or article, for one and the like cause, or
for mall reason: to wit, because God has revealed it; and delivered it to us,
by his Catholic Church, to be believed, For which reason every one should
believe, whatsoever he believes as a point of Christian faith.

A. W.
Iren. li. 1. 6. 3.
Irenaeus (as the two former) speaks of the articles of religion, many whereof
he had recited in Cap. 2.
the next chapter before: whereupon he infers the words, you set down. The
Church (says he) having received this doctrine, or preaching of this faith, Et
quidem in vniuersum mundum.
though it be spread over the whole world, keeps it diligently, etc. And this
your self acknowledge in these words, To wit, which are proposed for points of
faith; whereby you expound that which Irenaeus said, The Church believes those
things; which is all one with his former words in sense. This faith the Church
holds. So does Fevard. ad Iren. lib. 1. cap. 3. annot. 1.
Feuardentius one of your learned Friars understand Irenaeus, telling us,
that he sets the consent of all Churches, as a brazen wall that cannot be
overthrown, against heretics. Of the same things (says Feuardentius) they
think, believe, write and teach the same.

By this place it is manifest that you take faith as it is a quality: because
you distinguish the points we believe, from our faith, by which we believe: and
so speaking of faith in that sense, never a one of your proofs is either
plain or certain. But let us see how you interpret Irenaeus. He says, The
whole Church does believe Similiter.
alike: meaning that all believe the same things; not that the habit by which
they believe, is of like force and like strength in every particular Church or
man: which neither belongs to his purpose, nor is true. Intentio cumulatior.
The intention or inward strength even of the Catholic faith may be greater in
one man (says Sotus Apol. contra Cathar. cap. 2.
Domingo a Soto) then in another: and according to that increase, our faith.
Therefore your former reason which you give, why faith is said to be one,
namely because the belief of one man is in all points like the belief of
another, must be understood of likeness, in regard of the articles they
believe, not of any equality in the habit or quality it self: and in that
sense only does Irenaeus say that faith is one. Which (says he) no man by his
eloquence makes greater, no man by his weakness in speaking of it, less. We
see (says Feuardent. vbi supra. annot. 11.
Feuardentius) that Irenaeus vehemently urges the unity of doctrine and
consent of faith, which we affirmed to be one of the notes of the true Church.
Therefore whereas you said of Irenaeus, that he affirms faith to be one,
because the whole Church does believe those things (points of faith) in one
like manner: you mistake his meaning, and auow that which is untrue. It is
great pity, but that such as you are, coming in the name, and by the authority
of the Church, should have absolute credit given to that you teach, without
doubting or examining it at all.

Your second reason, why faith is said to be one, neither agrees with Irenaeus
meaning, as appears by that which has been already said, and in the latter
part is false too: for both it is a fancy of yours, that God has delivered it
to us by the Catholic Church, since the Prophets, Apostles and Ministers are
not the Catholic Church, but members of it: the last, all of them severally
and jointly subject to many errors though not fundamental. And Bellar. de
Iustif. lib. 1. cap. 5.. Denique quod.
the reason of believing, is simply and only the authority and will of God
made known to us by the ministry of men, the holy Ghost enlightening our
understanding, and enclining our hearts to believe. But of this matter we must
speak more at large hereafter.

A. D.
CHAP. III. That this one faith necessary to salvation, is infallible.

A. W.
If you had been desirous, that every man should understand you, instead of
infallible, you would rather have said certain, or without doubting:
especially since your self diverse times used the word in the passive
signification, for that which may not be doubted of, as being most certainly
true. In this sense you say afterward, in this Chapter, that the word of Christ
is absolutely infallible: and again in the end of the Chapter, that we must
account the word of faith absolutely infallible.

A. D.. 1.
This one faith, without which we cannot be saved, must be infallible, and most
certain. This is clear, because faith is that credit or inward assents of
mind, which we give to that which God (who is the prime or first verity,
which neither can deceive, nor be deceived) has revealed unto us by means of
the preaching or teaching of the true Church: as we may gather out of S. Paul,
when he says: Quomodo credent ei, quem non audierunt? quomodo audient, sine
praedicante? quomodo praedicabunt nisi mittantur? etc. Romans 10
ergo fides ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum Christi. The sense of which
words is that, since we cannot believe unless we hear: nor bear, unless some
lawfully sent do preach unto us: faith is bred in us by hearing, and yielding
assent or credit to the word of Christ made known unto us by the preaching of
the true Church, which only is lawfully sent of God: wherefore like as the
word of Christ, being God, is absolutely infallible, so also the credit given
to this word (which is our faith) must needs be also most certain and
infallible.

A. W.
The title and beginning of the Chapter speak of faith, as it is a grace or
quality; but the conclusion of the Chapter is concerning the infallibility or
certainty of the word of faith, as you call it, that is, the thing to be
believed: so do you run from one thing to another. But I may say of this
Chapter, as I have done in part of the former, that we acknowledge the truth of
both these points, and think your labor in proving them, altogether
unnecessary: only in the former there may be some doubt. For though it be out
of question, that we are to endeavor for the perfection, as of all other graces
of God, so of that faith, whereby we assent to the truth of that which God has
revealed: yet it comes to pass, sometimes by our infirmity, that our faith is
accompanied with doubting. And this (as we heard before) Sotus Apol. contra.
Cathar. cap. 2.
Sotus grants to be true of a Catholic faith: and proves it by the prayer of
the Apostles, Luc. 17. 5.
Lord increase our faith: to which I may add the like request of him, that
crying with tears said, Mark. 9. 24.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. But if any man desire to see a lively
pattern of this doubting, let him look upon David, as he describes himself
in the Psalm; Psalm. 73. 13.
Certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence
etc. Then thought I to know this, but it was too painful for me. And
afterward; Verse. 16.
so foolish was I and ignorant, I was a beast before thee. And yet the point he
speaks of, is a ruled case in Divinity, propounded Verse. 22.
by him in the beginning of the Psalm: namely that the providence of God
watches over the righteous for their good, and that he will be avenged of the
wicked.

That faith which some Divines call historical, is indeed such an assent, and
goes always before justifying faith; at the least, for the believing of so
much, as is necessary to justification. Which I note by the way, that no man
may be deceived with an opinion, that justifying faith is an assent to the
truth of Gods word: whereas it is quite of another nature, and has place in
the will, rather then in the understanding. If you had said, that God has
revealed his truth to us by the preaching of them that were in the true Church,
you had spoken more plainly and truly. But how the true Church, or any Church
at all, should be said to preach, I profess, I understand not. Neither can any
such thing be gathered out of Romans 10. 14.
Saint Paul, who speaks not a word of the Church, true or false. And to say
the truth, what a strange kind of speech is it to say, The Church is sent to
preach, when as only the Ministers preach, and not the Church: unless perhaps
John Baptist only for a time, was the Church: when he preached alone, before
our Savior was baptized. But this same Church is a goodly fair word, and
couers a great many foul errors, with the very name of it: The Apostles who
were they that God employed at the first beginning of the Gospel, both in
preaching and writing, were undoubtedly of the true Church, both in respect of
their election to everlasting life, and of the truth of the doctrine they held.
It is also true that God ordinarily begets faith in the hearts of men, by
the ministers of the true Church. But it is not true that such an assent as you
speak of, cannot be wrought in a man by the ministry of Schismatics or
Heretics, though they be perhaps, in neither respect, any members of the true
Church. Did not Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches, Nestorius, and many other wretched
heretics assent in general, to the truth of God in Scriptures, because they
held it to be the very true word of God? And might not men by their preaching
be brought to the same faith? For our parts, we make no doubt, but that, in the
midst of ignorance and superstition, many came to this faith by the preaching
of your Antichristian Priests, and so do at this day; yea we add further, that
we doubt not, many have (we are sure they might and may) attain to the same
faith (what if I say to justifying faith too) without any preaching, by the
reading of the Scriptures. For since it is partly the matter, that must argue
the Scripture to be the word of God, partly the majesty which any man may
discern in the manner of writing: unless it can be poooued out of the
Scripture, that the holy Ghost will not work by these upon the heart of him
that reads, but only of him, that hears a man expound this word unto him, I
see no sufficient reason, why faith may not be had by reading, where Gods
ordinance of preaching is only wanting, and not wilfully neglected.

But you will say, the Apostle tyeth faith to hearing. First, this is little
advantage for you Papists, amongst whom (til shame and emulation drove you to
it, within these last fifty or threescore years) no man could ordinarily
hear the word of God in any tongue, that he understood; and so all your
hearing was to no purpose. Secondly, if hearing be sufficient, where there is
nothing but reading, without any exposition of that, which is read; give me
some reason, why reading should not be more sufficient; since he that reads,
may easier understand, and better weigh that, he reads, then he that does
only hear an other read. But of this point I shall have occasion to say more
Chap. 9.
hereafter.

Now for the second point, that we cannot hear, unless some lawfully sent,
that is (as you understand it) unless some sent by the authority of the
Church, do preach unto us; first how shall this warrant the Apostles preaching,
of which S. Paul here speaks? For who knows not, that Matt.. 28. 19
they were sent immediately by our Savior, and not by any ordinary course in
the Church? Secondly it seems you fortet, what is written in Ruffin. histor.
eccles. lib. 1. cap. 10.
the Ecclesiastical histories of a captive maid, that converted the queen of
Iberia, she the king, and he his country. Theodorct. lib. 1. histor. eccles.
cap. 22.
What is recorded of Aedesius and Frumentius, by whom the Indians were brought
to the knowledge of the Gospel. How Eusebius hist. eccle. lib. 6 cap. 19.
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea defend
Origens preaching publicly, when as yet he was not allowed by the Church for a
minister. Which fact of his they maintain by the like examples of Euelpis,
Paulinus, and Theodorus, who had preached without any ordinary sending: And it
is very likely (say they) that the same has been done in other places,
though we know it not.

How little care you had of writing plainly, any man may guess by this one
sentence; wherein this needless word infallible is used in two diverse senses:
for certainty of truth, where you speak of that we are to believe; for
assurance of belief, without doubting, where you mean faith it self.

A. D.. 2.
Fides (says S. Basile) est, eorum quae dicta sunt, assentiens approbatio,
sine vlla haesitatione, cum animi persuasione de eorum Ser de Fidei confessione.
veritate, quae Dermunere praedicata sunt. Faith is a consenting approbation of
those things, which are said; and an undoubted persuasion of mind, of the
truth of those things, which are preached by the gift of God. Fides, (says
Saint Chrysostom) dici non potest, nisi circa ea quae non videntur, amplius
quam circa ea Hom. 12. in epist. ad Hebraeos.
quae videntur, certitudinem quis habeat. It cannot be called faith, unless
one be more certain of those things which are not seen, then of those things
which are seen. The reason whereof, the same Saint Hom. 83. in Matthew.
Chrysostom declares in an other place, saying: Superet sensum and rationem
nostram sermo ipsius (Dei:) nam verbis eius fraudari non possumus: sensus vero
noster deceptu facillimus est. Let Gods word (says he) surmount our sense and
reason: for we can not be deceived by his words, but our sense is most easily
deceived.

A. W.
These testimonies are more for ostentation to show your learning, then for
necessity to confirm a matter not doubted of. Yet I must put you in mind,
that these descriptions and commendations of faith are not brought by the
authors to condemn all as cast-awaies, that sometimes doubt, but to declare
what faith is in it own nature.

A. D. 3.
Since, therefore, our faith is grounded on the word of God, revealed to us by
Jesus Christ our Lord, speaking by the mouth of the Church, as he says
himself, Luc. 10.
Qui vos audit, me audit: he that hears you, hears me: we ought to receive
the word of faith preached by the true Church, 1. These 2.
not as the word of man, but, as it is truly, the word of God; and
consequently, we must account it a thing most certain, and absolutely
infallible.

A. W.
Our Savior Christ does no farther speak by the mouth of the Church, then the
Church speaks according to the Scripture, whom so speaking, whosoever hears,
without doubt he hears God; both because it is the word of God that is
spoken, and because God has commanded us to hear them that so speak. But
here again for a show, the name Church is brought in, whereas Luc. 10. 16.
the testimony belongs only to the Apostles (if you take it for them, that
must absolutely be heard, without all doubting of that, they deliver) and to
Bellor. de Roman. pontif lib. 4 cap 16. Quae verba.
every one of them severally, who doubtless is not the Church; or else to all
Ministers of the gospel from time to time, but not without that restraint, I
mentioned before, of speaking agreably to the word. If you will stretch the
place to other beside the Apostles, in that point of being absolutely heard,
show some reason why every Pastor and licensed Preacher may not claim the same
privilege of being heard and believed, whatsoever he teach. But that this is
absord, it may appear. because Mat. 24. 24.
our Savior Christ foretold, that there should come false prophets, who
always are to be discerned by their Mat. 7. 16.
doctrine. And who is ignorant, that the greatest heretics, had (many of them)
lawful calling in the Churches, and yet ran into monstrous heresies? Does
not Mat. 23. 3.
our Savior also will the Jews to hear the Scribes and Pharisees? what?
absolutely? If they will teach their own devises (says August. ad 100. tract.
46.
Austin) hear them not, do not as they say. But what name I Austen? Does not
Christ himself give the same charge? Mat. 16. 6. Verse. 12.
Take heed and beware of the leven of the Scribes and Pharisees. And what is
their leven but their doctrine, by the holy Ghosts own exposition? Iansenius
in concor. E^ ^^ang. cap. 80.
Iansenius Bishop of Gant expounds the place of the Apostles; and though he
gather from thence the power of the Ecclesiastical governors, yet he
restrains it to their inioyning of that which is right. We are to note
(says he) how great the authority of Ecclesiastical governors is; since we
must obey them, no otherwise then we must Christ, Recta praeci. pientions.
when they command those things, that are right. Do you not see your own
Bishops limitation upon this very place, you allege? The Cyrillus apud Thomam
in Catena. Irenaeus lib. 3. in praef^^.
ancient writers expound the place of the Apostles. Your Lyra ad Luc. 10. 16.
gloss requires devotion and reverence to the hearing of Christ's Disciples,
for the reverence of God, whose doctrine principally it is, which they deliver:
So that they, which preach not Christ's doctrine, cannot look for so much as
reverence. There fore true doctrine is always to be received, whosoever
deliver it, whether he be lawfully sent or no, and false doctrine never, though
it be preached by a Pope; who being no Apostle, can show no charter for his
being kept from error, though his prive, and your flattery, exalt him above
all save Peter.

A. D.
CHAP. IIII. That this one infallible faith necessary to salvation, must also
be entire.

A. W.
Whereas you say obscurely in your title, Faith must be entire, your meaning
is, that a Christian must believe all things appointed by God, and propounded
by the Church to be believed. Would you not have said so, if you had loved
plainness? What if I should ask you a reason, why the title of this Chapter is
not set down in the same form the rest are? Faith is necessary, Chap. 1. is
one, Chap. 2. is infallible, Chap. 3. But in this 4. Chap. must be entire. Can
you give me a sufficient reason of this difference?

A. D.. 1.
This one infallible faith, without which we cannot please God, must also be
entire, whole and sound in all points: and it is not sufficient to believe
steadfastly some points, misbeleeuing or not believing obstinately other some,
or any one.

A. W.
There are two things to be considered in your propounding of this question,
concerning the entirenesse of faith: in what sense all points must be believed,
and what it is to misbeleeue, or obstinately not to believe. Whatsoever is
delivered in Scriptures, is a matter of faith, because it is the word of God,
who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, and has propounded it to men for a
truth to be believed. But yet there is a great difference betwixt things set
down in Scripture: and that difference is in 2. respects. For neither are all
points therein true, in the like sense, Thom. opus. 3. in compend. Theol. cap.
1. Holcot. in 1. q. 1. ad 6. argum. princip. et in 3. q. 1. art. 6. prim.
neither is there like necessity of believing every particular. Concerning the
former, the general reason why all things in the Scriptures are true, is this,
because all things therein are recorded, and delivered by God for true;
therefore questionles they are true: yet (as once before I noted) only so far
forth true, as they are intended to be held for true by the holy Ghost, the
author of the Scripture. Whatsoever is registered therein by way of report, as
a story, is to be taken as true, only in respect of story, that we may not
doubt whether such or such things were done and said, or no. There is no doubt
to be made, but that the five books of Moses, the books of Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, etc. contain a true and certain story of
those things whereof they entreat. But in these books we have some worthy and
holy speeches of godly men: some lewd and blasphemous words of profane
wretches. The former are to be acknowledged for the truth of God every way. As
for example, it is true that Genesis 49. 1. 2. etc.
Jacob uttered those prophesies of the twelve Patriarks his sons; and it is
also true, that those prophesies of his, were the very truth of God. It is as
true, that 2. Reg. 18. 30 and 19. 4. 6.
Rabshaketh delivered those blasphemous threanings against the Lord and his
people; but it is not true, that those words came from God, as Jacobs did: so
Jacobs were to be taken as every way true; Rabshakeths only as truly reported
from his mouth.

Now that all points are not alike necessary to salvation, no man can make any
question, if he remember that a man may be saved, though he have never heard of
many things that are recorded in the Scripture: which is the case generally of
the greatest part both of Protestants and Papists, and has always been the
case of Christians in all ages. As for misbeleeuing, or not believing
obstinately, one of these differs a great deal from the other, and the latter
of the two was needless, if the former can be proved. For if mistaking some
point of doctrine be damnable, it is out of doubt that obstinate refusing to
believe the same point, must needs make a man much more liable to damnation.

But indeed misbeleeuing is not in all points so dangerous, though of it self
as a sin, it is subject to be punished Romans 6. 23.
with the eternal wrath of God in hell fire. To make plain that I say, A man
may misunderstand diverse places of Scripture, and thereupon hold that to be
true which is false, and yet be saved for all this error. For example, that I
may give insta^ce in a matter of no small importance. How many Christians, yea
how many great Divines have bin deceived, in the understanding of Mat. 1. 1. 2.
etc. Luke 3. 23.
our Savior Christ's genealogy, and by their misconceiuing of the Evangelists,
have fallen into no small error, that Solomon was the father of the Messiah? By
which opinion (to omit many other things that I may not be too long) the truth
of a prophecy uttered by Ier. 17. 29. 30
Jeremy, which makes Ieconiah childlesse, has bin ouerthrown; from whom our
Savior must needs have descended, if he had been the son of Solomon, as some
erroneously gather out of Saint Matthew; and not of Luke 3. 31.
Nathan, as it is manifest by S. Luke, he was. Shall I exemplify this matter
in another point? The Apostles themselves for a long time, even Act. 1. 6.
til after the ascension of our Savior into heaven, and and 2. 2. 3.
till the coming of the holy Ghost upon them, looked for the establishing of
an earthly kingdom in this world by their Lord and master. Did they not slip
into this error by misbeleeuing the Psalm. 72. 17. Dan. 2. 44.
prophesies of the old testament, concerning the Messiahs kingdom? yet were
they out of danger of damnation, and in the state of grace all that time,
because Joan. 1. 29. and 6. 68. 69.
they rested on our Savior Christ, as the spiritual Savior of their souls,
that should tak away their sins, and bring them to everlasting life in
heaven, though they erroneously hoped for a temporal kingdom also. The other
branch of this distribution, which concerns obstinately not believing, though
it be a far greater sin, then the former: yet it is not such, that it does
absolutely cut a man off from salvation. This obstinate refusal to believe, is
either of ignorance, or of wilfulness: if a Christian stand stiffly in some
false opinion, which he certainly holds to be true, in his error; the fault
of his judgment may continue, without the damnation of his soul. If wilfully
he refuse to believe that truth of God, which he discerns, no man can promise
him any hope of salvation, without true repentance. This I speak upon a
supposition, that it is possible for a man not to believe that, which he
perceives to be true, though indeed there is a contradiction implied herein.
For to believe is to assent to the truth; which a man cannot choose but do, that
sees it: that is, no man can think the same thing, in the same respects, true
and false. But this not believing in such a case, is a frowardness of the
heart, not yielding to acknowledge that he knows, rather then a false opinion
in the brain, by which a man is misled. We are further to observe, that there
is a second difference in this point, in regard of the matter, which is not
believed. If a man in his ignorance deny to believe, that there is but one God,
that there are three persons, that Jesus is the Messiah, that we are redeemed
by him, that we are justified by faith without works, or any other
fundamental point of religion; he does thereby shut himself out from all
possibility of salvation, as long as he continues in these errors, or any of
them. But other points there are, and those many more in Thomas opusc. comp.
Theol. c. 1
number, which a man, by reason of his ignorance, may obstinately refuse to
believe, and yet not be excluded out of heaven for such his error. Let the
former examples serve for breuities sake: I have been longer then I would or
meant to be; but I was desirous to speak plain, in a matter of such weight.
The conclusion is, that howsoever it is indeed a sin, and so (in it self)
damnable, to misbeleeue, or not believe all and every thing which God has
revealed; yet a man may be in the state of grace and salvation, though he
misbeleeue, or (through ignorance) obstinately not believe something so
revealed. In a word, Not right believing is never able to deprive a man of
salvation, but when that we believe amiss, is a maine point of salvation:
obstinately not believing only then shuts up heaven against us, when either
the points we will not believe, are fundamental, or our refusing to believe,
is against our own judgment and conscience. If you had no further reach in
this Chapter, we were of the same mind with you: but in propounding the reason
of your assertion, you bewray a further matter, then at the first a man would
imagine.

A. D.. 2.
The reason of this is, because every point of doctrine, yea every word that
almighty God has revealed, and by his Church propounded unto us to be
believed, must, under pain of damnation be believed: as we may gather out of
Saint Mark; where when Mark. 16.
our Savior had given charge to his Disciples, to preach the Gospel to every
creature (the which charge he also gave in Saint Matthew, saying: Docete omnes
gentes, etc. docentes eos seruare omnia Math. 28.
quaecunque mandaui vobis: Teach all nations, etc. teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you,) he pronounces indefinitely, Qui non
crediderit, condemnabitur: He that shall not believe, shall be condemned: not
excepting, or distinguishing any one point of doctrine, as needless to be
believed, or which a man might at his pleasure misbeleeue, or doubt of without
danger.

A. W.
Your first reason lies thus: If every point and word revealed by God, and
propounded by his Church to be believed, must, under pain of damnation, be
believed, then faith must be entire. But every word so revealed and propounded,
must, under pain of damnation be believed. Therefore faith must be entire.


The conclusion of this Syllogism is acknowledged by us for a certain truth,
Faith must be entire: but the premises seem liable to just exception. For
first, the antecedent and the consequent To the Proposition.
of the proposition are all one; and so the proof, and that which is proved,
differ not. What is it to say, every word revealed by God, must be believed,
but to affirm, that faith must be entire? Indeed if the question were of faith
as it is a quality, then the consequent might be inferred upon the antecedent:
but since we speak of the things to be believed, both are one. If every such
word must be believed, then we must believe every such word. It is the same
faith, by which all, and by which some is believed: but as the object or things
believed make a difference, which reaches not to the faith it self within the
soul.

Secondly the Assumption, though it be true, yet does it contain something
that had need to be warily considered. First To the Assumption.
you so couple the revealing by God, and the propounding of a thing to be
believed by the church, as if the latter were no less necessary then the
former, to make a matter of faith: whereas al things that God has revealed,
ought to be believed, whether the Church propou^d them for such or no. For the
reason why they are to be believed, is, that they proceed from God, who must
needs be credited in whatsoever he shall say; in respect both of his truth in
speaking, and his authority in commanding obedience. But Stapl. contra
Whitak. de autorit. script. cap. 1. sect. 1. 2.
you Papists make the authority of the Church, the very foundation of our
belief. The Scripture (you say) is in it self the word of God, and so worthy
of all credit; but to us it is not so, but by the authority of the Church;
upon the credit whereof we take it for the word of God. Yea farther, you limit
faith in particular points, by the determination of the Church, so that no man
shall be bound to believe, as a point of faith, any doctrine never so certainly
proved out of Scripture, unless the Church have resolved of it, that it is
true: and whatsoever is by the Church concluded for true, must be acknowledged
for such by faith, though it be beside or against the Scripture, which (as
Cusan. ad Bohem. epist. 2.
Cardinal Cusan is not ashamed, nor afraid to say) is fitted for the time, and
diversely understood. So that it may at one time be expounded one way, according
to the general current order of the Church, and the same order being changed,
the Scripture also is changed. And why should it not, if (as Syl^^est. Prierias
cont. Luth.
another Papist says) the holy Scripture take strength and authority from the
doctrine of the Church and Bishop of Rome? The Apostles (says Pigh. Hier. lib.
1. cap. 2.
Pighius) have written certain things, not that their writings should be above
our faith, but that they should be under it. But what should I stand to recite
your blasphemies in this kind, which are many and monstrous? That which is not
to day a point of faith, shall be one to morrow, if it please the Pope to
propound it to be believed.

It is farther to be considered in your Assumption, that although whatsoever
God reuealeth is to be believed, upon pain of damnation: yet a man may be
saved without believing every thing so revealed; always provided that he do
not against his conscience obstinately refuse to acknowledge any truth.

If our Savior have said, that he which believes not all that his Apostles
teach shall be condemned; then every word so revealed and propounded, must be
believed, under pain of damnation. But our Savior has said so: Therefore
every word so propounded must be believed, under pain of damnation.
This is a proof of your Assumption; wherein for the consequence To the
Proposition.
of your proposition, I would have all men understand, that although you
craftily imply therein a comparison of equality, betwixt the charge of
believing the Apostles, and all other Ministers allowed by you, whom you call
by the name of the Church, to deceive simple people with so glorious a title:
yet the truth of that proposition depends not thereupon, but only upon the
necessity of believing that which God has revealed. It is a certain truth,
that God is to be believed in all things he has revealed, by whom soever he
propound it: and in this respect the consequence of your proposition is true:
That if it were damnable not to believe the Apostles delivering that which God
had revealed, it is also damnable not to give credit to Ministers now, when
they propound that to be believed, which God has revealed; because the reason
of believing is, that God has revealed the things that are delivered. But yet
here are two differences to be observed: first, that it is less sin to doubt
of that, which any man, besides the Apostles, delivers, though it be the word
of God, then to make question of the same matter uttered by the Apostles:
because they spoke immediately by the direction of the spirit, and therefore
could not possibly err in any point; whereas all other men are subject to
error, and their doctrine to examination, ere it need be credited. Secondly, we
must remember, it does not follow, that if our Savior said, whosoever believed
not the Apostles, should be damned; then he that believes not the Ministers
now, in all they propound to be believed, should be therefore liable to
condemnation. I have stood the more upon this proposition, because the
consequence being true, may breed an error in the conceit of many, if the
reason of it be not truly understood.

Your Assumption or minor is thus to be limited, according To the Assumption.
to that which I before delivered, He that believes the Apostles spoke
immediately by the inspiration of the spirit of God, and yet doubts of the truth
of some things they preached, cannot without reforming this error be saved;
because he holds that the holy Ghost may inspire an untruth. No more can he
that does not believe they spoke by such inspiration. For of them our Savior
has absolutely said, Luke 10. 16.
He that despises you, despises me. The second limitation is about the things
themselves. The ignorance of some points delivered by the Apostles, utterly
excludes a man out of heaven: some other again may be unknown, and a man,
notwithstanding that his ignorance, be saved. Therefore though our Savior
except no point, nor distinguish betwixt matters of doctrine, yet the not
believing of some, is no farther damnable, then a man does wilfully refuse to
believe that, which he confesses to be truth in his heart; or at the least, in
which he thinks the Apostles were deceived, or which he despises as
needless, and so condemns the wisdom of God, in propounding it to be
believed.

A. D.. 3.
And this not without reason: for not to believe any one point whatsoever,
which God by revealing it, does testify to be true, and which, by his Church,
he has commanded us to believe, must needs be damnable, as being a notable
injury to Gods verity, and a great disobedience to his will. But all points
of faith are thus testified by God, and commanded to be believed; otherwise
they be not points of faith, but of opinion, or some other kind of knowledge.
Therefore all points of faith must under pain of damnation, be believed;
believed (I say) either expressly and actually, as learned men may do: or
implicit and virtually as unlearned Catholics commonly do: who believing
expressly those articles, which every one is bound particularly to know, do
not in the rest, obstinately doubt, or hold some error against the Church, but
have a mind prepared to submit themselves in all things, to the authority of
the Church, (which they are sure is taught and directed by the spirit of God)
and do in general hold for undoubted truth, whatsoever the Catholic or
universal Church does believe.

A. W.
Now follows the second proof of your assumption, in this manner: Every
notable injury to Gods verity, and disobedience to his will, is damnable. But
misbeleeuing, or absolutely not believing any one point revealed by God, and
propounded by his Church to be believed, is a notable injury to Gods verity,
and a great disobedience to his will. Therefore misbeleeuing or obstinately not
believing any one point revealed by God, and propounded by his Church to be
believed, is damnable.


To let pass this crafty conueyance, whereby you still shuffle in the Church,
whereas without it, the matter is as true, and To the assumption.
the proposition as perfect: I answer to your assumption; that all
misbeleeuing, or obstinately not believing is not a notable injury to Gods
truth, nor a great disobedience to his will: where it proceeds simply of
ignorance, and not of wilfulness; except in such cases as I showed in the end
of the last section: which I speak, not to excuse any man, as if he did not
sin, in misbeleeuing, or as if there were some sin not deadly, according to
your erroneous conceit: but only to distinguish notable injuries, and great
disobedience from some kind of misbeleeuing.

The conclusion is thus to be conceived: That misbeleeuing is in it self
damnable, not, that no man can be saved, which misbeleeueth. Of the conclusion.


This distinction of believing expressly, and implicitly, as you term it,
confirms part of that, which I have hitherto said: for by your confession,
there are some points, to the belief whereof a general faith will not serve
the turn, but a man must know the particulars, and assent actually to the
truth of them. For example, it is not enough for a man to believe in gross,
that he must be saved by such means only, as God has revealed; and the
Church has propounded to be believed; but it is absolutely necessary to
salvation, that he know what the Church holds in this case, concerning
redemption by our Savior Christ; and in his heart acknowledge the truth
thereof. Again, there are many other points, which, so a man neglect not the
means to know them, may be unknown, and believed only in general, without
danger of damnation, by reason of such ignorance. Now this general belief, is
not (as you falsely say) to be folded up in the faith of the Church; but to be
tied to the Scripture; all things wherein I acknowledge to be most true, and
believe all points whatsoever, as they are either expressed, or contained in
Scripture: howsoever I be ignorant what is true, touching, (perhaps) very many
particulars.

To the authority of the Church, I willingly submit my self thus far, as
that I hold it a sinful presumption for me, or any man, either to compare my
private opinion, with the general judgment of other Christians, especially
Ministers, or to condemn, or suspect that of falsehood, which they deliver,
unless I have apparent proof for the one, and great likelihood for the other.
In which cases I set not my own conceit, against the doctrine of the Church,
but prefer the truth of God before the opinions of men. As for any infallible
authority in the Church, upon supposall of such a certain direction by the
spirit of God, I hold it neither for true, nor probable, as shall appear
hereafter. In the mean while, I desire the Reader to consider these few
testimonies concerning the authority of men. Other writers (says August. ad
Hieron. Epist. 19.
Austin) I read with this prouiso, that, be their learning or holiness never
so great, I will not think a matter true, because they have thought so; but
because they have been able to persuade me, either by other Canonical writers,
or by some likely reason. In Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 10.
an other place, We may not consent to Bishops, though they be Catholic, if
at any time they be deceived, so that they judge contrary to the Canonical
Scripture of God. Of necessity (says Origin. in Ier. Hom. 1.
Origin) must we call for the testimony of the Scriptures; for our senses and
declarations, without them, as witnesses, have no credit. And this charge
Basil. in moral. Reg. 72.
Basil lays upon us, that, when we hear, we examine the points that are
delivered by our teachers, and receive those that are agreeable to the
Scriptures, and reject those that are diverse from them. Hieron. ad Ierem. cap.
7.
Other things that men invent of their own head (says Jerome) as it were by
Apostolical tradition, without the authority and witness of the Scriptures,
the word of God smites.

A. D.. 4.
Secondly, that man which believing some points, should deny others: cannot
while he does thus, have one and the same faith, which other Christians have.
Since he does not (as Irenaeus requires to the unity of faith) beleeeue the
points of faith in a like; but in a different manner from other Christians.
That is to say. Neither does he believe all the points which they do: neither
does he believe those points wherein he does agree with them, for the same
reason that they do; that is to say: He does not believe those points which he
seems to believe precisely, for that God has revealed them, and by his
Church propounded them: for if he did, since this reason is common to all points
of faith, he should as soon believe all, as any one. He has not, therefore (I
say) one and the same faith, which other Christians have, (who notwithstanding
have the true faith.) And since as S. Leo said, Nisi vna est, fides non est: If
it be not one faith, it is no faith at all: It follows that he, that
believes not entirely all points of faith, has no faith at all: and
consequently, since one that has no faith, can no way be saved: it is evident
that he that believing some articles, does obstinately deny others cannot be
saved.

A. W.
Your second reason, to prove that faith must be entire, is thus to be framed.

If faith cannot be one, unless it be entire, then it must be entire. But
faith cannot be one, unless it be entire. Therefore faith must be entire.
I deny the consequence of your proposition. For it is not To the proposition.
absolutely necessary to salvation, that faith should be one, in such sort as
you imagine. There is indeed an absolute necessity, that all men should agree
in the belief of certain points, without the belief whereof, there can
possibly be no salvation. But that there should be such an agreement in all
points, though it be necessary positiuely, to speak as you do, because Gods
truth is in every particular to be believed; yet it is not required as a
means, without which a man cannot be saved, as I have already showed.

I grant the assumption in that sense you understand being one; otherwise I
deny it. Faith may be one in all points necessary to To the assumption.
salvation, and yet not entire in believing all things that God has revealed.

To your allegation out of Ire^. li. 1. ca. 3
Irenaeus, I answered Chap. 1. sect. 5.
before: the exposition you make of it, as I then signified, in regard of the
latter part thereof, cannot be drawn out of Irenaeus, who speaks not a word
of the reason whereupon men believe, but only of the principal articles of
faith every where believed; in regard whereof there was, as he says, an unity
of belief.

Neither is your proof sufficient, if we grant your exposition. For a man may
believe that which he does believe, because God has revealed it, and in that
respect have one faith with other Christians, and yet doubt of, or deny some
other points which are commonly held; because he cannot persuade himself that
they are revealed by God: though it be generally so believed. I may say the
like of matters propounded also by the Church, because the decrees thereof are
not so plain, but that they may admit diverse senses. But I respect not that
clause, as being a point foisted in by you, without any warrant of Scripture or
reason.

Though it be no great matter what you build upon so slipperie a foundation:
because it cannot long stand: yet perhaps it is not amiss to push it down
presently, that it may not continue to make a show. Thus you build.

He, that has no faith at all, cannot be saved. But he, that believes not
entirely all points of faith, has no faith at all. Therefore he that believing
some articles, does obstinately deny any others, cannot be saved.
I deny your assumption. A man may doubt of, and deny To the assumption.
many points as I have showed, and yet both have faith, and be saved. Your
proof to the contrary out of Leo was answered Chap. 2. sect. 3.
before.

Your conclusion is not so large as it should be. For you restrain Of the
conclusion.
it to obstinately not believing: which cannot bar a man from salvation, but
in those points alone, which are necessary as means, to bring him to
everlasting life.

A. D.. 5.
Thirdly, to believe some points of faith, and to deny others, or any one, is
heresy: as to deny all, is absolute Infidelity. But it is sure, even out of
Scripture, that Heretics shall not be saved, no more then Infidels. For as it
is said Q^i non credit, iam indicatus est, he that believes not, is already
judged: so the Aposile Saint Joan. 3. In the Greek text, Haireseis Gal. 5.
Paul reckons heresies among the works of the flesh; of all which he does
pronounce. Qui talia agunt, regnum Dei non consequentur. Those which do such
like things, shall not attain the kingdom of God.

A. W.
Heretical faith is liable to damnation. That faith which is not entire, is
heretical. Therefore, that faith which is not entire, is liable to damnation.
I must entreat the Reader to call to mind, what I answered To the
proposition.
Sect. 1.
before in general concerning this point, about liablenesse to damnation.
There is no heresy nor error in matter of Religion, but it is a sin: and
being so, makes the party that does err, liable to damnation. But yet many
errors and heresies are of so small moment in comparison of other, that he
which holds them, may, notwithstanding such his error or heresy, be saved. I
gave examples before, and will not stand to repeat them. So then the
proposition is thus far true, and no farther: Heretical faith in matters
necessary to salvation, is simply damnable: so that he which continues in
such an estate, cannot possibly be saved.

Again, Heretical faith in any point of Gods truth whatsoever, of it self
deserves damnation: yet he that does err in some points, may be saved: else I
think there are few men living, or ever have been, that could have come, or
shall come to heaven. As for the authority of the Church, it is not of force
to make that simply damnable, which in it self is not so: though it much
increase the sin, whenever it determines truly of any point in question.
You will say Gal. 5. 20, 21
Saint Paul reckons heresy amongst the works of the flesh. So does he
contentions etc. yet may a man in ignorance be contentious, thinking he does
well, and Iud. verse. 3.
contends for the true faith, as he ought to do; and for all this contention,
not deprive himself of the interest he has to the kingdom of heaven in Jesus
Christ. I deny your assumption. To the assumption. Chap. 1. sect. 5.
A man may be excused, in your judgment, by ignorance, concerning any positive
commandment of God: but out of doubt, there are many points of truth revealed
by God, only as positive, not as such means to salvation, that without the
belief of them a man cannot be saved. Add hereunto, that a Christian may be
ignorant of many points held by the Church, and that by negative ignorance,
because he could never come where he might hear, that the Church believed such
and such things. It is therefore an unreasonable thing, to condemn all
ignorance for heresy: and a most uncharitable conceit to cast all into hell
fire that believe not in every point, as the Church generally does, yea though
they know what the Church mainteines, and be of a contrary mind. Your proof,
which is a comparison of likeness or equality betwixt infidelity in denying
all Christian religion, and heresy in not believing some points of it, is a
great deal too weak. Similitudes argue indeed, but rather by way of
illustration then proof. And there is no equality betwixt denying all, and
doubting of some. The former absolutely overthrows true religion: the latter
only misconceiues some points, leaving the grounds of truth untouched and
believing them as most certain.

A. D. 6.
Fourthly, I may confirm the same, with the testimony of the ancient Fathers.
First of S. Athanasius in his creed, which is commonly Athanas. in Symb.
known and approved of all. Quicunque (says he) vult saluus esse, ante omnia
opus est, vt teneat Catholicam fidem: quam nisi quisque integram, inuiolatamque
seruauerit, absque dubio in aeternum peribit. Whosoever will be saved, before
all things it is needful that he hold the Catholic faith: which unless
every one do keep entire and vnviolate, without doubt he shall perish
everlastingly.

A. W.
If the ancient writers should affirm a thing so unreasonable, there were good
reason for a man to look for some proof of it, out of the Scriptures. But (no
doubt) we shall find your citations of their writings as much to the purpose,
as we have done your former arguments. The first you allege is Athanasius in
his Creed; to which I answer, that See my answer to 12. Art part. 1. art. 4.
Athanasius speaks not of all points revealed by God, but of those substantial
matters, which are there set down by him, and namely, of the Trinity of
persons, and Godhead of our Savior Jesus Christ. This appears by the last
verse of the same Creed, where he thus concludes: This is the Catholic
faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. But
Athan^siu^ has not comprehended all points of religion in that Creed, (for he
leaves out the burial of our Savior Christ, unless you will say he put his
going down into hell for it,) neither does he require, in that place any other
point, as necessary to be believed to salvation, but those only, that he there
recites, which must be kept entire and inviolate of every man that will be
saved.

A. D.. 7.
Qui sunt in sacris literis eruditi, (says Saint Basil) ne vnam Test
Theodoreto lib. 4. Eccles. histor. cap. 17.
quidem sillabam diuinorum dogmatum prodi sinunt: sed pro istius defensione, si
opus est, nullum non mortis genus libenter amplectuntur. Those that are well
instructed in holy Writ, do not suffer one syllable of divine doctrine to be
betrayed or yielded up: but for the defense thereof, if need be, do willingly
embrace any kind of death.

A. W.
That of Basil apud Theodoret. hist. lib. 4. cap. 17.
Basil is less to the purpose. For first, he says nothing of any doctrine
propounded by the Church, or of your unwritten traditions, but only of the
Scriptures. And how makes this for the believing whatsoever the Church will
deliver, without which, in your judgment, faith cannot be one, or entire?
Secondly, he speaks not of all ignorant men, whose faith, upon pain of
damnation, you will have entire, concerning every point; but of those only
that are learned in the holy Scriptures, or at the most, so far as they are
learned in them. I astly, what says he of these, but that which we always
require, that a christian should not suffer any syllable of true doctrine to be
betrayed? This makes against you, who rest wholly upon Popes and Councils, and
by that means oftentimes betray the truth of God manifested in the Scripture;
yea so far are you from mainteining every syllable of it, with hazard of your
lives, that you do what you can for shame, to destroy it all. Azorius Moral.
instit. lib. 8 cap 26. Quaeres.
You Papists deprive the people of them altogether, at least for their private
reading; howsoever your Pope Pius 4. makes a show of permitting it. You have
thrust out the Council. Trid. sess 4. de edit. and vsu sac. liter.
Authentical copies of Hebrew and Greek, and, in steed of them authorized a
corrupt Latin translation, which no man may refuse, upon any pretense; though
it have 8000 places (as Isidorus Clarius praef. in Biblia.
Isidorus Clarius a great learned man of your own affirms) in which, the
sense of the holy Ghost is changed: yea Cardinal Hosius contr. Brent. prolegom
Hosius blusheth not to write: That it were better for the Church, if there
were no written Gospel extant. I omit your blasphemies against the Scriptures,
whereof I have spoken otherwhere.

A. D.. 8.
Nihil periculosius (says Nazianzen) his haereticis esse potest, qui cum
integre per omnia decurrant; vno tamen verbo, quasi Greg. Nazian. tract. de Fid.
veneni gutta, veram illam ac simplicem fidem dominicam inficiunt. Nothing can
be more perilous then these heretics, who, when they run uprightly through
all the rest, yet with one word, as with a drop of poison, do infect that true
and sincere faith of our Lord.

A. W.
What if Nazianzen. de Fide.
Gregory Nazianzen complain, that heretics which held most points soundly,
according to truth, as Arius, Eutyches, Macedonius, Nestorius, and diverse other
did, were very pernicious to the Church, because they did more easily and
secretly poison the truth of doctrine by their heresies? Will it follow
hereupon, that therefore a man cannot be saved, unless he believe every point
of truth revealed by God? or that a man has no faith, because his belief
agrees not in every small matter with other Christians? Remember I pray you, we
deny not that faith should be entire, but that it cannot be available to
salvation, if in any one point it misbeleeue. Thus have I examined the first
part of this your Treatise of Faith, which I know not how I should apply to
your maine syllogism, implied in your preface: when you show the use of it in
any part thereof, I will give you answer accordingly.

A. D.
CHAP. V. That there must be some means provided by almighty God, by which all
sorts of men may learn this faith, which is so necessary to salvation.

A. W.
The title of this Chapter is so propounded, that your meaning may easily be
mistaken. There must be (say you) some means provided: May not a man gather by
these words, that as yet there are no such means provided? where as you would
have us believe, that God has already made provision of fit means to that
purpose.

A. D.. 1.
As this one, infallible and entire faith is necessary to salvation, to all
sorts of men, as well unlearned, as learned: so we must say, that almighty 1.
Tim. 2.
God, Qui vult omnes homines saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis venire,
who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of truth, has
(for proof that this, of his part, is a true will) provided some rule or
means, whereby every man learned and unlearned, may sufficiently in all points,
questions or doubts of faith, be infallibly instructed, what is to be holden
for the true faith: and that the only cause, why any man misseth of the true
faith, is either because he does not seek out and find this rule and means;
or having found it, he will not use it, and in all points (submitting his own
sense, self opinion, and proper judgment) obediently yield assent unto it; as
the nature of divine faith, and the duty of every Christian binds him to do.
This is proved, because if Almighty 1. Tim. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 3. Aug. lib.
de Sp. and lit. c. 33. Prosper. lib. 2. de vocat. gent. cap. 23. 25. 28. D.
Ambros. ser. 8. in Psalm. 118. Jren. l. 4. ca. 71.
God has a true will, of his part, to lead all men to this happy end of
eternal salvation, (as it may be plainly proved that he has, out of Scripture
and Fathers) he must needs provide them sufficient means, by which it may at
least be possible for them to attain that end. For we never say, that God has
a will to do any thing, unless he do either absolutely work the thing, or at
least provide means sufficient, by which it is possible to be done. But
unless there be such a rule or means provided, by which every one learned and
unlearned, may attain to this one, infallible and entire faith, of which I
have spoken before, there are not sufficient means provided, by which it is
possible for all men to come to salvation; since (as I proved) without that
faith it is impossible for any one to come to salvation. Therefore we must
needs say, that Almighty God has provided this rule or means, by which every
man, even the most unlearned, may sufficiently be instructed in matters of
faith.

A. W.
Whether your comparison, by which you propound this point, be of likeness or
equality, I see not what agreement the one part can have with the other. But
to let that pass, because it is of no great moment; I am now earnestly to
request all men, Protestants and Papists, who will vouchsafe to read my
answer, that they would give me leave to examine this treatise by the light of
true reason, and themselves take a little pains, more then ordinary in the
understanding of it. We are then first of all to remember, that the sum of
this treatise was propounded by the author himself in his preface, to this
effect: That the faith which the authority of the true Catholic Church
commends to us, is, without doubt, to be holden for the true faith: and that
the faith which the authority of the Church of Rome commends to us, is that
faith. Now then these two points being proved, that which was intended, is
dispatched; and either of these failing, the matter is still in question. For
proof of the former proposition or sentence, he disputes on this manner: That
we must needs admit an infallible authority in the Catholic Church, by
reason whereof every one must learn of it only what is the true faith. Now he
addresseth himself to the proof of this last proposition, which, as I showed
in my answer to the Preface, is the assumption of his second Syllogism: and
thus he reasons: If God have not provided some rule or means, whereby every
man learned and unlearned, may sufficiently in all points, questions or doubts
of faith, be infallibly instructed, what is to be holden for the true faith,
unless we admit such an authority, then we must needs admit it. But God has
not provided any rule or means, unless we admit such an authority. Therefore
we must needs admit such an authority in the Catholic Church.


The ground of the proposition, or mayor, is this, that God will The
Proposition.
have all, as well unlearned as learned to be saved. Which being understood, I
answer concerning the consequence of the proposition, that it is false. I will
be as plain as I can, that every one may understand me. If his meaning be,
that we must admit such an authority in the Catholic Church, because without
it there are no sufficient means of salvation for every particular learned and
unlearned man. I deny the consequence of his proposition. For neither is it
necessary to salvation, that a man should be infallibly instructed in all
points, questions, and doubts of faith, and God never had any purpose, that
every particular man should be affoorded that means of salvation. I will not
spend time nor labor in this point: it may be proved sufficiently by this his
argument. For these means, he imagines of a visible Church always continuing,
are not such, but that before the coming of our Savior, and since also, many
thousands have lived and died, which could never have any suspicion or thought
of such a Church. Till it pleased our Savior Mat. 28. 19.
to send his Apostles with a general commission, the knowledge of him was shut
up within Mat. 10. 5. and 15. 24.
the land of Iewry, or at the most, was heard of but in the countries near
adjoining. After the commission given, it asked some time for the Apostles to
disperse themselves over the world; and in that time many thousands must needs
die, without the knowledge of our Savior Christ. But what speak I of the
beginnings of the Gospel? How many countries are there, in which no steps of
the Gospel have been, to which no little sound of it has come for many
hundred years? August. de unit. Eccles. cap. 14.
Austin says, that in his time there were many nations, to whom the Gospel
had not then been preached: yea it August. Ser. Dom. in monte. lib. 2. Orige^.
ad Mat. homil. 28.
was commonly held amongst the ancient writers, that the day of judgment
should speedily ensue, after the Gospel had been preached in all the world.

If you urge that 1. Tim. 2. 3.
place of Timothy, that God will have all men to be saved: you shall be
answered by one of your own side; that Luc Brugen. ad Mat. 22.
(all) signifies all kind of men, not every man of every kind: of every kind
many. They are called all (says Fulgent. de incar. cap. 31.
Fulgentius) because God saves them out of every nation, condition, age: out
of every province, of every language. So does August. En. chir. ad Lauren. cap.
103. De correp. and great. cap. 14.
Austin expound that text in diverse places, though he bring also some other
interpretations, but all against the conceits of men, that would have all taken
for every one. The like exposition he gives of that in the Gospel, August. in
Joan. tract. 52. Holk. in 2. q. 1. ad 4. princip. art. 1.
I will draw all to me: All kinds of men, in all languages, in all ages, in all
degrees of honor, in all diversities of dispositions and wits, in all
professions of arts lawful and profitable, etc. Holkot not the meanest of your
schoolmen, makes this sense of those words, God will have all men to be
saved: that is says he, God has made all men capable of salvation, and given
commandments, which if all men should observe, they should be saved. But what
need I be long in this matter, when as your self (as it should seem) so
understood it? In the title you say, All sorts of men, in the Chapter you
repeat those same words, and add two sorts, learned and unlearned; which also
you do afterward. It may therefore seem strange (perhaps) to some man, that I
trouble my self and the reader with this exception against your proposition.
But I do it not without just cause. For although both title and chapter make
profession as it were, of that meaning: yet within half a doze^ lines after,
you give me occasion to suspect the other sense: where you say, God has
provided means whereby every man learned and unlearned may sufficiently be
instructed. And indeed, whereto else tends that discourse of the visibilitie
of the Church, so much magnified and urged by you? In that sense then I deny
the consequence of the proposition. But if you understand it according to the
plain words, not of every man, but of all sorts of men. I still deny the
consequence. For though it be out of doubt, that God has appointed as well
unlearned as learned to everlasting life; yet it is false, that there needs
any such rule or means, as of necessity to salvation.

I deny your assumption. For God has provided a rule, To the Assumption.
whereby a man may be instructed in all points and questions of faith. Let them
that would attain to salvation (says Chrysostom. ad 1. Cor. hom. 6.
Chrysostom) bestow their time in the Scriptures. And again, Ad Joan. homil.
52.
If we search the Scriptures diligently, we shall attain to salvation. We are
not commanded (says Justin. in dialog. cu^ Tryphon.
Justin the martyr) by Christ to give credit to the doctrines of men, but to
those which the holy Prophets have published, and Christ has taught. Therefore
does Tertul. contra Hermog. cap. 22.
Tertullian call Hermogenes to the Scripture, and adore the sufficiency
thereof. By which only (as Opus imperf. in Mat. homil. 49.
one says) after heresy once has possessed the Churches, the true Church of
Christ is to be found. A little after, He that would know which is the true
Church of Christ, how shall he know it, but only by the Scriptures? From, and
in which only, Firmitatem.
assurance of faith is to be had, as he says presently after.

God has a true will (which also certainly takes effect) that some me^ of al
sorts should be saved, but not that every particular man should: as I proved
before by your reason, because he has not vouchsafed every one the means.
Concerning 1. Tim. 2. 3.
the first place alleged by you, the Apostles own interpretation seems to
allow that which I brought before out of Austin, of the diverse conditions and
sorts of men. For so himself speaks. I will ver. 1. 2.
that prayers, supplications and intercessions be made for all men: for Kings,
and for all that are in authority. He shows in these last words what he
means by all men, All sorts of men. The reason why he names Kings and
magistrates, is, because they were at that time, not only heathen, but also
enemies and persecutors: so that no such doctrine can be certainly and
necessarily concluded out of this text, that God would have every particular
man to be saved. For the auowing of the former exposition, we must understand,
that the word all is often used in Scripture for every kind. Mat. 4. 23. (...).
Jesus healed every sickness and every disease: not every particular, but all
kind of diseases. Mat. 12. 31. (...).
Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven: not every particular sin, but
every kind of sin, save only that against the holy Ghost. We heard before that
of John, Joan. 11. 32.
I will draw all to me: and August. tract. 52.
Saint Austins judgment thereupon. And if it were true, that God had (as you
speak) a true will, that all men should be saved, how can that be true, which
not we only, but the learned of your Papists hold, according to the
Scriptures, that he appointed some to damnation, as well as other some to
salvation; and that there can be no reason given why this man in particular is
vouchsafed faith and salvation, that man is not, but only the will of God. As
it is evidently proved by Thomas ad Romans 9. in. qq. disp. de praedest. q. 6.
art. 2. 1. q. 23. art. 5. in 1. did. 41. q. 1. ar. 3. Lombard. 1. did. 41.
and ibi Petr. de Aliac. Joan. Capreo. and alij.
Thomas of Aquin, Romans 9. and long before him, by S. Austin in many places. Ad
Simplician. lib. 1. q. 2. de praedest. and great. cap. 46. Enchir. ad Laurent,
cap. 32. 99. Epist. 105, ad Sixtu^: you therefore do Austin wrong, who allege
him in your margin, as if he thought that God would have every particular man to
be saved; against which his doctrine August. de spir. et. lit. c. 33. De
correp. and great. cap. 14.
in so many places is direct, and which (as I showed before) he purposely
refuteth. Prosp. epist. ad August. and in resp. ad excerpt. Genue.
Prosper also is of the same opinion, as having defended that doctrine of
Austin, against his adversaries: which also is the title and matter of a whole
chapter Prosp. de voc. gent. lib. 1. c. 12. Lib. 2. ca. 2. 25. 28. cap. 19.
in one of his books: That the saying of the Apostle, God will have all men to
be saved, is meant of all kind of men. Therefore the place you bring must be
understood according to the course of Prospers writings in the same treatise,
that God has not barred any nation, nor kept back any man from hearing and
believing the Gospel. And farther, has by his general providence and benesiles
affoorded means to stir up all to seek God: as himself speaks in two of the
places you bring, and in some other. In Prosper. de lib. arbitr. ad Russia.
one place when he had said, that many infants are dead, who certainly have no
part in the city of God; he adds: And where is that, which by some that
understand it not, is objected to us, as contrary hereunto, that God will have
all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth? Are not they to be
reckoned among those All men, who heretofore from time to time have perished
without the knowledge of God? This might serve for answer to you in this point,
concerning Gods will to have all men saved. But for your better satisfaction,
or if that will not be, for the closer stopping of your mouth, I will add that
solution, which your great Cardinal Bellarmine gives to these three places of
Scripture that you allege, though in another question. These places (says
Bellar. de great. et lib. arb. lib. 2. ca. 3.. 8.
Bellarmine) only signify that God hinders no man from salvation, yea that
he has appointed remedies and helps in common, and that he would have the
preaching of the word and the sacraments to be common to all. In the same sense
is God said to be 1. Tim. 4. 10.
the Savior of all, because by his general providence he has care of all,
and has left no man untouched, but either by the Gospel, or by the law, or by
nature it self has moved him to seek after God; as Prosper. de voc. gent.
lib. 2. cap. 25. and ad cap. Gallor. cap. 8. De voc. gent. lib. 2. c. 10
Prosper says: yea has affoorded means whereby every man may be saved. This
place (as Bellar. de great. and lib. arb. lib. 2. cap. 5.. Illud item.
Bellarmine says) can hardly have any other exposition, then that latter.
Glossinterli. ad 1. Tim. 2. 3.
Your Gloss expounds it of Gods goodness to all men in respect of outward
blessings, who makes his Sun to shine (says it) upon good and bad.

The other place of 2. Pet. 3. 9.
Peter (as we heard Bellar. de gr. and lib. arb. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Bellarmine say) signifies no more, but that God keeps no man from being
saved, but has vouchsafed the word and sacraments in common to all. Your
Gloss. interl. ad 2. Pet. 3.
Gloss restraines that Any to them that are to be converted, that is to the
elect. That other which are to be converted, may be conuertea. Thomas ad 2.
Pet. 3. Holk. in 2. q. 1. ad 4. princip. ^t. 1.
Thomas and Holkot interpret it de voluntate signi: of that will of God, which
we may gather by the signs he shows: as for example, God calls all men
from danger of damnation, by precepts, counsels, threatenings, rewards. These
are signs to us, that God would have all men to be saved: but there is another
will called volunt as beneplaciti, the good pleasure of God, which is indeed
truly that which God intends. Thomas adds also a second exposition out of
Damascen, but it can prove nothing, because it cannot be necessarily enforced
out of the text, rather then the other, which is also more warrantable for the
truth of it, as I will show another time, upon more just occasion, if it please
God. Caietan. ad 2. Pet. 3.
Caietan alleges three several interpretations, that of Damascens, a second
of All kind of men, whereof before, and a third of the elect, which also he
does exemplify in the person of Peter. Thus I have showed, that the maine
foundation you build upon, is but weak, wanting ground of warrant from the word
of God. But admit it were never so true, that God would have every man to be
saved; which in some sense, as I have said, indeed is most true; yet were not
the consequence of your proposition proved. For there might be sufficient
means for every man's salvation, though there were no means to bring him to
that same one, infallible, entire faith, which you conceit; but only to so
much faith and knowledge as is necessary to salvation, by which he might be
sufficiently instructed in matters of faith: which is all that you craftily
seem to require in the conclusion of this section; whereas before, in your
proposition, no less would serve the turn, then infallible instruction in all
points, questions, and doubts of faith.

A. D.. 2.
To this purpose says S. Austin: Si Dei prouidentia praesidet Lib. de vtil.
credendi.
rebus humanis, non est desperandum, ab eodem ipso Deo auctoritatem aliquam
constitutam esse, qua, velut certo gradu, nitentes attollamur in Deum. If Gods
providence (says he) rule and govern humane matters, (as he proves that it
does) we may not despair, but that there is a certain authority appointed by
the same God, upon which staying our selves as upon a sure step, we may be
lifted up to God. Saint Austin therefore does acknowledge some authority to be
needful, as a means whereby we may be lifted up to God. The which lifting up
to God, is first begun by true faith. And because this authority is so
needful a means, he would not have us doubt, but that God, whose providence
stretches it self to all humane matters, has not failed to provide this
means for us, it being a principal matter, and so principal, as upon which
(according to the ordinary course) depends the sum of our salvation. We are
not therefore (I say) to doubt, but that Almghtie God has provided a means
whereby Animalis homo qui non percipit ea que sunt spiritus Dei, a sensual man
who has no understanding of 1. Cor. 2.
the divine mysteries of faith, may come to know them by a firm and infallible
belief.

A. W.
To what purpose does August de vtil credon. cap. 16.
Saint Austine bring this? To prove that God has appointed a rule, by which
all men may come to your infallible faith? Nothing less: but to show that
where truth is not evident, as to men ordinarily it is not, there God has
provided means to stir them up to a diligent enquiry after it; or rather (as
he plainly affirms) to a ridding of themselves of the cares and pleasures of
this life, which he calls purging of the soul, that so they may be fit to
embrace the truth. Authority (says August. ibid.
Austin) is at hand for a man that is not able to discern the truth, that he
may be fitted to it, and suffer himself to be purged. What is this authority?
what is the use of it? Miracles and multitude make up this authority: whereby
men not able to see truth, in it self, are moved to a reverend respect of the
Church, and so to an examination of the doctrine, which upon trial is found
true. Thus does the wisdom of God provide for men's ignorance, that authority
of miracles and multitude may draw them to a consideration of the truth: which,
whenever it shows it self so plainly that it cannot be doubted of, is to be
preferred before all other means of persuading a man to believe, or holding
him in belief whatsoever; as the same August. cont. epist. Fundam. cap. 4.
Austin says: we deny not these to be good helps and strong means to the
searching and finding of the truth, but to be sufficient and infallible grounds
of religion, that a man should rely upon them, without trying the doctrine by
the truth of God revealed in the Scriptures.

It is indeed out of doubt among Christians, that God has provided some
means, by which a natural man (whom you absurdly call sensual) whereas Romans
8. 6. Ephesians. 4. 18.
the Apostle means a man in his best natural estate since his fall) who cannot
discern of Gods truth, nor admit of it, may come to the knowledge thereof.
Because it was impossible (says Iren. lib. 4. cap. 77.
Irenaeus) to learn God without God, he teaches men by his word (his son)
to know God. It is he, that has vouchsafed us this knowledge by the ministry
of men, and work of the spirit in their hearts, that believe according to the
word of God in the Scriptures. Let us not hear (says August. de unit. Eccles.
cap. 3.
Austin) This I say, This thou say, but let us hear, This says the Lord;
there are the Lords books extant, to the authority whereof both of us
consent, both of us give credit, both of us obey: there let us seek the
Church, there let us discuss our question. Other means of trial, then by the
Scripture August. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
he accounts, and calls deceitful. The Scriptures are Hieron. ad Mich. li.
1. ca. 1
the bounds of the Church, beyond which she may not wander. Ad Psalm. 86.
Whatsoever any man since the Apostles has seen without warrant of Scripture,
let him be never so holy, never so eloquent, it is of no authority: but only
to move us to a consideration of that he says.

A. D.. 3.
Only the question is, what manner of thing this means must be; and where
every man must seek and find it, that having found it he may (as S. Austen
speaks) stay himself upon it, as upon a sure step, thereby to be lifted up
to a true faith, and by faith to God. The which question being of so great
consequence, that it being well determined, a man need never make more question
in matters of faith; I will (God willing) in the chapters following, endeavor to
resolve it as clearly as I can. And this I purpose to do, first by setting
down what conditions or properties this rule of faith must have: afterward by
proouing particularly, that neither Scripture alone: not any natural wit or
humane lerning: nor private spirit, can be this rule of faith. And finally that
this rule which all me^ may safely, and must necessarily follow, can be no
other, but the teaching of the Catholic Church.

A. W.
It is only thus far agreed betwixt us, that there must needs be means
appointed by Almighty God, whereby all sorts of men may come to such a measure
of knowledge, and faith, as is necessary to salvation, not whereby every man
may be infalliblie instructed in all points of religion, that he need never
make more question in any matter of faith: though we grant that there is such a
means provided by God, howsoever we in our weakness cannot make such use of
it.

But that we may understand matters aright, as we go forward; I must entreat
the Reader to remember, that if all things to come in this your Treatise be
sufficiently proved; yet you fail much of your maine purpose. For this last
Syllogism is the foundation of all yet behind, concerning one of the
principal points which you propounded in the beginning, viz. That it was
necessary to admit such an infallible authority in the Catholic Church. Now
the proposition of this Syllogism I have denied, and refuted. Therefore if the
assumption thereof were most certainly true, as it is undoubtedly false, yet
could your conclusion be nothing sure: because the syllogism fails in the
proposition: but let us see how you prove the assumtion: If neither the
Scripture alone, nor natural wit or learning, nor a private spirit, can be
such a rule, then God has provided no such rule, unless we admit an
infallible authority in the Catholic Church. But neither the Scripture alone,
nor natural wit or learning, nor a private spirit can be such a rule.
Therefore God has provided no such rule, unless we admit an infallible
authority in the Catholic Church.


This proposition is not set down by you in plain terms, but necessarily and
certainly gathered out of the course you hold in the five next chapters:
wherein the assumption and conclusion are manifestly contained; that in the
four former; this in the tenth.

The consequence of your proposition is very weak: For, To the Proposition.
what if none of these (severally) be such a rule? may not all these together
be? Sure there is nothing brought by you to the contrary. But if all these
fail, what can you say to the contrary, why a general Council without the
Popes authority, should not be such a rule? Or, to go farther, do you not
think that the Pope alone may serve the turn? And yet, in your opinion:
neither the Council nor the Pope (severally considered) are the Church.
Therefore it seems there may be such a rule, though there be no company of
men, that has any such authority as you speak of.

Secondly, your consequence is but feeble in an other respect. For it
presumes, that if there be such an authority, there is such a rule. Whereas
many thousands in the world may be utterly without means of knowing that there
is such an authority, and so the means, as in regard of them, insufficient.
Add hereunto, that although it were possible, and easy for every man to know
and see the Church: yet the means might be insufficient: because there is no
certain reason to persuade them, that they must believe this Church in all
things: so that still, according to your doctrine, the Lord must needs have
failed much in his providence, though he have given this authority to the
Church: because he has provided no means whereby every man may certainly be
persuaded, that the Church has such authority. Will you say, He has
appointed that all men should believe the Church? What can that help, when he
has not provided means, for all men to know, that they must believe her? Must
we not come now to a private spirit, that is, to the teaching of Gods spirit in
the hearts of particular men? And if this must needs be in this one case, how
prove you, it may not be so in other? To answer, we must believe the Church,
is to beg the question, against all reason.

A. D.
CHAP. VI. What conditions or properties must be found in the rule of Faith.

THis rule, which Almighty God has provided, as a sufficient means to direct
men to the knowledge of true faith, necessary to salvation; must have three
conditions or properties.

First it must be certain and infallible; for otherwise it cannot be a
sufficient foundation, whereupon to build faith, which (as is proved before) is
absolutely infallible.

Secondly it must be such, as may be certainly, and plainly known of all sorts
of men. For if to any sort, it could not be known, or not certainly known, it
could not be to them a rule or means, whereby they might direct themselves, to
the certain knowledge of the true faith.

Thirdly it must be universal, that it may not only make us know certainly,
what is the true faith in some one or two, or more points, but absolutely in all
points of faith. For otherwise it were not a sufficient means, whereby we may
attain to an entire faith: which integrity of faith is necessary to
salvation, in such wise, as has been declared and proved before.

A. W.
Your assumption had three points, and, as it were parts, making three several
sentences or propositions, which for the more To the assumption.
plainness I will handle severally, as you have done. First of the Scripture.

The rule of faith must be certain, and infallible, certainly and plainly
known, and universal. The Scripture alone is not so. Therefore the Scripture
alone is not the rule of faith.
Ere I come to answer your Syllogism, give me leave to show how obscurely and
doubtfully these properties are delivered by you. First infallible is taken in
two diverse senses. Faith must be infallible. The rule must be infallible. In
the former we must needs expound infallible, not being deceived by holding any
error, or nor doubting of that which it believes. In the latter, what can
infallible signify, but either that, which is certainly true, or that, which
may not be doubted of? Is it plain dealing to speak so doubtfully? Or is it a
good kind of reasoning to run the ring, and to dispute in a circle, as they
speak in the Schools? Chap. 3. Sect. 3.
Before, you would prove the infallibility of faith, by the infallibility of
the word of God, which it must believe: now you conclude the infallibility of
the rule, from the infallibility of faith. Is not this to trifle, rather then
to reason? Would you not laugh at us, if we should dispute thus? The elect
cannot fall away, because the holy Ghost, that vpholds them, is true God. The
holy Ghost is true God, because the elect, whom he vpholds, cannot fall away.
View your self in this glass.

Secondly, what would a reasonable man conceive by these words, The rule must
be certainly and plainly known: but that every man must be able to perceive
that this, or that is the rule? What is your meaning? That Chap. 7. Sect. 2.
the rule must not be hard to be understood.

Thirdly, your term of universality is not so plain, as it might have been;
because it is commonly, I think every where in this Treatise, save in this one
chapter, taken for that which belongs to all persons, times and places: no
where for all points of doctrine, no not there, Chap. 4.
where you speak of the entirenesse of faith. And I pray you tell me, why, as
you apply infallibility to faith and the rule, you do not in like sort deal
with entirenesse, and say that the rule must be entire, because faith must be
entire.

I come now to your proposition, which I deny: because it To the proposition.
is not necessary, that the rule of faith should be such, as may be certainly
and plainly known, that is understood in every point. It is sufficient, if it
may be understood in those points, that are necessary to salvation. Who would
say, that he, which is to measure out timber in length, had not a perfect rule
to that purpose, having an ordinary Carpenters rule, because there are upon
the rule some figures, circles, triangles, squares and such like, the use
whereof he understands not? If you run back to the entirenesse of faith, I
will follow you for a refutation of my answer thereunto, and a founder proof
of that your conceit.

A. D.
CHAP. VII. That Scripture alone cannot be this rule of Faith.

A. W.
The title of this chapter, as it shall appear by and by, agrees not with the
discourse in the chapter; and besides, propounds very craftily a matter,
which is no way in question betwixt us and the Papists. For there is no
Protestant divine, that thinks the Scripture alone, that is, without the
ministry of man, a sufficient means for the salvation or instruction of all
men, to which the fond example of this Author tends, where he talks of
locking up an unlearned man that cannot read, alone, without any help but a
Bible.

A. D.. 1.
Out of these former grounds four conclusions.

The first conclusion is, that Scripture alone, especially as it is by
Protestants translated into the English tongue; cannot be this rule of faith.

This I prove.

First, for that these translations fail in the first condition; that is to
say, they are not infallible (as the rule of faith must be); for neither were
the Scriptures written in this language, immediately by the holy Ghost: neither
were the translators assisted by the same holy Ghost infallibly. Infallibly (I
say) that is, in such sort, as it were impossible that they should err in any
point. Since, therefore, the translators, as being but men, may err. (To say
nothing of that which by Gregory Martin is proved: and by the often changes of
new and variable translations is showed that some have erred) how can a man,
(and especially an unlearned man, who has not sufficient means, learning, nor
leisure to compare the translations with the prime authentical original) how
can (I say) such a man be infallibly sure, that this particular translation,
which he has, does not err? And if in some places it err; how can he be
infallibly sure, that in those places, which do seem to favor that sect,
which he follows, it does not err? unless he will admit an infallible
authority in the Church, to assure us, that such, or such a translation does
not err, in any point; of which authority, I shall speak more hereafter.

A. W.
The Scripture is, in it self, such a rule or means, and (no doubt) so made
effectual to some by reading, without any other outward help of man: but this
is not the ordinary course, that God has appointed, for the instruction of
the people, in the knowledge of his truth. Therefore, if at any time we say,
that the Scripture alone, is the rule of faith, by Alone, we sever it from the
traditions and authority of men, not from their ministry: and ascribe unto
it sufficiency in respect of the matter to be believed, not simply of the
means to bring men to belief.

The assumption, which you should prove (as also the title of your chapter
professes) is this, That the scripture alone, cannot be the rule of faith. By
what reason do you prove it? Truly by none at all: but leaving the question,
you dispute against the English translation. Wherefore I take it for granted,
that, in your conscience, you acknowledge the sufficiency of the Scripture, to
direct us in all matters and questions of faith. And thereupon I infer, that
the infallible authority, which you would tie to the Church, is needless;
because, without it, there is a sufficient rule of faith provided by Almighty
God, whereby every man, learned and unlearned, may be instructed in all points
of faith, what is to be holden for true. Hence it follows, that the first of
your maine points, set down in the preface is false, and so your whole
Treatise void and untrue. You tell us indeed afterward, that some of your
reasons against the English translation have also force to prove, that the
Scripture alone, in what language soever, is no sufficient means: but you
neither show us, which those reasons are, nor are there any of sufficient
weight to that purpose. Let them judge, that will read my answer. But first I
will propound certain testimonies of the Fathers concerning the infallibility
and sufficiency of the Scriptures. When heresy (says Opus imperf. in Mat.
24. hom. 49.
one) has once gotten footing in the Church, there can be no refuge for
Christians, which desire to know the true faith, but only to the Scriptures.
And afterward, Christ commands, that they, that desire to have certainty of
faith, fly to no other thing but to the Scriptures. In the same place, three
several times in one half page, he assures all men, that in the most
dangerous days of Antichrist, there will be no way to know the true Church of
Christ, Nisi tantu^modo per scripturas.
but only by the Scriptures. If certainty of faith, and knowledge of the true
Church may be had from the Scriptures, and in time of heresy, cannot else
where be had: out of doubt the Scripture is certain and infallible, and so
consequently the rule of faith. Irenaeus li. 3. cap 1.
Irenaeus tells us, that the Gospel is left to us in the Scriptures, to be the
foundation and pillar of our faith. Tertul. cont. Hermog. cap. 22.
Tertullian calls to Hermogenes for proof of that he said, out of the
Scriptures, and warns him and his accomplices to beware of the woe, that is
threatened against them, which add to, or take from the Scriptures, If they
bring any doctrine, that is not written therein. Origin. ad Ierem. hom. 1. ad
Romans lib. 3. ad cap. 3.
Origin is ours every where in this question, allowing not any expositions or
senses, but those that are warranted by the Scriptures: requiring of us, to
bring not our own, but the sayings of the holy Ghost, when we teach. This was
the rule, which Theodoret. hist. eccle. lib. 1. ca 7
Constantine the Emperor enjoined the Fathers of that first famous Council of
Nice to follow, and which they accordingly followed. The books of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and the Oracles of the old prophets, plainly instruct
us (quoth that worthy Emperor) what we are to judge of matters (...). de
diuina voluntate vel lege, ut Cassiodorus. Triport.
concerning God. Therefore laying aside all enemie-like discord, let us debate
ad determine the points in question, by the testimonies of the Scriptures
inspired by God. These, as we heard before, Hieron. ad Mich. li. 1. ca: 1.
Jerome makes the bounds of the Church, within which she must keep her self;
and Proclus. de Fide ad Armen. Anno. 430.
Proclus Archbishop of Constantinople confineth faith to the same place. Faith
(says he) must abide within the Evangelical, and Apostolical bounds.
Paschasius co^tra Macedon. lib. 1. cap. 1. Anno. 500.
Paschasius a Cardinal of your Church (as you say) many years since, tied
Macedonius the heretic to the Scriptures equiring him, either to show by
evident testimonies of the word of God, that we must believe in the Church, or
else to urge the point no further. For (as Chrysostom. ad 2. Tim. homil. 9.
Chrysostom truly affirms) If there be any thing needful to be known, we
shall learn it in the Scriptures. I mightfil whole sides with testimonies out
of the Fathers, to this purpose, but I let them pass as needless: especially
since your self before confessed, that the word of God is infallible, and
therefore, in that respect, sufficient to be the rule of faith. Now to your
conclusion.

The first part of this first conclusion is false, in regard of the
infallibility of Scripture: which it should seem you saw well enough, and
therefore balkt that matter, and devised an other point, concerning our
translation, to play withal. For what is it but trifling, when a man leaves
the thing in question, and busies him self about the refuting of that, which
besides himself, no man ever dreamed of? What English protestant ever
affirmed, that our translation was infallible, that is, such as had no error in
it, or might not be doubted of? Or who ever took it for the rule of faith? You
make babies, which you beat as you list. Against the Scriptures being the rule
of faith, which we affirm, you say nothing. Against the infallibility of our
translation, which we grant not to be the rule of faith, you discourse at
large; wherein I entreat the Reader to consider these few things with me. That
which he speaks in disgrace of our translation, makes no more against it, then
against all other whatsoever. For neither is any translation the language in
which the Scripture was written; and no translators ever had any such
infallible assistance by the holy Ghost. Remember the 8000. places Chap. 4.
sect. 10.
Sure the author of the vulgar Latin translation had not such help as the
Hebrew and Greek originals, which the translations of all the learned Papists
themselves declare; Pegnm, Vatablus, Isidorus, Clarius.
Pagnin, Vatablus, Isidorus, Clarius, etc.

As for Martin was set out 1582. Fulks answer 1583.
Gregory Martins cauils, they were answered long since by D. Fulke: and I
marvel that you can name them without blushing, seeing never a one of you
durst undertake the defense of them, for the space of these 23. years. Nay,
which is worse, you were not ashamed, in Printed at Antwerp. 1600.
the second edition of your Rhemish Testament, to bleare your blind followers
eyes, with a table of heretical corruptions in translating the Scriptures, as
if you had propounded some new matter, whereas they were all taken out of that
book of Martins, and had long before been justified by D. Fulke, without any
reply on your parts.

You demand, how any unlearned man can be infallibly sure, that in those
places which do seem to favor our sect, our translation does not err. I
answer, that there are better means of assurance for unlearned Protestants,
concerning the truth of our translation, then any Papist can have by your
imagined authority, for your vulgar Latin. First, it is no slender persuasion
to any reasonable man, that those places you speak of, if not wholly, yet for
the most part are translated with the same sense in other toungs which they
have in ours; as in Spanish, French, Italian, Flemish, Dutch. Secondly, it is a
great confirmation of the truth, that many of those texts which seem most to
favor us, are the same in your vulgar and Rhemish editions, that they are in
ours. Thirdly, the truth of ours is yet more clear, because every man may see,
that in books of controversy betwixt us, our translations are seldom denied
by the learned of your side, though you condemn our expositions. Fourthly, who
may not easily discern how much more faithful our translation of those
places, and all others is, then yours; seeing we are ready to make trial of
it by the originals, the learned on your sides being judges: you are afraid of
nothing more, then to have yours examined by the Hebrew and Greek? Fifthly, in
the places you speak of, our translations deserve the more credit, because we
labor to make them plain for every man's understanding, and show how they
agree with the rest of the book and chapter: whereas your Rhemish Testament is
so handled, that an English man of good understanding can hardly tell what to
make of it, for the very words themselves in many places, as if you avoided
nothing more then plainness. Sixthly, we persuade all men, as much as we can,
to labor for the knowledge of the original tongues, that so they may be able
to judge of our translation: you do all you can to keep men in the mist of
ignorance, because you are afraid to have your corruptions discovered.
Seventhly, though we allow not our ministers such an infinite authority as you
give your Clergy: yet we teach, that it becoms Christian charity and
modesty, neither to suspect a translation where the analogy of faith is kept,
and the plain meaning of the holy Ghost not manifestly altered; nor to rest
upon private conceit, against the general judgment of the learned, without
very evident proof of error. These, amongst other, are reasonable grounds for
a Christian to build upon, that he may have some good assurance of the truth of
our translation. Now let us examine yours.

We must (say you) admit an infallible authority in the Church, to assure us
that such or such a translation does not err in any point. First, this is more
then neeeds. For if that authority can assure us, that the translation erreth
not in any point needful to salvation in regard of the sense, it may be a
sufficient ground for us to build our faith upon, though it should mistake some
words in many points, and the sense too, in matters of less importance.
Secondly, though we do admit such an authority in the Church, yet may we be
far enough from any such assurance. For how shall I be sure, that the Church
has so affirmed of this, or that translation? How shall I know, what the Church
is? A company (you say) of men upon earth, infallibly taught by the holy Ghost,
what is the true faith in all points. Is this teaching common to every one of
this company severally, or only annexed to them all jointly when they are
together? What if all, what if the greater part assemble not? Is this company
of Clergy men only, or of Lay men also? If of them, then belike these are
none of the Church. But let us grant that, which (as it shall appear in due
place) is neither true nor probable, that the Clergy only is the church,
howsoever they may be so representatiuely. What assurance can any man have, who
lives not in the time of this assembly (I might say, in the place too, where
it is) that there was any such assembly? that the greatest part agreed to the
approouing of such a translation? that this is the translation they agreed to?
Especially seeing two Bellu^ Papate
Popes, since the last Conuenticle of Trent, have set out your authentical
translation diversely. Whether of these two was agreed on? How shall I be
infallibly assured, that these Popes altered nothing in the translation allowed
by the Council? Shall I say more? What if this Council used not the means of
examining this translation by the originals? What if most of them (as it is
most certain) had no skill in the originals? and so did but leap after some
few, like sheep, not understanding what they did? yet the shoot Anchor holds:
the Pope allowed of their judgment. What if his skill were but indifferent? He
could not err, you will say. What was the reason, why he allowed that
translation? because the Council examined and approved it. But without him, al
they might err, especially if they did not use all good means to find out the
truth. Who assured him they did? Shall we have the holy Ghost like Mahomets
dove, to come and certify the Pope of this doubt? This is a matter of fact;
and in things of such nature the Pope may err, even iudicially. Well, I will
deal bountifully with you. Put case all this be true. How shall I attain to
infallible assurance hereof? Forsooth some Priest or Friar, Jesuit or other,
tells me, that things so passed, and therefore I am bound to believe it. Then
my faith rests not upon the authority of the Church, but upon the credit of
him that says, he is sent by the Church to make such report. Thus it comes to
pass, that the belief of unlearned Papists is nothing else but a persuasion
they have, that such a priest knows what is true, and will not deceive them
with any false informations. Tell me not of other Priests and Jesuits
consenting with him, that was thy spiritual father: for all these together, if
there were ten times as many of them, are not the Church, in which only this
infallible authority is to be found. And so there can be no such assurance in
any unlearned Papist of the truth of your vulgar, or any other translation. I
confess it is against both Charity and Civility to suspect a man of untruth,
without just cause of suspicion: but such fruits grow upon such roots of
Popery, that a man must needs be either uncivil in giving credit to nothing,
though upon never so good reason; or else ridiculously credulous in believing
every thing that shall be told him, though never so much against reason. But the
spirit of God teaches and persuades men to believe the Church. Are you they
that mock at private spirits, and yet are glad to fly to that help? Is it
not as likely the spirit should teach men which is the Scripture, as which is
the Church? And assure them of a translation, as of this or that man's
ordination and priesthood? If such proofs, as I have spoken of before, will
serve, we are nothing inferior to you, but as well for weight as number,
superior. If you say, the Scriptures enjoin us to believe the church: How
shall I be assured that they are not in those places that seem to enjoin such
a belief falsely translated? Because the Church says, they are true in all
points. What if the Church be deceived? It cannot be. Who says so? The
Scripture. Who tells you the Scripture says so? The Church. What is to be
ridiculous, if this be not? It might seem exceeding strange, that ever any
reasonable man should be led away with such fopperies: if the holy Ghost had
not foretold us of it, that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.
God would send men strong delusions, that they should believe lies, that all
they might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. These delusions poor ignorant Papists trust to, and to none
more then to those which are the maynest of all, the authority of the Church,
and impossibility of the Popes erring: to which whosoever firmly cleaves,
can never be good Christian or faithful subject in any Church or state
whatsoever.

A. D.. 2.
Secondly, they fail in the second condition or property, which the rule of
faith should have. For the Scriptures themselves alone, in what language
soever, be obscure, and hard to be understood, at least to unlearned men, who
cannot read them; and therefore the Scriptures alone cannot be unto unlearned
men, a sufficient rule to instruct them in all points of faith; as is plain.
For lock up an unlettered man, and an English Bible, for a time in a study,
and he will come forth (I warrant you) as ignorant in matters of faith as he
went in, if we add no other means to instruct him but the bare written word,
which he cannot read. And yet unlearned men may be saved; and saved they
cannot be, without an entire and infallible faith: and this they cannot have,
unless there be some certain rule and infallible means provided by Almighty
God, meet for their capacity, to teach them this faith: and Scripture alone
(as is now proved) is not a rule meet for the capacity of unlearned men, or
apt to instruct them sufficiently in all points of faith. But what speak I
only of unlearned men? since also learned men cannot by only reading the
Scriptures, be infallibly sure, that they do rightly understand them. For
while they understand one way, perhaps they ought to understand another way:
that which they understand plainly and literally, ought perhaps to be
understood figuratively and mystically; and contrary, that which they
understand figuratively, ought perhaps to be understood properly. And seeing
that it is most certain, that all do not expound right, since the exposition
of one, is contrary to the exposition of another; (as right is never contrary
to right) how should one be infallibly sure, that he only expounds right;
having nothing to assure him, but the seeming of his own sense and reason,
which is as uncertain and fallible, as the judgments and persuasions of other
men, who seem to themselves to have attained as well as he, the right
interpretation or sense. Moreover there be many things required to the perfect
understanding of Scripture, which are found but in very few: and those also in
whom those gifts are, are not infallibly sure, that they are so guided by those
gifts, but that both they and others may prudently doubt, lest sometimes in
their private expositions, as men, they err. And consequently, their private
expositions cannot be that rule of faith, which we seek for; which must on the
one side be determinately and plainly understood: and on the other side it must
be infallible, certain, and such as cannot err.

A. W.
That second condition of easiness to be understood, is no property
necessarily belonging to the rule of faith: unless perhaps you imagine that
God fails in his providence, if a man may not come to the knowledge of the
truth, and everlasting life, without any pains. Is it not enough that the rule
is such, as may be understood of every one, unless a man may know it by
dreaming of it? Is not the knowledge of the means of salvation worthy of some
care and labor?

Are the Scriptures obscure and hard, that they cannot be understood? How then
says the holy Ghost, that Psalm. 19. 8.
they give wisdom unto the simple, and light to the eyes: that and 119. 105.
ver. 13.
they are a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths: that the entrance
into them shows light, and gives understanding to the simple? Why does the
Apostle call them 2. Pet. 1. 19.
a light shining in a dark place? And yet all this is spoken of the Scriptures
of the old Testament, which, in comparison of the new, are indeed obscure. Your
Gloss expounds that place, Glossa ad Psalm. 119.
Thy word is a lantern, of all the holy Scriptures. Your Cardinal Joan. de
Turrecrem. ad Psa. 18. and ad Psalm. 118. verse. 130.
Turrecremata seeing the plainness and clearness of the word of God, so
directly and expressly commended, applies those places to the new Testament,
which (as he said) is bright and clear, which enlightens our darkness, and
gives understanding to the humble. And who can doubt that the Scriptures are
such, as may be understood by all men, seeing the Lord writ them for the
instruction of all men: and our Savior Christ in the Gospel commends the
Jews for searching the Scriptures, affirming that Joan. 5. 39.
in them there is proof of his nature and office? But to what purpose were
this search, if nothing could be found by it? So clear is this truth, that the
ancient writers auow it without any doubting.

Clem. Alexa^. orat. ad gentes.
Hearken ye that be far off, hearken ye that be near: The word of God is hid
from no man, it shines to all men; there is no great darkness in the word.
The Scriptures (says Jren. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Irenaeus) are plain, and without doubtfulnesse: and may be heard alike of all
men. Give heed (says Justin. contra Tryph.
Justin the martyr) to those things that I will rehearse out of the Scriptures,
which are such as need hearing only, and not any expounding. This, as the
Greek shows, is to be understood not only of those places which he was then
to deliver, but generally of the Scriptures: (...). Cyrill. Alex. contra
Julian, lib. 7.
That the Scriptures might be known to all men great and little, they are
profitably commended to us in a familiar speech, so that they are not above any
man's capacity. Yea there is nothing in them hard (says Lib. 9.
the same author) to them that are conversant in them, as they ought to be,
though every sentence be obscure to Julian and his accomplices. The like has
Epiph. haeres. 79.
Epiphanius: All things are clear in the Scriptures to them who will bring to
the understanding of the word of God, a religious kind of discourse. Where that
same (...), which Epiphanius requires, seems to be nothing else but a
reverend examining of the Scripture, according to the holy Ghosts manner of
speaking and reasoning in the Scripture. Haeres. 69.
In another place he says, that Al things are clear and plain in the holy
Scriptures. So also says Chrysostom. ad 2 Thessalonians. hom. 3.
Chrysostom. And a little after, he teaches us how to restrain those All
things. All things (says he) that are necessary, are open and manifest.
Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
In another place comparing the Apostles with the Philosophers, he says, that
the Philosophers indeed writ obscurely, that they might be had in admiration
for their eloquence and learning; but the Apostles and Prophets take a contrary
course, delivering all things plainly and clearly to all men, as being the
common teachers of all the world; that every one by himself might be able to
learn those things that were taught, even by the only reading of them. He
says yet further, that In Mat. hom. 1.
the Scriptures are easy to be understood, of servants, of country people, of
widows, of children, yea and of him that is very unskillful. I could be large
in this matter: a few more testimonies shall suffice. God (says August. ad
Psalm. 8.
Austin) has applied the Scriptures to the understanding of infants and
sucklings. Therefore Contra Julian. lib. 1. cap. 5. August. de peccat. mer. and
remiss. lib. 2. cap. 36.
he justly reproves Julian, who (as you Papists do now) laid out with many
words the hardness of the Scripture: yet is it not to be denied, that the
Scriptures are hard: but as hard as they are, enough may be learned out of
them, even by the simplest, for his salvation. There is meat for strong men
(says Fulgent. in sermon. de Confessor.
Fulgentius) and milk for babes. There has God altogether provided for the
salvation of all, who^ he vouchsafes to save. Every man (says August. de
vtil. eredendi. cap. 6.
Austin) may draw from thence as much as is sufficient for him. But is this
knowledge to be had with idleness and carelessness? Nothing less. If you will
persuade your selves (says Chrysostom. in Prologad Roman.
Chrysostom) to bestow pains and diligence in reading, surely nothing shall be
wanting for your understanding of the Scriptures. There are indeed (as August.
de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 6. 9.
Austin says) hard places in the Scripture: yet no other, then are other where
in plain terms expounded. There is great obscurity (says Ambros. ad Psalm.
118. ser. 8.
Ambrose) in the writings of the Prophets: but if thou knock at the gate of
the Scriptures with a certain hand of thy mind, and diligently examine those
things which are hidden, by little and little thou shall begin to gather the
sense of that which is spoker, and it shall be opened to thee by no other but by
the word of God. For it is the order of the Scriptures (says Hieron. ad Esai.
cap. 9.
Jerome) to hard things, to join other that are plain. The circumstance of
the Scripture (says August. qq. 83 q. 69.
Austin) does give light to the sense of it. The fewer (says Tertull. cont.
Praxeam.
Tertullian) must be understood by the more. That rule of August. de vtil.
cred. cap. 6.
Austins must always be remembered, that we come with devout and religious
affection to the reading of the Scriptures, as true religion requires. And (as
Chrysostom. in. Prolog. ad Roman.
Chrysostom says) we must seek, namely by prayer, if we will find the sense
of the Scripture. For (as Origin. in Exodus hom. 9.
Origin says upon the like occasion) it is hidden from them that are
negligent, but opened to them that knock, and found of them that seek. The
reason why God has so tempered all things in scripture, writing some where
plainly, some where obscurely, is given by August. de doct. Christ. lib. 2.
cap. 6.
Austin: That it is done by Gods provident care, that by labor he might beat
down our pride, and draw away our minds from lothing: things easily attained
to seem of little worth. Gloriously therefore (as Cap. 9.
he says) and wholsomly has the holy Ghost so tempered the Scriptures, that
by plain and easy places he might provide for the satisfying of our hunger,
and by hard and dark, take away lothing. But (as Cap. 9.
he adds) in those places which are plain in the Scriptures, all those
matters are found which contain faith and good manners: that is, hope and
charity. This is that which Marsil. Patauin. de fens. pacis. part. 1. cap. 9.
Marsilius of Padua, above 800 years since, disputed against the Pope, That the
Gospel was very sufficient, perfect and clear of it self, that by it we may be
directed immediately, concerning, and in all things, which belong to a man's
obteyning of everlasting life, and avoiding misery.

As in the former property, having propounded your matter against the
Scripture, you reason only against the English translation; so in this, that
one may be some what suitable to the other, being to speak of the obscurity of
the Scripture, you show that it is hard to one kind only, viz unlearned men:
though you help the matter a little, afterward, by auouching the hardness of
it, even to the learned also. The Scriptures (say you) are not the rule of
faith. Why so? Because they are hard to be understood of those unlearned me^,
that cannot read them. Is not the teaching of the Church, whereto you ascribe
so much, impossible to be understood by them, that cannot hear? Is it
therefore no sufficient rule? But the Scripture is not so hard, as you imagine:
no not to them that cannot read, as long as they may hear it read, and have
care to understand, and remember what they hear. Yea there are many in
England, that know never a letter on the book, who notwithstanding are able to
give a better sense of many places of Scripture, then some of your
Mass Priests, that can read their whole Portuise and Service book. Idle
therefore and ridiculous is your example of a man locked up with a Bible: since
by hearing it read, though himself cannot read, he may attain to more
knowledge, then many of your blind guides have: who for all their skill in
reading, understand never a word of their Epistles and Gospels, which they
daily say at Mass, like prating parrots.

Now for your conclusions inferred hereupon; the first, as I have showed, is
false, that any such entire and infallible faith is necessary, so that without
it a man cannot be saved: the second, of the means without which, such a faith
cannot be had, is ordinarily true; the third, which denies the Scripture alone
to be such a means, is either false, and not proved by you, or nothing to the
purpose. Can any man truly say, that God has not provided sufficient means
for every man's salvation, because some men are unable to read the Scriptures,
which are those means? Has not God done his part, in making all men capable
to read, though many neglect to learn? Therefore if the Scripture be
sufficient for all men's instruction, as I have proved it to be, for all your
supposed obscurity: God cannot be charged with want of care, because men are
careless to use the means of their own salvation. But if by Scripture alone,
you mean Scripture without any help of man; all you say is besides the
matter. For no man ever was so foolish, as to make Scripture alone, in that
sense, either the rule of faith, or a means of any good whatsoever: unless
perhaps you Papists, according to the rest of your superstition in Agnus Deis,
hallowed Granes, and such like, may have a conceit, as those priests (of whom
Opus imperf. in Math. hom. 43.
an ancient writer speaks) had, that a part of the Gospel hung about ones
neck, may be a preservative against I know not what bodily or ghostly danger.

You have undertaken to prove, that the scriptures are not the rule of faith,
because they are hard to be understood. Their hardness, in respect of the
ignorant, was auowed by you only against those, that cannot read. Now for the
learned you tell us, that they cannot, by only reading the Scriptures, be
infallibly sure, that they rightly understand them. What then? Therefore can
they not at all be sure? Because reading only will not assure them: therefore
is there no means, whereby they may be assured? Call to mind what I alleged
before, out of Ambrose, Origin, Chrysostom, and Austin: who doubt not to
assure men, that they may come to the understanding of the Scripture, if they
will use the means of prayer and diligence. Whom shall we believe? These
worthies of the Church, speaking also upon manifold experience; or you, whom we
know not so much as by sight or name? If you can so far bewitch any of your
own poor ignorant souls, yet sure there is no man of any indifferent good
judgment, that will be carried away with this your simple authority, against
the joint consent of those famous Divines.

But you will add reason to your authority: let us hear it. It may be (say
you) they ought to be understood otherwise. Therefore they cannot be sure, they
rightly understand. Tell me, I pray you, for my better instruction, whether you
make this doubt of all places of scripture, or of some only. It will not sink
into my head, that you do so much condemn the scripture of obscurity, that
you think no one place of it, can be certainly understood. Nay it is
impossible you should so despise the judgment of those, I named er while, or
condemn your own capacity, as to deny, that Canus loc. Thcol. lib. 3. c. 2
many texts of scripture are so evident, that a child cannot mistake the
meaning of them. Then, that antecedent, It may be they ought to understand
otherwise, in some places of scripture can have no place. Let us limit it, that
the truth may appear. Some places of scripture are so hard, that a man may
understand them otherwise, then, in truth, they are to be understood. This
proposition is out of all question: what will you conclude hereupon? That men
cannot be sure they rightly understand these places. I grant this too.
Therefore these doubtful places are not to be made the foundation of our
faith: but (as August. ad Marcel. de Baptis. paruulo.
Austin says) We must rest upon those places of scripture, which are very
manifest, that by them the harder may be expounded. But admit there were diverse
texts of scripture, which can by no means be certainly understood (which yet
for my part, saving other men's better judgment, I do not think to be true,
because God has appointed every syllable of the scripture for our instruction
in this life) but admit (I say) there were such places; yet would it not follow
hereupon, that because those texts cannot be understood, therefore the
scripture is so obscure, that it cannot be the rule of faith. For there may be
sufficient means of salvation plainly discovered in the scriptures, though
these places be not understood: yea it may be, and it is very likely, that the
very same things which in these places are signified, are otherwhere in
scripture apparently set down. You will say, this proves that the scripture
is obscure in some places. Who ever denied it? But this does not prove, that
it is hard to be understood in those points; that are necessary to salvation.
Remember, I denied that second property of your rule, when I answered to your
proposition. A man may be saved, though he understand not the true sense of
every verse in the Bible; so he do not acknowledge it to be the word of God,
and withal deny it to be true. But if it be so hard to understand the
Scripture aright, is it good dealing in you to urge the expositions of men,
with such pere^ ptorinesse, as if it were an heinous sin not to give credit
to every interpretation of the Fathers? We See my answer to 12. art. part 1.
art. 5.
acknowledge their learning and piety: but we remember they are men, and
therefore may be deceived. Where they bring reason for their expositions, we
consider of it with reverence to them: where they bring none, we try whether
we can bring any proof of their interpretation. If we find none, we labor to
expound the text so, as true reason (so far as we can judge) shows that we
ought to do. Where our weakness affoords no proof for our interpretation,
nor against theirs, we are willing and ready to give more credit to them, then
to our selves. But it is no disgrace to them, that process of time, by Gods
blessing upon men's endeauours, should bring somewhat to light now, which in
former ages has not been understood. It cannot be hidden from any man (says
your Joan. Roffens. cont. Luth. art. 18.
Bishop of Rochester) that many things are now more clearly beaten out and
understood, as well in other things, as in the Gospel, then heretofore;
because the ancient writers had not the Ice broken before them, neither did
their time suffice to sound the deepth of Scripture in all places. We may add
hereunto another reason, observed by Stella in Luc. 10. confiteor tibi pater.
Stella, that, though of our selves we were but Pigmees or dwarfes, yet being
carried upon the shoulders of them, as it were upon Giants, we may see farther
then they could. Which is the reason, why Salmero ad Romans 5. disp. 51
an other of your writers doubts not to affirm, that the latter doctrines or
expositions are the quicker sighted.

But diverse men (you say) expound diversely: and thereupon you demand, how any
man can be sure he expounds truly, having nothing to assure him, but the
seeming of his own sense and reason. When I read this objection, me thought I
saw one of Cicero in Acad.
the old Academicks or Scepticks, sweating to prove, that there is no truth in
any thing to be known, but that we must be content to rest upon likelihood. I
pray you answer me, in good earnest: Are you persuaded of your self (I speak
to a Scholar) that you understand not the true meaning of any one place in
Aristotle's Physics, with the commentaries upon him expounding diversely? Surely
if your ignorance had been so great, I presume neither Rome, Rhemes, Doway, nor
any other University or College would have vouchsafed you the degree of a
Batcheler in Arts. And yet Arist. in Epist. ad Alexan.
Aristotle himself professes of that book, that he set it out, as if he had
not set it out; because no body (for sooth) could understand it, but he, that
had, or should hear him teach by word of mouth; as you speak of the preaching
of the Church. If then it be possible to understand Aristotle's meaning, and
that certainly, for all the diverse interpretations of his expositors, and his
own intended obscurity: give us leave to think, that the Lord God purposing
to reveal his will by the scriptures, has written in such sort, that man his
creature, to whom (as Gregor. 1. Epistola. 84.
Gregory says) he writ them, may without any just cause of doubting,
understand so much at the least, as is necessary for his salvation; Joan. 20.
31:
which was Gods end in writing. But every interpreter thinks that himself
has attained to the right sense. What of that? Therefore, is there no means
to discern, which interpretation is true, which false? Does not this doubt
accompany the writings of the Philosophers, as well as the scriptures? Never
go about to persuade us to such an injurious and unthankful conceit toward
God, as to imagine, that he has vouchsafed us the use of reason, and the
treasure of his word, to so little purpose. If it be impossible to know, when
we have the true sense of the scripture it had been far better, that no
scripture had been written, but all left to the direction of your Pope, from
time to time. Such blasphemies, as I have showed, some of your side utter: but
a true Christian is so thoroughly persuaded of Gods wisdom, that by his giving
the scripture, he sees al these your cauils and shifts refuted.

Now in the last place you tell us, that there be many things required to the
perfect understanding of scripture, which are found in very few; If by perfect
understanding you mean an exact knowledge of all places: that you say is true,
but not much to the purpose. For there is no such knowledge necessary, but that
the scripture may be the rule of faith, though every text in it cannot be
certainly understood. But consider a little, that if there be means of
attaining to a perfect understanding of scripture, though they be many, yet by
your confession they may be had: else are they in vain, if neither any man,
nor all men can attain unto them: some to one, some to more, as it pleases
God to bestow his gifts severally. If you mean, that many things are required
to a perfect understanding of points necessary to salvation: see how much you
differ from the judgment of the ancient Fathers. The truth is not hid (says
Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 24.
Chrysostom) but from the^, that will not seek it. And in In Genesis hom. 3
an other place; The Scripture expounds it self, and suffers no man to
err. Let him that has an heart (says August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap.
6.
Austin) read those things, that go before, and those that follow, and he shall
find the sense. For (as Hieron. in Psalm. 86:
Jerome truly says) the Lord has spoken by his Gospel, not that a few should
understand him, but that all should. August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Austin gave us the reason before, why he speaks plain in some places and not
in all; To feed our hunger, and to keep our queasie stomachs from loathing our
meat.

But you require I know not what infallible assurance, that they which have
these gifts, may be sure, they never err, in any of their private expositions.
What assurance look you for? No revelation I hope. They may be sure not to
err, if they deliver no expositions, but such, as they can evidently prove to
be true. For other places, where the sense is hard, let them use all the
diligence they can, and if it prove not very plain and certain, let the^
leave it y uncertain, til it please God some other man may find the true
meaning of it, and so make it known to men for the rule of faith, in that
point it concerns, as it is always in it self. Are you afraid, lest it
should come to pass hereby, that many matters of faith should be unknown? The
ignorance of these things, cannot hinder a man's salvation, and this
inconvenience follows the preaching of your Church, as well as the reading of
the scripture: For how many points of doctrine are there, not yet decreed of by
your Church? How many thousand places of scripture, not yet expounded by it? If
then it be no hindrance to salvation, for a man to be ignorant of the truth, in
many points and places of scripture, may not the written word of God be the
rule of faith, though diverse things in it be not certainly understood?

A. D.. 3.
Thirdly, they fail in the third condition. For the Scriptures are not so
universal, as the rule of faith had need to be. For this rule ought to be so
universal, that it may be able, absolutely to resolve and determine all doubts
and questions of faith, which either have been, or may hereafter be in
controversy; for otherwise there were not sufficient means provided, by
which, schism and heresies might be avoided: unity of faith, (so necessary
to salvation) might be conserved among Christian men.

A. W.
The last imperfection, you note in the Scripture, whereby you would make it
insufficient to be the rule of faith, is the scantnesse of it, that it
contains not all things necessary to be believed: which you go about to
prove thus.

The rule of faith must be able absolutely to resolve all doubts of faith, that
have been, or may be. The Scripture is not able absolutely to resolve all such
doubts. Therefore the Scripture is not the rule of faith.
I should have let your proposition pass, without any question, To the
proposition.
but that I am so used to your craft in speaking doubtfully. For fear whereof
I would feign understand, what the reason is, why you put in absolutely. If
your intent be to signify, that the resolution must be certainly true, you
might have spoken plainly, as you meant. But it may be you understand by
resolving absolutely, such a kind of resolution, as shall take away all
outward contention, which sometimes is indeed brought to pass by the Decrees
of your Popes, no man daring, for fear of his life, once to open his mouth
against them: Such a resolution the scripture cannot give, neither is it to be
looked for, that the rule of faith should be of that nature. It is enough that
it show plainly and certainly, what is true in all matters of faith. Secondly,
the controversies of faith, you speak of, must be indeed matters, that require
belief, otherwise the rule of faith is not to meddle with them. To speak more
plain; It is not to be held as a duty of the rule of faith, that it should
be able to determine of every idle question, that curious and contentious
heads can devise. For example, if any man will make question of the Virgin
Marie, whether she were (as Lady Hungerfords meditations upon the Beads,
you teach) fifteen year old, or, perhaps eighteen or nineteen when our
Savior Christ her Son was borne; whether she were threescore and three when
she died, or more or less. In these, and a thousand such matters, delivered as
points of faith by your Priests and Jesuits, it is not to be expected that the
rule of faith should afford any resolution. We grant that infinite questions
of your schoolmen, and positio^s of your Divines, cannot be determined by the
rule of faith: but only thus, that they may be co^uinced to be no matters of
belief, that a Christian must needs think thus or thus of the^; because they
cannot be proved, either one way, or other by scripture: your proposition
therefore is true only of those things, that are needful to be believed, all
which may be certainly resolved by it. What cannot, is not of necessity to be
held by faith.

Your proposition you prove, as you think, by this reason.

If there be no sufficient means provided, by which schisms and Proof of the
proposition.
heresies may be avoided, and unity among Christians conserved, unless the
rule of faith be able to resolve all such doubts, then it must be able to
resolve them. But there is no sufficient means provided, whereby schisms and
heresies may be avoided, and vnitic conserved, unless the rule be able to
resolve all such doubts. Therefore the rule of faith must be able to resolve
them.
If the proposition be taken in that sense, which the former may seem to have,
as I showed, then I deny the consequence To the proposition.
thereof; that is, I say it does not follow, that if there be no sufficient
means provided, whereby schisms and heresies shall de facto, and in eue^t be
avoided, unless the rule of faith be able to show what is true, what false in
all questions, that any man will move, then the rule must be able so to do.
The reason of my denial is, that, as before I answered, it is sufficient for
the rule to show what is true, in matters of faith; and let us know, that those
are not needful to be believed, of the truth whereof it says nothing any way.

The assumption also is false, though you speak not of actual To the
assumption.
avoiding of heresy and schism. For there is sufficient means provided for
the avoiding of schism; because nothing must be held for certain truth, which
cannot be proved to be according to the rule, which is the only measure of
true unity among Christians.

A. D.. 4.
But the Scriptures be not thus universal. For there be diverse questions or
doubts moved now a days, and those also touching very substantial matters,
which are not expressly set down, nor determined by only Scripture. For where
have we any express Scripture, to prove, that all those, and only those
books which Catholics or Protestants hold for Scripture, are indeed Gods
word, and true Scripure? This we shall not find expressly set down in a part of
Scripture. This point therefore, whereupon depends the certainty of every
point, proved out of Scripture, cannot be made certain to our knowledge or
belief, unless we admit some other infallible rule or authority, whereupon we
may ground an infallible belief: which infallible rule if we admit, to assure
us, that there is at all any Scripture; and that those books and no other be
Canonical Scripture; why should we not admit the same to assure us infallibly,
which is the true sense and meaning of the same Scripture? Hereupon S. Austin
Lib. de vtilit. credend. cap. 4.
says very well, Cur non apud eos diligentissime requiram, quid Christus
praeceperit, quorum auctoritate commotus, Christum aliquid praecepisse iam
credidi? Tune mihi melius expositurus es, quid ille dixerit? etc. Why should I
not most diligently ask or learn of those (he means of the Catholic
Church) what Christ has commanded, by whose authority I was moved to believe,
that Christ commanded any thing at all? What, will thou expound unto me better,
what he has said? that is to say, the meaning of his words: Quae Ibidem.
(says he) ista tanta dementia est, illis creed Christo esse credendum, and a
nobis disce quid ille dixerit? multo facilius mihi persuaderem, Christo non
esse credendum: quam de illo quidquam, nisi ab ijs, per quos ei credidissem,
discendum. What a madness is this in thee, to say, believe them (to wit the
Catholics) that we must believe Christ (and the Scriptures to be his word),
yet learn of us what Christ said? that is to say, what is the meaning of his
word. I should (says S. Austin) much more easily persuade my self that I ought
not to believe Christ at all, then that I must learn any thing concerning him
of any, except of those of whom I have already learned to believe in him.

A. W.
I deny your principal Assumption, wherein you deny the sufficiency of the
Scripture for the determining of all matters of To the principal assumptio^.
faith. For if the Scripture were not sufficient to this purpose, it might be
lawful for men to add to the word of God, that which is wanting: but Deuteronomy. 4.
2.
that God has precisely forbidden all me^; Ye shall put nothing to the word
which I command you, neither shall you take any thing from it: out of which,
Cardinal Caietan. ad Deuteronomy. 4.
Caietane says, we may gather that the law of God is perfect. But of this
place I have said more Defense of the Reform. Cath. pa. 405. etc.
other where; and our Divines are large and plentiful in this argument. Act.
26. 12.
The Apostle Paul affirms of him self, that he preached nothing but that
which had bin spoken by Moses and the Prophets: yea our Savior every where
avouches his doctrine by the writings of the old Testament. Indeed of whom
should we know the will of God, but of God himself? who doubtless has not
delivered it so sparingly, in so many several books, but that it contains
whatsoever is needful to salvation. All things indeed that our Lord did, are
not written, but those (says Cyril. Alexa^. in Joan. lib. 12 cap. 68.
Cyril) that the writers thought to be sufficient for manners and doctrine. I
could ouerwhelme you with testimonies of the Fathers in this matter. A few
shall serve. The Canonical Scripture (says August. de peccat. mer. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
Austin) is the rule of all. The letters of Bb. are reprehended by some other
of grauer authority. Plenaria.
General Councels correct provincial, and the former are amended by the
latter. Let the Scripture be judge (says Basil. epist. 8.
another) and let those doctrines be held for true that agree with it. For the
law of God or Scripture (as Chrysostom. ad 2 Cor. hom. 13.
Chrysostom says) is a most exact balance, square, and rule. Therefore let us
pass by that which he or he thinks, and let us enquire all things of the
Scriptures. Athanas. con. gentes, vel idola.
The holy Scriptures inspired by God, are sufficient to show the truth. And
therefore (as Hilar. de Trin. lib. 3.
Hilary says wisely and religiously) It were well we would content our selves
with those things that are written. If we will not, this is Basil. de vera ac
pia fide.
Basils censure of us, that we are without faith, and proud. It is a manifest
argument of infidelity (says Basil) and a certain sign of pride, if any man
reject ought that is written, or attempt to bring in any thing that is not
written. Therefore Joan. Damas. orth. fid. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Damascen says, that the Church receives, acknowledges and reuerenceth all
things that are delivered by the law, the Prophets, the Apostles and
Evangelists, and further seeks not for any thing. I pray you show me some
reason, if you can, why the Lord that does not omit necessary matters, and
repeateth those that are less needful to be known, should fill so many books
of Scripture with the same histories and points of doctrine oftentimes
rehearsed, and quite leave out many things of far greater importance, then
some of those are which he has caused to be written. Without the knowledge of
many things recorded in the Scriptures, a man may be saved; but you deny
salvation to all men that believe not whatsoever you teach them (and there is
no end of your devices) though it have no warrant in any part of Scripture. Is
it not better then to rest only upon that which both you and we acknowledge to
be the word of God, then to give an infinite liberty to men of devising what
they will; and to lay a grievous burden upon our selves, to believe under pain
of damnation, whatsoever they will father upon, I know not what impossibility
of erring? Let him that has eyes see, though the blind delight in blindness.

The weakness of your principal Assumption, concerning the insufficiency of
the Scriptures, you strive to fortify with this slender reason.

If there be diverse questions moved now a days, touching substantial Proof
of the principal assumption.
matters, which are not expressly set down, nor determined by only express
Scripture, then the Scripture is not able to resolve all such doubts. But there
are diverse such questions. Therefore the Scripture is not able to resolve all
such doubts.
Ere I answer directly to your syllogism, I must note two To the Proposition.
things in the propounding of it. First, by whom the questions you speak of,
are moved. If by Papists, it is the shame and sin of your Church, to suffer
idle and needless questions to be moved, of which there can be no
determination but by a Council, to be held, no man knows how many years
hence, ever or never. If you say, these questions are set on foot by us; all
the world may discern your untruth. For we are certainly persuaded, that it is
not lawful to accept any doctrine, as a point of faith, which cannot be proved
by the Scriptures. But you will say, We think they are determinable by
Scripture, though indeed they be not. At the least then, answer the proofs we
bring out of Scripture, and on our part the controversy is ended. You will
reply, that we will not be answered, but interpret Scripture as we list. Who
sees not that this is a mere slander, since we stand not upon any private
revelations, but on those rules of interpretation, which the fathers, according
to the light of true reason, have left us, as it were by legacy? But this reply
is also otherwise insufficient. For whereas you yield, as appears by this
reason, that some things may be determined by Scripture; this objection denies
that any point of doctrine whatsoever can be resolved of by it; because if that
you say, be true, we will in all cases interpret Scripture as we please.
Secondly, I observe another point, in respect of the time. If the questions you
mean be such, as were never moved till now, and the Scripture never failed in
any former doubts, which seems to be implied in that speech Now a days: me
thinks there is no show of reason to imagine, that so many and so capital
heresies, for the space of 1500 years should be refuted and overthrown by
Scriptures; and now at the last, matters of less importance, and yet as you
say, very substantial, should have no means of satisfaction by the like
course. Doubtless if the Scripture has hitherto been sufficient, it is no
small wrong to suspect and accuse it now of insufficiency, especially in very
substantial matters, necessary to be believed.

Now concerning your syllogism, I deny the consequence To the proposition.
of your proposition. What? is the Scripture so poor and weak, that it can
determine nothing which is not expressly set down therein? What art, what
writing of any man is so bare? Are the Scriptures only, that come immediately
from the author of true reason, to be barred of that privilege, which all
other writings justly challenge? Is not a necessary consequence, according to
the rules of logic and reason, to be allowed of in Divinity as well as in
the Mathematics, where consectaries are as certainly true, as the theoremes,
out of which they are drawn? Is it not as certain by Scripture, that there
are three persons distinct each from other, and all three but one God, as if
these very words had bin expressly set down? But we must bear with you in
this matter, who learned this shift of your great Cardinal Bellarmine. We say
(quoth Bellarm. de verb Dei non script. lib. 4. c. 3 in princip.
Bellarmine, where he delivers the opinion of your Church) that the whole
doctrine of faith and manners, is not expressly contained in the Scriptures.
Expressly contained? To be expressed, and to be contained, are (at the least)
diverse, if not contrary. But I pray you, who says otherwise? Not the
Protestants doubtless: whose opinion he propounds presently, after this
sort. They preach (says Vbisuprae.
Bellarmine, speaking of us) that all things necessary to faith and manners,
are contained in the Scriptures. What is become now of expressly? For pure shame
he was glad to leave out that word, though he had craftily stolen it in before.
Well, this may serve to make good my denial of your proposition. A thing may
be determinable by Scripture, though the determination be not expressly set
down therein. Take not advantage of my words, because I say determinable, and
you determined. For the question is not what is determined, that is, set down
in plain words; but it is sufficient if the Scripture afford us the
determination of matters by certain consequence, upon truth therein delivered.
Therefore whereas you add, by only express Scripture: only and express are
but mere shifts, nothing at all against that we affirm: who require besides
only express words of Scripture, the ministry and industry of man, to gather
and conclude points of doctrine out of that which is written in the Scripture.

Your assumption is true, that there are diverse questions not determinable To
the proof of the assumption.
by express Scripture, and yet (as I have showed) the Scripture is sufficient
for the determining of all points of faith necessary to salvation. Concerning
the particular question, you bring for the proof of your assumption. First you
seem to grant (and that grant is as much as we require) that it may be
gathered out of the Scripture by consequence, that those books which we and you
acknowledge to be the word of God, are so indeed: otherwise, why say you, that
we shall not find it expressly set down in a part of Scripture? Secondly, I
demand, as before, who moves this question? Not the Protestants, who account
it a kind of blasphemy to deny it, and of infidelity to doubt of it. Your
holy Church of Rome is she that has buzzed this matter into Christian men's
ears, so that religion is thereby become a scorn to Atheists, while you make
no conscience of discrediting the word of God, so you may by any means
increase the reputation of your Apostaticall sea. The truth is, that this
opinion is not a matter now a days first set abroach: for Atheists (such as
August. cont. Faust. lib. 32. cap. 21.
Julian) have from time to time objected it; therefore might you have spared to
mention it, as a question now a days moved. But it is new and strange, yea
almost incredible, that Christians, and those Divines, yea such as think
religion rests on their shoulders, as the Poets feign heaven does upon Atlas,
should make a question whether the Scriptures be the word of God or no, and so
give men occasion to doubt thereof.

Thirdly, if this matter cannot be resolved of by the Scripture, we shall be
little the nearer for the infallible authority you have devised. Christians
need it not, who are already persuaded, that the books of the old and new
Testament are the undoubted word of God: and with Christians only, to speak
truly and properly, has the Church to do, ordinarily. But it falls out
sometimes, that amongst those which make profession of Christianity, there are
some found who are in doubt of this point. If this doubt arise in the heart of
a man that makes conscience of religion, he is to be taught, that it is but a
tentation of Satan, and therefore not to be hearkened to. Further, we must
demand the reasons of his doubting, August. confess. lib. 6. ca. 5. De morib.
Eccles. Cathol. cap 29.
showing him how absurd and unreasonable a matter it is, to make question of
that, which generally both Protestants and Papists hold, and which has been
held by the space of 1500. years, unless he be able to give very sufficient
cause why he may doubt. His arguments, if he bring any, must be answered, and
the Scriptures auowed by the matter and manner of writing; which is such, as
will certainly, if not convert, yet Agrippa de vanit. scient, cap. 100.
convince any man in the world, that man is not the deviser of those books. If
he be an Atheist, that derideth religion, and withal so unreasonable, that the
former and many other important proofs will not persuade him, what remains,
but that the magistrate whom God has appointed to see true religion
established, cut off so corrupt a member by lawful authority? Where this
course is not taken, what means have you to help the matter? Will you tell
him of an infallible authority in the Church? He will laugh at your folly, who
instead of proving beg the question. I do not believe (says he) there is any
such Church or authority. If I doubt of the Scripture, you prove it by the
Church: if I believe there is not any such Church, or authority in the Church,
you will persuade me by Scripture. To say the truth, who can be so patient, or
foolish rather, as to suffer himself to be led up and down in a ring, as it
were a door turning upon hinges, still in the same place? The authority of
the Church is an argument of such weight, as that he is not to be counted
either a Christian, or a man of reason, that is not much moved therewithal:
yea so much, as that he will not dissent from the continual judgment of it,
unless he be driven to it by certain reason: but yet this authority is not
infallible. Christ evermore judges truly (says August. cont. Cresc. lib. 2.
cap. 21.
Austin) but the Ecclesiastical judges, as being men, are very often deceived.
And therefore he says De not. and great. cap. 61.
in another place, that he is not bound to give his consent, without liberty
to refuse, to any thing but the Canonical Scriptures. And in Epist. 19. ad
Hier. and ad Paulin. epist. 112. cap. 1.
an Epistle to Jerome, I have learned (says he) to give this reverence and
honor only to those books that are called Canonical, that I constantly
believe that no writer of any of them has erred.

But to make an end of this needless question, where both sides are agreed,
let us hear Saint Austin speak to the Manichees: If you ask us (says
August. cont. Faust. lib. 32. cap. 21.
he) how we know that these be the Apostles writings, we make you this short
answer, Thence we know these to be the Apostles, whence you know that Manicheus
was the author of yours. And Confess. lib. 6 cap. 5.
in his Confessions he sets out the matter more at large, that when he
considered how many things we are feign to believe, for which we have no
certain proof, it pleased God, at the last to persuade him, that they were
worthy of just reproof, which would not give credit to those books of God,
which he had established almost in all countries with such authority: and that
they were (at no hand) to be hearkened unto, who would ask him how he knew
that those books were vouchsafed to mankind by the spirit of the only true
God. This (as Greg. de Valent. Analys. fid. lib. 1. c. 15.
Valentia says) may be known by the admirable effect these books work in
the hearts of men, in stirring them up to virtue, without any such eloquence
and persuasions, as other writers stuff their books withal, and yet never
move us as these do. The like has Staple. de autorit. script. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Stapleton, where he speaks of the means which the Church uses to discern
of the Scriptures. It is not our meaning to shut out the holy Ghost, who is the
teacher of the children of God, as in other points, so also in this, but to
stop the mouths of Atheists and importunate men, who object so unreasonably
against the judgment of the whole Christian world, without authority or
reason. But of the spirit, and teaching thereof, hereafter.

Whatsoever you gather upon the former point, it must needs be of small
strength, because that has need of better proof. But let us grant that it is
true: does it therefore seem necessary or reasonable to you, that we should
admit the interpretation of the Church, as you speak, without any trial;
because by the authority thereof we believe that the Scriptures are the word
of God? What if God gave the Church no further authority, but only to assure
us of the Scripture? It does not follow that we must give credit to whatsoever
a man will say, because in some one point he must be believed. We may not in
reason doubt, but that the records which we find in an office, are true,
because they are avouched so to be by the clearke and master of the office.
But what of that? may we therefore take them for competent judges, so that we
must of necessity hold that to be the meaning of the record, which they
deliver to us as such? I am persuaded no man of any understanding will say so.

Yet do we acknowledge that August. ad Honor. de vtil. creden. contra Manich.
Austin speaks with very great reason. For where should an ignorant man
enquire of the sense of the Scripture, rather then there, where be learned it
was scripture? He shall not deal either kindly or reasonably, if he refuse
their judgment, other things being alike, for any man's else whatsoever; and
therefore I pray you be not offended, if we, that lived not in the times of
Popish ignorance, do give credit to our own Church, by which we have been
persuaded, that these are the scriptures of God, rather then to your Priests
and Clergy, from whom we have not received this persuasion. But the case, in
Saint Austins time, was far otherwise. The Manichees against whom he wrote
that Treatise, would not suffer a man to believe any thing, though it were
written in scripture, unless it were proved true by reason: and yet
themselves, as Cap. 14.
Austin shows in the chapter you allege, were driven to allow faith without
reason: and to lay this for a ground, that a man must believe Christ, that is,
he must believe that there was such a man, though he have no proof for it, but
report generally continued a long time: which Austin confesses to have been
the authority, that first moved him to believe. Now the Manichees
acknowledging thus much of Christ, and that only upon belief, without reason,
brought in monstrous opinions of their own: which could in no sort agree with
the scriptures. Therefore being pressed hard by the Divines of that age, with
scripture, they denied all authority thereunto; farther then they in their
ignorance and heresy, could make it serve for their unreasonable conceits. Yea
August. contra epist. fundament. Manich.
they made small or no reckoning of the scriptures, in comparison of their
fundamental Epistle, and such other blasphemies written by Manes their
founder, and some of his followers. Had not Austin great reason then, to answer
as he does? not concerning the sense of scripture, to which you falsely apply
his words, but touching those books of theirs, August. de haer. cap. 46.
wherein they had written horrible and senseless absurdities against religion
and reason. Surely (says August. contra epist. fund.
Austin) since by their authority I have been brought to believe, that there
was such an one as Christ, because it was so generally held, time out of mind;
I will never run to a few of yours, who learned of them, that Christ was, to
know what I must believe of him. Why should I not rather believe them, that the
scriptures teach, what is to be held of Christ, then you, that, in your
writings only is the truth: since in this matter you can bring no reason, why
I should believe you rather then them? For since by them (says Austin) I have
believed, being moved, by the authority of their general consent: if they
should fail, and could teach nothing (which words you craftily leave out) I
should easlier persuade my self, not to believe Christ, then to believe any
thing of him, by any man's report but by theirs, who first made me believe in
him. Your gloss, of believing the scriptures to be his word, and what is the
meaning of his word, agree not either with the place you allege (as may
appear evidently to him that will read it) or August. de haeres. cap. 46.
Epiphan. lib. 2. hares. 66.
with their heresy; but of both I have spoken sufficiently.

A. D.. 5.
Thus I have proved, that those English translations, whereupon Protestants
commonly build their faith, cannot be a sufficient rule of true Christian
faith. First because they are not infallibly free from error. Secondly, for
that all men cannot read them; neither can any by only reading, be sure to
attain the right sense, without which to have the words of Scripture, is to
have them, as Austin says, ad speciem, non ad salutem, for a show, but not to
salvation. Lastly, for that all points of doctrine, which appertain to true
Christian faith, are not expressly set down in scripture, as, beside my proof
Saint Austin, Saint Basil, and Epiphanius do affirm. Some of Aug. l. 5. de
bap. con. donat. c. 23 Basil. lib. de Sp. cap. 29. Epiph. haer. 61.
which reasons have also force to prove, that scripture alone, in what
language soever, is not a fit means, to instruct sufficiently, all sorts of
men in all matters of faith. Wherefore I may absolutely conclude, that
Scripture alone cannot be that rule of faith, which we seek for.

A. W.
Thus in steed of disputing against the scriptures being the rule of faith,
which was the matter you propounded, you have made a discourse against our
translations, having fancied to your self a conceit, which besides your self,
I think no man ever dreamed of; viz. that we commonly build our faith upon our
English translation. So that the Scripture may well be the rule of faith, for
ought that you have said against it, concerning the first property of certain
truth, which it were blasphemy to deny of the scripture. For the second, that
the rule must be easy to understand: I have showed, that there is no
necessity of that condition, and that the scripture is easy in matters
necessary to salvation. In the last point, of the scriptures defect, touching
many things, that must needs be believed, you do both wrong God, in making his
word written so imperfect, and by a foolish craft, instead of proouing, that
the scripture contains not all matters of faith needful to salvation,
undertake to show (that which no man denies) that all points of belief are
not expressly set down and determined by scripture. And lest we should forget
your shuffling, in this point, you offer new proof of a needless matter, from
the authority of Austin, Basil, and Epiphanius: whose testimonies I alleged
before, to prove the sufficiency of the scripture, in all matters necessary
to salvation. The places by you alleged are not of such matters, neither
speak of things not expressly contained, but only show, that for matters of
fact and ceremony, the Apostles have not determined al particulars. The
Apostles (says Aug. de baptis. contra Donat. lib. 5. ca. 23
Austin) have commanded nothing, touching not rebaptising them, which have
been baptized by heretics, but the custom which was pleaded against Cyprian,
is to be believed to have had beginning from their tradition: as there are many
things, which the Church every where holds, that we well believe therefore to
have been enjoined by the Apostles, though they are not found written. What is
this to prove, that there are matters necessary to be believed to salvation,
which are not expressed in the scriptures? Basil. de spirsancto.
Basil was not the the author of that Treatise, at the least of the latter part
of it, from about the 17. chapter, and so forward. That appears first, by
observing the difference of style, being neither like Basils writing, nor in
one place like an other, as Erasm. in praef ad illum libru^
Erasmus has truly observed, who translated it. Secondly, by the fond
discourse he makes, propounding one thing, handling an other, and concluding a
third, which not only Basil would never have done, but no man of any
discretion. Last of all, he Cap. 27. 29.
bewraieth himself to be a counterfeit, by speaking of Meletius, as one dead
long before, who lived in his time, and ouerliued him, as it is manifest by
Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26. and lib. 5. cap. 8.
the Ecclesiastical history. But admit the book were Basils: what is there
in it to prove, that all points of doctrine, which appertain to true Christian
faith, are not expressly set down in Scripture? This Author says, that we must
believe oraditions. What? In matters of doctrine? There is no such word in
him. He speaks of outward carriage in ceremonies and phrases of speech. The
question, Cap. 25. 27. 29.
in that part of his Treatise, is of the preposition with, that is (to speak
that every man may understand) whether it be lawful to say in the Church
service, and otherwise, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, with the
holy Ghost; or whether we must needs say, and to the holy Ghost, not with. For
this speech that author pleades tradition. Do we deny any such matter? Or do
we not acknowledge the liberty and authority of the Churches, in such
matters? Who sees not, that our custom now is to say, Glory be to the Father,
to the Son, and to the holy Ghost? Not that thereby we condemn the other
kind of speech, but because in matters left to our liberty, we take that which
seems fittest. Epiphan. li. 2 cap. 61.
Epiphanius speaking of prayer for the dead, which has no warrant of
Scripture, is glad to help himself with the authority of tradition: telling
us, that some things must be held by tradition, and not all taken out of the
scriptures. But Epiphanius does not say, that this is a doctrine, or action
necessary to salvation.

A. D.. 6.
Some object against this conclusion, that place of S. Paul. Omnis Scriptura
diuinitus inspirata, vtilis est ad docendum etc. vt perfectus sit homo, etc.
But this place proves nothing against that which I have said. For it says
not, that scripture alone is sufficient to instruct a man to perfection, but
that it is profitable for this purpose, as it is indeed; and the rather,
because, it commends unto us the authority of the Church, which (as I shall
afterward prove) is sufficient. Now it is certain, that to be profitable, and
to be of it self alone sufficient, be far different things. Stones and
Timber be profitable to the building of an house: yet they alone, without a
worke-man to square them, and set them in order, be not sufficient for this
purpose.

A. W.
2. Tim. 3. 16 17.
Of this place I have spoken sufficiently Defense of the reformed Catholic.
page. 416.
otherwhere, and showed that the Scriptures are able to make us wise to
salvation, and therefore sufficient to that purpose, Now the Apostle having
given that commendation to the scripture, verse. 15. proceeds in the next to
exemplify that in particular, which he had before said in general, It is able
to make thee wise to salvation, it is able to fit thee to teaching, reproouing,
correcting, instructing. Can any reasonable man think, that the Apostle,
delivering (by way of amplification) his former commendation of the scripture,
that he might the rather stir up Timothy to the study of it, would say
less, then he had done before? But it is a great deal less, to say no more,
but the scripture is profitable to such purposes, then to commend it, as able
to make a man wise to salvation. Therefore, though the word indeed do not
expressly signify sufficiency: yet it cannot be doubted, but the profit Hugo
Cardinalis ad 2. Tim. 3
mentioned implies such a sufficiency; especially since he adds perfection,
which must arise from this word of God. And so (as Defense of the reformed
Cathol. page 416.
I have showed elsewhere) do Chrysostom. and Theophyl. ad 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Chrysostom and Theophylact understand it, who make the Apostle speak to
Timothy to this effect, that he being now to be offered up, leaves the
scriptures in his steed of which he may in all things take advise, and
counsel, as if the Apostle himself were present with him.

But you forsooth would make us believe, that the scripture is indeed
profitable to this end, but not sufficient. Is not the knowledge of arts and
tongues, philosophy and history, of very good use also to this purpose?
Slender then, and too slender is the commendation our Apostle gives the
scriptures, if it be of no greater excellency then these humane furtherances,
but only in a certain degree of profit. To help the matter you propound one
particular, for which the scripture is profitable: namely to commend unto us
the authority of the Church. But neither does it commend to us any such
authority, as you imagine, and, if that be the rule of the scripture, one
sentence had bin as good and better then the whole volume of the Bible: which
to say, were no less the^ blasphemy. But I am afraid the scriptures, that Paul
there speaks of, which were the books of the old Testament, are rather
unprofitable, the^ profitable to that purpose. For they often amplify and
magnify the word of God written, in so plain terms, that eueuery man may
understand them: as for the authority, you fancy to your self, they speak
either nothing, or little, and that very obscurely thereof. But we shall see,
in the rest of your Treatise, what proof you can find of this authority in
Moses and the Prophets, and the writers of the old Testament.

Now at the last, you remember your self again, and return to your old shift
of Scripture alone. Which you devised of your own head, that you might have
somewhat to confute. It is not all one (say you) to be profitable, and to be of
it self alone sufficient. And you tell us, This is certain. Who ever denied
it? Or who but he, that wanted matter to reply against, would cast such
doubts? Especially who would have wasted time and paper to prove or declare a
thing so certain and clear, by a needless comparison? The scripture without
any doctrines of men (call them what you will, and imagine what assistance of
the spirit you list) is sufficient to teach all men the true and certain way
to salvation. This is that we affirm, not as you ridiculously slander us, that
there needs no ministry of man, for the instructing of any one in the
understanding of any place of scripture, or knowledge of any point of religion.
These are your own fancies, or mo^sters rather, with which like bugbeares, you
scare your poor seduced followers, and bleare the eyes of the ignorant, that
they may not enquire, what we teach indeed, but hate our doctrine, before they
any way understand it. But they that have any care of their own salvation,
will not suffer themselves to be led by you hoodwinkt to destruction: if any
man will needs be wilfully ignorant, the Lord shall require his blood at his
own hands: we have done our duty in teaching and proouing the truth.

A. D.
CHAP. VIII. That no natural wit or learning can be the rule of faith.

A. W.
If you had bestowed that pains and time in confirming your proposition, which
you waste needlessly in proouing that, which no man denies: you might perhaps
have spoken somewhat more to the purpose, but it is lost labor to go about the
refutatio^ of that, which besides your self, no body ever thought on. That
natural wit or learning should be the rule of faith, is a conceit, amongst
Christians never heard of, yet this have you propounded for to exercise your
strength upon.

A. D.. 1.
The second conclusion is, that no one man's natural wit and learning; neither
any company of men never so learned (only as they are learned men, not
infallibly assisted by the holy Spirit of God) can, either by interpreting
Scripture, or otherwise, be this rule of faith.

A. W.
Here you set out the former proposition more at large, in respect of the
Antecedent, or first part of it. Neither any one man's natural wit, nor many
men's joined together, whatsoever their learning be, or what course soever they
take, as natural men, can be the rule of faith: either for any doctrine, they
shall deliver, or for any interpretation, they shall make of Scripture. But what
needs all this ado? you do but fight with your own shadow, yet let us se
how you have bestirred your self.

A. D.. 2.
This I prove. Because all this wit and learning, be it never so exquisite or
rare, is humane, natural, and fallible: and therefore it cannot be a
sufficient foundation, whereupon to build a divine, supernatural, and
infallible faith.

This reason I confirm. Because whatsoever a man, never so witty and learned
propounds to others, to be believed, upon the only credit of his word, wit,
or humane study and learning: it can have no more certainty, then is this his
word, wit, and learning. But these being all natural and humane, are subject
to error, and deceit. For Omnis homo mendax, there is no man, but he may, Romans
3. 4.
both deceive, and be deceived: and may (if he have no other help, but of
nature, and industry) both be deceived, in thinking that to be Gods word,
which is not: or that to be the true meaning, and sense of Gods word, which is
not: and may also deceive others, whilst being too confident of his wit and
learning, he presumes to teach others, these his erroneous opinions. Therefore
the belief which shall be built upon such a man's word, and teaching, is, or
may be a false belief: and always is uncertain and fallible: and therefore
can never be a true Divine and Christian faith, which always is most certain
and infallible. And this which I have said of the wit and learning of one
particular man: may also be applied, to prove against the wit and learning of
any company of men, having no assistance, but their own natural gifts, and
industry of study or reading.

A. W.
No humane, natural, and fallible thing can be the rule of faith. Natural wit
and learning, though never so exquisite, are humane, natural, and fallible.
Therefore no humane wit nor learning can be the rule of faith.
I grant this reason and conclusion to be sound and true: only in the
confirmation of it, I find some occasion to note one thing for the better
understanding of the matter, we have in hand. If any man would speak for
natural wit, and learning in this question, he would not say, as the matter is
here propounded, that any man's wit or learning were the rule of faith, but that
the wit and learning of man might find out somewhat at least in the Scripture,
whereupon faith might safely be grounded. For example (as I said once before)
though it be not written any where in the Scripture, that there are three
persons distinct each from other, and all these three but one God: yet may a
man by natural wit and learning gather this out of the Scripture, and confirm
it thence so plainly, and certainly, that any Christian may hold those points
as Articles of faith. Not that they are to be taken for such, upon the only
credit of his word, (which is a second thing, wherein you mistake the matter)
but because, though every man be a lier; yet a man may see and show a truth,
which cannot, nor may be suspected of falsehood or error. And a belief,
builded upon Doctrine so taught, shall be free from possibility of erring, and
as you speak, infallible. This I thought good to observe by occasion of your
confirmation, where you suppose, that a man delivers matters to be believed,
upon the bare credit of his word, by reason of his wit and learning. In this
sense it is out of all question, that no natural wit or learning of any, many,
or all the men in the world, can be the rule of faith, but that, which a man
deduceth by necessary and certain consequence, through his wit and learning,
out of the Scriptures, is as strong and sure a foundation of faith, as that,
which is expressed there in plain terms. We may see by this, it was not for
nothing, that Bellar. de verb. Dei non script. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Bellarmine, and you by his example, foyst in expressly into the question,
which is betwixt us, concerning the sufficiency of the Scriptures to be the
rule of faith. But of this enough.

A. D.. 3.
This same reason I confirm yet again more strongly. For the rule of faith
must be able to propose to us infallibly, not only the letters and seeming
sense, but the true sense of Gods word, and the sense intended by the holy
Spirit of God, the author of this word; otherwise it cannot be a sufficient
means to breed in us an infallible Christian faith and belief, which is only
grounded upon the true sense intended by Almighty God, the prime or first
verity, the speaker of this word. But no man, nor no company of men can by
their natural wit and learning tell infallibly what (especially in all points of
faith) is the true intended sense of Gods word. For as S. Paul says, Quis
cognouit sensum Domini? Who has known (to wit, by nature, art or learning)
the sense of our Lord? Quae Dei sunt (says the same S. Paul) nemo cognouit
nisi spiritus Dei: those things which are of God, no man has known, but the
spirit of God. And therefore that knowledge which himself had of divine
matters, came not from any natural wit of man, but (as he plainly affirms)
from the spirit of God: Nobis reuelauit Deus per Spiritum suum: God has
revealed unto us (says he) by his Spirit. Therefore we may well conclude, That
no one man, nor no company of men (without the assistance of Gods spirit) can
either by interpreting Scripture, or otherwise be the rule of faith.

A. W.
It seems the former reason did not fully satisfy your self, because you
make profession of a more strong confirmation thereof: which lies thus: The
rule of faith must be able to propose infallibly to us the true sense of the
word of God, intended by the holy Ghost. But no natural wit or learning is
able to propose infallibly that sense. Therefore no natural wit or learning
can be the rule of faith.


I have made bold to alter your proposition or mayor a little, To the
Proposition.
as I persuade my self not without reason. You make a kind of difference
betwixt the true sense of Gods word, and the sense intended by the holy Ghost.
These two in my poor opinion are all one: for there is no sense of any piece
of Scripture to be accounted true, but that which delivers the holy Ghosts
meaning in that place. The reason is, for that the use of interpretation is
nothing else but to make us understand what the Lord meant to teach us, or to
say to us by those words. I deny not, that a man may deliver true and sound
divinity, though he misconceiue and misinterprete a text of Scriptures but
this is that I say, that howsoever he teach true doctrine by his exposition,
yet he does not give us the true sense of that word of God, if he propound nor
the sense which was there intended by the holy Ghost; every truth of God, is
not the true sense of every place of Scripture.

I will not except against your Syllogism, though you put somewhat more into
the Assumption, then you propounded in To the Assumption.
the mayor: yet let me put you in mind, that both natural wit and learning can
show the true sense of Gods word in very many places; and also that by your
confession this may be done. Whence it will follow, that in all likelihood of
reason, many points of faith are so delivered in Scripture, that there needs
no infallible authority of the Church to teach us what is true in those
points, what false. To answer more directly to the Assumption; I see no
sufficient reason, why a man by wit and learning may not be able to understand,
and that infallibly, what is true according to the letter of the Scripture, in
matters necessary to salvation. I think I may truly say, that many a man
attaineth to this knowledge, without any infallible assistance of the holy
Ghost, whose principal office it is, so to sanctify, direct, and preserve the
children of God, that they never fall away by any such opinion as shall make
them lose their interest they have to the kingdom of heaven.

Your proof, if it be sufficient, shows your exception, especially in all
points, to have bin altogether needless. For if the 1. Cor. 2. 16.
Apostle in the place alleged, speak of understanding the true sense of the
Scripture, no one place can be understood by any natural wit or learning. Who
has known the sense of our Lord? Is not this speech general, as well of one
place as of another? But it is evident, that the Apostle speaks not of
understanding any or all places of Scripture. For the spiritual man he
speaks of, attaineth not to that height of knowledge, no not in your own
judgment, unless perhaps no man be spiritual but your Pope. And yet a man
may well doubt, whether he be able to understand the meaning of the holy Ghost
in every place or no, though it be granted he cannot err iudicially. But Saint
Paul thinks not in that place of interpreting scripture. Of what then? Surely
of acknowledging or assenting to the truth of the Gospel, concerning salvation
by Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Hugo Cardin. ad 1. Cor. 2.
The things that God has prepared for them that love him (viz. the means of
salvation and glory by Christ) are such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
yea such as never entered into any man's heart. For who was able to have devised
by any experience and observation (to which the eye and ear are especial
helps) or by any discourse of reason (wherein the heart is exercised) that the
Son of God should take our nature, and procure forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance verse. 16.
of heaven for all them that would believe in him? This was only Gods will and
counsel, which no man was privy to, no man could instruct him in, or persuade
him to. These things God only knew, these he revealed by his spirit to the
Patriarks, verse. 10.
Prophets and Apostles, who without such revelation, could never have suspected
any such matter. Now the question is not in the Apostles course of writing,
whether a man without revelation can understand the meaning of the Scripture;
but whether he could of himself know, that there must be such a means of
salvation, or acknowledge the doctrine thereof to be true, without the teaching
of the holy Ghost. The natural man (...) receives not these things for true,
or if you will, perceives not that there are such means of his salvation. As
for understanding of Scripture, since it is more then manifest, that a mere
natural man may find the true sense intended by the holy Ghost, at the least in
many places, it cannot be the Apostles meaning, that no man knows the sense
of our Lord in the Scripture. But the more you mistake the sense of the holy
Ghost in Scripture, the better you prove your opinion, that no natural wit or
learning can bring a man to the understanding thereof: only you must take heed
of ouerweening your own wit and learning, and so of erring, by drawing a
general conclusion against all men from your own defect: which also perhaps
is not so much for want of wit or learning, as for lack of pains taking, and
because of a preiudicate conceit against the truth.

A. D.. 4.
Hence I infer that those, who, for matters of faith, rely wholly, either
upon their own private opinion or judgment, of the sense and meaning of
Scripture, or upon the learning and judgment of others, who are but men, not
infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, nor by him infallibly preserved from
error: (as many, or rather all Protestants do) those (I say) cannot have
divine and Christian faith, but only fallible opinion and humane faith.

As before I granted your conclusion, that natural wit and learning cannot be
the rule of faith: so I now acknowledge the truth of your illation, which you
bring in thereupon, that he which relieth wholly upon his own private opinion,
or any other man's judgment, can have no true faith. Yet must I again remember,
that to rely upon such opinion or judgment, is to take that for truth, which
is taught barely upon the credit of the teacher. For otherwise, a man may have
a true faith, that is a certain and infallible assent to the truth, though he
believe upon evident reason those points and interpretations, which are proved
to him by men, without any infallible authority of the Church. But whereas you
charge many, or rather all Protestants to rely so upon the judgment of men, I
hope you do it without the authority of your Church that cannot err; for I am
sure you do it without any show of truth. No Protestant of any discretion (not
only not all) believes the doctrine of the Gospel in general, or any one
particular interpretation as a matter of faith, upon any man's credit
whatsoever. This reverence indeed we give to our teachers, that we rather trust
their judgment then our own, and dare not dissent from them, but where we
have great likelihood of reason, at least to the contrary. Howsoever, we ground
no point of faith upon any interpretation, which is not plain and evident to
any man that will take pains to examine it according to true reason.

A. D.
CHAP. IX. That a private spirit cannot be the rule of faith.

A. W.
A man may easily perceive that you choose to say any thing, rather then
nothing: and therefore you make your self work, Chapter after Chapter. I
shall not need to repeat that which I have noted before; this Chapter gives
sufficient evidence of that I say. What a strange kind of speech is this, that
a private spirit is the rule of faith? No spirit, neither private nor public,
is ordinarily the rule of faith, no not the most holy spirit of God, but only
as he speaks in the Scripture, who always teaches one and the same truth
publicly and privately.

A. D.. 1.
The third conclusion is, that no private man, who persuades himself to be
singularly instructed by the spirit, can be this rule of faith; especially so
far forth as he believes or teaches, contrary to the received doctrine of
the Catholic Church.

A. W.
This is the interpretation of the title of your Chapter: No private spirit,
that is, no private man, who persuades himself to be singularly instructed by
the spirit, etc. I cannot tell whether I should think you have forgotten to
speak English, or purposely affect, as strange doctrine, so strange speech
also. To be singularly instructed, with us plain Englishmen, is to be taught
in rare and excellent sort; not to be apart, or severally alone instructed,
which is your meaning. I grant men's private opinions are called singular, and
the men themselves, that have such conceits, are also so termed; but he that
professes plainness to teach all kind of men, should labor to speak so,
that all might understand him. But to the matter. Whose opinion is it, that any
such man as you conceit, or any man at all, can be the rule of faith? Sure not
ours; who (as it has often been said) give this honor only to the word of
God. If any man hold that opinion (unless perhaps the senseless Anabaptists,
with whom we have nothing to do) you are they, who as it seems by the
exception you add, grant that with limitation, a man may be the rule of faith.
For you say, he cannot be the rule of faith, especially so far forth as he
believes or teaches contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic
Church. Do you not imply in this speech, that so far forth as he agrees with
the doctrine of the Catholic Church, he may be the rule of faith? But I
observe one rare thing in your course of disputing; that you ordinarily
propound your matter in such sort, that you are feign presently after to make
one exception or other. Chap. 7.
Scripture alone (say you) cannot be the rule of faith: is this all you mean?
No: a limitation follows: Especially as it is translated by Protestants into
English. Chap. 8.
No natural wit or learning can be the rule of faith. What? by no means?
except they be infallibly assisted by the holy spirit of God. In this Chapter
we have the like course held by you. But leave we this, and be take our selves
to consider your proof.

A. D.. 2.
This I prove: first because Saint Paul says, Si quis vobis euangelizauerit
Gal. 1. 8.
praeter id quod accepistis, Anathemasit: pronouncing generally, that whosoever
teaches or preaches contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic
Church, should be held Anathematized or accursed.

A. W.
Your reason is thus to be framed.

He that must be accursed for his teaching, cannot be the rule of faith. But a
private spirit, that teaches contrary to the received doctrine of the
Catholic Church, must be accursed for his teaching. Therefore a private
spirit that teaches contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic
Church, cannot be the rule of faith.
First, I desire all men to observe, that this argument of yours does not prove
that a private spirit cannot be the rule of faith, but only so far forth as
he does disagree from the doctrine of the Church; otherwise, for all this
reason, he may be. Wherein you speak absurdly and falsely. Absurdly, in
propounding such a question to refute, as neither we whom you profess to
refute, nor any reasonable man would ever once imagne, viz. that a private
spirit teaching an untruth, might be the rule of faith. For, how can that be
but an untruth, which is contrary to that the Apostle delivered by his
preaching and writing? Further, it is false, that a private spirit agreeing
with the Catholic Church in doctrine, can be in that point of agreement, the
rule of faith. For although the doctrine he teaches be true, yet is it not the
rule of faith (much less is he himself) because of his authority; but either
as you say, by reason of the authority of the Church, or indeed, as we truly
affirm, for that it is agreeable to the word of God in the Scripture, called
canonical, because it is (...). A rule. To the Assumption.
the rule of faith and manners.

Now for answer to your Syllogism; I say your Assumption is not simply true,
but only so far forth as the received doctrine of the Catholic Church (I
speak as you do) agrees with the truth in the Scripture revealed. Neither
does Gal. 1. 8.
Saint Paul speak of whatsoever doctrine received by your imagined Catholic
Church of Rome; but of that which he himself or some other of the Apostles had
taught the Galatians, to whom he writes that Epistle. This it should seem you
saw well enough, and therefore in your crastie discretion, for bare to
translate the Apostles words, which for the most part you set down always as
well in English as in Latin. The reason lies thus: He that teaches contrary
to the doctrine which the Galatians had received of the Apostles, is to be
accursed for his preaching so. But a private spirit that teaches contrary to
the received doctrine of the Catholic Church, teaches contrary to the
doctrine which the Galatians had received by the Apostles. Therefore a private
spirit teaching contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic Church, is
to be accursed for his preaching so.


Who sees not, that the truth of this Assumption depends upon this point,
that the Catholic Church has received no other doctrine then that which the
Apostles taught the Galatians? But this has as much need of sound proof, as
that, for the proof whereof it is brought: and therefore to dispute thus
against any man that would hold a private spirit to be the rule of faith, were
to give him occasion to laugh at you, for begging the question in stead of
proving it. But to make all men see, how small force there is in this your
reason, for the keeping of a private spirit from being the rule of faith, I
will frame two other syllogismes against a public spirit or Council, and
against the Pope.

1.
He that must be accursed for his teaching, cannot be the rule of faith. But a
public spirit or Council, that teaches contrary to the received doctrine of
the Catholic Church, must be accursed for his teaching. Therefore a public
spirit or Council, that teaches contrary to the received doctrine of the
Catholic Church, cannot be the rule of faith.
2.
He that must be accursed for his teaching, cannot be the rule of faith. But
the Pope that teaches contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic
Church, must be accursed for his teaching. Therefore the Pope that teaches
contrary to the received doctrine of the Catholic Church, cannot be the rule
of faith.
Have you not spun a fair thread (think you) to choke the Popes and the
Councels authority withal? Call your wits about you, and devise some cleanly
shift for the matter, or I can tell you, all will be naught. For your Religion is
no more able to hold up head, if the Popes authority be cast down, then a man
that has never a leg, is able to stand upright. It will go the harder with you
in this matter, because if I grant that the Pope cannot err, you are never a
whit the nearer, for the answering of my syllogism: as you may perceive, if
you will but assay to apply that point for answer to either part thereof. There
is no other way, but to give over this your first reason against a private
spirit, and to make amends for it in the second, if you can.

A. D.. 3.
Secondly, the rule of faith must be infallible, plainly known to all sorts of
men, and universal; that is to say, such as may sufficiently instruct all men
in all points of faith, without danger of error: (as has been proved before.)
But this private spirit is not such. For first, that man himself cannot be
infallibly sure, that he in particular is taught by the holy spirit. For
neither is there any promise in Scripture, to assure him infallibly that he in
particular is thus taught: neither is there any other sufficient reason to
persuade the same. For suppose he have such extraordinary motions, feelings or
illustrations, which he thinks cannot come of himself, but from some spirit;
yet he cannot in reason straightwayes conclude, that he is thus moved and
taught by the spirit of God. For sure it is, that every spirit is not the
Spirit of God. As there is the spirit of truth: so there is a spirit of error.
As there is an Angel of light: so there is a Prince of darkness. Yea
sometimes Ipse Sathanas transfigurat se in Angelum lucis: Satan himself does
2. Cor. 11.
transfigure himself into an Angel of light. Wherefore he had need very
carefully to put in practice, the advice of Saint John, who says. Nolite
credere omni spiritui, sed probate spiritus, si ex Deo sint, 1. John. 4.
Do not believe every spirit, but prove and try them, whether they be of
God or no. Neither does it seem sufficient, that a private man try them,
only by his own judgment; or by those motions, feelings or illuminations,
which in his private conceit, are conformable to Scripture; because all this
trial is very uncertain, and subject to error; by reason that our own
judgment (especially in our own matters) is very easily deceived: and that
Satan can so cunningly cover himself under the shape of a good Angel; and so
color his wicked designements with pretense of good; and so gild his dark and
gross errors, with the glistering light of the words, and seeming sense of
scripture, that hardly, or not at all, he shall be perceived. Wherefore the
safest way were to try these spirits, by the touchstone, of the true Pastors
of the Catholic Church, who may say with S. Paul. No^ ignoramus cogitationes
Satanae, we are not ignorant of the cogitations of Satan: and who may also say
with 2. Co. 2. 11.
S. John. Nos ex Deo sumus, qui nouit Deum, audit nos: qui non 1. John. 4. 6.
est ex Deo, non audit nos. In hoc cognoscimus spiritum veritatis, and spiritum
erroris. We are of God, he that knows God, hears us: he that is not of
God, does not hear us. In this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of
error. Now, if any will not admit this manner of trying, and discerning the
spirit of truth, from the spirit of error, but will trust their own judgment
alone, in this matter: fear they may justly, nay rather they may be sure (as
Cassian says) Collat. 61. c. 11
that they shall worship in their thoughts, the Angel of darkness for the
Angel of light, to their exceeding great harm. And, at least, how soever their
private affection and self-love incline them to think well of themselves, and
of that spirit, which they permit to teach them those singular points of new
and strange doctrine: yet sure it is, that this their persuasion of the
goodness of their spirit, is not infallible, as the rule of faith must be:
since diverse now adays, persuade themselves in the same manner to be taught by
the holy spirit: and yet (one of them teaching against another) it is not
possible, that all, that thus persuade themselves, should be taught by this
spirit; since this spirit does never teach contrary to it self. And therefore
some in this their persuasion, must needs be deceived. And therefore who,
having no testimony of evident miracle, or some other undoubted proof, dare
arrogantly affirm, that he only is not deceived, especially in such sort, as
to condemn all other, and to propose himself to himself and others, as the
only sufficient rule of faith, considering that others, who presume, and
persuade themselves altogether in like manner, are in this their persuasion,
deceived.

A. W.
I must again put the Reader in mind, that no Protestant maintains, that a
private spirit is the rule of faith; neither will I undertake the defense of
any such matter: but only examine his reasons against it, as I have done in
the former chapters, in the like case. His reason is thus to be concluded.

The rule of faith must be infallible, plain, known to all sorts of men, and
universal. A private spirit is not such. Therefore a private spirit is not the
rule of faith.
Of the proposition, I spoke at the sixth chapter, and showed b Chap. 6.
the fault of it, in respect of the second property, which is easiness c
Chap. 7.
to be understood of all men, as it is expounded by your self. All the doubt
now is in the assumption, of the three points, wherein you go about to prove
but only the first, of infallibility. It should seem your stomach is greater
against the scripture, then against either natural wit and learning or private
spirit. For you disprooue the ability of these two, but in respect of one
property, namely the first, as if for the other two, they or either of them
were sufficient enough. But you allow the Scripture never a one of the three,
you condemn it of obscurity, you accuse it of defect for wanting diverse
points necessary to salvation. And although you do not simply deny the
infallibility of it, yet you make all knowledge, that can be had out of our
English translation, very uncertain; so that none of our people can have any
benefit by the scripture, as by the rule of faith, or word of God, but only
some few, that understand Hebrew or Greek. But I perceive you were more afraid
that the scripture would be taken for the rule of faith, then you were, that
either of the other would. Let us see how you prove your assumption, since you
will needs put your self to more pains then was looked for.

He (say you) that cannot assure himself, and other men, that he is taught by
the holy Ghost, cannot be the rule of faith. But a private spirit cannot assure
himself, and other men, that he is so taught. Therefore a private spirit,
cannot be the rule of faith.
There is some cause to doubt of your mayor. For it is not necessary, To the
proposition.
that the rule of faith should know it self to be the rule. The Pope, you
think, is the rule of faith: Put case that some Pope should doubt, whether
himself were infallibly directed in all his determinations by the holy Ghost
or no: should he, by reason of this doubting, cease to be the rule of faith? I
dare say, you think not so. Never urge me with the impossibility of this
matter. For both it is possible, if Declarat. mot. VVisbic. page 29.
he, that is no Christian may be Pope of Rome, If John the 22 doubted of the
immortality of the soul, if Leo 10. counted the history of our Savior Christ
a fable: and it is all one to my answer whether it may be or no; it is enough
for me, if the Pope may be the rule, though he should so doubt.

You should have done well, if you had kept your former To the assumption.
wary course of adding some exception to your assumption. It had not been
altogether without need. For out of question, a private spirit may be so
assured by revelation, as the Prophets and Apostles were. And by such means a
man may come to assurance, for all the subtlety of Satan; the Lord being able
to make the motions of his spirit known to whom he please, what shift soever
Satan use to the contrary. The Minor therefore Holkot. in 2. q. 4. ad 7. arg.
princip.
without this exception be either expressed or understood, is untrue, otherwise
it is true.

As for the trial you propound, by the touchstone of the true pastors of the
Catholic Church, it is utterly insufficient in this case. It may be, and is
indeed a means of great authority, and use to direct a man in finding out,
and holding the truth: but it is no certain proof, that a man has found, or
does hold the truth in all points, because Bellar. de. Council. lib. 2. cap. 11.
those pastors (as in due place shall appear) may all be deceived, without the
Popes especial direction. But admit their judgment or authority were, in the
matter, infallible: yet could no man thereby be assured, that himself is
taught particularly by the holy Ghost. For many men hold the truth of God, as
the true Church does, and yet have no such teaching by the spirit: since it is
certain, a man may deliver truth, and he himself not believe. Of your
testimonies out of scripture, touching the Pastors of the Church, I will say
only thus much by the way; that the Pastors can speak neither of those
sentences truly of themselves, but in a measure. 2. Cor. 2. 11.
They know the devises of Satan, but in part, not wholly. 1. John. 4. 6.
He that knows God, hears them, not simply in all points; for he that
knows God, may doubt of some point delivered by the true Pastors of the
Church, who also are no farther to be heard, then they can show that, they
speak, to be from God. The Apostles, every one of them severally, knew all
things, which the Lord thought fit to make known to men, and were to be heard,
without any doubting of that, they delivered: with them that privilege died,
and all men now are tied to the trial of their doctrine by the scriptures.

The conclusion of this discourse concerns either no man in the world, or if
any, the Pope of Rome, Extra. Ioa. 22 de verb. signif. cap. quum inter.
your Lord God. For the Anabaptists themselves, are not so absurd and
shameless, as to make any one of their sect the only sufficient rule of all
men's faith: but every man claims (though falsely and lewdly) a privilege of
not erring, for himself. Only your insolent Pope will have all men to depend
upon his judgment, and in comparison of himself, disdaineth all writers, and
all Councils whatsoever. What promises he has, whereupon he bears himself
so high and stout, I make no doubt but we shall hear of you in this Treatise;
till when I forbear to say any more.

A. D.. 4.
But suppose one could assure himself, that he were taught by Gods Spirit
immediately, what is the true faith in all points, in such sort, that he could
err in none, (as it is not the manner of Almighty God, to teach men
immediately by himself alone, or by an Angel; but rather as the Scripture
tells us, Fides ex auditu. Faith is bred in us by hearing: and is to be
required ex ore Sacerdotis Romans 10. 17.
out of the mouth of the Priest: and is to be learned of Pastors Mal. 2. 7.
and Doctors, whom God has appointed in his Church, of purpose, to instruct
us, and continue us in the ancient faith. But suppose (I say) that one could
assuredly persuade himself, to be immediately taught of God, what is the truth
in all points: how should he, without testimony of miracle, give assurance to
others, that he is thus taught? Especially when he teaches quite contrary to
the Catholic Church, which, by plain promises and testimonies of Scripture,
we know to be taught of God.

A. W:
Hitherto you have proved, that a man cannot assure himself, that he is
infallibly instructed by the holy Ghost. Now you are to show, that howsoever
the point might be clear to him, yet he has no means to persuade other men
thereof, but that still there will be cause of doubting, whether he be so
taught or no. But by the way, you tell us, that it is not Gods manner to teach
us immediately by himself alone, or by an Angel, but rather, as the scripture
tells us, faith is bred in us by hearing. For the general, that God teaches
not immediately, we are wholly of your opinion, and that the ordinary means of
faith is preaching: but we see no sufficient reason to disable the word of God
in the scripture, as if it were not of force to bring forth the same effect,
where Gods ordinance of preaching cannot be had, or is not neglected. For since
the matter delivered in true preaching, and reading the scripture, is all one,
unless it be very apparent that the holy Ghost will not give a blessing to him
that reads, having not opportunity to hear; out of question faith may come
by reading. Faith (says Bellar de sacr. Bapt li. 1. cap. 11.. Tertio.
Bellarmine) cannot arise in the heart, but by divine revelation, which is
either immediately from God alone, or by the instrument of the word preached,
or read. And whereas the Apostle speaks Romans 10. 14.
in that place of preaching and hearing, it is not his purpose to disable the
word read, but to show partly, (as 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10.
otherwhere) that the means of salvation, were not, nor could be devised by
man, but proceed wholly from God: partly, that no man may excuse himself by
ignorance, because God has sent his servants Mat. 28. 19.
into all parts of the world, to give notice of the way of salvation, without
which commandment of his, no man might have undertaken the office of
preaching the Gospel, either by word of mouth or 1. Pet. 1. 25.
writing; and without the Gospel had been published, no man could have
believed. For as it is in the same chapter, a little before. Romans 10. 14. verse.
18.
How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear, without a preacher? And how shall they preach, except they be sent?
Faith then is by hearing, that is, Whitaker. de Script. q. 5. cap. 8. arg. 2.
as one rightly expounds it, by the sense of the scripture truly understood.
I do not equal reading to preaching, nor promise any blessing, but rather
threaten a curse, where men refuse to hear the Pastors and Ministers of the
several congregations, wherein they live; or any other, that by lawful
authority preach truly and faithfully: but I would have no man, by any
conceit, weaken the power of God, speaking in his word, to all that can, and
will read and hear. Now to your argument.

He that has not testimony of miracles, cannot give assurance to others, that
he is infallibly taught by the Spirit of God. But a private spirit has not
testimony of miracles. Therefore he cannot give assurance to others, that he
is infallibly so taught.
First, I note two things in the propounding of this reason: the one that you
add an exception, according to your custom, the other that you seem to give
over great force to miracles. Your exception is, that he can give no assurance,
if he teach contrary to the Catholic Church: why so? Because we know that
she is taught of God. Suppose that to be true, yet may he give assurance to
them, that know no such thing of the Church, and so be to them the rule of
faith.

But it is worth the marking, that you prefer miracles before the authority
of the Church. For by them, a man (in your opinion) may have assurance to
others, that he is taught by the holy Ghost, though he teach quite contrary to
the Catholic Church. But Gal. 1. 8.
the Apostle has accursed them, that receive any other doctrine, then he
taught, though it be preached by an Angel from heaven. What will become of the
faith of such men, when 2. These. 2. 9.
Antichrist comes with signs and lying wonders? But why should I ask that
question? Your self and the rest of your popish brood have answered it
already. For you are Apoc. 17 2.
made drunk with the cup of fornication of the whore of Babylon, and bewitched
with the miracles of that great Antichrist the Pope of Rome, to 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11
believe lies, against the manifest truth of God in scripture. But 2. Pet. 1.
19.
we have a most sure word of the Prophets, confirmed, and expounded by the
Apostles, contrary to which, or without warrant of which, we will believe
nothing, as necessary to salvation, for all the miracles that your Antichrist,
or the Devil himself can work. For mine own part (under correction I speak
it) I am not persuaded, that ever any true miracle was, or shall be wrought,
for confirmation of false doctrine, how soever the Devil may serve his turn,
by a show of such matters. But it is all one to the moving of a man, whether
the thing done, be in truth a miracle, or only such in his opinion. Be it
never so true, it may bring no credit to any point of doctrine contrary to the
word of God, in the scripture. Yet since false shows will work the same
effect in their hearts, whom God has given over to the believing of lies, that
true miracles will, me thinks I see no sufficient cause to imagine, that God
will employ his infinite power to the countena^cing of any untruth, where no
such thing is needful.

I say then, for your proposition, that no assurance can be Of the proposition.
given either without, or with never so many miracles, if a man's doctrine be
contrary to the teaching of the Church, when the Church teaches according to
the Scripture. But in those points, wherein the Church shall fail of her
duty, the exposition of the word may give assurance of truth spoken by him,
that delivers the contrary. But this I speak by way of explication, not of
refutation. For I grant your proposition: So revelation be excepted, as before.
To the assumption.


If you mean, that every private spirit, has not miracles to testify of
him, or that none has true miracles to avow false doctrine by, I grant your
Minor. But if you would have us believe, that no man has power by the devils
assistance, to make show of such matters, as cannot by man be discerned from
true miracles, I deny your assumption: and refute it by that former instance
of Antichrist, Whose 2. These. 2. 9.
coming is by the effectual working of Satan, with all power and signs, and
lying wonders.

A. D.. 5.
Perhaps he will allege that general promise of scripture, Omnis Math. 7.
qui petit, accipit, assuring them thereby, that every one that prays for
any thing, receives it: and that he has earnestly prayed for the spirit,
therefore he must needs have it. But to this argument, we may easily answer;
that this promise of our Savior, is not so universally to be understood, as
though every one that prays for a thing, shall infallibly obtain it,
without any condition (at least in the manner of praying) required of our part.
For we read, even in Scripture, Petitis, and non accipitis, eo quod male
petatis. You ask or pray, and receive not (the thing requested) because you
ask amiss. By Jacob. 4.
which place we learn, that to obtain any thing by prayer, requires a
condition of praying well, or in such sort, as is fit, the which condition,
does (as learned men observe) include many circumstances, for fault of the due
observance whereof, it may and does often happen, that our prayer is not well
made, nor in such sort as is fit: and is consequently frustrate of the
efficacy, which otherwise by the promise of our Savior it should have had.
Now these circumstances being many, and diverse of them very inward, it is not
very easy for any man, to be absolutely sure, that he has observed them, in
such sort, as is fit: and therefore he cannot be absolutely sure, that his
prayer has taken effect; and therefore it is not sufficient proof, whereby
one may persuade others, that he has the Spirit of God, to say, he has prayed
for it; especially considering, that we may find very many most contrary, in
religion, one to another, who notwithstanding will say, that they daily pray
for the holy Spirit: and I doubt not, but many of them in some sort, yea
earnestly, after their manner, do pray for it: yet sure it is, that all these
(being thus contrary) have it not. How shall we then be assured, that this or
that man, who, presuming upon the assistance of this Spirit, (which he thinks
he has obtained by prayer) sets abroach a singular and new invented
doctrine, how shall we be sure (I say) that such a man has the Spirit of God
indeed?

A. W.
This objection you make, is so void of all likelihood, that I persuade my
self, no man would ever be so foolish as to allege it in this question. For
who can choose but see at the very first reading of it, that if it may be had by
prayer, one may have it as well as another? and therefore there is little
reason, why all should rely upon any one in such a matter. Besides, what a
ridiculous thing is it for me to imagine that every body will believe me on my
word, when I tell them that I have prayed earnestly for the spirit, and
therefore must needs have it? Wherefore your objection and answer are not worth
the considering or reading.

Only of the place you allege, in a word, thus much may be said, that our
Savior by it Mat. 7. 7.
encourages and persuades us to pray, assuring us of gracious acceptance by
God his Father in all our petitions, so far forth as the obtaining of them
shall make for his glory, the good of his Church, and our own spiritual and
bodily comfort. And though it be most true, that we can never pray as we ought,
yet may we be assured to have our requests granted (the former conditions
remembered) whenever we pray for any thing belonging to the general estate of
Christians, or our particular callings, with a true acknowledgement of Gods
power, feeling of our own wants, and resting upon his promise to us in Jesus
Christ. Particularly, concerning the understanding of Scripture: for any thing
belonging to the general estate of Christians, or our particular callings,
which belongs to the question we have in hand, thus speaks Chrysostom. in
praef. ad Romans
Chrysostom of this place. If you will persuade your selves (says he) to
read the Scriptures diligently and carefully, there is nothing farther to be
required of you for the understanding of the^. His reason follows: For Christ
has truly said, Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you.

A. D.. 6.
Some will perchance say, that we may safely believe them, because they preach
nothing but pure Scripture, while as for every point of their doctrine, they
cite still sentences of Scripture. But this answer will not serve. First,
because for and in the name of Scripture they bring forth their false and
corrupt translations, which do differ in some places, even in words, from true
Scripture. Secondly, supposing that they did always cite the true words of
Scripture, yet they may easily apply them to a wrong sense or meaning; to wit
to that which they falsely imagine (being seduced by their own appetite, or by
their own former error) to be the true sense. For as Saint Austin says, Ad
imagines phantasmatum suorum carnalls anima conuertit Lib. 3. de bapt. cont.
Donatist. cap. 19.
omnia sacramenta and verba librorum, sanctorum: a carnal and sensual mind
(such as heretics are not without, since heresy it self is accounted by Saint
Paul a work of the flesh) does convert or turn all the mysteries and words of
holy books unto his own imaginations and fantasies. Whereupon it comes to
pass, that as the same Saint Austin says: Omnes haeretici, qui in authoritate
Scripturas recipient, Ep. 222. and tract. 18. in Joan.
ipsas sibi videntur sectari, cum suos sectentur errores. All heretics that
receive and admit the authority of the Scriptures, seem to themselves to
follow the only Scriptures, when they follow their own errors. And as they
may seem to themselves to follow only the Scriptures, when they follow their
own errors: so they may seem, especially to the simple people; or to those,
who being seduced by them, wholly build their belief upon them, to preach
nothing but pure Scripture, when indeed they preach their own erroneous
opinions, colored and painted with words of Scripture; as it is the manner of
every sect master to confirm his error with words of Scripture: yea the
devil himself does sometime for his purpose allege words of Scripture.

A. W.
It appears by this second objection, that this discourse was intended
against us, who call you for the trial of all questions of Religion, to the
Scripture of God. But how injuriously you deal with us herein, a blind man may
see. For we neither claim any such privilege of being free from error in
citing and understanding Scripture, nor desire to be any farther believed for
translation or interpretation, then we can approve them by evident reason. And
this you knew well enough, and are ready with the rest of your accomplices, to
accuse us of referring all to every man's private spirit. But malice is as well
without sight, as without shame.

That of Saint Austin we acknowledge to be most true, and find it verified by
your Rhemish translation, and the application of Scripture in your Canon law,
and Schoole-mens writings: out of which it is easy to bring a cloud of
witnesses to this purpose.

For the other place of Austin, you quote two treatises, his 18. tract upon
John, and his 222. epistle to Consentius. In the former whereof, there is no
such word to be found, nor any such epistle either in the Basil, or 1523.
the old Paris print. But in your 1586.
late edition of Austin at Paris, both the epistle and the words are, wherein
Austin makes the misunderstanding of the Scriptures the occasion of heresy.
Who denies it? This may serve us to prove, that (...).
the ignorance of the Scriptures is exceeding dangerous; even as Chrysostom. ad
Coloss bom. 19.
Chrysostom says, (...).
the cause of all evils. In another place the August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 7.
cap. 9.
same Austin tells us, that men are for nothing else heretics, but because
not rightly understanding the Scriptures, they obstinately maintain their own
opinions against the truth of them. And Tertul. de resur. carnis. cap. 63.
Tertullian goes somewhat further, showing that heresies durst not peep up
without some occasion taken by the Scriptures. But he adds, that those very
heresies may be convinced by the Scriptures. If we misinterprete the
Scriptures, why do not you great Clearkes, that have the spirit tied to your
Church, refute our false interpretations by the Scriptures? Do we refuse this
trial? Is it not that we still urge, to have all things examined by the
Scriptures? or is there any thing you more fear, then to be confined to the
Scriptures? What though the devil and heretics allege them? Did not our
Savior himself say so too? Opus imperf. in Math. hom. 48.
What plea can you make, wherein some heretics have not gone before you? Will
you brag of the Church? Heretics also both think and say they are of the
Church: yea they are in all things so like true professors, that in Antichrists
time (as Opus imperf. in Math. hom. 49.
an ancient author speaks) there is no means of trial left but the
Scripture. If you urge tradition, so do heretics too, running up and down
(right like you Papists) Jren. lib. 3. cap. 1. 2.
from tradition to Scripture, and from Scripture to tradition. They plead
Councels as well as you. The August. cont. Maxim. lib. 1.
Arians object diverse against Austin and other writers. As for the Fathers: was
not De bapt. con. Donat. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Austin pressed by the Donatists with Agrippin and Cyprian? Did not the heretic
Dioscorus cry out Council. Chaiced. Actio 1.
in the Council of Chalcedon, I have the testimonies of the holy Fathers,
Athanasius, Gregory, Cyrill. I vary not from them in any point, I am cast out
with the Fathers, I defend the fathers doctrine, I have their judgment extant
in their books.

Neither may we rest upon miracles. To let pass what before I said of that
point, remember what August. in Joan. tract. 13.
Austin says, Pontius (say the Manichees) did a miracle, Donat prayed, and God
answered him from heaven. The Scripture only is the true touchstone in these
cases, if it be hard, Let him that has an heart (says August. de doct.
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Austin) read those things that go before, and those that follow, and he shall
find the sense.

A. D.: 7.
Wherefore there is no reason, whereby we may be assured, that such men have
the spirit of God: but we may find many reasons to convince that they have not
this spirit. And to omit, for breuitic sake, the seeking out of any other, even
the singularity or priuatnesse of their spirit, is sufficient not only to
move us to suspect it, but also to condemn it, and to assure us, that it
cannot be the spirit of truth: as it is very well signified by Saint Austin,
who says, Veritas tua, Lib. 12. Confess. cap. 25.
Domine, nec mea est, nec illius, sed omnium quos ad eius communionem public
vocas; terribiliter admonens nos, ne eam habere velimus priuatam, ne priuemur
ea. Nam quisquis id quod tu ad fruendu^ omnibus proponis, sibi proprie
vendicat, and suum esse vult, quod omniu^ est, a communi propellitur ad sua, id
est, a veritate ad mendaciu^. Thy truth (O Lord) is neither proper to me, nor
him, but common to all, whom thou do publikly call to the common partaking
of it; warning us terribly to take heed, that we will not have it private to
our self, least we be deprived of it. For whosoever does challenge that to
himself privately, which thou do propose publicly to be enjoyed of all, and
will have that his own, which is common to all, he is driven from the common
to his own, that is to say, from the truth to a lie.

A. W.
To refute this conceit of a private spirit (which was not worth this ado) you
argue from the singularity or priuatenesse of it; as if it could not be true,
because it is not agreeable to the common opinion. And surely he that shall be
so arrogant and shameless, as to deny all the points of Religion commonly
held, upon a presumption that himself only has the spirit of God, is fitter
to be cut off by the Magistrates sword, then confuted by the word of Scripture.
But it is very possible, that in some points and places, some one man, without
any revelation, by diligent searching and prayer, may find out that, which no
other man yet knows, at least for interpretation of Scripture, as it falls
out every day amongst both Protestants and Papists. Therefore your Caietan.
praef. in lib. Mosis.
Cardinal Caietan doubts not to say, that God has not tied the exposition
of the Scriptures to the senses of the Fathers: and therefore asks no more
then reason, when he wills the Reader not to be offended or mislike it, if
sometimes himself hit upon a new sense agreeable to the text, though it go
against the stream of the fathers. For which, though Canus loc. Theol. lib. 7.
cap. 3.
Canus reprove him without cause, Andrad. defens. fid. Trid. lib 2.
Andradius justly defends him. And why should he not? since, as Domingo a
Soto witnesses, one man's authority and learning draws numbers after him to
his opinion. By reason of a saying of Saint Austins, (says Sotus de not. and
great. l. 3. c. 4.
Soto) all the fathers after his time, and all the Divines, with one consent
have worthily affirmed, that the glorious Virgin never committed any actual
sin, for all Chrysostom, auncienter then he, thought the contrary. Yet was
Austins judgment in this case, but private, and for truth, inferior to
Chrysostomes. If publicknesse or general consent should carry the matter, how
chance Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Paphnutius withstood all the rest of the famous Council of Nice, and
prevailed? We ought (says Picus in quaes. An Papa sit supra Concilium.
Picus Earl of Mirandula) to believe a simple husbandman, a child, or an old
woman, rather then the Pope, and a thousand Bb. if these speak against the
Gospel, and the other with it. Then belike a private man may see some truth,
which is not generally discerned.

The place of August. conf. lib. 12. cap. 25.
Austin you bring, does not condemn all interpretations or opinions, which
some one man finds out, and holds, but only reproves them, who in
expounding the places of Scripture, which will bear a diverse sense, urge one
only, not because it is truth, but because they like it best. His example is
out of Genesis concerning the sense of those words: Genesis 1. 1.
In the beginning God created heaven and earth. They know not which of those
diverse senses that may be, Moses did intend (says August. vbi supra. cap. 11.
12
Austin) but they love their own opinion, not because it is true, but because
it is their own. What does this concern us? who, as we give every man of
judgment leave to propound his interpretation to be examined: so permit no man
to thrust any exposition upon the Church, which he cannot make evident proof
of, by sound reason. Neither is it then taken as his private conceit, but
acknowledged as the truth of God, manifested by his industry. In doubtful
places we follow the likeliest sense, without any resolute determining what is
true, what false: and therefore See my answer to 12. art. part. 1. art. 5.
cannot with any show of reason be charged to appropriate the knowledge of Gods
truth to our selves, where it has pleased his Majesty so to propound it, that
of diverse senses a man cannot certainly affirm, that this or that is true.

A. D.
CHAP. X. That the doctrine and teaching of the true Church, is the rule of
faith.

A. W.
If you had mentioned nothing but the doctrine of the true Church, we might
have understood you, without any cause of doubting: but now you ad teaching to
doctrine, we are enforced to enquire farther into your meaning. For we are
uncertain, whether by those words you mean one and the same thing, or no. The
doctrine of the Church, is that which the Church propounds to be believed,
whether by word of mouth, or in writing. Teaching, if we make it differ from
doctrine, is that only which is delivered by voice to the ear. If we
understand you in the former sense for teaching by writing, as well as by word
of mouth, the latter word was needless; if in the latter of writing only,
then the same doctrine written, is not the rule of faith, which uttered by a
teacher will become such a rule; not because it is true, but because it is
taught by authority.

A. D.. 1.
The fourth conclusion is, that this infallible rule, which every one ought to
follow in all points of faith, is the doctrine and teaching of the true Church,
or company of the true faithful of Christ.

A. W.
That we may the better understand what you say, and how you prove your saying,
there are a few things to be considered in this fourth condition. First, by the
faithful of Christ, you must mean those that profess Christian Religion,
whether they believe as they profess, or no; as I have showed out of Bellar.
de Eccles. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Bellarmine, who doubtless knows what the Church is, as well as you. If you
be of any other opinion, by Chap. ^.
your own rule we may reject it, for the priuatnesse thereof.

Secondly, where you say the true faithful, it is not your purpose to speak
as we, for whom you writ this, commonly do, of them that have a true
justifying faith; but of them that profess the doctrine of the Gospel,
according to the true sense and meaning of it, whether they have any justifying
faith or no.

Thirdly, by this company or Church, whom understand you? If the whole number
of the believers, as well Laity as Clergy, I oppose the judgment of your
own Doctors against you, who speaking of the Churches doctrine and teaching,
restrain the word only to the Pope and Bishops. The spirit (says Bellar. de
verb. Dei. lib. 3. cap. 3.. Tota igitur.
Bellarmine) is certainly found in the Church, that is, in a Council of
Bishops, confirmed by the chief Pastor of the whole Church, or in the chief
Pastor with a Council of the other Pastors. If you follow Bellarmine, I
demand whether your Laity be none of the true faithful of Christ, nor parts
of the Church. But to leave this doubt, we are thus to conceive your meaning,
that the doctrine which the Pope and other Pastors of the Church, namely Bb.
deliver in a Council, is the rule of faith.

Now let us propound your reason, and examine it; but first I confess, that I
dare not resolutely determine whether it be brought in by you, for a proof of
any thing that hitherto has been spoken, or intended only, as a discourse
concerning the authority of the Church. If we apply it to any matter already
past, as far as I am able to conceive, it must be a second proof of the
proposition or mayor of your maine Syllogism in this manner.

If the doctrine and teaching of the true Church be the infallible rule which
all men ought to follow, then the faith which the authority of the true Church
commends to us, is to be holden for the true faith. But the doctrine and
teaching of the true church, is the infallible rule, that all men ought to
follow. Therefore the faith which the authority of the true Church commends
to us, is to be holden for the true faith.
This reasonable coherence we may make betwixt this Chapter and your former
course, without changing or weakening any part or point of your proof, which is
applied to the confirming of this last minor, the argument of this Chapter.

A. D.. 2.
This I prove by this reason. If our Savior Christ has promised to any
company of men, the presence of himself, and the assistance of his holy
spirit, of purpose to instruct and teach them all truth: giving withal
peculiar charge and commission to them, to teach all nations, and to preach to
every creature: giving also warrant to all, that they may safely hear them:
giving also commandment, whereby he binds all, to do in all things according
to their saying: and threatening greatly those who will not hear and believe
them: then certainly the doctrine and teaching of these men, is in all points
most true and infallible; and such, as (if the other conditions required in the
rule of faith be not, as they are not, wanting) may well be proposed to all
sorts as an assured ground, whereupon they may safely build an infallible
Christian faith. For look what our Savior Christ has promised, must needs be
performed; and whatsoever he warranteth or commands, may safely and without
danger of error be done, nay must of necessity be done, especially when he
threatens those that will not do it: and consequently if he have promised to
send his holy Spirit to teach any company of men all truth; it is not to be
doubted, but that he sends this his holy Spirit, and by it teaches them all
truth: and fith the teaching of his Spirit is infallible, we are not to doubt
but that this company is in all points infallibly taught the truth. If also
the same our Savior gave warrant and commandment, that they should teach us,
and that we should hear them, and do in all things according to their saying:
we may not likewise doubt, but that they shall be able to teach all sorts of
men, in all points, the infallible truth; and that all sorts of men may, if
they will, learn of that company, what in all points is the infallible truth.
For otherwise by this general commandment of hearing them, and doing
according to their saying, we should be bound sometime to hear and believe an
untruth, and to do that, which were not upright and good: which without
blasphemy to Christ his verity and goodness can no way be thought.

A. W.
1 If our Savior Christ (say you) has promised to any company his presence
and assistance of his spirit, of purpose to instruct and teach them all truth.
2 If he have given them charge and commission to preach to every creature. 3
If he have given warrant to all, that they may safely hear them. 4 If he have
given commandment to all, to do in all things, according to their saying. 5
If he have threatened them, who will not hear and believe them. 6 If the other
conditions required in the rule of faith be not wanting, then the doctrine and
teaching of the true Church is the rule, that all men ought to follow.
But our Savior Christ has so 1. promised, 2. charged, 3. warranted, 4.
commanded, 5. threatened, and 6. the other conditions required, are not wanting.

Therefore the doctrine and teaching of the true Church is the rule that all
men ought to follow.

I have propounded this Syllogism, as your self have set it Of the
proposition.
down, save only that I have endeavored to make it somewhat shorter, keeping
your sense whole and full. Now for the proposition, I grant the consequence,
upon all those conditions jointly considered, to be sound and good: Howsoever
some of them might well have been omitted: for example.

1 If our Savior have promised his presence and assistance of his spirit, of
purpose to teach a certain company of men all truth, then the doctrine of the
Church is the rule of faith.

This consequence is but weak: for Christ may afford such presence and
assistance to such a purpose, and yet the effect not ensue, by reason that
those men fail in some duties required on their part. Do not you affirm Chap.
5.
in this Treatise, that God has appointed means of salvation for all men,
with a true will to have them saved; and yet very many, yea the greatest part
are not saved?

2 If he have given them charge and commission to preach to every creature,
then their preaching is the rule of faith.

Their commission is not simply to teach, but to teach Math. 28. 20.
those things, that our Savior himself commanded, and therefore their
doctrine can be no farther the rule of faith, then they preach according to
their commission. If I, or an Angel from heaven (says Gal. 1. 8.
the Apostle) preach unto you, otherwise, then that you have received, let him
be accursed.

The same may be objected against the third, and the fifth points: It does not
follow that their doctrine is the rule of faith, because all men have warrant
to hear them safely: or because, they are threatened, who will not hear and
believe them. For first, they may be free from danger of erring, and yet not
know all points of faith, Chap. 6.
which is made by you one condition of the rule. Secondly, unless you enlarge
the warrant, as far as the commandment, in the fourth point, (which is in a
manner to confound them) so that they may safely hear them in all things, your
consequence will still be naught. Thirdly, they may hear them safely, though
the other may err, if they have means affoorded to examine that they deliver,
and skill and care to use those means. Fourthly, the threatening, for not
believing, is to be restrained to their teaching, as they ought. Are not they
threatened Luc. 10. 16.
by our Savior, who believe not any Minister lawfully authorized, and
preaching the truth? Yet does it not follow hereupon, that they cannot err, or
that their preaching is simply the rule of faith.

But these feeble consequences might all have been omitted by you, and your
matter as fully proved, if you had set down none, but the fourth and sixth
points thus.

If God have commanded all men to do, in all things, as the Church teaches,
and the other conditions required in the rule be not wanting, then their
preaching is the rule, that all men ought to follow.

This consequence is true, and sufficient for your purpose; the other serve for
number to make a show, rather then for substance of weight. But of your Mayor
this may be sufficient, especially since I acknowledge the truth thereof.

A. D.. 3.
But so it is, that Christ our Savior has in holy Scripture promised, given
commission, warranted, commanded, and threatened in manner aforesaid.

Therefore we cannot doubt, but that there is a certain company (the which is
called the true Church of Christ) which both is, in all points of faith,
infallibly taught, by the holy Spirit; and is likewise to teach all sorts of
men, in all points of faith, what is the infallible truth: and therefore the
teaching of this company, may well be assigned, and proposed to all men, as an
undoubted, sufficient rule of faith.

A. W.
I deny your Minor, first in general; because our Savior did To the
assumption.
not so promise, charge, warrant, command, threaten, in regard of any company
of men, as if there had been some joint teaching appointed by him: but in
respect of his Apostles, and Ministers severally, who, in their proportion,
have as much authority, for necessity of being believed, severally one by
one, as jointly all together; though such a joint consent is the more to be
reverenced, and respected. Secondly, I deny it also, in the fourth point,
which is the strength of it. There never was since the Apostles, any man, or
any company of men, according to whose saying we were commanded to do in all
things. Lastly, I say the conditions required in the rule of faith, are wanting
in the teaching you understand.

This conclusion of yours gives me occasion to speak somewhat Of the
conclusion.
at large of the Church, with the name whereof applied Heruaeus de potest
Papae. cap. 23.
to your Pope alone, or Pope and Clergy, you daily seduce many unsettled and
ignorant people. The word Church in our English tongue seems first of all to
have been applied to the Temple, or place of Gods service, as if it were called
Kyrke, of the Greek (...)
(...), as you would say the Lords house. But the Hebrew and Greek words, which
must be the Judges in this matter, signify a Company, Congregation, or
Assembly. The Hebrew (...)
words are two, the Greek as many; the Latin, besides the two Greek made
Latin, are diverse, Populi, people: Coetus, company, congregatio, congregation:
multitudo, multitude: turba, troop: concio, assembly: exercitus, army. But
the two Greek words are best known, (...).
Ecclesia and Synagoga: the former whereof comes of the Hebrew, retaining
almost the signification, and sound thereof. In this, they all agree, that they
note unto us a company or assembly. But because the Greek (...) is the word,
that most of all concerns this question, let us enquire of that the more
diligently. The word, for the nature of it, signifies any company called
together; generally any assembly lawfully or unlawfully, orderly or disorderly
assembled. Of lawful assemblies there is no question, of unlawful we have an
example Act. 19. 25. 29. 40. 41.
in the Scripture, where the people of Ephesus, tumultuously ran together
against Paul and Apollos. So does the Hebrew word signify in the Psalms,
where (...) and ecclesiam.
the Greek and Latin translate by the same word: Psalm. 25. 5.
I have hated the assembly of the wicked. But in the new testament, except that
one place of the Acts, it is always applied to them, that make profession of
religion. In which sense it is sometimes used indefinitely, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
God has ordained some in the Church, first Apostles etc. So the Apostle Paul
says, that and 15. 9. Phil. 3. 6.
he had persecuted the Church of God. Thus may we also understand that, 1. Tim.
3. 15.
The house of God, which is the Church of the living God: If we conceive that
the Apostle speaks to Timothy, as to an Evangelist, and not as to the Pastor
or Bishop of Ephesus. Hitherto may those places be referred, Act. 2. 47.
The Lord added to the Church from day to day: And and 5. 11.
great fear came on all the Church. Herod stretched forth his hand to vex
certain of the Church: and such like, though they may also be understood of
the believers, at those times ordinarily abiding in Jerusalem, and assembling
themselves together in one, or (which is the likelier) in diverse congregations,
for exercise of religion. More particularly, and usually, the Church is taken
for any one congregation assembled about matters of religion: Act. 15. 22.
It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church. Not as if the
Apostles and Elders had been no members of that Church, but the principal
being first named, the general term is added, which comprehended all: as if
they should have said: The Apostles and Elders, and all the rest of the Church
at Jerusalem: whereof, as it was a particular congregation, the Apostles, at
that time were not members. And in this meaning may a Council of diverse
parishes, provinces, or nations be called by the name of a Church; and in the
like sort may we call the assemblies and congregations in Rome, Coriath,
Ephesus, the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus: because of some common synod,
or because by the term Church, the believers are signified. Most usually, the
several congregations in any country or City are called Churches, because of
their ordinary assembling. Act. 9. 31.
Then had the Churches rest, through all Judea. and 14. 23.
When they had ordained them Elders by election in every Church. 1. Cor. 11. 16
We have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. When the title is applied
to particular families, it has no other meaning, as I take it, then to note
them for Christians or believers. Romans 16. 5. Philem. ver. 2.
Greet the Church (that is the believers) which are in their house. And thus
much of the Church, as it signifies generally Believers.

The word Church, is used in the scriptures, and that very often, not for all,
but only for some believers, namely, for such as are indeed true believers, in
respect of true faith in Jesus Christ: and these are always of the elect: who
are then called the Church, when they are brought to the knowledge of the
truth, and to Justifying faith: Therefore when we say that the Church
signifies the elect, or predestinate, we mean only such of the elect, as by
faith are members of our Saviors body, he being the head. For howsoever, in
the secret Counsel of God, many not yet borne, be predestinate to everlasting
life; yet they are not to be accounted of this Church, before it has pleased
God to call them to believe in Christ.

Examples of the Church thus taken, amongst many are these. Mat. 16. 18.
Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 23.
God has given Christ above all, the head of the Church. So Col. 1. 24.
the Church is called Christ's body. This may serve, concerning the meaning of
the wotd: out of which I observe this point, that since the term Church is so
diversely taken in the scripture, no argument from any place of Scripture can be
of force to prove any question, till the signification of the word, in that
place, be evident and certain. And therefore it is not enough, for proof of a
matter in controversy betwixt us, to allege a text of Scripture, where such a
thing is spoken of the Church, but it stands us upon to prove, that in the
place we allege, by Church, the company we intend, is signified. This being
understood and remembered, I come now to the several points in your Minor.

A. D.. 4.
The promise of our Savior Christ we have first in the Gospel of Mat. cap. 28.
Saint Matthew: Ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus, vsque ad consummationem
seculi: I am with you all the days, until the end of the world: in which
words is promised the continual presence of Christ himself, (who is veritas
the truth it self) with his Church; not for a while then, or for a while now;
but, all the days until the end of the world. Secondly, we have an other
promise in the Gospel of Saint John: Ego rogabo Patrem, and alium paracletum
Joan. 14.
dabit vobis, vt maneat vobiscum in aeternum, Spiritum veritatis. I will ask
my Father, and he will give you an other paraclite, the spirit of truth, that
he may remain with you (not only for 600. years) but for ever. And again
(in the same Saint John) to show us, for what purpose he would have his holy
Spirit remain among us for ever; he says, Paracletus quem mittet Pater in
nomine Joan. 14.
meo, ille vos docebit omnia, and suggeret vobis omnia, quaecunque dixero
vobis. The paraclite, whom my Father will send in my name, shall teach you all
things, and shall put you in mind of all things whatsoever I shall say unto
you. And again, Cum venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos omnem
veritatem. Joan. 16.
When that spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth.

A. W.
The first point of your Minor is, that Christ promises his presence, and the
assistance of his spirit, to teach them all truth. First I demand, whether our
Saviors presence be for the teaching of all truth, or no: or whether that be
only the office of the spirit? If the former, to what purpose is the spirit
promised, whom our Savior has appointed his vicegerent, as it were, in that
matter; as the other places you allege prove? If it belong to the spirit, how
is the presence of Christ applied thereunto? But to answer directly to the
place, thus you dispute.

If Christ have promised to be with a company of men, till the end of the
world: then he has promised it, that he might teach the Church all truth. But
he has promised to be with a company of men, till the end of the world.
Therefore he has promised it, that he might teach them all truth.
Admit all this were granted: yet would it not follow hereupon, To the whole
Syllogism.
that the Church therefore could not err: because, as I answered before,
perhaps they would not have care to learn and remember all, though our Savior
were ready to teach them all.

I deny the consequence of your proposition. First, because To the proposition.
they, to whom our Savior makes this promise, are not the Church, as you
understand the Church, that is, the Clergy, of whose teaching you wholly
speak, but the faithful jointly, and severally, as well hearers as teachers,
as well every one, as all together. This appears by the text, Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Go teach all nations etc. and behold I am with you, till the end of the world.
With whom? With you that teach only? Nay rather with all believers, Joan. 17. 20.
for all which he prayed, as well as for the teachers. So have the ancient
writers expounded and understood this place. He does not say, he will be with
them only (says Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 91.
Chrysostom) but also with all, that shall believe after them. For the
Apostles were not to continue to the end of the world, but he speaks to the
faithful, as to one body. Christ shows (says Hieron. ad Matthew. 28.
Jerome) that he will never depart from them that believe. So does Cyprian.
epistola. 81.. 1. ad Serg. Rogat. and caeteros.
Cyprian make it common to all believers, that confess the truth of God in
time of trial. So does Leo. ser. de resurrec. 2.
Leo, to all, that are adopted. He that is gone up into Heaven (says Leo) does
not forsake them, that are adopted. So Beda apud Thoan Cate. ad Mat. 28.
Beda, he remains with his elect in this world protecting the^. To which
purpose August. in Joan. tract. 50.
S. Austin says, that this promise is fulfilled by our Savior, in that he is
present, according to his majesty, according to his providence, according to
his unspeakable, and invisible grace. With all that believe, (says Gaudent. ad
Neophyt. de promis. Paracl.
Gaudentius) I will be with you that is (says Dionys. Carthus. ad Mat. 28
Denis the Charterhouse monk) with you, and your successors, and with all the
faithful, or militant Church. And thereupon he gathers, that the faith shall
never wholly fail, but Christian religion shall continue in some till the end
of the world. The like collection Raban. Maur. ad Math. 28.
Rabanus makes, Hereby (says he) it is understood, that there shall never be
some wanting, till the end of the world, who shall be worthy, or fit for God
to dwell in. The Council of Vienna (as Gregor. de Val. de praesent. Christ. in
Eucbar. cap. 11
Gregory de Valentia says) expounded the place of Christ being present in the
Sacrament: which is common to all believers, lib. 3. Clement de relic and
vener. sanctorum c. si Dominum.

Secondly, the consequence is naught, because the end of Christ's presence is
not to teach the Church all truth, but to protect and defend them by his power,
in the profession of the truth. So it is applied, as we heard before, by
Cyprian. epistola 81.. 1.
Cyprian to the comfort of the Christians then imprisoned for religion. So does
August. in Joan. tract 50.
Austin take it, that he is present by his providence and divine Majesty. The
same is Haymo. in homil. fer. 6. post pasch.
Haymo his judgment and exposition. But Martial. ad Tolos. cap. 25.
Martialis is most plain, who by this promise exhorts the^ of Toulouse in
France to persevere in the profession of religion, because our Savior Christ
will never leave the^, but always be present with them. He confirms and
encourages them (says Theoph. ad Mat. 28. and Chrysostom. ibid.
Theophylact) because he sent them to the Gentiles, into dangers and hazards of
their lives: And Chrysostom. ad. Mat. 28.
Chrysostom thinks (wherein also Theophyl. secondeth him) that our Savior
mentions the end of the world, because he would have them with more patience
and constancy, endure what soever hard measure for a time upon earth, in regard
of the joys whereof they should be made partakers in the world to come. If
then this promise of our Savior, belong to all and every true believer, if it
be uttered for the comfort of all such, that they may rest upon his mighty
protection, who sees not that an impossibility of your Cleargies erring
cannot be concluded from it?

1 The places of John are thus to be concluded.

If our Savior have promised the spirit of truth to a certain company of men,
to abide with the^ for ever, and teach the^ all truth, then the teaching of
these men is an assured ground of faith. But Christ has promised the spirit so
to a certain company of men. Therefore the teaching of these men is an assured
ground of faith.
First I answer, that your conclusion proves not the point in question;
because this company, to which the promise is made, is not the Church from
time to time, but that promise belongs to the Apostles, either only, or at
the least principally, in such a measure of being taught. The former may thus
appear, because our Savior speaks of another comforter, in respect of his
own bodily departure from them, which cannot belong to the Church now, with
which Christ was never present in that sort. Secondly, this spirit promised,
was to bring all things that Christ had taught, to their remembrance, whom he
should teach. But this cannot belong to the present Church, nor to any Church
since the Apostles. Thirdly, this sending of the spirit was performed Act. 2.
3. 4.
when the holy Ghost came upon the Apostles; which does not befall the Church
now a days. Fourthly, the same spirit was to show them the things to come,
either concerning themselves in particular, or by giving them the gift of
prophecy, which now the Church has not. Thus do Tertul. de praescrip. cap. 8.
Tertullian and August. in Joan. tract. 75.
Austin understand these places, applying them to the Apostles: so does Iansen
harm. cap. 134.
Iansenius bishop of Gaunt; so Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 74.
Chrysostom and Theophyl. in Joan 14.
Theophylact; so your ordinary Glosses and Lyra. And whereas this
interpretation may seem to be refuted by the place it self, because the
spirit must abide with them, to whom he is promised, for ever: that is
expounded by Neque post mortem abit. Chrysostom. vbi supr.
Chrysostom, to signify his continuance with them, even after death also.
Which Hugo Cardin. ad Joan. 14. Theoph. vbi supra.
Theophylact sets out more at large. His company with you (says our Savior)
shall not be for a time, as mine; but shall continue for ever: neither shall it
fail when you are dead, but shall remain with you, and shall make you more
glorious. He promises (says Gloss. ordin. ad Joan. 16.
your Gloss) that the spirit shall do all; not that all is fulfilled in this
life. This Comforter (says Lyra ad Joa. 14.
Lyra) shall not be taken from you, as my humane nature is drawn away by
death: but shall be with you eternally, here by grace, but in the world to come
by glory. We may (perhaps) conceive our Saviors meaning to be no more, but
that the spirit which he would send, should not leave them as he was to do,
but should abide with them to the very end of their lives, for their
instruction and comfort: neither of which are needful any longer then while we
are in this world.

They that apply these promises to all the elect also (for to any visible
company of men, I think besides you Papists, no man does) neither make for
your opinion; because they tie them not to any company, but give every true
Christian his like part in the privilege of this spirit, and (as we heard ere
while out of your Gloss. ordin. vti supra.
ordinary Gloss) leave some truth to be revealed in the life to come. I do not
think (says August. ad Joan. tract. 96.
Austin) that in this life the promise of being taught all truth, can be
fulfilled in any man's mind. For who living in this body which is corrupted,
and presses down the soul, can know all truth; when the Apostle says, We
know in part. By which it is also apparent, that according to Austins
judgment, for ever, may be understood of continuing after this life.

Secondly, if these places prove, that the Church is a sure foundation or rule
of faith; it must follow, that every particular Of the Assumption.
teacher is so. For eueryone of them, to whom our Savior made these promises,
was severally according thereunto taught all truth, and not all jointly; as if
they might have erred being severed, which you confess of your Church: and
therefore this teaching appertains not to it.

Of the several places I say further, that Joan. 14. 17.
in the first of them there is no mention of teaching all truth, but only of
sending the spirit of truth. That is (says Theophyl. ad Joan. 14.

Hugo Cardin. ibi.


Theophylact) the spirit, not of the old Testament (for that was a figure and a
shadow) but of the new, which is the truth. The spirit of truth (says Lyra.
ibi.
Lyra) because he is essentially the truth, and teaches the truth. He calls
him the spirit of truth (says Iansen. harm. cap. 134.
Iansenius) because he is the author of all truth, and the only giver of pure
and sound truth. For he only teaches the truth, without mixture of any
falsehood or error: Also he only teaches the truth, wherein the salvation of
man consists.

Joan. 14. 26.
In the second place you have followed the vulgar Latin against the truth of
the Greek and sense of the text. The Greek is, (...)
All that I have told you: not as you translare it, All that I shall say unto
you. It is the praeter tense (says your B. Iansen. vti supra.
Iansenius) not the future, in the Greek. So do Pagnin, Vatablus, and Montanus
translate it. The holy Ghost (says Theophyl. ad Joan. 14.
Theophylact) shall make you understand those things that are obscure and hard.
For those things that seem hard unto you, I told you when I remained with you.
Your interlined Gloss refers teaching to the understanding, and putting in
mind to the will. He shall teach you (says the Gloss. interl. ibi.
Gloss) that you may know; and Suggerit, vt velitis.
suggest, that you may will. Tell me then, why I may not gather from hence,
that the Church shall not err in manners; or at least shall have true faith in
heart, not only in profession? But it is certain, that it is possible, the
greater part of a Council, yea and the Pope himself may be without true
faith: and it is enough to make a man a member of your church, Bellar. de
Eccles. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10.
that he profess outwardly.

By all truth Joan. 16. 13.
our Savior means all truth necessary to salvation, says Iansen harm. cap.
134.
Iansenius. Gloss. ordin. ibi.
So your Gloss. Theophyl. ad Joan. 16.

Hugo Cardin. ad Joan. 16.


Theophylact refers it to the truth of those things which were shadowed out
in the law: and by the discovery of the truth to be abolished. Hugo
restrains it to all truth, concerning Christ himself. But let us take all
truth as largely as you can reasonably conceive it. Will it follow thereupon trow
you, that therefore the teaching of the Church is the rule of faith? May not
the Church be taught all truth by the holy Ghost, and yet teach some device of
her own which she never learned of him? It is one thing to teach a man all
truth, and another to keep him so, that he shall deliver nothing but that
truth. Your Minor therefore is false, because this first part of it is so.

A. D.. 5.
The charge and commission is plain in S. Matthew: Euntes docete omnes gentes:
Going teach all nations. And in S. Mark: Euntes Math. 28. Mark 16.
in mundum vniuersum, praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae: Going into the
whole world, preach the Gospel to every creature.

A. W.
The charge which Math. 28. 19
our Savior gave for preaching the Gospel to all nations, was no commandment
to his Church, that is, to the company of the believers, or to the Clergy,
as you speak, in all ages; but a commission to the Apostles and first
Disciples, for the performance of that duty. The reason, why it is delivered
so at large, may be gathered out of Mat. 10. 5.
Matthew 10. chapter where at their first sending they were limited to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, and barred from going to the Gentiles. Go not
(says our Savior) into the way of the Gentiles, and into the cities of the
Samaritans enter not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And that this charge belongs not to men now a days, it is evident, because
neither does our Savior bestow the gift of tongues to that purpose, as Act 2.
5.
he did on those whom he sent to that work; neither can we have any calling to
such a purpose, having no gifts for it: yet do not we deny but that it is
lawful for Princes, who have by conquest or otherwise the government of
strange nations, to see that they be instructed in the faith; yea we think
this lies upon them, as a necessary duty. Neither do we bar any man of
taking whatsoever opportunity God shall give, to preach the Gospel to any
people. Russin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 10.
A captive maid was by the blessing of God made the means of converting the
Iberians from heathenisme to Christianity: the King of that people (as the
history says) becoming the Apostle of his nation. Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 23.
Frumentius and Aedesius being carried into India when they were young, were
afterward employed by God for the instructing of the Indians in true religion.
But your minor is not proved by that commission. Christ commanded his Apostles
and Disciples in the beginning of the Church, to preach to all nations:
therefore the Church has commission to do the like now. Besides, this charge
was laid upon every one of the Apostles and all the disciples so furnished with
the gift of tongues, according as the Apostles thought it meet to employ them.
Does this commandment bind your church, that is, either your Pope who will not
preach at home, much less will he go abroad to all quarters of the world; or
your Councels, who several are not the church? And this charge lay upon them,
to whom it was given, severally, and was not a matter to be performed by all
together in one place. Therefore your minor is false also in the second part of
it, concerning the charge, which (you say) is given to the Church, to preach to
all nations. For your Church is (as I have said) your Bb. assembled in Council,
not your Clergy men severally one by one. And it is not our Sauiors meaning to
have such a kind of teaching.

A. D.. 6.
The warrant we have in S. Luke: Qui vos audit, me audit: He Luke 10.
that hears you, hears me. By which words appears plainly, that our
Savior Christ would have us to hear and give credit to his church, no less
then to himself.

A. W:
Our Savior Luke 10. 16.
by this place has warranted all men to hear them that teach those things
which he commanded to be taught; besides which, if any man teach his own
fancies for matters of faith, that of the Apostle belongs to him, Gal. 1. 8.
Let him be accursed. The Apostles were absolutely to be heard, without
exception, as Christ himself: all other teachers, only so far as they speak
according to the word of God. He teaches by this (says Cyril. Alexa^. a pud
Thom. in catena.
Cyril) that whatsoever the holy Apostles deliver, is to be received: because
he that hears them, hears Christ. Our Savior adds this in the end (says
Lyra ad Luc. 10. 16.
Lyra) to show that the doctrine of his disciples is devoutly and reverently to
be heard, at the least for reverence of God, whose principally that doctrine
is. But what does this concern the church? Surely, if it may be enforced to
make us hear any besides the Apostles, without limiting of our hearing, we are
bound so to hear at the least every B. These words (says Bellar. de Pontif.
Romans lib. 4. cap. 16.. Quae verba.
Bellarmine) belong properly to the Apostles and to their successors: neither
may it be said that this was spoken to all of them jointly, and not to every
one severally. Now if it be absurd, and worse, to hold that we have warrant to
hear every B. whatsoever he teach, doubtless this place proves nothing for
hearing the Church. For by virtue of this speech, the Apostles were to be
heard, without any exception. If then it belong to their successors, which are
(as you say) Bb. as fully as to them, every B. must be heard and believed,
teach he what he will. I will yet say more: our Savior speaks this of the 72.
disciples, and Luc. 10.
of every two of them at the least. Now your opinion is, that your ordinary
Priests succeed them, as Bishops do the Apostles. Hence it will follow, that
whatsoever any two Priests preach, that must be holden for as certain a truth,
as if Christ himself had spoken it. Do you not see then, that this must needs
be restrained either to the Apostles, or to the doctrine taught? He that
hears you, preaching that which I have charged you to preach, hears me. So
does Gloss. interl. ad Luc. 10.
your Gloss limit the latter part of the sentence, He that despises you, that
is, He that will not believe in Christ. Indeed he that refuses to believe in
Christ, by the ministry of men, refuses Christ himself, whose doctrine it
is, that we should believe in him. Therefore your minor is false also in regard
of the third part thereof: We have no warrant to hear any man, the Apostles
being dead, but so far only as he agrees with the Scriptures.

A. D.. 7.
The commandment is expressed in S. Matthew: Super Cathedram Mat. 23.
Moysi sederunt Scribae and Pharisaei. Omnia ergo quaecunque dixerint vobis,
seruate and facite. The Scribes and Pharisees have sitten upon the chair of
Moses, All things therefore whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe and do.
Out of which words we may gather, that we are bound in all points to do
according to the doctrine of the Prelates of the Catholic Church, yea,
although it should happen that their lives were not laudable but bad. For
although our Savior in this place does only in express words make mention of
the chair of Moses, in which the Priests of the old Law did sit: yet he is to
be understood to speak also of the chair of S. Peter, his own Vicegerent, in
which the Priests of the new law do succeed. And this a fortiori, because we
have greater reason to think that our Savior intended in his doctrine to give
rules to the Priests and people of his new law, which was presently to begin,
and to continue till the worlds end, then only to give documents to those of
the old Law, considering he knew that it should so shortly cease. Wherefore the
ancient fathers do understand that place to be meant of the Priests of the new
Law, and namely S. Augustine, who says thus: In illum ordinem Episcoporum, qui
ducitur ab ipso Petro ad Epist. 165.
Anastasium, qui nunc in eadem Cathedra sedet, etiamsi quisquam traditor per
illa tempora subrepsisset, nihil praeiudicaret Ecclesiae, and innocentibus
Christianis; quibus prouidens, Dominus ait, de praepositis malis: quae dicunt,
facite; quae faciunt, facere nolite. Into that order of Bishops, which is
derived from S. Peter himself unto Anastasius, who now sits upon the same
chair, although some traitor had crept in, in those times, he should nothing
hurt the Church and the innocent Christians, for whom our Lord providing, says
of evil Prelates: What they say, do; what they do, do not.

A. W.
This is the only point, which is able to make good the consequence of your
proposition: and therefore if you fail in the proof of this, all is naught.
But out of doubt, you fail here exceedingly, and so your reason comes to
nothing.

He that commands the Jews to do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees who sit
upon Moses chair say, binds all to do in all things according to the saying
of the Church. But Mat. 23. 2.
our Savior so commands the Jews. Therefore he binds all to do in all
things according to the saying of the Church.
First I say of this syllogism as of the two last points, that if it give any
authority to your Church, it gives the same to every particular teacher. For
the Scribes and Pharisees did expound the law of Moses, not in Councels only,
but every one severally in the synagogues where they were appointed to teach.
Therefore if it be absurd to conclude upon this text, that every Scribe and
Pharisey was then, and every Preacher lawfully called is now to be heard,
whatsoever he teach, sure no such matter can be wrung out of this place for the
Church.

Secondly, this reason makes the Scribes and Pharisees the Church, shutting out
the high Priest himself, and all other priests that were not either Scribes or
Pharisees: yea it presumes (which is utterly false) that the Scribes and
Pharisees were successors to Moses in an ordinary course of authority, as you
say your Church, that is your Pope and Bb. succeed Peter and the rest of the
Apostles. Can such an argument prove a matter of such importance and doubt?

Your proposition implies, that our Savior intended to give rules concerning
Saint Peter's authority, whom you call Of the proposition.
his Vicegerent. Who would trifle so, in a question of such weight? First prove
his office, and your Popes right to it; and then frame such arguments:
otherwise any man of never so little judgment may find more cause to pity or
disdain your proof or presumption, then to stagger at the force of your
reason. All things in the Scripture were indeed written for our learning, and
therefore belong to us so far as the general doctrine reaches, and the
particular circumstances are alike. Wherefore I grant your proposition, not
because of any succession, which could not be in those Scribes and Pharisees,
being of diverse tribes, and (as your Genebrard. chron. lib. 2.
Genebrard says) having thrust themselves into the chair of Moses being
empty: but because they expounded the law of Moses among the Jews, as the
Ministers of Christ do the Gospel, at this day to the Christians.

Ere I answer to your Assumption, I must speak a word of To the Assumption.
your translation, (...).
have sitten. The Greek indeed is so, but (as Vatablus ibi.
Vatablus notes) the praeter tense is put for the present tense. Therefore
Pagnin. ibi.
Pagnine doubts not so to translate it, sedent, sit. Which must needs be our
Saviors meaning. For how were it agreeable to reason, that he should charge us
to hear the Scribes and the Pharisees, because they did sometimes sit upon
Moses chair, if now they sit beside it? It is our Saviors purpose to
signify, that the expositions of the former Pharisees, and of those that
taught in his time, were not to be rejected: or rather, it is al one, as if he
had said, Alfons. Salm. prolegom. 15. Reg. 3. sederu^t. i. e. sedent.
do sit. But let us read the place which way we list, it is all one to your
minor; which I deny. To the proof of it out of the text, I answer: First, the
sitting upon Moses chair, signifies not succession, but teaching the law of
Moses. For Exodus 3. 10. and 19. 20. and 21. 1.
Moses calling was altogether extraordinary from God, both for governing and
teaching. In the former, Joshua and the Judges succeeded him, 1. Sam. 8. 7.
till the people were weary of Gods ruling of them. The other part of his
office was to be discharged ordinarily by the Priests and Leuits. Leuit. 10.
11. Deuteronomy. 31. 9. 19:
That ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the Lord has
commanded them by the hand of Moses. Mal. 2. 7.
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at
his mouth. Neh. 8. 8. 9.
Ieshua and Bani, etc. and the Levites caused the people to understand the law.
And they read in the book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense,
and caused them to understand the reading. It was one thing to succeed Aaron,
another to sit on Moses chair. The chair of Moses (says Cyril. Hieros.
catech. 12.
Cyril) signifies power of doctrine. They sit in Moses chair (says Orige. in
Mat. hom. 24.
Origin) which interpret Moses sayings well, and according to reason. And a
little after: The Scribes and Pharisees sit naughtily upon Moses chair: they
sat well, that well understood the law. What is the meaning of that (says Ambr.
enar. in Psalm. 43.
Ambrose) The Scribes sat; but because letters are written? whereupon the
Scribes in Greek are called (...) in Greek is a letter.
(...), following the interpretation of the letter, not the sense of the
spirit. And afterward: Therefore they teaching those things that Moses wrote,
etc. So does Theophyl. ad Mat. 23.
Theophylact expound it. They that sit in Moses chair: that is, that teach the
things, that are in the law. And immediately before. They that exhort to evil
life, do not then teach out of Moses chair, nor out of the Law. Therefore to
sit upon Moses chair, is nothing else, but to have authority to expound Moses
Law, as he himself did expound it. So the Ministers of the Gospel may be said
to sit upon the Apostles chair, because they have authority to interpret the
Gospel, which the Apostles themselves preached.

Secondly, I deny that our Savior commanded the Jews, or does now charge us,
to believe whatsoever, they that have authority to teach us, deliver, or to do
whatsoever they enjoin. This is apparent, because himself refuteth and
condemns their interpretations and doctrines many times: as Mat. 5. In many
points of which, that one is most clear, Mat. 5. 43 44
Ye have heard, that it has been said, thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy: but I say unto you, love your enemies etc. Mat. 15. 11.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines men's traditions. And in
the same place, he calls them blind leaders of the blind: and adds
further, that if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch. Now
verse. 14.
can any man be so impious, I might say blasphemous, as to say, that our
Savior commanded the Jews to take such a course, as should certainly bring
them to destruction? Nay rather he warns them to take heed of their doctrine.
Mat. 16. 6
Take heed and beware, (he doubleth his admonition to make them more careful)
of the leaven of the Pharisees: And what was this leaven? verse. 12.
The doctrine of the Pharisees, says the Evangelist. But what need we go out of
this chapter for the point in question? Does he not afterward call them Mat.
23. 16.
blind guides, verse. 16. 24. fools and blind, verse. 17. 19? Does he not in
the same places, condemn and confute their absurd and lewd doctrine of
swearing? A man would wonder, that ever any man professing himself a scholar
or teacher, should bring such miserable proofs in matters of so great weight.
But alas we must bear with you, you bring such as you have; if you knew any
better, we should be sure to have them. But these serve to deceive your devoted
followers; who wilfully shut their eyes against the truth. The judgments of
God are past searching out, and his mercy in opening our eyes to see your
grossnesse, greater then we are able to conceive.

Well, yet perhaps you have some color from antiquity to countenance your
exposition withal. You quote Austin: what? None but Austin in a matter of so
great doubt? But let us see why you quote him. If to prove that the Pharisees
were to be heard and obeyed in all things, there is no such word in his
sentence alleged by you. For he says no more, then we grant, that August.
epistola. 165.
Our Savior provided before hand, that we should not refuse good doctrine,
because it was delivered by wicked men. Indeed that was the very purpose of
our Savior, and to that does August. in Joan. tract. 46.
Austin apply it otherwhere, according to the true sense of it. What says he
else, but hear the voice of the shepherd, though by hirelings? such as
Austin in that place says the Pharifies and Scribes were: and such as Mat. 23.
5. 6. 13. 14. 23.
our Savior proves them to be by their hypocrisy, ambition, and
covetousness. The Apostle shows (says August. de bapt. contra Donat. lib.
4. cap. 11.
Austin in an other place) that men without charity may teach somewhat, that
is wholesome: of such our Lord speaks, They sit upon Moses chair etc.
Whereupon also the Apostle speaking of envious and malicious men, yet such as
preached salvation by Christ, says; Phil. 1. 18.
Whether by occasion, or in truth Christ be preached, Ireioice. And August. de
dect. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 27.
in a third place, He that speaks wisely and eloquently, but lives wickedly,
teaches many that are desirous to learn, but is unprofitable to his own
soul, as it is written. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, do that
they say, but do not that they do. For they say and do not, to which he adds
that to the Philippians, as in the other place. But yet Austin was so far
from tying either the Jews, because of our Saviors speech, or any men, upon
any pretense, to believe whatsoever should be taught them, though by men
lawfully authorized, that he forbids all to hear, when men preach their own
devises. By sitting on Moses chair (says August. in Joan tract. 46.
he) they teach the Law of God, therefore God teaches by them. But if they
will teach their own sayings (observe that Austin thinks it is possible they
should) hear them not, do not. An evil man (says August cont. liter.
Petilia. lib. 2. cap. 6.
the same author) out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things. But when he preaches the word of God, when he ministers the
Sacraments, he preaches not, nor ministers not of his own, if he be a wicked
man, but is to be counted among them, of whom it is said, do that they say, but
do not that they do. For as we heard before out of Theophyl. ad Mat. 23.
Theophylact, he that exhorts to evil life, speaks neither from Moses
chair, nor from the Law. Therefore (as it follows in him) they that teach
the Law of God, are to be heard, though they do it not. So does Chrysostom. ad
Hebr. hom. 34.
Chrysostom understand and apply this text, What then will some men say? shall
we obey our Prelates, when they are evil? How mean you evil? If it be in a
point of faith, sly and avoid him, not only if he be a man, but if an Angel
come down from heaven. But if you mean, that he is evil in his behavior, be
not curious. Neither speak I this of my self, but of the Scripture. For Mat.
23. 2.
Christ says, the Scribes and Pharisees sit on Moses Chair. And when first he
had recited many evil things of them, then he faith: They sit upon Moses
chair, All things, that they say unto you, do; but do not, as they do: They
are to be reverenced (says he) though they be of a wicked life: but heed you
not their living, but their preaching. For concerning their manners, no man can
be hurt by the^. How so? Because that they do, is manifest to all, and though
they should come to the height of iniquity, they could not teach other men
that their evil. But when a point of faith is in question, neither does every
body perceive manifestly that which is spoken, neither will a lewd fellow be
afraid to teach contrary to truth. For whereas as it is faid, Mat. 7. 1.
Judge not, that ye be not judged, that is spoken of life, not of faith. This
is Chrysostomes judgment, and that where he expounds Heb. 13. 17.
one of the principal places, which you bring to support your unreasonable
authority. The Scribes and Pharisees (says O pus imperf. in Mat. homil. 43.
another) sit on Moses chair: that is, there are many Priests, and few
priests; many in name, few in deed. Take heed therefore how you sit upon that
seat: for the seat makes not the priest, but the priest the seat: the place
sanctifies not the man, but the man the place. Your own writers are of the
same opinion, concerning this place. Two things (says Ianse. harm. cap. 120.
Iansenius) are here signified: first that obedience is due to the^ which teach
and command by authority, not in respect of their life, but of their
authority, which they have, and because of God, whose Ambassadors they are.
Secondly that we must not obey them, if they command or teach any thing
wickedly. For if they are to be obeyed, because they sit in Moses chair, the^
are they not to be obeyed, when they teach or command any thing against that
chair. The Lord says absolutely, All, and whatsoever, that he might show,
that they must be perfectly obeyed; but yet with such an obedience, as lays
this for a ground, that we must obey God, rather the^ man: as Col. 3. 20.
the Apostle Paul says. Children obey your parents in all things. Christ
(says Montanus elucid. in Mat. 23.
Arias Montanus) taught his Disciples to observe, and do whatsoever the
Scribes and Pharisees commanded, by the prescript of the Law, that is out of
Moses chair. Christ did not mean (says Joan. Ferus in Math. lib. 3.
Ferus) that they should observe all the decrees of the Pharisees, but so far
forth as they agreed with the Law. As far as they teach those things, which
Moses taught in the chair, they are to be beard, otherwise to be taken heed
of, as says Stella. ad Luc. cap. 12
Stella. The Lord (says Maldonat. ad Math. 23.
one of your famous Jesuits) by the chair of Moses, does not understand the
doctrine of the Pharisees, but the doctrine of Moses Law: For it is all one, as
if he had said, All that the Law and Moses say to you. Christ (says Cassander
consult. art. 7. See Dionys. Carthusian. ad Mat. 23.
Cassander) commands us to hear the Pharisees, yet so, that we must take
heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, that is corruptions of their life and
doctrine.

But you will say August. epist. 165. ad Generosum.
Austin tells us, that it should nothing have hurt the Church, and innocent
Christians, if some traitor had crept into that sea. What else have we showed
all this while, but that the wickedness of evil Prelates must not make their
doctrine, as long as it is true, less regarded? Austin, in that Epistle,
answers a certain Donatists letter, who bragged of succession from Donatus the
author of that sect: against whose brag he sets that Catalogue of the
Bishops of Rome, amongst whom there was never a Donatist; but if there had
been, yet should not that have prejudiced the Church, or the innocent
Christians: as if the doctrine, they held, were not true, because some lewd or
heretical reacher, had sometime been Bishop of that City. August. epist. 265.
160. and contra lit Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 14. 23.
We know it was usual with the Donatists, to cry out against the true
Catholic Bishops, for their conversation, which they also slaundered:
therefore had Austin good reason to speak, as he did, that no man might be
carried away from the truth of then doctrine, by the supposed wickedness of their
lives. I have been somewhat the longer in this point, because (as I signified)
it is the only proof of this controversy. Now I leave the consideration of
it to all reasonable men, that they bethink themselves, whether it be not
mere simplicity, or rather wilful ignorance, to be drawn away from the
truth of the Gospel upon a pretense of hearing the Church, when there is not a
syllable, nor a letter, in the scripture, to tie a man to such blind obedience,
whereupon nothing can ensue, but destruction.

A. D.. 8.
The threats we may gather first out of Saint Luke, when our Savior Luc. 10.
says, Qui vos spernit, me spernit. He that despises you, despises me.
Signifying, that look what sin it were, not to hear, but to despise our
Savior Christ himself, that we should account it the same, to despise, and
not to give ear, and credit, to the Catholic Church. Insinuating thereby,
that the like punishment is to he expected, for the said contempt. Secondly, in
Saint Matthew, the same our Savior expressly says; Si Ecclesiam non audierit,
sit tibi Matthew. 18.
sicut Ethnicus and publicanus, If he will not hear the Church, let him be to
thee like an Ethnicke and a Publican. Finally, in Saint Mark, after he had
given charge and commission to preach the Gospel to every creature, he
pronounces this threat to those that will not believe, saying: Qui non
crediderit Mark. 16.
condemnabitur, He that will not believe, shall be condemned.

A. W.
This is the last point in your Assumption, and thus it is to be concluded.

He, that despises our Savior, that is to be accounted as an heathen or
Publican, that shall be condemned, is greatly threatened in Scripture. But he
that will not hear the Church, and do in all things according to the saying
thereof, despises our Savior, etc. Therefore he that will not hear the
Church, and do in all things according to the saying thereof, is greatly
threatened in Scripture.
I deny your Minor: and will answer to the several proofs To the
asassumption.
of it. To Luc. 10. 16.
the first whereof I shall need to say little, because I spoke sufficiently of
the former part of that text, at the third point. The sum is, that this
threatening (as the warrant) is not uttered, in respect of any Church, or
company, but of several teachers, and preachers; and therefore, if we may not
conclude from hence, that he, which hears not every minister, and does in all
things according to his saying, is guilty of these crimes; no more is he, that
performs not the like duty to a company of Pastors or bishops assembled
together. Secondly, if it were spoken of the Church, yet were not any man to be
held faulty in such a measure, but he only, that refuses the ministry of
the Gospel, and embraces not the doctrine thereof, as the only way of
salvation. Therefore said our Savior in the same chapter and matter: Luc. 10.
10. 11
Into whatsoever City ye shall enter, if they will not receive you, go your
ways out into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust, which
cleaves on us of your City, we wipe off against you. So did Act. 13. 51.
the Apostles against the Jews of Antioch in Pisidia, for their contempt of
the Gospel. They shook off the dust of their feet against them. Thus (as I
signified before,) Gloss. interl. ad Luc. 10.
your gloss understands it: He that despises you, so that he will not
believe in Christ. Is it all one to despise a man, and not to assent to the
truth of whatsoever he speaks? This may proceed, and does ordinarily, from an
error of judgment; that comes always from a resolute determination of the
will. Thirdly, as hearing, so despising must be understood, not simply but when
the parties to be heard or despised, preach the truth of Jesus Christ,
according to his word. For there is no commandment, as I showed in handling
of the last point, that binds us any farther to obedience, or makes us liable
to punishment, then the things delivered are agreeable to the word of God:
unless we do against our conscience. Therefore your speech of your Catholic
Church, is but idle, there being no speech, nor thought of it in this place,
but only a charge to hear the Apostles simply, because they could not err:
other teachers jointly, or severally, though the latter be properly intended,
so far forth, as they speak agreeably to the Scriptures, and so do not err.

First, I say Mat. 1^. 17.
this place is not to purpose, because it speaks of a man already in the
Church, a believer by profession: whereas your question is of him, that is no
Christian, but to be made a believer by giving credit to that, which shall be
preached to him. That it is to be understood of believers only, the text it
self speaks. If thy brother: 1. Cor. 5. 11.
If any man that is called a brother. Thy brother: that is a Christian (says
Theophyl. ad Mat. 18.
Theophylact) For our Lord has appointed no such course to be taken (says
Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 62.
Chrysostom) with them, that are out of the Church. But this is meant of him,
that under the name of a believer (says Hieron. ad Mat. 18.
Jerome) plaieth the Infidel. A brother (says Iansen. harm. cap. 72.
Iansenius) is here understood not to be every neighbor, or every man, but
he, that is a Christian of the same religion with us. His reasons are, first,
because our Savior says, Tell the Church; but the Church has nothing to do,
in such cases, with those that are not members of it: What have I to do (says
1. Cor. 5. 12.
Paul) to judge them, that are without? Secondly, because an Heathen and
Publican are already out of the Church, and so the censure here appointed
cannot concern them.

Secondly, by not hearing the Church, our Savior does not mean, not believing
all points of doctrine, the Church delivers, (of which there was no occasion
for him to speak, at that time) but refusing to be ordered by the Church, and
despising the admonition thereof. So is hearing and not hearing there to be
understood. If he hear thee: what is that? If he believe the doctrine thou
teach? No such matter. But if he take thy admonition in good part, and
accordingly reform himself. So afterward: If he refuse to hear the
witnesses. This refusal has a kind of contempt joined with it. If he
contemn the Church, says Cyprian. epist. 76. ad Magnum.. 1.
Cyprian. Despising the commandment of his prelate: says Lyra. ad Math. 18.
Lyra.

Thirdly, by Church, no man in this place can reasonably understand a general
Council, either without, or with the Pope. For questionless our Savior would
never speak so obscurely to the Jews, for whom it was impossible to understand
his meaning, and whom that matter did not concern. But he speaks either of
the governors of several Churches, or of the congregatio^s and governors,
which are properly the Church Rhem. test. in the marginall notes Mat. 18.
in those places where they live. In the former sense do Chrysostom. in Mat. hom.
62.
Chrysostom and Theophylact. ad Mat. 18.
Theophylact take it, and your Rhemists by Chrysostomes authority: Tell the
Prelates and governors. Tell them (says Bellar de Pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap. 6.
Bellarmine) that are public persons in the Church. And in an other place: De
verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Every man's Prelate, or a company of Prelates is meant. The latter opinion
your Ianse. harm. cap. 72.
Bishop Iansenius maintains: He says, tell the Church, not tell the Bishops
and governors of the Church, though they especially are to be told, and the
Church is not to be told, but in their presence: as a company of believers, is
not to be called a Church, if the governors thereof be not present. He says,
tell the Church, that he may reverence the agreement of the multitude. Glossa.
interl. ibi.
That the reproof by many may correct him. To this purpose Hieron. ad Mat cap.
18.
Jerome says, It must be told to many. And therefore if any man think, that
by telling the Church, it is meant we should tell the Pope: besides the
absurdity of the interpretation, the Pope being but one, and the Church (by
your own definition) a Company, both our Savior Christ's course is perverted,
Tell him alone, the^ with one or two witnesses; and lastly, tell one again: and
Iansenins, and Ierom are professedly against him.

Fourthly, it may be, that by the Church our Savior understands, according
to the custom of the Jews in those days, not any assembly of the Clergy,
about Church causes, but generally the Council of the Elders, which had power
to end diverse matters betwixt parties of their own nation. After which example
1. Cor. 6. 4. 5.
the Apostle wills the Corinthians to appoint Judges amongst themselves, that
they might not dishonor God, and the profession of christianity, by going to
law one with another under infidels. If this course take not effect, then,
says our Savior, deal with him as thou would and might deal with an
heathen, or Publican, by following the Law against him in what Court thou
think best for thy advantage. And this exposition (as far as I can yet
see) seems agreeable to the text it self, and the purpose of our Savior,
who seems to speak only or especially of private abuses and quarrels: as
might be showed by diverse reasons, and in part has been by Bilson. perpet.
govern. cap. 4. page 29. etc.
a learned writer, to whom I refer the Reader in this point.

Fifthly, it is more then manifest, that our Savior speaks not of hearing or
not hearing the word, but of some quarrel, or sinful action at the most: which
also is to be determined or corrected in each several congregation: as the
testimonies of Vbi supra.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Iansenius and Bellarmine declare. Tell the Church,
not the universal Church spread over the face of the earth; but that
particular Church, in which every man lives, and to which he is subject, says
Luc. Brugens. ad Math. 18.
Lucas of Bruges. There is De 12. abus. saecul. cap. 10.
a treatise that goes under Cyprians name, wherein the author out of this place
concludes, that every man must seek to his own Bishop. All these things
considered, let every one judge, whether this piece of scripture be fitly
applied by you to prove that we must believe without doubting, whatsoever the
Church delivers. But I will propound the reason, that all men may understand,
and consider it.

If he that being proceeded withal first by admonition of one man alone, then
by the like with one or two witnesses, lastly by the gouerners of the Church,
concerning some quarrel or matter of fact, will not obey the voice of the
Church, must be to us as an heathen or a Publican: then whosoever will not
believe whatsoever the Church teaches, is greatly threatened in the Scripture.
But he that being so proceeded against, in such a matter, will not obey, is so
to be accounted of. Therefore he that will not believe whatsoever the Church
teaches, is greatly threatened in the Scripture.
I have framed this Syllogism, as every man may see, with the greatest
advantage that can reasonably be taken by this place to your purpose; whereas I
needed not have allowed the interpretation, on which the reason is grounded Al
which notwithstanding, who discerns not the weakness of the consequence in
the proposition? What if such a man be so to be accounted of? does it follow
thereupon, that every one who believes not the Church in all points, is
threatened? First, unless the same course of proceeding be held, why should the
party be threatened, because where such a course is taken, there a man is to be
so reckoned of? Secondly, how does it follow, that if in judgment concerning a
matter of fact, the Church must be hearkened to for reformation, then in all
matters whatsoever, it is absolutely to be heard by all men? Such are your
proofs in points of greatest importance.

I refer the Reader to that which I answered before, concerning Mark. 16. 16.
Chap 4. sect. 2
this place; to which I add upon the present occasion, that Mat. 28. 19.
our Savior sending forth his Ministers to preach the Gospel, charge them
to square their doctrine according to those things which they had received in
commission from him: Luc. Brugen. ad Marc. 16.
therefore are they no farther to be obeyed, then their preaching is warrantable
for the particulars out of our Saviors instructions given them; which the
Apostles directed by Gods spirit, truly and faithfully delivered, first by word
of mouth, and after by writing, to be the pillar (as Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Irenaeus says) and foundation of our faith. And if this place convey any such
authority to the Church, it gives the same to every several teacher, as it
did to every one of the Apostles severally; and so every priest secular or
regular, must be heard and believed whatsoever he teach.

A. D.. 9.
Thus you see our Savior Christ has promised to his Church the continual
presence of himself and of his holy Spirit, to teach that company all truth.
Whereof follows, that it is infallibly taught all truth. Moreover, he has
given charge and commission to that Church to teach us, and has warranted and
commanded us, in all points to hear and do according to the saying of this
Church: which proves, that it appertains to this church to instruct us in
all points of faith, and that we ought to learn of it, in all matters of
religion, what is the infallible truth: and consequently, that the doctrine of
this Church is the rule of faith.

A. W.
Neither we nor you can see any such thing, if we look no farther then the
holy Ghost directs us: who assures us of no more but that the Apostles
should be so instructed and guided, that they should not err in their
teaching, either by word of mouth or by writing, by reason of ignorance, or any
other perverse affection; and that all the children of God shall be so taught
and protected, that they shall never fall away from salvation by Christ. As for
your Church or certain company, that is your Clergy and Pope assembled in a
general Council, neither those places of Scripture you have brought, nor any
other you can bring, once make mention of any such promise to them. Therefore
have we no warrant to hear and do in all points according to the saying of
any Church, (not only not of yours) but so far as that Church teaches
according to the doctrine of our Savior Christ in the Scripture, which is the
rule of faith.

A. D.. 10.
Worthily therefore does S. Paul call this Church columnam and 1. Tim. 3. Lib.
1. cot. Crescon. cap. 33.
firmamentu^ veritatis, the pillar and ground of truth. Worthily also says S.
Austin: Scripturarum a nobis tenetur veritas, cum id facimus, quod vniuersae
placet Ecclesiae, quam earundem Scripturarum commendat authoritas: vt quoniam
Scriptura sancta fallere non potest, quisquis falli metuit huius obscuritate
quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam sine vlla ambiguitate, Scriptura
sancta demonstrat. The truth of the Scriptures is holden of us, when we do that
which pleases the universal or whole Church, the which is commended by the
authority of the Scriptures themselves; that because the holy Scripture cannot
deceive, whosoever fears to be deceived with the obscurity of this question,
let him require the judgment of the Church, which without any ambiguitie, the
holy Scripture does demonstrate: by which words he shows plainly, that the
sentence of the Church is of infallible and undoubted truth, and that the way
not to be deceived in an obscure question, is to ask and follow the judgment
of the Church. Wherefore worthily also do we all say, Credo Ecclesiam
Catholicam: I believe the Catholic Church: and worthily also may I conclude,
that neither Scripture alone, nor natural wit and learning, nor private
spirit, nor any other thing, but only the teaching of the true Church of
Christ, is that ordinary means which Almighty God has provided, whereby all
men may learn that one, infallible, entire faith, which I proved to be
necessary to salvation.

A. W.
1. Tim. 3. 15.
Saint Paul does worthily call the Church, the pillar and ground of truth: but
not (as you would have us believe) because it is the rule of faith. Oecumen. ad
1. Tim. 3. 15. e Chrysostom.
The Greek Scholiast takes that speech of the Apostle to be uttered by way of
comparison, betwixt the Church of Christ and the Jewish Temple. Not as the
Jewish Temple (says Oecumenius) but the pillar and ground of truth: for the
Temple was the ground of the shadows of the truth. Out of which we may gather,
that as the Jewish synagogue was the pillar and ground of those shadows of the
truth: so is the Church of Christ the pillar and ground of the truth it self.
But that synagogue was not the rule of faith in that point, because whatsoever
it taught, was to be held for infallible truth; but for that Romans 3. 2.
to it were committed the oracles of God, and the knowledge and use of those
ceremonies: so has the Church of Christ the truth of doctrine in the
scripture, and the exercises of Gods worship and religion. Therefore is it
called the pillar and ground of it, because it constantly maintains that
truth, preaching and professing it, in despite of all the practices and power
of Satan, and tyrants of the world. As the thighs (says Philo episc. Carpath,
in Cantic cap. 4. circa ann. 410.
an ancient writer) sustain and bear up the weight of the whole body: so
also the Apostles like pilars, valiantly carry the universal Church of
Christians over the whole world; being for the value of their invincible
courage and steadfastness of their holy purpose, called marble pillars. And a
little after: They preached the Gospel with such wisdom and constancy, that
as if they had been of marble or adamant, they were afraid of no violence nor
adversity, but always continuing firm and invincible against all the forces
of men and devils, shining as it were in the dark, by that light of their
wisdom, by preaching, admonishing, teaching and glistering with miracles, at
the last they most happily became conquerors. To this effect speak Lyra ad 1.
Tim. cap. 3.
your Glosses: The ground of the truth of the Gospel, which the Church
constantly maintained even in the greatest persecutions. Well upholding the
truth in it self (says Gloss. ordin. ibi.
another Gloss.) Ne corruat.
That it may not fall to the ground, though it be afflicted, says Lombar. ibi.
Lombard. But let us bring your reason into due frame.

The pillar and ground of truth is the rule of faith. The Church is the pillar
and ground of truth. Therefore the Church is the rule of faith.
Your proposition or mayor is false, unless you restrain it, as To the
proposition.
I have often said, to the truth; and then it is so far the rule of faith, as
it is the pillar and ground of truth. Whatsoever it holds truly, according to
the scripture, is the rule of faith for those points: not because of the
Churches authority, but for the truth of the doctrine. Yet may it easily come
to pass, that a Church maintaining the general truth of the Gospel, and all
particulars necessary to soluation, may fail in many other points of great
importance, and for all that, continue both a true Church, and the pillar and
ground of truth, though not the rule of faith.

Your minor also (as you understand it) is untrue. First because To the
Assumption.
the Apostle speaks not of any such company as you imagine, Pope, Bishop,
Council; but either of the Church of Ephesus, in which Timothy, to whom he
writes, then abode; or indefinitely of any and every Church whatsoever, where
the true Religion of our Savior is or shall be professed, according to the
Gospel. If Timothy were (as you will not deny) Bishop of Ephesus, then it is
apparent, that the Apostle calls the Church of Ephesus, wherein Timothy
lived, taught and governed, the pillar and ground of truth: yet was it not the
rule of faith; for then had the rule of faith perished long since with that
Church of Ephesus. If he speak to him as to an Evangelist, who was to follow
him from place to place, and to establish the Churches which the Apostle had
planted, then must every one of those Churches, wherein Timothy was to behave
himself, as he had done in Ephesus, be understood to be the pillar and ground
of truth: and yet neither any, nor all of them were the rule of faith, which
else must have been lost with them. What remains then? Shall we expound it of
all believers in general? I grant it reaches to all the faithful: but as to
them considered in their several Churches, because among them so disposed of,
was Timothy to perform that duty which the Apostle there enioyneth him. But
let us so conceive of the Church. What shall it avail you, or endamage us? All
believers are not the company you plead for, but only the Pope and your
Bishops, whom you would have taken for the rule of faith.

Secondly, I deny your minor, in respect of the sense you give of those words,
the pillar and ground of truth. For you so understand them, as if the truth of
God depended upon the verdict of the Church, so that nothing may be held for
truth, but what the Church delivers for such; and whatsoever she so
propounds, must so be received upon pain of certain damnation. How contrary
are you in this interpretation and doctrine to the ancient fathers? The
Apostles (says Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Irenaeus) left us the Scriptures to be the pillar and ground of our faith. Nay
(say you) they left us the Church to be the pillar and ground of the
Scriptures. The Gospel and spirit of life (says Cap. 11.
the same father in the same book) is the pillar and ground of the Church.
Nay, by your leave (reply you) the Church is the pillar and ground of the
Gospel. But Chrysostom. ad 1. Tim. hom. 11.
Chrysostom handling this place of the Apostle, is not afraid to affirm, that
the truth is the pillar and ground of the Church: not as if he would deny that
which the Apostle says: for the Church indeed is the vpholder of the truth;
but to show, that although the Church maintain and auow the truth, yet it is
built and founded upon the truth, which (as Hicron. ibi.
Jerome says) vpholds the building. Therefore to make short, when the Apostle
says, that the Church is the pillar and ground of truth: his meaning is, that
amongst Christians, and among no other sort of men, the truth is to be found;
and amongst, and by them it is constantly and worthily maintained. The
Philosophers indeed (as Thom. ad 1. Tim. cap. 3. lect. 3.
Thomas says) had a kind of notion of some points thereof, but they had no
certainty: as well because they were corrupted with errors, as for that very
few of them are found to have agreed in the same truth. But in the Church is
certain knowledge and truth. Which (as Caiet. ad 1. Tim. 3.
Caietan says) is vpheld aloft in it, because it is auowed, reverenced and
honored above all things: and it is so founded in the Church, that out of it,
it is not to be found. This is the reason (as they truly say) why the Church is
called a pillar. Thomas vbi supra.
Thomas adds that it is termed the ground in respect of others, because men
cannot be confirmed in the truth, but by the sacraments of the Church.

August. cont. Crescon. Lib. 1. cap. 33.
This testimony of Austine is alleged by you otherwise, then it was written
by him. For whereas he spoke of that which had then already been resolved of
by the whole Church: you make him speak indefinitely of any thing that
pleases the Church, turning iam placuit into placet. But we must understand,
that he writing in that place concerning the rebaptizing of heretics, which
question had been agreed upon (as he says Cap. 32.
in the former chapter) before the hatching of Donatus heresy, says, that the
judgment of the Church in that case is to be held as agreeable to the
Scripture. This might the Reader have seen in his words, if you had not
changed the tense in placet, and left out etiam in hac re, in the beginning of
the sentence: The truth of the Scriptures (says Austin) is held by us even in
this thing. If you reply farther, that the reason which Austin uses, is
general for all questions whatsoever, namely the authority of the Church,
commended by the Scriptures, which cannot err: I answer you, first that we
have seen Austins judgment directly to the contrary, viz. that whatsoever is
of necessity to salvation, is plainly delivered in the Scriptures, and that
the authority of men without Scripture, is insufficient to propound any
doctrine as a matter of faith: and therefore if he should write otherwise in
this place, we might with good reason make question of his authority.
Secondly, I answer, that Austine speaks here of those points only which are
not determinable by Scripture, such as he takes the question of rebaptizing
heretics to be, as it appears in the words immediately before those you
allege, being also a piece of the sentence by you omitted. Although (says
Austin) there be no example to be brought out of the Scriptures concerning this
matter, yet the truth of the same Scriptures is (even in this matter) also held
by us, when we do that which has now already pleased the whole Church, etc.
Now in such cases as cannot by Scripture be decided, who would or may be so
presumptuous, as to withstand or mislike the practice of the church in all
places? Surely 1. Cor. 11. 16.
the authority of the church is so far commended in the Scriptures, that it
ought in all things of such nature to ouerweigh our judgment, and incline our
affection to the liking of that which is agreed on by so general a consent of
so many churches in all nations. Therefore that which you gather out of Austins
words, of following the judgment of the church in an obscure question, is to
be restrained to such questions as cannot be determined by the Scriptures (and
those are few or none of any importance, of necessity to salvation none at
all) or else your consequence will be nothing worth. Austin says, that in
questions not determinable by Scripture, we must follow the judgment of the
church. Therefore we must follow it in all obscure questions whatsoever.
Austins foundation will not bear your building. Is it a good reason to say, In
cases not provided for by law, custom must bear sway: therefore it must be
followed in all cases? So, and so weakly do you dispute.

It is not enough for you to teach us new divinity, but you will drive us to
learn new Latin too: Caesar could make men free of Rome, but not words.
Credere Ecclesiam Catholicam, to believe the Catholic Church, in ordinary
Latin, is to believe that there is a Catholic Church. Credo (esse) I believe
there is: but you would make the ignorant believe, that credo Ecclesiam and
credo Ecclesiae is all one. For how else can this sentence reasonably depend
upon the former: We must follow the judgment of the Church: Therefore worthily
also do we all say, Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam? What can you mean by this, but
I believe, that is, I give credit to the Catholic Church: that is, I believe
that to be true which the Catholic Church teaches? But the article of the
Creed has no such sense, as it may appear by the other that follow, all being
alike in respect of our belief. I believe the communion of Saints, the
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting: To
which of these four dowe give any such credit? But we believe that there is a
Church of Christ, to which all these privileges belong. He that translated
Epiphanius into Latin, more curiously then truly made a difference betwixt
believing the church and the other articles. We believe (says Ianus Corua. in
transl. Anchorat. Epiph. in extremo.
he) one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, we confess one baptism for
the forgiveness of sins, and look for the resurrection of the dead, and the
life of the world to come. But the Greek which Epiph. recites out of the
Nicene creed, is alike in all the articles, (...)
in the Church, in the baptism of repentance, in the resurrection of the dead.
And Paschas. diac. Romans Eccles. contra Maced. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Paschasius doubts not to say, that the ignorance of some drew the
preposition In praefat. ibi.
in from the former sentence concerning belief in the holy Ghost, into the
article of the church: yet (as he shows) credere Deum, and in Deum greatly
differ. That there is a God, the Apostle says, the devil believes: but no man
is held to believe in God, but he that Pie in cum sperauerit.
religiously puts his trust in him. Cyril. Hierof. catceh. 18.
Cyril also recites the articles after the same manner, without any difference
in the particulars, yet with In, to every one of them, and in that sense, in
which we take them. Ruffin. in sym. Apost. sect. 35.
Ruffin (as Paschasius before) denies that the Creed says: In the holy
Church, in the forgiveness of sins, in the resurrection of the flesh.
Because that were to equal our belief of these points, with our believing in
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. But of these articles we are to
believe, that they are true, that there is a Church, gathered unto God, that
there is a remission of sins, that there is a resurrection of the flesh. So
does August. Sermon. de tempore. 115
Austin (if those Sermons be his) read and understand it. I believe the
Catholic Church etc. We must believe, that God will vouchsafe the
resurrection of bodies, and the forgiveness of sins. And whereas Sermon. 119.
in an other Sermon, he says in the Church, so does he also, in the
forgiveness of sins, and the meaning is all one. And Sermon. 131.
in a third Sermon he gives us this caveat: we must know (says he) that we
must believe the Church, not believe in the Church, that is, must believe there
is a Church. So then, (...). Credere Ecclesiam. Heb. 11. 6.
To believe the Catholic Church, is not to believe all that the Church says
(which neither the Greek nor the Latin will bear) but to believe there is a
Church; (...), Credo esse Ecclesiam: which in the phrase of the new Testament,
for the Greek, might be (...). Which is word for word, I believe that there is
a Church. Now if any man shall demand of me, what the meaning of this article
is, or what we believe, by believing there is a Church, and what that Church
is, to which so many gracious promises are made, and of which so many glorious
things are spoken in the scripture; I will endeavor to satisfy him, as briefly
as I can with plainness. First then (leaving the holiness and catholicknesse
of this church to be discussed Chap. 15.
in due place) I say, that by believing the Church, we believe that there is a
company of men called to true faith in Jesus Christ, and to the participation
of those privileges, which belong to all the true members of his mystical
body, some of the principal whereof are recited in the articles following.
But we may not imagine, as the Papists do, without any likelihood of true
reason, that this company is their Pope and Bishops assembled in a general
council, or that they of this company make one visible congregation, but that
they are all one Church in regard of the common means of salvation, which they
embrace, and their dependence upon on mystical head Jesus Christ, of whose
body they are all members. So that by Church in the Creed, we understand such
of the elect, as are by faith lively members of our Saviors body, or at the
least, are by the baptism of the spirit and water in corporated into that
body, howsoever as yet they have not faith. I deny not that all the elect,
even those, which are yet unborn, belong to the Church of Christ, but I think
the Creed does not stretch so far, but only to them, that are actually
members of Christ, not to all, that are so in Gods everlasting predestination.
In this sense, namely for the living members of Christ's body, the word Church
is often used in the Scripture. Mat. 16. 18.
Upon this rock will I build my Church. Act. 20. 28.
The Church, which he has purchased with his blood. Ephesians. 1. 21. 22.
God has given Christ over all things to be the head of the Church, which is
his body, the fullness of him, that fills all in all things. and 5. 23.
Christ is the head of the Church, and the same is the Savior of his body. So
is it taken in the same chapter diverse times. verse. 25. 27. 29. 32.
He is the head of the body of the Church. Thus do the ancient writers speak
of the Church. August. de bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27.
Austin denies, that he dares take any for the Church of Christ, but those
that are just, and holy, no though they have been baptized: For (as he says
Cont. Cresc. lib. 2. cap. 21.
in another place) they that are condemned by Christ, are not now in his body,
which is the Church: because Christ cannot have members condemned. As for the
reprobate (says De bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 1. cap, 17.
the same Author) whether they seem to be within the Church, or be apparently
out of it, they are always divided from the unity of the Church, which is
without spot or wrincle. The Church (says Clem. Alexan. Strom. lib. 7.
Clement of Alexandria) is the company of the elect. Therefore says Cyprian.
epist. 49. Sect. 2. ad Cornel.
Cyprian, that the unity of Christ and the Church is coupled together with
indivisible links. For (as he says and epist. 55. Sect. 8 ad eund. Cornel.
otherwhere) the Church that believes in Christ, and holds that which once it
has received, never departs wholly from him: they are the Church, that
continue in the house of God: but they are not a planting planted by God, who
are not settled with the fastness and soundness of wheat, but are scattered
like chafe by the breath of the enemy Satan. The Church stands on the
right hand (says Hieron. epist. 140.
Jerome) and has nothing in it, belonging to them, on the left hand. And
Hieron. ad Ephesians. 5.
again: He that is a sinner, and defiled with any filthiness, cannot be
called one of Christ's Church, nor be said to be subject to Christ. There are
many such sayings in the writings of the Fathers, grounded upon the book of
Canticles; which all men know entreats of the true church. There is no doubt
(says Bernard. in cant. ser. 78.
Bernard upon the Canticles) but the elect are the Church of God. But the
reprobat (as one of your Joan. de Turrecremata lib. 4 sum. part. 2. cap. 20
Cardinals says) are not truly members of the Church. Of many believers purged
from their sins, there is made one Church, says Albert. in Math. cap. 26.
Albertus magnus, Thomas his master. Thomas in Apoc. cap. 3.
Thomas himself expounding that place of the Revelation, In the Temple of my
God, says, that by the temple of God, the Church of the faithful is
understood, which is the special temple of God: and to that purpose he
alleges that of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 3. 17.
The temple of God is holy, which you are. And in Thomas ad Romans cap. 12,
an other place he says, that the mystical body of Christ is the Church. Now
the union of this mystical body is spiritual, by which, through faith and
charity, they are united to God, and one to another. As the godly, or they
that are holy, are the members of Christ, so the wicked (says Ambros. in
Psalm. 35. Guliel. Altiss. in sum. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. q. 5.
Ambrose) are the members of the Devil. The congregation of them that believe
aright, is the Church, says Altissiodorensis. Who can reasonably doubt whether
this be the Church spoken of in the Creed, or no?

As for the promises, and commendations given to the Church in the Scripture,
to what other Church should they appertain? The Dove, and the perfect one
praised in the Canticles, is (as Epiphan. hares. 35.
Epiphanius truly says) the holy spouse and Catholic Church. Whereas, the
Church in the Canticles (says August, de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27.
Austin) is described to be a garden enclosed, a fountain sealed up, a well of
living water etc. I dare not understand this, but of the holy and righteous,
not of covetous men, not of deceivers, extortioners, usurers, drunkards,
envious persons, although they have received the same baptism, but have not
the same charity, or sanctifying grace. The promises and praises belong either
severally to every one of the elect called; as that Mat. 16. 18. and Theophyl.
ad cum locum.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church: that Ephe. 5. 23. 25
the Church is loved and cherished by Christ her husband and head: or to the
congregations of believers, in regard of the elect amongst them. Once this I
dare boldly affirm (let any Papist disprove it if he can) that the Church is
no where in all the Scripture taken for one company through the world, in
respect of any outward government or dependence: which is the foundation of all
your doctrine, touching the Church: but in regard of the common means of
salvation by faith in Christ. And here I might well make an end of answering to
this treatise, because I have overthrown the maine strength of your discourse,
and discovered to all men that will not be wilfully blind, the weakness of
your reason: but for the better satisfaction of the unlearned, I will follow
you from Chapter to Chapter, that the truth may the more easily be discerned.

A. D.
CHAP. XI. That the Church, whose doctrine must be to us the rule of faith,
must always continue without interruption, from Christ his time, till the
worlds end.

A. W.
That there always has been, since the beginning of the world (excepting
perhaps the time betwixt the fall of our first parents, and their faith in the
Messiah) that there is, and always shall be a Church, viz. certain men that
are predestinate to life, and actually believe in Jesus Christ, it never came
into any of our minds to be doubted of: that there should be such a company as
you conceit, all the Papists in the world cannot prove.

A. D.. 1.
Considering what has been proved in the former Chapter, about the infallible
authority of the doctrine of the true Church: I hope no Christian will deny,
but that so long as this Church does continue, we have of it a sure pillar and
a firm foundation, whereupon we may safely build our belief. For either a man
must deny, that ever our Savior did make any such promise, gave such charge
and commission, left any such warrant, set forth such a commandment, or
thundered out any such threats, as before is rehearsed: which were to deny the
Scriptures, which scriptures are generally received by all Christians, no
otherwise then (as they are) the undoubted word of God: or else he must wrest
the interpretation thereof, both from that which the words, of themselves,
naturally yield, and also from the common sense and understanding, either of
all, or the most learned, and almost of the unlearned also, of the whole
Christian world: or else he shall be forced to confess that, which, not I, but
Saint Paul has 1. Tim. 3.
said: Ecclesia est columna and firmamentum veritatis: the Church is the pillar
and ground of truth. Only it may perchance seem to some (of those, that do,
at this day oppose themselves against the authority of the Church,) that this
was true, for Saint Paul's time, and perhaps for some three, four, five, or six
hundred years after: but not to be presumed upon in latter times, and namely
when Luther began his reformation (as they term it) or now adays.

A. W.
Considering how weak your proofs have been, as in the former Chapters, so
namely in the last, about the infallible authority of the doctrine of the true
Church: I hope there is no reasonable man, not only no Christian, that will
build his faith and salvation upon so tottering a pillar, and so slipperie a
foundation. But because you seem to dote so much upon your last Chapter, I will
once again be content to examine the substance of it, as it is here repeated
by you, with some little alteration.

Either we must deny that our Savior, has so promised, charged, warranted,
threatened, or we must falsely interpret the scriptures; or else we must grant,
that the authority of the Church is a sure pillar, and firm foundation,
whereupon we may safely build our faith. But we neither may deny that our
Savior has so promised, charged, warranted, commanded, threatened, neither
may we falsely interpret the Scriptures. Therefore we must grant, that the
authority of the Church is a sure pillar and firm foundation, whereupon we
may safely build our belief,
First in general for your whole syllogism, if the conclusion you To the
syllogism.
intend, were no other, the^ that you pretend and propou^d, that the Church is
the pillar and ground of truth, as S. Paul says, there would be no question in
this matter betwixt us. For we have learned to acknowledge the truth of all and
every part of the scripture. But the beginning of this Chapter shows, that
you mean, by the Churches being the pillar and ground of truth, that we may
safely build our belief upon the Churches authority: which, as I proved in my
answer to that Chapter, is no part of the Apostles meaning. In this sense must
we take your conclusion.

Secondly, in particular, I deny your Mayor; because your disjunction To the
proposition.
is naught: presuming a necessity, where there is none: For neither we need to
deny that our Savior has so promised, charged, warranted, commanded,
threatened; neither is there any cause why we should falsely interpret the
Scriptures: and yet we have no reason to grant, that our faith may safely be
built upon the authority of the Church. No such thing (as I have showed) can
follow upon the words of scripture alleged by you. Therefore we need not deny
the promises, charge, warrant, commandment, or threatening of our Savior, or
else grant the Church, such an unlimited authority. Neither will the true sense
of those Scriptures, either enforce or bear any such illation or conclusion,
touching the infallible authority of the Church.

And whereas you think to face out the matter, with naming the common sense
and understanding, either of all, or the most learned, and almost of the
unlearned also of the whole Christian world: my answer propounding the
judgment of many excellently learned, and ancient writers of those places,
proves that to be but a vain popish brag, without all likelihood of truth,
especially since you, that Chap. 1.
spare not to heap up testimonies of Fathers, when they are needless, and
Chap. 14.
to quote their books and chapters, sometimes for a bare phrase, allege not
so much as the name of any one author, for the proof of your interpretation of
twelve several places of scripture.

Your proffered service, in helping us with this distinction, has more show of
kindness, then good meaning. For it is not brought in, to confirm our answer,
but to give your self occasion of uttering that, which you are taught to urge
for proof of this question. But we neither need your aid, and have good cause
to suspect your favors. In a word, your distinction is such as none of us ever
brought, or would bring to answer those places of scripture. We confess, that
whatsoever was promised to the Church in those texts, was promised for
continuance to the end of the world: but we say, that the first promise was not
concerning the Churches not erring, the three last are particular to the
Apostles, at least for such a measure of teaching. But what should I repeat
that, which was delivered in the very last Chapter? The thing you harp upon,
though vntunably, is, that your Romish church, or rather the Church of the East
and West, were indeed the pillar and ground of truth, for the space of some
600. years after Christ, but afterward fell away from that soundness of
doctrine, which before it had cleaued unto. Such a matter there is acknowledged
by our Divines; yet no man says, either that the Church erred not, in any
point, during that time (for all men know it erred in diverse though not
fundamental, if we may guess by the writings of the learned in those ages) or
that the Church has, or shall want the performance of Christ's promise, at any
time, for a moment. But what is all this to the matter we have in hand? Well:
Let us see yet, what you say.

A. D.. 2.
Against these men I set down this assertion. The true Church of Christ (which
the forenamed testimonies of Scripture do commend) was, and is to continue,
without interruption, till the worlds end. This I prove: First, out of the
very words of those promises which I cited out of Saint Matthew, and Saint
John. For how can Christ our Savior, or his holy Spirit, be with his Church,
in such sort, as there is promised; to wit till the worlds end, and for ever:
and especially, as is said in Saint Matthew: Omnibus diebus vsque ad
consummationem seculi: All the days, even to the end of the Matthew. cap. 28.
world; unless the Church also be all the days, until the end of the world?
For if the Church for any time, days, months, or years do cease to be:
Christ cannot for these years, months, and days, be truly said, to be with
his Church (since he cannot be with that which is not) and consequently he
cannot be said, to have fulfilled his promise, wherein he said, he would be
with his Church, all the days, until the end of the world.

A. W.
The men, against whom you set down this Assertion, are of your own making,
that you might have, against whom to show your valor: once it cannot concern
us, who acknowledge the continuance of Christ's Church, without interruption,
till the worlds end. As long as these times shall run on (says August. in
Psalm. 71.
Austin) the Church of God, that is, the body of Christ, shall not be wanting
upon earth. This is the Church, spoken of in as many of these testimonies, as
are not peculiar to the Apostles, namely the elect, from time to time: not your
Romish synagogue, wherein Bellar. de Eccles. milit. lib. 3 cap. 7. per lot.
many of the reprobate also are included, and that as members of your
congregation, who cannot without dishonor of our Savior Christ, be accounted
parts of his glorious body.

The truth of your Assertion needs no proof, and the weakness of your
proof is a disgrace to your Assertion. Christ will be with his Church, at all
times whenever there are any that believe in him, not only whilst the
Apostles live: therefore there shall always be some in the world without
interruption, that shall believe in him. This is but a loose consequence: I
grant the conclusion, or consequent, that there shall be a Church always: but
I deny that therefore there shall always be one, because our Savior
promises to be with it, whenever it is. Put case our Savior had thus
spoken; I will be with you, in your persecution, all the days, even to the end
of the world: might a man reasonably conclude from hence, that therefore the
Church shall be always persecuted, without any interruption, or ease one day
from persecution? Such is your consequence, and as such, insufficient to prove
your Assertion.

A. D.. 3.
Secondly, I prove the same, out of an other promise, or prophecy of our
Savior Christ, to his Church, wherein he says: Portae inferninon praeualebunt
aduersus eam: the gates of hell shall not Matthew. 16.
prevail against it. For how was it true, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail, if they have prevailed so much, as utterly to abolish the Church, or
at least, to banish it quite out of the world, for so long a time? Granting
therefore (which every Christian must needs grant) that the prophesies and
promises of our Savior, are always fulfilled, and that they are infallibly
true; we may not doubt, but that the church has ever been since Christ his
time, and shall never cease to be in the world.

A. W.
This proof is little or nothing better then the former: thus you conclude.

If Christ have promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against his
Church, then it must continue without interruption till the worlds end. But
Christ has promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Therefore it must continue without interruption, till the worlds end.
I deny the consequence of your mayor: first because the To the proposition.
Church in this place does not signify such a company of men as you by that
name understand; but the congregation of the elect, who by true faith confess,
as Peter did, and being built upon our Savior the rock, shall never be removed
and perish. And this promise is made not only to all jointly, but to every one
severally, as it was to Peter and all the rest of the Apostles. If there be any
(says Origin. in Mat. cap. 16.
Origin) against whom the gates of hell shall prevail, such a one is neither
the rock upon which Christ builds, nor the Church, which is built by Christ
upon the rock. Petra est omnis.
Every one (says Apud Thom. in caten. ad Mat 16.
the same Origin) that is a follower of Christ by imitation, is a rock or
stone. But he, against whom the gates of hell prevail, is neither to be
counted a rock nor the Church, nor part of the Church, which Christ builds
upon the rock. Again, whosoever is Christ's disciple (says Ad Mat. 16.
the same author) is a rock: but many are called, and few chosen. As if he
should have said, that the Church, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail, is every one of the elect; and that he against whom those gates do
prevail, is none of the elect or church, to which that promise of our Savior
was made. Theophyl. ad Mat. 16.
Theophylact, though he expound the place of the Church somewhat generally, yet
he doubts not to add, that every one of us also is the church, which is the
house of God: if therefore we be confirmed in the confession of Christ, the
gates of hell, that is, sins, shall not prevail against us. The gates of
hell (says Gloss. ordin. ad Mat. 16.
your Gloss) are sins, threatenings, flatterings, heresies, whereby they that
are weak, run into destruction: who are not to be thought to have built the
house of their profession of believing soundly upon the rock, but upon the
sand: that is, to follow Christ with a simple and true intent, but to have made
a show for some earthly respect. For he that receives the faith of Christ with
the inward love of his heart, easily ouercometh whatsoever outwardly befalls
him. Lyra ibi.
Lyra says, that the church here spoken of, consists of those persons, in
who^ there is true knowledge and confession of the faith and truth; and not of
any men, in respect of their power or dignity ecclesiastical or civil;
because many Princes, Popes, and other inferior Christians, are found to have
made Apostasy from the faith. Lucas Brugens. ibi.
Luke of Bruges, though he will not have this promise of victory belong to
every particular member of the church, yet he grants that every living member
thereof, steadfastly cleaving unto it, may conceive good hope of triumphing over
all Satan's forces. I think (says Hieron. ad Mat. 16.
Jerome) the gates of hell are vices and sins, or surely the doctrines of
heretics, by which men being entised are led to hell. Does any of these
writers expound this place of such a company as you dream of? Nay, does not
our Savior himself restrain it to the elect, and yet apply it to every one of
them? For who beside them, is built upon the rock? or which of them in his due
time, is not so built? Joan. 6. 37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me: and him that comes to me,
I cast not away. And again, Ver. 40.
This is the Fathers will that sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

Secondly, the consequence of your mayor is yet more weak, because you
misinterprete the text: as if our Savior meant to promise a perpetual
continuance of his Church upon earth, by saying that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. For hereby it must needs be granted, that the gates of
hell do prevail against all such Christians, as by persecution or any violence
are taken out of the world. Yea Peter himself, and his fellow Apostles, to
whom this promise was first made, found not the true performance of it in their
own persons, but were overcome by the gates of hell. Do you magnify our
Saviors promises, that make them fail so notoriously, even to the Apostles
themselves? The gates of hell (says Theophyl. ad Mat. 16.
Theophylact) are temporal persecutors, who endeavor to send Christians to
hell. Heretics also are gates leading to hell. The Church therefore has
prevailed against many heretics and persecutors. The gates of hell (says
Gloss. interl. ibi.
your Gloss) shall not separate the Church from my love and faith.
Persecutions of tyrants (says Lyra ibi.
Lyra) assaults and tentations of wicked spirits shall not prevail, by
subuerting the Church from the true faith. Luc Brugens. ibi.
Brugensis speaks yet more plainly: The gates of hell shall not prevail
(says he) so that the Church shall be overthrown, that is, separated from
Christ, or Salute in Christo excidere, aut frustrati
fall away from salvation by Christ, or fail of it. The Apostles and other
holy Martyrs and Christians, were overcome in regard of their continuance upon
earth; but not separated from Christ: nay rather they are more nearly joined to
him. It is one thing to say the Church, that is, they that truly believe in
Christ, shall by no power of Satan and his instruments, either inward or
outward, be severed from Christ, or fail of salvation by him: another to
affirm that there shall always be some on earth that shall believe and make
profession of the Gospel. Bellar. de Council. lib 2. cap. 2.. Secunda classis.
Bellarmine applies this text one while to the general Councels approved by
the Pope, which (as he says) by reason of this promise cannot err, either in
believing or in teaching: De Pont. Romans lib. 1. c. 9.. Quinta.
another while to the universal Church and to the sea of Rome, which absurdly
and falsely he makes the rock, upon which the universal Church is built: so
that by the Church, according to Bellarmine, Rome, or Peter's seat (as he
calls it) must be meant first and principally, from which at the second hand,
the universal Church must have her perpetual stabilitie. But what should I
stand any longer upon this place, having showed that the promise is not of the
Churches continuance, without interruption, but of the certainty of their
salvation, that believe truly in our Savior Christ, and so being built upon
the Math 7. 25. Joan. 10. 28, To the Assumption.
rock, cannot be shaken down or overthrown by any storm.

In this sense I grant the minor: our Savior has made a promise, that no one
member of his shall perish, though the gates of hell send out and employ all
their forces against him. He that confesses and believes with Saint Peter,
shall be saved with Saint Peter. But I deny the minor, according to the sense
you make of it, concerning the perpetual continuance of a certain company,
without interruption or error: and yet I believe the Catholic Church; and
that at all times there are some true members thereof upon earth, chosen to
life, and justified by faith in Christ.

A. D.. 4.
Thirdly, I may confirm the same out of other Scriptures, where the
perpetuity of the church is either affirmed or promised: of which kind of
testimonies, being very many, I will only rehearse some few. Of the Church (if
we will believe S. Austin his exposition) it is said, Deus fundauit eam in
aeternum: God has established it for ever. And of it, signified by the name of
the kingdom of Christ, the Prophet Psalm. 47.
Daniel says: Suscitabit Deus coeli regnum, quod in aeternum non dissipabitur:
The God of heaven shall raise up a kingdom, Dan. 2.
which shall not be broken in pieces for ever. As is also said in S. Luke: Regni
eius non erit finis: there shall be no end of his kingdom. Luc. 1.


A. W.
These few are more then need, for the proof of that, whereof no man doubts:
but if they were twice as many, their weight would be too small for the matter
you undertake to prove by them: as it will appear by the weighing of them in
the balance of true reason.

That (say you) which God has established for ever, so that there shall be no
end of it, must always continue without interruption, till the worlds end. But
God has so established the Church, that there shall be no end of it. Therefore
the Church must always continue without interruption, till the worlds end.
That the Church shall continue in all times and ages, as I have often said, we
grant and maintain: that such a Church To the proposition.
as you fancy to your selves, either shall be always, or ever was in the
world, since the Apostles, we utterly deny. Farther, I say your proposition is
false: because the continuance of the church depends not upon her being in
the world, but upon her being joined to Christ. And if the Church shall remain
even after this world is ended, and then especially flourish; what folly is it
to think it continues not, unless it be upon the earth? May I not certainly
conclude, that it shall continue after this world, because it is established
for ever? How then do you gather hereupon, that it cease to be, if it be not
in this world at all times without interruption? Was not this spoken of the
Church of the Jews also? Is not the like affirmed of the ceremonies? And yet
neither of these has continued, nor did continue without interruption, while
they stood, before the time of their abolishing. That Psalm. 48. 1.
the Psalm was written either wholly or principally of Jerusalem, and of the
Church of the Jews belonging thereunto, both the course of it manifestly
shows, and he that considers the expositions of it by Hieron. and August ad
Psa. 47. per tot.
Jerome and Austine, and what ado they have to fit the several verses thereof
to the Church of Christ, will easily be persuaded. But what Church mean they,
think you? Such a company of men as you talk of? Let Hieron. ibi. ad ver. 1.
Hierome speak. If you would know of him, what that city of our God is: he
answers, that it is Anima sancta.
An holy soul: and by the citizens and householders of it, he understands
Boni actus.
good actions. Again: What is the Lords holy mountain? Assump. dom. homin.
corpus.
The nature of man, which our Lord took upon him. I might go forward with the
rest of the Psalm in like sort, but it is enough that I have given a taste of
this exposition. The like difficulties may be observed in Augustines
interpretation; besides the great difference betwixt him and Hierome, in their
commentaries upon this Psalm. Now that the people, and worship of God among
the Jews had the like said of them, it may appear by these places. Psalm. 111.
9. ^^
He has commanded his covenant for ever. 133. 3.
There, that is, upon the mountains of Sion, the Lord promised his blessing
and life for ever. 132. 13. 14.
The Lord has chosen Sion, and loved to dwell in it, saying, This is my rest
for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. If then, for all
these promises and commendations, the Church and service of God be perished
from among the Jews; how can you from this only conclude, that the Church of
Christ shall continue without interruption?

Your minor also is false, understanding by Church (as you do) To the
Assumption.
a certain company of men, infallibly taught in all points of faith, and
infallibly to be believed by all men. To the proofs of it I answer, that they
are all insufficient; which I will show in particular. Psalm. 48. 8.
The Psalm (as I have showed) belongs to the city of Jerusalem, to the
Temple and Church of the jews. The phrase does not necessarily require any
such continuance, without interruption. Psalm. 105. 8.
The Lord (says another Psalm) remembered his covenant for ever. The Prophet
speaks of the performance of that point of Gods promise to Abraham, which
concerned the outward prosperous estate of the Jews: so it is expounded in the
next verse: verse. 9.
The covenant that he made with Abraham, and the oath that he swear to Isaac:
yet did the Lord punish them oftentimes himself, and give them up into the
hands of their enemies, Psalm. 106. 40 41. 42. 43.
as the history of the Scripture shows, from time to time. So speaks the
Prophet Isai. 63. 9.
Esaias also of his kindness toward them: In all their troubles he was troubled,
and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his mercy he
redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them always continually; yet was
not this without interruption, either in the wilderness, or in the land of
Iewry. Therefore Gloss. interl. ad Psalm. 47.
your Gloss expounds for ever, Stabiliter.
steadfastly: and Gloss. ordin. ibi.
another Gloss takes it as spoken in comparison of the ceremonial Law: not
for an hour or short time, as (before) the tabernacle of Moses was: signifying
that there was no change in religion to succeed the Gospel of Christ, as the
Gospel was to succeed the law of Moses. What is this to continuing without
interruption?

First I oppose to your bare word, whereby you so peremptorily affirm, that by
the name of Dan. 2. 44.
the kingdom of Christ, the Church is signified, the authority of Theodoret.
ad Dan. 2. 44.
Theodoret, who understands it of our Saviors eternal government: The
Prophet shows (says Theodoret) the end of things present, and the kingdom
of heaven without end. And whereas you will have his kingdom in this world to
be meant, he refuteth that conceit by this reason: If they stand upon it, that
our Saviors former coming is signified by these words, let them show (says
that ancient Father) that the Roman Empire perished, as soon as our Savior
appeared. And afterward: At his second coming he shall strike the image upon
his feet of Iron and clay, etc. and having destroyed all kingdoms, and made
them as it were to be forgotten, he shall bestow his kingdom upon them that
are worthy of it. The kingdom of Christ (says Lyra ibi.
Lyra) is especially in heaven, where the citizens are immortal. Hitherto
belongs that in Apud Iren. in arg. lib. 5. c. 26
Irenaeus, in the argument of a chapter, that John and Daniel foretold the
dissolution and desolation of the Roman Empire, which should go before the end
of the world, and our Savior Christ's everlasting kingdom. So does Barradius
expound Number. 24. 17.
that prophecy of Balaam, concerning our Saviors destroying of Moab and
Sheth: Christ (says Sebast. Barra. in co^cor. Euan. lib. 9. cap 9.
he) shall smite the captains of Moab, and destroy all the sons of Sheth at
the last day of judgment. I doubt not, but in any reasonable man's judgment,
the authority of these writers is of weight enough to crush your bare
affirmation to powder, that, for ought you have said, we may interpret these
places of our Saviors kingdom in heaven. But that I may answer the place to
the full, I grant that the prophecy belongs to the kingdom of Christ, even
in respect of this world also; as it is plain by the time the Prophet speaks
of, namely the destroying of the kingdoms of Syria and Egypt, the remains of
Alexanders conquest. And so Theodoret is answered, who grounded his exposition
concerning Christ's second coming, upon a mistaking of Daniels image, as if that
belonged to the Empire of Rome, which was prophesied of the Syrian and Egyptian
kingdoms. I say then, first, that this kingdom of Christ is not any outward
state of the true Church, which should continue without all manner of
interruption. For who knows not, that diverse heresies have for a time
mightily prevailed against the Church outwardly, so that they seemed to have
gotten the upper hand? Who has not heard, that Hieron. dialo. contra. Luciser.
the whole Christian world sometimes wondered at it self, that it was become an
Arian? Was it not almost four hundred years, before the Church came to be of
so great account in the world? Is it not prophesied in the Apoc. 12. 6
Revelation, that she should be forced to fly into the wilderness for the space
of 1260. days? How then should the outward kingdom of Christ be said to
continue (simply) without interruption? Some subjects of the kingdom might
live scattered here and there, but out of question the kingdom was not in
those times to be found, if we measure it by any outward state. I say therefore
secondly, that by the kingdom of Christ in Daniel and Luke, the spiritual
government of our Savior is signified, whereby he rules in the hearts of his
chosen; so that no force of Satan or his instruments can dispossess him of
this kingdom, but that it shall always continue in dispight of the gates of
hell. This appears in that place of Luke 2. 32. 33
Luke more manifestly. For what is the throne of David, what is the house of
Jacob, but the elect of God among the Jews and Gentiles? All are not Israel
(says the Romans 9. 6. 7.
Apostle) that are of Israel: neither are they all children, because they are
the seed of Abraham: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. The kingdom of
Christ is over Gal. 6. 16.
the Israel of God, and they are that house of Jacob, of which the Angel
speaks to the virgin Mary, concerning our Saviors kingdom, which shall have
no end.

A. D., 5.
Lastly, I might confirm the same with the testimony of the ancient Fathers,
Origin, Saint Chrysostom, S. Bernard, and especially of S. Austin, who
disputing against the Donatists, says thus, as rehearsing In Psalm. 101.
one of their speeches: Sed illa Ecclesia, quae fuit omnium gentium, iam non
est, perijt: That Church, which was of all nations, Conc. 2.
is not now, it is perished. Unto which their speech, he answers; O
impudentem vocem! Accounting it great impudency to say, the Church is
perished. And in the same place he brings in the Church, as speaking
personally thus: Quam diu ero in hoc seculo? Ibidem.
annuncia mihi propter illos qui dicunt: Fuit, and iam non est: apostatauit,
and perijt Ecclesia ab omnibus gentibus. Et annunciauit, nec vacua fuit vox
ista. Quis annunciauit mihi nisi ipsa via? quando annunciauit? Ecce ego
vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem seculi. How long shall I be
in this world? tell me in regard of them who say, the Church indeed was, but it
is not now: it is become apostata, and is perished out of all nations. And he
told me, neither was this word in vain: who told me but the way it self? (to
wit Christ, who says, I am the way:) when did he tell? Behold I am with you
until the end of the world.

A. W.
Here is a flourish of names to little purpose, especially since these authors
you mention, agree with us about the true Church, that consists only of the
elect, and not (as you teach) of all sorts good and bad, elect and reprobate,
so they make an outward profession of believing: But Austin condemns the
Donatists of impudency, for saying that the Church was in their time perished
out of the world, save that it remained in a part of Africa amongst them that
held with Donatus. So would he cry out against you Papists, if he lived at
this day, and heard you complain, that there is no Church in the world, but
only in Rome, and in those countries, which depend upon the Church of Rome.
Only Donatus his part (as August. ad Psalm. 101. concio. 2.
Austin calls it) was the Church with them: and only the Popes part is the
Church with you. You are not indeed as yet come so far, as they were, because
some other countries, besides Italy, are content to be ruled by your Pope: but
when it shall please God to leave that strumpet, the Church of Rome destitute of
friends (as her wound is unrecoverable, and she draws every day nearer and
nearer to her end;) August. contra part. Donat
then will you take up the very same complaint, that the Donatists used, and
there shall be no Church at all but in Rome, or where the Pope shall lurk, in
some other corner of the world. We deny not that the Church, Mat. 28. 20.
to whom our Savior makes that promise, shall continue till the end of the
world, and we detest Donatus heresy, in affirming, that it was then to be
found only in Africa. But (as I said before) what makes this for the
continuance of such a Church, as you imagine? This rather belongs to the
visibilitie and famousnesse of the Church, whereof in the next chapter.

A. D.
CHAP. XII. That this Church, which must be to us the rule of faith, as it must
always continue, so it must also always be visible.

A. W.
It is yet to prove, and always will be, that there is any such Church, as
must be to us the rule of faith: what should we then strive about the
continuance and visibilitie thereof? But you must needs be answered, according
to the counsel of Solomon, Lest you be wise in your own conceit, to the hurt
^ Prou. 26. 5.
of other.

A. D.. 1.
Now having proved that the true Church of Christ must always continue,
without interruption, till the worlds end: it remains that I show also in
what manner it is to continue; to wit, whether it shall always be visible.
That is to say, whether, in all ages, it was, and shall be a company of men,
who may be seen, and in some sort, plainly known to be that company, which
men are to believe, by faith, to be the true Church of Christ: or that it shall
be, sometime at least, invisible; that no man can see those men, nor know them
to be that company, which we must believe, to be the true Church of Christ.

A. W.
That the Church of Christ must always continue, is a point that needs no
proof: that it is to continue without interruption, if we did not believe
already, we should never be driven or persuaded to it by your weak reasons.
But (as me thinks, I must be feign to tell you oftener) the continuance of the
true Church without interruption makes nothing at all for that imaginary
Church of your devising, of the visibilitie whereof you entreat in this
Chapter. Wherein, first you go about to propound, and expound the question;
then you make a show of proouing it, according to the conceit, you have of it.
In the propounding of the question, for the readers better understanding, I
must let him know, that howsoever your words, shall always be visible, seem
to tie the question only to the time hereafter to come, yet your meaning is to
enquire, whether the Church of Christ have not always, since his first
coming, and shall not always, till his second coming, be apparent and
visible. This is manifest by your exposition, In all ages it was, and shall be:
and by your proofs, which at the least in your opinion, concern the whole
Church of Christ, ever since his coming in the flesh.

Your exposition rather darkens, then cleares the State of the question. For
who would not think, by your words, that one part of the controversy betwixt
you and us, is, whether the men, the company of whom is the church, may at all
times be seen or no; as if we were so void of sense as to imagine, that men
could be at any time (except by miracle) invisible? Do not your words imply
thus much? I pray you consider them a little with me. The question is (say you)
whether the Church be always a company of men, that may be seen. If you
answer, that I must add that, which follows, And in some sort plainly known
to be that company: I reply, that your self afterward make those two
distinct parts of the question, when you expound what is meant by Invisible,
that no man (say you) can see those men, nor know them to be that company;
wherein you may reasonably be thought, first to speak of those men's being
seen, and secondly of their being known to be such a company.

But to make short, and to speak plain withal; the question of the Churches
inuisiblenesse is double. First whether a man by his bodily sight can discern,
who they are, that be members of Christ's mystical body or no? that is, who be
elect, and who be not. This we say (and herein you agree with us) is
impossible: because God does not reveal this point to men, neither are they
able to judge, who are truly justified and sanctified, and who are not.
Secondly the question is, whether the catholic Church, spoken off in the
Creed, can be discerned by the same bodily sight, or no: we say it cannot,
because it contains none but the elect; you say it can, Bellar. de Eccles.
milit. lib. 3. cap. 2. Turrian. de Eccles. and ordin. ministr.
because it consists of all them that make profession of christian Religion,
under the absolute government of the Pope of Rome. The only true means to
make a full end of this controversy, is to show what the Church is, of which
the Creed and the Scriptures speak so many, and so glorious matters. This point
you have not once touched, but either ignorantly, or craftily concealed that
difference betwixt us, and allege that for the definition of the Church, which
if it were true, as it is evidently false, yet is but one privilege of the
Church, and expresses not the nature of it. But let us leave these matters,
and consider what it is, that according to your former discourse, you are to
prove. Now, that is (say I), that there always has been, since our Saviors
coming, is, and shall be, to the end of the world, a company of men famous,
and visible in the world, so that all men, at all times, may discern, that
they are the true Church of Jesus Christ. For (that I may, in part, use your
own words, as they follow in this chapter) if at any time it could not be
known, then the men, that lived in that time, wanted necessary means,
whereby they might attain to the knowledge of true faith, and consequently,
whereby they might come to salvation. Give me leave to apply that to all men,
which you speak of all times. If there ever were, are, or shall be any men, to
whose sight the Church was not so visible, that they might discern and know
it; then those men wanted necessary means whereby they might attain to
salvation: which if it were so (say you) how is it universally true, which is
universally said in Scripture, God would have all men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth? Do you not perceive that your reason necessarily
requires to have it proved, that the Church is visible, as at all times, so
to all men? For if it fail in either of these respects, your consequence will
follow, that some men have wanted necessary means of salvation, and so God
would not have all men saved. Therefore you propound the question very
insufficiently, when you say, We inquire, whether the Church at any time be
invisible, so that no man can see those men etc. For though at all times some
men may see and know it; yet unless all men, at all times may, you have
proved nothing to purpose in this whole Treatise.

A. D.. 2.
In which matter my Assertion is, that the Church of Christ (of which the
places of Scripture before cited do speak) must always be visible.

This I prove: first by that plain Prophecy of Isaias in the 61. Chapter.
(Which Chapter to be understood of our Savior Isa. cap. 61.
Christ and his Church, we may gather out of Saint Luke, where our Savior
himself cites some words out of that Chapter, and Luc. 4.
expounds them to be fulfilled in himself.) The words of the Prophecy are
these. Foedus perpetuum feriam eis, and scietur in gentibus Isa. 61.
semen eorum: Omnes qui viderint eos, cognoscentillos, quoniam isti sunt semen
cui benedixit Dominus. I will make a perpetual covenant or league with them,
and their seed shall be known among Nations: all that shall see them, shall
know them, that they are the seed, which our Lord has blessed. How could he
more plainly have foretold the visiblenesse of the Church?

The places of Scripture before cited speak not all alike: some of them
concern the Apostles only, and that not only as they are a company, but as
they are several teachers authorized by our Savior Christ, with so high and
absolute a commission: some belong to all true christians, as well severally
considered one by one, as taken jointly all together. Some appertain to all
Ministers, some reach to all professors of the truth of the gospel. How then
can you truly say, that the true Church of Christ (of which the places of
Scripture before recited do speak) must always be visible? The Apostles have
not been visible these 1500 years. The elect, that is the Church, built upon a
rock, never was, nor ever shall be visible in this world. All Ministers were
not, nor can be visible to all men. All professors neither are the true Church
of Christ, nor can by any means possible be seen of all me^, as one church,
but with the eyes of the mind. Particulars are subject to sense, but universals
are discerned only by understanding. Your assertion then is false: but we will
take it, as it is set down by you, supposing that those places of Scripture
speak of the Church in general. Yet we may not forget that the second point
must needs be added, concerning all men; and so your assertion must be this,
The true Church of Christ must always be visible, to all men living.

To make way to your argument out of this prophecy, you go about to prove
that the Isai. 61. 8. 9.
Chapter is to be understood of our Savior Christ and his Church: your proof
lies thus.

Our Savior himself cites some words out of that Chapter, and expounds
them to be fulfilled in himself. Therefore that Chapter is to be understood of
our Savior Christ and his Church.
This consequent does not follow upon that Antecedent First because the whole
chapter may be written of our Savior himself, and yet not of his Church also.
Secondly because some part of it may be of our Savior, and yet not those words
you allege. For who is he that knows not, that one and the same Chapter
often times, contains diverse prophesies, belonging to diverse matters and
parties? But though your proof be naught, your opinion is true. For those
words and that whole chapter concern our Savior, and his Church. Let us see
how you reason.

If our Savior promise to make a perpetual covenant with his Church, and that
their seed shall be known among nations, and that all that shall see them,
shall know them that they are the seed, which our Lord has blessed, then the
Church must always be visible to all men living. But our Savior has promised
to make a perpetual covenant with his Church, and that their seed shall be
known among nations, and that all that shall see them, shall know them, that
they are the seed which our Lord has blessed. Therefore the Church must
always be visible to all men living.
I deny the consequence of your Mayor: Though our Sauiuiour To the proposition.
made such a promise, and indeed has, and does daily perform it; yet it does
not follow thereupon, that the Church must always be visible to all men. Shall
the promise of our Savior fail, if the Church at some time be not Apoc. 12. 6.
apparent to all men? 12. Art. part.
Take heed we give not the Atheists of the world occasion to say, that his
promise was never fulfilled, because the 1. art. 1.
Church was never known to all men living at any one time. The Lord by this
prophecy foretells the enlarging of the Church amongst the Gentiles, not the
visiblenesse of it, at all times, to all men. But the covenant (y you will say)
is perpetual. True: that is (says Gloss. ordin. ad Esai. 61.
your gloss) not as the old Testament, to which the new has succeeded; and
therefore he expounds the perpetual covenant, to be Euangelium aeternum.
the eternal Gospel, which shall never be abolished for any other, as the
ceremonial Law was, by the sacrifice of our Savior Christ. Glos. inter l. ibi.
An other of your Glosses calls it a perpetual covenant, because it shall be
certainly performed, applying to that purpose, the place of Matthew. Mat. 5. 18.
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but one jot or title of the Law shall not pass,
till all things be fulfilled. The other clause is as little to your purpose.
The Prophet says not that all men, at all times shall, or may see the Church,
but that all, which shall see it, shall know it. Neither is that sight an
outward beholding of those men, that are members of the Church, but a
discerning spirit given by God to them, whom he has appointed to everlasting
life, by faith in Christ. For if we strictly press the words, who sees not,
that this promise has failed, since there have been many in all ages, yea in
our Saviors own days, who for all his powerful miracles, divine doctrine,
and unspotted conversation, acknowledged neither his Church nor himself? Say
not, they might have done. For that is not the question. The Propher says, All
that see them, shall know them, not may know them. Gloss. ordin.
Your ordinary gloss applies this to Apostolos and eorum imitatores.
the Apostles, and their followers, or those that imitate their works. So does
Vatablus, opera eorum.
Vatablus expound them, their works. And Lyra, operibus miraculosis, and
virtuosis.
Lyra more particularly shows what works are meant. They (says Lyra) that
shall see them distinguished from other men, by their miraculous and powerful
works, wherein the Apostles, and other their successors excelled the common
people, and yet excel them in many things. Now the Apostles themselves, for
all their many, and strange miracles, might have been, and had been unknown, I
will not say to many men, but to many nations, and the far greatest part of
the world, if they had not, Math. 28. 19.
according to their commission, traveled from place to place, and so into
diverse countries brought the first tidings of themselves. How can it be then,
that at all times since the death of the Apostles, the Church has been visible
to all men, seeing there has been neither charge, nor warrant, nor practice of
any such universal ministry? If any man had rather understand this Prophecy
of the knowledge, that the unbelievers have of the Church, the meaning Os^rius
in Esa. lib. 5. ad ca. 61.
is, that the Lord will bestow such graces of Sanctification upon his children,
that even their very enemies, amongst whom they live, shall be driven to
acknowledge them for the people of God. But what is this to the visiblenesse of
the Church, to all men at all times?

A. D.. 3.
Secondly our Savior has ordained this his Church to be the light of the
world; according as he says, Vos estis lux mundi, Matthew. 5.
you are the light of the world: and to be a rule or means, by which all men,
at all times, may come to the knowledge of that One, infallible, entire faith,
which is necessary to salvation, as has been proved. But how can it be the
light of the world, if it self be invisible? (Nemo accendit lucernam, and
ponit eam sub modio. No man lights a candle, and when he has done, sets
it under a bushel, where it cannot be seen.) And how can it be a means, by
which, at all times the infallible truth may be made known, to all sorts of
men; if it self at any time, could not be known of men? Or if you say, that
sometimes it could neither be known it self, nor be a means, by which the
true faith might be made known; then, since that I proved that it is a
necessary means, and so necessary, that without it, according to the
ordinary course, there is not sufficient means provided by Almighty God to
instruct all men infallibly in all points of faith: Then (I say) men, that
lived at that time, wanted necessary means, whereby they might attain to the
knowledge of true faith, and consequenly, whereby they might come to salvation.
Which if it were so, how is it universally true, which is universally said in
Scripture? Deus vult omnes homines saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis
venire. God would have men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of 1 Timothy
2.
the truth. For how can he be said, to have a true will to save all men, If he
have not, at all times, provided means sufficient, whereby, all men may come to
the knowledge of true faith, and thereby, by degrees, to salvation? Since
especially, he has power to provide these means: and knows, that without
these means provided, it is impossible for men to attain true faith, and
eternal salvation. For knowing it impossible, he cannot be said to will it;
since no wise man wills that, which he knows perfectly to be altogether
impossible; and much less may Almighty God be said, to will any thing, which
is absolutely impossible, considering that his wisdom is infinite, and that
his will is always joined with some work or effect, by which work or effect,
that which he wills, at least, is made possible to be done. Wherefore to
verify that Almighty God would have all men saved, we must needs say, that he
has provided, for all men, these means, which be necessary, and without
which, it is impossible for them, to come to the knowledge of true faith, and
thereby to salvation: One of which means, is a visible Church, of which they
must hear and learn the true faith; which is the first, and a necessary step
to salvation. The Church therefore must needs be always visible.

This your second reason is thus to be framed: If the Church be not visible to
all men, at all times, then it is not ordained by our Savior to be the light
of the world, and a rule or means by which all men at all times may come to
faith and salvation. But it is ordained by our Savior to be such a light, and
such a rule or means. Therefore it is visible to all men at all times.


That I may be the more easily understood by the ordinary Reader, I will apply
my answer to the course that you have taken in setting down your reason: where
in the first place we have your minor, and one proof of it; another follows
after your proposition, and there shall be examined.

Concerning your Assumption, I say it is false. The Church is To the Assumption.
not ordained to be such a light, rule and means: To Math. 5. 14.
your proof touching the light, I answer, with diverse of the ancient, that
our Savior speaks to, and of the Apostles, not of the Church in succession
from time to time. All the Apostles (says Chrysostom. ad Psalm. 38.
Chrysostom) are the light, to who^ he said, Ye are the light of the world.
These were the light of the eyes of the two testaments, the Law and the Gospel.
For they by the light of our Lord, Illuminant nobis.
enlightened for us the old and new testaments. He that reproves those things
that are done secretly, is the light (quoth Theophyl. ad Math. 5.
Theophylact.) For all that makes any thing manifest, is light. But they (the
Apostles) enlightened not one nation, but the world. So does Aug. in Joan.
tract. 23. and De Sanctis. ser. 43.
Austin sometimes expound it. So Hieron. ad Math. 5.
Ierom, Hilar. a pud Thom. in caten. ad Math 5.
Hilary, and Remigius. Luc. Brugen. ad Math. 5.
Lucas Brugensis a learned Papist, not only applies this text to the
Apostles, but also affoords us a second answer. You are, that is (says he) you
must be, or ought to be the light of the world, that you may carry the light of
the Gospel into the world, he set round about with darkness. And thus in a
manner do Austin and Hilary expound it.

But let us understand it of all teachers, that they are the light of the
world, as indeed they are, in a certain proportion. What then? Will it follow
hereupon, that therefore the Church is at all times visible to al men? The
Apostles themselves, whom this does especially concern, were not so. For many
thousands in the world died, after Mark. 16. 15:
the general commission given to the Apostles, before it was any way possible
for them to take any knowledge of such Preachers, or of the Gospel. Your great
Cardinal Bellar. de verb Dei scrip. lib. 3 cap. 2. ad arg 3.
Bellarmine will needs have the place expounded, not of the Apostles doctrine,
but of their conversation: which is not so easy and ready to be known as
their preaching was. Tertullian applies it to the behavior of all Christians.
Why has our Lord (says Tert. de cultu foemina. cap. 13.
he) compared us to a light, and a hill, if we shine not in the midst of the
darkness, if we hold not up our heads in the middle of them that lie drowned?
But out of question, this holiness of true Christians, is not always visible
to all men, neither can it belong to your Church, the Bellar. de Eccles. milit.
lib. 3 cap. 2.. Atque hoc.
members whereof may be utterly void of true faith and love, save only in the
outward profession. Take it how you will, for doctrine or manners, or both, you
are never a whit the nearer. If I would press the words, I could say, that our
Savior requires no more in this place of the light, but that it give light
Mat. 5. 15.
to all them that are in the house: that is, to all in the Church, or at the
most, to them that are near neighbors thereunto. For what Apoc. 1. 12. 20.
and 2. 5.
candle is there so bright, that the light of it can be seen over all the
world? What though our Savior call his Apostles the light of the world? does
he meaue, that they all jointly together considered, as a company, are so; or
that every one of them (severally) is the light of the world? If you will have
it spoken of them as the Church (and else it cannot serve your turn to prove
the perpetual visiblenesse of the Church) I doubt how you will be able to
show, that they were the light of the world. For they did not enlighten the
world by any joint act of them all together, but by their several preaching in
several places. Neither did they persuade men to believe, because they were
such, or such a company; but every one of them taught the doctrine of the
Gospel, and was of himself without relation to all, or any of the rest, the
light of the world in that part, where it pleased God to bless his labors, to
the begetting of faith. If you say, that every one of them was the light of the
world (as doubtless every one was) then will it not follow, that because the
Church is the light of the world, therefore it must be at all times visible to
all men. For never any one of the Apostles was so; no nor all of them, as I
said before, many thousands being taken out of the world, after the Apostles
began to preach, ere they could possibly have any glimpse of such a light. To
conclude, the Apostles were, and the Ministers (in some sort) now are the light
of the world, because by their preaching, it pleases Almighty God to open the
eyes of worldly men, that Act. 26. 18.
they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith in Christ: not as if any, or all these must at all times be
visible to all men; but that there may be means for the salvation of those
whom the Lord (of his infinite love) has chosen out of the world, to be heirs
of his endless glory.

By all men, we may understand either every particular man, or Of the
proposition.
all sorts of me^. If you would prove that which you undertake, you must mean
every particular man, as I have showed in answering the fifth Chapter; and as
it is apparent in this afterward, where you repeat that which before you had
delivered concerning Gods will to have every man saved, one and other. But I
know not how, in the proof of your proposition, you seem to expound all men
by all sorts of men. How can it be a means (say you) by which at all times the
infallible truth may be made known to all sorts of men, if it self at any
time could not be known of men? In this sense, if I should grant your whole
fyllogisme, yet would the point in question remain still unproven. For the
Church may be ordained for the light of the world, and for a rule or means
whereby all sorts of men may come to faith and salvation: and yet at no time be
visible to every particular man. To speak more plain; your proposition may be
understood two several ways; first thus, that all men shall be taken in the one
part of it, namely in the antecedent or former part, for every particular man;
in the other for all sorts of men. If it be thus understood, I say the
consequence is naught. Secondly, those words All men, may have the same
signification in both parts of the proposition, yet in two diverse senses. For
they may be taken either for All sorts of men, and then, as I have showed, the
syllogism proves not that which is in question: or for every particular man,
in which sense only I allow of the proposition, as true and to the purpose. It
had bin better therefore that you had spared the proof of it, especially
unless you could have done it better. Math. 5. 15.
The light which is not put under a bushel, is not the church, but the
apostles. He teaches them (says Theophyl ibi.
Theophylact) to endure the trial, and to have great care of their
conversation, as they Aspectabiles eritis.
on whom al men gaze. Think not therefore (says our Savior) that ye shall lie
hid in a corner: Ye shall be the light of the world: and therefore see that you
live unblameably, and become not an offense to other men. Who can gather from
hence the consequence of your proposition; If the Church be not visible to all
men at all times, it is not ordained by our Savior to be the light of the
world?

Your second proof, concerning the rule and means, is no less insufficient.
If the Church at any time could not be known of men, (you must needs mean of
every particular man, if you will speak to the purpose) it cannot at all times
be a means, by which the truth may be known to all sorts of men. This is the
consequence I denied before, either brought by you for a new proof, or
repeated idly within 3. or 4. lines after it was first delivered.

Here you return to your minor, and to prove the latter part To the proof of
the latter part of the assumption.
of it, propound the second time your maine reason, answered at large in the
fifth Chapter. It would be tedious, and loss of time and labor, to repeat
all that was then said: I will therefore content my self to draw it into form,
as it lies, and to deny the false propositions, without any more ado,
unless I meet with somewhat by the way, which was not in your former
discourse. Thus you reason.

If the Church be not ordained by our Savior, to be a rule or means, by which
all men, at all times, may attain to faith and salvation; then some men, at
some time, have wanted one necessary means to that purpose. But no man at any
time has wanted any necessary means to that purpose. Therefore the Church is
ordained by our Savior to be a rule or means, by which all men at all times
may attain to faith and salvation.
I deny your Assumption; which you endeavor to prove in this sort: If any man
at any time has wanted any necessary means, then it is not universally true,
that God has a true will to have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of
his truth. But it is universally true, that God has a true will to have all
men saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth. Therefore no man, at any
time, has wanted any necessary means.


Again I deny your minor, referring the Reader, for the true sense of 1. Tim.
2. 4.
that Scripture, to my answer in the fifth Chapter. The proof of your
consequence, about which you labor like a man that claps plaster upon plaster
on a sound place, is altogether needless, and not worth the examining; save
only that in the last clause thereof, you confidently harp upon the former
string, which sounds nothing but the necessity of a visible Church to
salvation. But the Apostle, Romans 10. 14. 15.
where he shows what is of necessity to faith, neither mentions, nor any
way implies a visible Church, but only requires a sending of some to preach:
and that may be from God immediately, not by succession, Gal. 1. 1.
in and by men. Did not our Savior Christ's preaching bring many to faith in
him, and so to salvation? Did not Peter Act. 2. 41.
convert 3000. at one Sermon? Did not the Apostle Paul plant many Churches? Was
any of these a visible Church? or did the people to whom they preached, either
seek to them, as to a visible Church, or believe that they delivered, because
they were sent by a visible Church? It is true, that no man (ordinarily) can
believe, unless he hear; no man can hear, unless there be one to preach to
him: no man can preach, unless he be sent. But what is all this to the
necessity of a visible Church? Look through the whole history of the new
Testament, and see how many examples you can find of any, that were but so
much as occasioned to believe, by the means of a visible Church. The same of
our Saviors miracles drew many to the hearing of him, not the knowledge of any
visible Church. Act. 10. 3. 5.
Cornelius a devout man, and one that feared God, living near to the places
where the Gospel was preached, was not moved by the visible Church, but by a
vision from heaven, to send for Peter, that he might hear and believe. I might
show the like in diverse other examples, that the Apostles were feign severally
to go from place to place to preach the Gospel, and not to stay, till the fame
of them, or a visible Church should move people to enquire after them. I deny
not, that 1. Cor. 14. 23 25.
occasion may be given to men to hearken after the Gospel, by reason of some
visible Church, whereof they may by diverse means have understanding: but, that
it is impossible for men to come to the knowledge of true faith, and hereby to
salvation, without a visible Church; or that a visible Church is always the
first step to salvation, though sometimes it may be the first occasion of
hearing and believing.

A. D.. 4.
Thirdly, if the universal Church of Christ, should for any space of time be
invisible: it should for that space cease to profess outwardly that faith,
which in heart it did believe. For if it did outwardly profess, how should it
not by this profession be made visible and known? But if the universal Church
should for such a time fail to profess the faith, hell gates (contrary to
Christ's promise) did mightily prevail against it. For, were it not a mighty
prevailing, that the whole Church should fail in a thing so necessary to
salvation, as we know, outward profession of faith to be necessary, both by
that of our Savior: Qui negauerit me coram hominibus, Math. 10.
ego negabo illum coram Patre meo: He that shall deny me before men, I will
deny him before my Father? And, Qui Luke 9.
me erubuerit and sermones meos, hunc Filius hominis erubescet: He that shall be
ashamed of me and of my words, him the Son of man will be ashamed of. And by
that of S. Paul: Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem:
With heart we believe Romans 10.
to justice, with mouth we confess to salvation. Which place learned men
interpret to signify, that profession of faith is sometimes necessary to
salvation: and they say further, that this sometimes is so often, as either the
glory of God, or the profit of our neighbor, does of necessity require it:
the which cases of necessity do happen very often; and great marvel it were
(or rather impossible) that they should never have happened, for so long a time
as the Protestants would have their Church to have been invisible.

A. W.
If the universal Church of Christ (say you) should for any space of time be
invisible, it should for that space cease to profess outwardly that faith
which in heart it did believe. But it may not for any space cease to profess
that faith. Therefore it may not for any space of time be invisible.
To omit that fancy, that there is one such universal Church To the
proposition.
of Christ upon earth (whereof hereafter, when I come to speak of the
Catholic Church,) I deny the consequence of your proposition. For it is
possible, that all the Churches in the world should gloriously profess the true
faith, and yet many thousands be utterly ignorant, that there are any such
Churches. Was not your Church of Rome (which has been famous enough for
outward state) altogether unknown (at the least a long time) in the Indies and
America, till within these 100. years, or thereabouts? And yet do you ask, If
it did outwardly profess, how it should not by this profession be made visible
and known? Has not the kingdom of China, if we believe the report of your
Jesuits and other Friars, been a mighty and rich estate many hundred years;
and yet not heard of till of late, in most parts of Christendom? If you reply,
that the Churches must needs be known to them, amongst, or near whom they
are: I answer, that this proves not their visibilitie to all men at all times;
no nor to them, in the midst of whom they dwell, unless the Churches be settled
in some outward peace, that the members thereof may freely show themselves.

Your minor is false: it may come to pass, that the Church To the Assumption.
may cease for a space to make open profession of that faith, which in heart it
does believe: else how could 1. Reg. 19. 18.
Eliah, living in the kingdom of Israel, have been ignorant, that there were
7000. true worshippers of God in that country? Your proof is insufficient.

If it might come to pass (say you) that the Church should cease to profess
outwardly, then should the gates of hell mightily prevail against it, contrary
to our Saviors promise. But the gates of hell shall not mightily prevail
against it, contrary to his promise. Therefore it may not come to pass, that
the Church should cease so to profess.
The consequence of your mayor is too weak. Our Saviors promise is neither to
the whole Church, considered as a company jointly together, but to every true
believer, as I showed before; nor concerning outward profession, against which
Peter (the head of the Church, as you dream) grievously sinned: but of
continuing joined to Jesus Christ, as the head, by a true justifying faith,
resting on him for salvation. In which estate Peter always was preserved by
our Savior, though Mat. 26. 70 72. 74.
the devil prevailed against him to the denial of his Lord and Master, for
feate of death. But let us see your proof.

If outward profession be a thing necessary to salvation, then if the church
fail in that, the gates of hell mightily prevail against it, contrary to our
Saviors promise. But outward profession is a thing necessary to salvation.
Therefore if the Church fail in outward profession, the gates of hell mightily
prevail against it, contrary to our Saviors promise.
I deny your minor. Such outward profession as you mean, is not To the
Assumption.
necessary to salvation.

For the better clearing whereof, we must a little examine what it is, for a
thing to be necessary to salvation; then, what profession may be counted
necessary. For the former: that is necessary to the salvation of a man, without
which he cannot possibly be saved. Now these things are either simply
necessary, so that the absence of them shuts a man out of heaven; or
necessary only in some sort. Simply necessary, on man's part (for in that
sense we speak now of things necessary) are, acknowledgement of sin, faith
in Jesus Christ, and repentance: wheresoever any of these is wanting, there is
no possibility of salvation, so long as they are wanting. Other things there
are only so far necessary, as that the contempt or neglect of them, ba^s a
man of salvation. Such are the Sacraments and outward profession: both in
general, by becoming a member of some true visible Church, and in particular,
by witnessing the truth, as often as the Lord shall minister just occasion.
Concerning this latter kind of things necessary, we are to know that if we
truly repent our contempt and neglect of these duties, and believe in Jesus
Christ, there is mercy for us with God, though for want of opportunity we can
never come to the performance of them.

Touching the latter point of outward profession, it is (as I signified ere
while) of two sorts: either a joining of our selves to some Church professing
true Religion, or a bearing witness of the truth of God, which we profess. To
this latter especially belong the two former places of Scripture alleged by
you. To the former, that text which you set in the last place, as it shall
appear by and by. You will ask me perchance, whether of these two, is the
profession you speak of. Surely to speak plainly and properly, neither of
them. For it is a conceit of your own devising, without any authority or
warrant of Scripture; and namely of those places you bring for proof of it:
yet may it in some sort be referred to the latter, as being a means whereby we
may avouch the truth of God, whereof we are professors. So then the answer is,
first, that no kind of outward profession is simply necessary to salvation, as
if the absence of it, were in it self damnable, though the contempt or neglect
of the duty, not repented of, brings certain damnation. Secondly, that it is
not necessary to salvation, either simply, or in any sort, that a whole Church
should at all times make open profession to the world of that Religion which
they hold, and secretly practice. This is that outward profession, which is
meant in your minor: by which conceit you shut out of heaven all Churches, that
is, all assemblies of the faithful, which at any time have for borne to cast
themselves wilfully into the mouths of the bloud-thirstie and ravening
persecutors, by proclaiming openly their faith in Christ. It is too true, that
an ouer-great zeal of martyrdom carried Ignatius ad Romans Cyprian. de Martyr.
Joan. 4. 1. 2, 3., and 8. 59. and 9. 39. Act 8. 1. and 9. 24. 25.
some men, now and then, farther then they should have gone, to the endangering
and losing of their lives. But it is as true, that our Savior, his Apostles,
and the Churches, from time to time, have been careful to hide themselves
from the sight of Tyrants, when the Gospel was persecuted, as far as their
callings, and other occasions would give them leave. Indeed they they never
would (neither is it lawful) deny the truth of God, or themselves to be
professors of it, if they were called in question for it: yet did they
conceal, as much as they could, from the persecutors, their times and places
of meeting, and also the several members of their Churches. To deny Christ,
or the truth of his religion is always damnable, and without repentance,
brings damnation vnauoideably; not to make public profession of religion is
not always so; but then only, when the Lord, by some special occasion,
according to the general duty of a Christian, or a man's particular calling,
thrusts or draws him forth to give testimony to the truth, by maintaining
it, or suffering for it. Which your self also afterward acknowledge, by the
judgment of the learned, who teach that profession of faith is sometimes
necessary to salvation.

Now for answer to your proofs, I say (as before) that the two former concern
especially, the denying either of religion in general, or some special truth
in question, when the Lord, as it were, calls us out to profess and avouch
it: as he did the Apostles Mat. 10. 5.
in that place, by sending them abroad to preach the Gospel. If you (says our
Savior in effect) or any other minister shall forbear to discharge your
duties, by preaching my truth, and maintaining it, if you be called in question
for it, I will never acknowledge you for mine, in the kingdom of heaven. Mat.
28. 19. Act. 10. 42.
The Apostles calling necessarily required preaching of the word, and for them
to have failed in that duty, for fear or shame, or otherwise, had been to
deny their Lord and master. Yet were they not so tied to this duty, that they
must needs continue their public preaching, in those places, where
persecution was raised against them, but Mat. 10. 23.
they might flee from one City to another: and yet not be counted to deny the
Lord Jesus. As for the Churches, that were gathered by the Apostles preaching,
there is neither charge, nor reason to be showed why they should bewray
themselves to their persecutors, by open practice of religion in the eyes of
the world. Indeed the worship of God is not to be neglected, though we cannot
perform it without manifest danger of our lives; but there is no necessity
to worship God publicly, where the truth is persecuted. Therefore did the
ancient Christians, in such places assemble as secretly as they could, neither
leaving the exercises of religion for fear, nor by an inco^siderate zeal,
hazarding their own lives. To deny Christ is not to conceal himself from
persecutors, but being found by them, to renounce his profession: and so is the
place ordinarily applied by Cyprian. epist. 56. ad Thibar. Sect 3.
Cyprian, Clerus Roman, ad Cyprian. epist. 30. 31. Cypria. epist. 55. ad
Corncl. sect. 13. Delapsis. sect. 14 Ad Nouatian. haer. sect. 7.
the Clergy of Rome, and Tertul. in Scor. cap 10. 11.
Tertullian, men enough favoring martyrdom. Yea De fuga in persec. cap. 14.
Tertullian in that very book, wherein he labors to prove, that it is not
lawful for a man to fly in time of persecution: yet advises men to hold
their assemblies for the exercises of religion, in the night time, if they
cannot have them conveniently in the day. Theophyl. ad Math. 10.
Theophylact expounds this confession and denial, of acknowledging, or
denying Christ to be God. Luc. Brugen. ibi.
Brugensis somewhat more particularly, He that denies me to be his Lord and
Savior, that he believes in me, that he sticks fast to me, and my doctrine.
So does Ianse. harm. cap. 55.
Iansenius vnderstandit, though he stretch it also to the denying of Christ, by
wicked conversation. The denying of Christ's name (says Lyra. ad Mat 10. 33.
Lyra) is always a mortal sin, Not to confess or be silent (concerning it)
is sometimes a mortal sin: As if a man be silent, when he is asked of it; If
he profess it, being not asked, it is a work of supererogation. Does any of
these, or any man else, conclude the visibilitie of the Church from these, or
the like places of Scripture? No man is to deny our Savior, nor to be ashamed
of his truth. What then? Therefore must they that believe in Christ, openly
make profession thereof, at all times, without Mat. 10. 16.
any wisdom of the Serpent, for their own preservation: or else can they not
be saved? A cruel and foolish conceit.

This proof is to as little purpose as the former. Confession by mouth is
required to salvation: therefore outward profession of faith Romans 10. 10.
is at all times necessary. Who sees not the weakness of this consequence?
Does not he confess with mouth, that ioynes himself to some known Church of
Christ, and communicates with them (ordinarily) in the outward worship of God:
though all the world know not there are any such believers and professors; yea
though the people, among whom they live, be not privy to their meetings and
profession? There may be occasion for a man, or a Church to manifest themselves
unto the world: and they that in such a time shall fail, can look for no
mercy at the hands of God, without true and earnest repentance. But this
proves not, that therefore the Churches must make such public profession,
that they may at all times be known to all men. To persuade us of the former
(wherein there is no doubt) you tell us that Learned men (autors in the air,
as D. B. P. against the reformed Catholic. page 677.
one of your side says, in the like case) interpret this place, to signify
that profession of faith is sometimes necessary. Who ever denied it? But does
any learned man say, that therefore the Church must always make such
profession? That is the point in question: and of that you are as dumb as a
fish: yea do you not perceive, that Lombard. and Gloss. Ordin. and interlin.
ibi.
your learned men, refute that conceit? Does not he, that expounds that place
of necessity at sometimes, deny that it requires such necessity at all
times? It is necessary (says Friar Dominic. Sotus ad Romans 10.
Soto) for a righteous man, that he may obtain everlasting life, to confess
his faith with his mouth, wheresoever the time Necessarium praecepti tempus.
necessarily required by this precept offers it self. Catharin your Bishop
speaks yet more plain: Ambros. Catharin. ibi.
Such confession (namely, that a man confess with his mouth, that which he
believes in his heart, as he expounded himself a little before) is not
always required, but (as Thomas says) according to the time and place. h
Thomas. ibi. vide Thom. 2. 2 q. 3. art. 2.
And indeed so Thomas says, adding withal, that Praecepta affirmatiua
obligant semper, scel non ad semper.
Affirmative commandments bind at all times, but require not performance at
all times. Your interlinear and ordinary Glosses, and Lombard restrain it to
the time of persecution: or at least, when the truth is called in question.
Caietan makes this Caietan. ibi.
when more general, but signifies, that this confession is not at all times
necessary.

As for the times, when it is to be held for necessary, your learned men do
somewhat more particularly deliver the point, then you report it. Confession of
Gods truth (quoth Sotus ad Romans 10.
Sotus, and therein he followth Thomas. ibi.
Thomas) is necessary upon pain of losing salvation, either when it is
required by a persecutor of the faith, which confession the martyrs made with
their blood: or when it is necessary for those Subditis
that belong to our charge, by danger of heresy likely to ensue: which duty
of confession properly concerns Prelates, etc. These occasions have many
times been offered, and accordingly See Acts and momuments of the Church.
many professors of that truth which we now maintain, have, with the shedding
of their blood, given testimony of the Gospel, against the errors and
tyranny of your Antichristian Prelates. Those holy martyrs, who from time to
time have been butchered by your Synagogue of Satan, were of the same Church
with us, howsoever they saw not the truth of God in many points so clearly as
it has pleased him to reveal it to us by the ministry of his servants in
these latter days. If they used their best discretion and endeavors, to hide
themselves (as much as might be) from your fury, they did no more then the
light of nature and Scripture warrant, to preserve life, without denying their
faith in the Lord Jesus, or refraining to perform true worship to him, though
they did it secretly. And thus much of your argument.

A. D.. 5.
Fourthly if the Church were not visible, we could not fulfill that Math. 18.
commandment of our Savior, wherein he said: Dic Ecclesiae: Tell the Church.
For how can we tell the Church any thing, if we cannot tell where to seek it:
neither if we did by chance meet it, could we know it to be the Church?

A. W.
If the Church (say you) be not visible to al men, at all times, then can we
not tell the Church, according to our Saviors commandment. But we must tell
the Church, according to his commandment. Therefore the Church must be
visible to all men, at all times.
That I may answer directly and plainly to your Syllogism, To the Proposition.
I must understand what you mean by Church and we. The Church may signify in
this place, either the whole company of the faithful, or severally every
particular congregation, which yet properly is not the Church, but a Church. So
may the other word We be taken for All men whatsoever, or only for such as
make profession of Religion. Taking Church in the former sense, I deny the
consequence of your Mayor. We must fulfill that commandment of our Savior,
though the whole company of the faithful be not at all visible. For the
charge is not to tell the whole company, but the several Churches whereof we
are members. I have showed this before: I will only put you in mind of a
learned Papists exposition, formerly alleged. We are not willed (says Lue.
Brugens. ad Mat. 18. 17.
Brugensis) to tell the universal Church spread over the earth, but that
particular Church, Cui conuiuit and subject. etc.
to which every man is subject, and wherein he lives. If by we, you mean none
but professors of Religion, as our Savior Christ does, and as See Chap. 10
sect. 8.
Brugensis, and all other interpreters understand it; then howsoever you take
the Church for the whole company, or the several congregations, I deny your
consequence in that respect also. The faithful may tell their particular
Churches, whereof they are members, though the Church be not visible to all
men, at all times. It is enough if every man know his own Church, to which he
belongs, though he know not of any other in the world.

Your minor is utterly false, if (as you must needs do, according To the
Assumption.
to that you intend) you mean either all men, or the whole Church. For as I
said before, our Saviors charge is neither to all men, but only to Professors
of Religion: nor concerning the whole Church, but particular congregations. And
so your fourth reason proouing the visibilitie of the Church, at all times to
all men, by our Saviors commandment, to tell the Church, is of as small
force as the former. It is sufficient, as I noted ere while, for the fulfilling
of this charge, that every man know the Church, of which himself is a member,
and which he is to tell: and in this sort the Churches are always visible.

A. D.. 6.
Fifthly, it is certain, that once the true Church of Christ was visible, to
wit, when it first began in Jerusalem, in the Apostles and Disciples of our
Savior Christ, and that company, which by their preaching was converted to
the faith. But there can no reason be showed, why it should be visible then,
and not now. If it were needful to be visible then, because otherwise it could
not be a Church, that is, A Society of men lincked together, in the profession
of one faith: in the use of the same Sacraments: under the government of
lawful Pastors: for the same reason, it must needs be visible now; because,
(as in the last Chapter is proved) there must be a Church now: and therefore
it must be a society of men, professing the same faith: using the same
Sacraments: living under the government of lawful Pastors. For all this
pertains to the very essence of the Church.

If also it were needful to be visible then, that those offices and functio^s,
which must be done in the Church, might be well performed: to wit, as there were
in the Church some Pastors, and some sheep, (as Saint Gregory Nazianzene
says) some to command, some to obey: some to teach, some to be taught: some
to feed the flock of Oratione de moderat. in disput. habenda.
Christ, some to be fed: so (that every one of these, might do what pertained
properly to his duty;) it was needful, that the Pastors must know their
sheep, and the sheep their Pastors, and that those that should teach, and
rule, and minister the Sacraments, must see, and know them, whom they were to
teach and rule, and to whom they were to give the Sacraments. And on the
contrary side, the other had need to have known those, of whom they must be
taught, whom they must obey, and from whom they were to receive the wholesome
food of the holy Sacraments. If (I say) this reason prove, that it was
needful then, that the Church should be visible and known: for the same
reason, it will be also needful to say, that the Church must be visible, now,
and at all times. For, at all times, there must be Pastors and sheep in the
Church, being the sheepefold of Christ. And at all times these Pastors must
govern, instruct, and minister the holy Sacraments: and the other must receive
government, instruction, and the food of the holy Sacraments, at their hands.
And consequently, there had need be some visible tokens, at all times, by which
the Pastors may know their sheep, lest for want of this knowledge, they may
unawares, Dare sanctu^ canibus, and proijcere margaritas ante porcos, Give that
which is holy to dogs, and Matthew. 7.
cast margarites before hogs, which our Savior commands them not to do. And
on the other side, there had need be some visible marks, by which the sheep
may know and discern their lawful Pastors, and true preachers, from false
teachers, and intruding usurpers. For otherwise, they could not tell, whom to
hear and obey, and whom to repair to for the Sacraments: and contrary, whom
to take heed of, as of false Prophets: whose voice to neglect, as of strangers:
and whose poisoned food of polluted Sacraments to reject, no less then a bait
laid to kill them by thieves and robbers; as it imports greatly every one to
do.

If lastly it were needful to be visible then, that those, which were out of
it, might join themselves unto it, and become members of it; thereby to
participate the graces and benedictions, which Christ our Lord communicated
only to it; and to escape the deluge of eternal damnation, wherewith all was
sure to be drowned, that were found out of it, as it were, out of another Noe
his Arc: this reason also requires and urges, that the Church must be
visible now, and at all other times. For if, at any time, it were not visible;
how could men, that were out of it, come unto it? Or how could they attain
salvation, if they did not enter into it? Since at all times, the merits and
fruits of Christ's passion are enclosed in it: and the means of salvation, and
to escape eternal damnation, are only found in it. The Church therefore is
visible at all times. For at all times, that prophecy of Isaias must be true,
wherein our Lord speaks thus to the Church: Aperie^tur portae tuae iugiter,
die ac nocte non claudentur; vt afferatur ad te fortitudo gentium, and reges
earu^ adducantur; Isa. 60.
Gens enim and regnu^ quod non seruierit tibi, peribit. Thy gates shall be
continually opened, day and night they shall not be shut, that the strength of
nations and the kings thereof may be brought unto thee; for the nation and
kingdom which shall not serve thee, shall perish.

A. W.
This is your fifth argument, wherein you have wasted more paper, then in all
the former. Let us see if your pains be not to as little purpose.

If the true Church (say you) was once visible (you should add, to all men)
and no reason can be showed, why it should be so then, and not now, then it is
so now. But the true Church was once visible, and no reason can be showed why
it should be so then, and not now. Therefore the true Church is now visible.
Who denies this conclusion? or what do you get by it? The To the Syllogism.
question is, whether the Church of Christ be always visible to all men, or
no. You conclude, that it is now visible, speaking neither of all men, nor of
all times; in which two points the whole controversy betwixt us lies: save
that we also deny that there is any such one Church, as you fondly suppose,
without any show of proof. But that I may let nothing pass which is worth the
answering, I will apply this argument of yours, as directly to the question as
I can. To speak plain to every man's understanding: the doubt is, whether
there be not at all times some one company of Christians or other, that makes
public profession of religion, so that all men whatsoever and wheresoever,
may take notice of them, as the true Church of Christ, or no. In this question
we differ from you in two points. First we say, that there never was any such
company in the world, that could be known to all men. Secondly we add
farther, that every true Church may be so oppressed and driven into a corner,
that it can be discerned by none but the members of it; and yet may continue in
the practice of religion by the ministry of the word, sacraments and censures.
Now then, I thus frame your reason, for proof of the question.

If at any time there were a company of me^ visible to all the world, and no
reason can be showed why there should at that time be such a company, and not
at all other times also; then there has been always, is now, and shall be for
ever such a company visible to all men. But there was once such a company
visible to all men, and no reason can be showed, why there should be at any
time, and not at all times. Therefore there always has been, is, and shall be
such a company visible to all men.
I deny the consequence of your mayor; though there had To the proposition.
bin sometime such a company, and no man were able to show sufficient reason,
why there should be such a company then, and not always; yet I say, it does
not follow, that therefore there must at all times be such a company. The
ground of my denial, is, that God has not revealed to men the reason of all
his decrees and actions. Your Pope himself (as presumptuous as he is) I
think, dares not undertake to declare or determine, why many things fall out,
which we see daily come to pass. I presume all this while, that you deny this
possibility of giving a reason, to men only, not to God also: for else your
minor will want little of blasphemy.

Your minor has two parts, and it is false in both. For neither To the
Assumption.
was the Church (as you speak) in the Apostles time visible to all men; and
there may be some reason, why though it had bin so then, yet it should not
continue so always. Of the former I have said enough heretofore; and it is a
conceit without truth or likelihood, that all the world might take knowledge of
the Church, when it began in Jerusalem. For the other point, though I might
stand upon it, and put you to prove, that there can no reason be given; yet
will I endeavor for your better satisfaction, if it may be, to show some
reasons why it must needs be visible in the beginning (yet was it not then
visible to all me^) and need not be so at all times. But first let us examine
your proof. I will propound your reason in a syllogism, and then answer to it.

If the Church were in the Apostles time to be visible, 1. because otherwise it
could not be a Church: 2. the offices and functions of the Church could not
else be well performed: 3. else men could not join themselves unto it: and
these reasons, why it should be visible, still continue; then no reason can be
showed, why it should then be visible, and not always. But it was then to be
visible for those reasons, and they always continue. Therefore no reason can
be showed, why it should then be so visible, and not always.
I do purposely omit the former part of the Assumption, that the Church was
visible to all men, because I spoke sufficiently of it before, and it will but
hinder the examining of this syllogism. To which that I may answer orderly and
plainly, I deny To the proposition.
the consequence of the mayor. Although these three had bin some of the reasons
(whether they be or no, we will consider in the Assumption) why the Church at
the first must needs be visible: and these reasons still continue: yet would it
not follow, that then no reason can be showed, why it should be visible then,
and not so always. For there may and shall be other reasons given of the
necessity of visibilitie in those times.

Your minor also is false. Never a one of the three alleged To the Assumption.
by you, is any necessary reason of the Churches visibilitie in the Apostles
times; as shall appear in the handling of them. Wherein first I must speak a
word or two of the definition of the Church, as it is propounded in this place.
In the whole course of your treatise, as I have noted in my answer here and
there, you mean by the Church nothing else but your Clergy, or rather your
Bb. assembled together in a general Council. Here (belike upon better advice)
you are content to allow the people also for parts of the Church. But to let
that pass: the first fault in your definition is, that you fancy to your
self one visible universal Church, consisting of all such as you account true
Christians throughout the world: whereas you are not able to bring any place of
Scripture, in which the holy Ghost so speaks of the church. I deny not, that
all Christians agreeing in one profession, may in some sort be said to be of
one church: but that the Church whereof the Scripture speaks, and of which we
therefore must speak, if we will speak to any purpose, is to be conceived as
any one such society. The same word, the same sacraments, the same kind of
gouerners may be in diverse churches, and yet not all these be one society. We
may imagine the like in common wealths or kingdoms, that several states may
have the same kind of laws, customs and magistrates, and yet not be all one
kingdom or common wealth. Your second fault is, that undertaking to define the
true church, you content your self with the same faith, and the same
sacraments: whereas no company nor man can be of that church, but they that
hold the true faith of Christ, and the right use of the sacraments. The third
thing I will observe, is rather by way of explication, then of refutation: you
require the government of lawful pastors, as a thing essential to the church.
If you speak of that church, to which our Savior makes those goodly promises
Mat. 16. 16. and 28. 20.
in the Gospel, it may be for a time without such gouerners: the promises
themselves not concerning the whole body, in respect of their lawful Pastors,
but every particular, in regard of his faith in Jesus Christ. And indeed,
howsoever it be true, that to the being of a Church, as it is commonly taken,
it is necessary that there be both a pastor and a people: yet a people deprived
of their pastors by what means soever, and having no dependence upon any other
congregation, does not cease to be such a Church as our Savior promises to
protect from spiritual and bodily enemies: yea a people so destitute, has
power to choose a pastor for themselves, and therefore are still in some sort a
Church, because that power is no where out of a Church, but is appropriated to
the companies of believers, who make several Churches, though not properly and
fully Churches, for want of lawful gouerners. In the last place, I may not
omit to note your craft, in adding to your definition of the Church, the
government of lawful Pastors; as if you would have the ignorant imagine, that
there were certain Pastors who had some joint government of the Church: for
example, perhaps your Pope, and his Council of Cardinals, or a Council of
Bishops assembled by his authority, and governed by his direction. In this
sense we utterly deny, that any government of Pastors is necessary to the
being of a Church; though we gladly embrace the helps of Synodall,
provincial, national and general Councels. All true Churches properly so
called, are governed by their several Pastors: but this makes them not one
church, as long as there are not more, or at the least one, gouerner common to
the^ al. This Bellar. de Eccles. milit. lib. 3 cap. 2.

Turrian. de Eccles. and ordin. ministr.

Stapl. princip. doct. controu. 1. lib. 1. cap. 3.


the learned of your side discerning (though you cannot or will not see it)
never define the Church without relation to one general pastor, the Pope of
Rome. As for the several pastors, be they never so lawful, they do no more
make their congregations one Church, in respect of their government, then the
Companies of London, because they are governed by their Master and Wardens,
(severally) make one body, without respect of their common subjection to the
Lord Mayor of that city. You will then perhaps demand of me, whether the Church
be not a mere sound only, having nothing truly answerable thereunto indeed? I
answer to this question, that the Church is more then a mere sound, and has a
thing in nature truly answerable to the name, and that in two respects. For the
Church may be taken for the whole multitude of them, that in all places of the
world profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ: and in this sense it contains all,
save the Jews and the heathen. Secondly, the Church truly and properly is the
company of the elect, that are called to true faith in Jesus Christ. More
particularly it signifies such of the elect believers, as are living in the
world. And this is that Church, to which those glorious and comfortable
promises of our Savior do appertain: though there be also some promises of
outward blessings, which are common to all Churches and professors of Christian
Religion. Now these elect thus called, are truly a Church, because they are a
company linked together in the sound profession of the same true faith, and
members of the same mystical body of Jesus Christ, under the government of
the holy Ghost his Vicegerent. I do not take upon me exactly to define the
Church, but only to show in gross, what is necessary to the being of it; nor
perhaps all that, but the especial point, where in you have failed, which is
subjection to one and the same Lieutenant and Sovereign, not to diverse of the
like kind severally, as your definition seems to require. But of this matter
enough.

Now I answer to your minor, that there was no necessity of the Churches
visibilitie, that it might be such a society as you imagine. For there have
bin, and easily may be such societies, which may be, and have bin hid from all
the world, save those of their own company. Consider I pray, what should
hinder this. Is it not possible for a company of men to profess the same
religion, but other men must needs be prive to that their profession? It is
like enough, that such a company growing to a great multitude, and ordinarily.
holding the exercises of their Religion, will in time be discovered: as it fell
out with the true Christians in the late persecution under Queen Marie. But
this proves not, that therefore there cannot be any such society, but the
world must needs take knowledge of it. Could your detestable traitors band them
selves together in that monstrous plot of treason and murder by gunpowder, yea
and assemble so often, and work so hard in the devils service, without being
descried: and cannot God by his providence keep his servants, meeting together
for his worship, but that Satan shall certainly discover them? It is more then
manifest (how long or short a while soever they may keep themselves unknown)
that they may be such a company, and not by and by be known.

The second point in the first part of your minor is this, and thus concluded.

If the Pastors were to know the sheep, and the sheep the Pastors, and this
could not be, unless the Church were visible; then was this one reason of the
Churches being visible. But the Pastors were to know the sheep, and the sheep
the Pastors, and this could not be unless the Church were visible. Therefore
this is one reason of the Churches being visible.
I may grant you the whole Syllogism, in the terms it is To the Syllogism.
propounded by you, and yet neither I lose, nor you get any thing. For there is
no more concluded by it, but that the church must be visible to the members of
it: the Pastor must know the sheep, and the sheep the Pastor: Which of us
ever denied this visibilitie? or what is this to prove, that the Church in the
beginning of the Gospel was to be famously visible in the eyes of all the
world?

In a word then to your propositions severally: you must add To the
proposition.
to your mayor, one of these two clauses, either to the members of it,
signifying that the Pastors and sheep could not know one another, unless the
Church were then visible to the members of it; or to all men, meaning that
there could not be such mutual knowledge betwixt the Pastor and the sheep,
unless the church were visible to all men. In the former sense your proposition
is true, but altogether wide from the mark you aim at. In the latter you
shoot right, but a great deal over. For though your consequence by this
means will prove true, and to the purpose; yet your minor will be ouerlarge, and
your question still remain unproven. For it is ridiculous to imagine, not only
to affirm, To the Assumption.
that the Pastor and flock cannot know each other, except all the world know
them too. Why may not the like be said of the husband and the wife, the father
and the children, the master and the servants? May there not be governing and
obeying, but where all men see these actions performed? But I dwell too long
upon so clear a matter. Only I was desirous to suite my answer somewhat like
to your argument, for the length of it, lest shortness might make your
followers think it not well answered.

We are now come to the third point of the former part, which you conclude thus.

If men, that were out of the church, were to come into it for salvation, and
this could not be unless it were visible, then was this one reason of the
visibilitie thereof. But men out of it, were to come into it for salvation, and
this could not be, unless it were visible. Therefore this is one reason of the
Churches visibilitie.
This is the only argument of the three, that has any show To the Assumption.
of reason in it: and yet this also is far from any necessary proof. For if in
your minor you mean, that all and every man was to come into the Church for
salvation, as if God had intended the salvation of every particular man by the
publishing of the Gospel: your said minor is in that respect false. For our
Savior himself Luke 10. 21.
gives his Father thanks, that he had hid the mysteries of the Gospel, even
there where it was publikly preached, from the wise and men of understanding,
and revealed it to babes or simple men. Yea he professes, that there was an
especial act of God his Father required Ioh. 6. 44. 65.
to the drawing of men to belief, even there where himself preached most
powerfully, and that some only and not all, were so drawn by God. Neither does
the difference in this case proceed from man, but from God; lest that man,
which makes the difference betwixt himself and another, should have just cause
to boast, as if he were more beholding to himself, of whom he had the very act
of being willing to be saved, then to God, who only gave him power to be
willing. Therefore Thom. ad Romans 9. See Chap. 5. sect. 1. C.
your glorious and Angelical Dr. Thomas says, that there can no more reason
be given why God intends the salvation of this man, and not of that man, then
why the Mason lays this stone above, and that below, each of them having a
like fitness to each place. But if by men, you understand those men that were
chosen of God to everlasting life, Act. 13. 48.
to whom only the preaching of the Gospel was effectual to true faith and
salvation, then I deny your minor in regard of the latter part also. For there
was no necessity of the visibilitie of the Church to that purpose, as if God
could not otherwise have procured that they should believe and be saved: I add
farther, that the means which it pleased God to use, for the converting of
those that were then to be saved, and ordinarily for publishing the glad
tidings of the Gospel, was not the visiblenesse of the Church, but the
preaching of his Apostles. So that (as I signified before) the greatest nations
of the world embraced the Gospel of Jesus Christ, not because they saw some
visible Church, to which they might adioyne themselves, but for the evidence of
the truth which some one man or other preached to them, without any reference
or respect to any visible Church whatsoever. Act. 8. 4.
The dissoluing of the visible Church at Jerusalem, was the occasion of
preaching the Gospel through the world.

Having thus examined your several proofs, I return now to your principal
assumption; for the farther confuting whereof, I must show, that there may be
some reason given, why it might please God to have the Churches visible in the
beginning, and not always. To which purpose I must first entreat all men to
understand, that I do not undertake precisely to set down the reasons why God
will have his churches sometimes famously known, sometimes hidden from the
knowledge of the world. For his counsels are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out. Farther, I acknowledge in all truth and humbleness, that I hold
the revealed will of God for a sufficient reason of any thing which he does
will, though I could in my ignorance object something against it, which might
afford some cause of doubting. With this protestation I say, these might be
some reasons. First, whereas the means of salvation had bin, for a long time,
shut up in the land of Jury, and in a manner, made proper to the Jews; now
the partition wall being broken down, the Gentiles also were to be received
into the Covenant; which (to our reason at least) could not conveniently have
been done, unless the profession of the truth had been famous and visible. But
when once by this means the sound of it was gone over the world, there was no
such necessity of continuing visible Churches. Secondly, this visibilitie was
at the first the more necessary, because otherwise the Jews, Act. 2. 38.
to whom first the Gospel appertained, being dispersed in many nations, could
not so easily take knowledge of it: now and 13. 46.
they have judged themselves unworthy of it, and the Lord has given it to us
Gentiles. Thirdly, it was no small proof of the truth of the Gospel, and the
power of God working by the ministry of the word, that so great multitudes
should so speedily be converted by so weak means: there is not always the
like use of the Churches visiblenesse. Fourthly, though the Lord in his mercy,
would have the Gospel published to the world, yet when it became generally
abused to wantonness, that men's ears itched after new doctrines, and esteemed
more of their own devises, then of the true worship of God, appointed by
himself; it pleased his majesty to leave men to their own blindness, and
presumption, reserving to himself a small company here and there, whom he
kept, as the 7000 in Elias time. Lastly it was requisite that the prophecies in
2. These. 2. 10.
Paul and Revel. 17. 1.
John, concerning Antichrist, and his tyranny, and universal Apostacy,
should be fulfilled; which could not have come to the just height of
extremity, if any Churches, at least in those parts where Antichrist
prevailed, had continued visible. These are a few of those reasons, which in
the blind judgment of man, not able to sound the depth of Gods secrets, might
be an occasion of making the Churches of Christ cease to be famous, and of
keeping the true professors Revel. 12. 6.
shut up in the wilderness; till the time appointed by God for Antichrists
decay and ruin approached. Yet did not the Lord all this time, leave himself
and his truth without witness, but from time to time, stirred up the spirits
of his children, to make the world search the Scriptures, and discern, if they
would, that your Church of Rome so famous and visible, was corrupted with many
errors, and become the very seat of Antichrist. Thus I have answered your fifth
reason, in the conclusion whereof you add a testimony of Scripture, to
confirm the necessity of the Churches perpetual visiblenesse to all men.

If (say you) Esai. 60. 11.
that prophecy of Esaias (Thy gates shall be continually open) must at all times
be true, then the Church is visible at all times, to all men. But that
Prophecy must be true at all times. Therefore the Church, is visible at all
times, to all men.
Though you ordinarily leave out that clause of the Churches To the syllogism.
visiblenesse to all men, yet I make bold to supply it; because I am desirous
to persuade my self, that you do so, rather for shortness sake, then in a
crafty purpose to deceive the Reader.

I deny the consequence of your Mayor: first, because that prophecy may be
always true, and yet the Church not always To the proposition.
visible. For all prophecies in Scripture are always true, as being from God,
and yet does it not follow hereupon, that therefore whatsoever is prophesied
must always be true. It was prophesied by God himself, that Genesis 15. 13.
the children of Israel should be servants in Egypt: May I then say as you do
If this prophecy must always be true, they must always be servants in
Egypt? I trow not. Prophecies are always true; but true only, according to
the meaning of them: that such or such things must be, at the time, and in the
manner signified by them. If you say, your meaning is no more, but that if that
prophecy be true, then the Church is always visible to all men; I answer,
that At all times was put in without cause, and might as you see, breed a
question in your proposition.

Secondly, taking your Mayor in that sense, I still deny the consequence of
it. For the gates of the Church may be open at all times, and yet all men
neither see the^ always open, nor know that there are any such gates, or
Church. Might not the gates of Mexico, or some City in the East Indies, China,
or America be always open, and yet none in these western parts ever hear of
any such City? You will say perhaps, that the Prophet by the gates being open,
signifies the visibilitie of the Church. It is not enough to say so, unless
you prove it too. But that I may yield somewhat of my right in this case, and
not put you to your proofs in so hard a matter: I answer with August. de
ciuit. dei lib. 20 cap. 68.
Austin speaking of such prophecies and promises, that this place belongs
properly to the Church of the elect, into which, without any restraint, many of
the Gentiles do enter continually from day to day, by their actual believing
truly in Jesus Christ. Which answer may the better appear to be true, if we
consider that this promise is made to the Jews, whose Churchgates must always
stand open to entertain the Gentiles coming unto it. But this can no way be
true of the outward Church of the Jews, which then flourished in Jerusalem, and
was utterly destroyed some forty years after our Saviors ascension.
Therefore it must belong to that remnant of Israel, Romans 9. 6. 7. and 11. 2. 7.
which is according to the election of grace. Do not reply to this answer,
that the gates of this Church were always open, even before our Saviors
coming. For this Church, in respect of the Gentiles, had not a gate then, but a
little wicket, which stood not always open, but was opened now and then, upon
occasion, when it pleased God, to bring some one or other of the heathen,
extraordinarily to salvation, by the acknowledging of the Messiah to come.
These gates are now, and have been this 1500 years and upward shut up against
the Jews: as Romans 9. and 10
the Apostle lamentably coplaines, not, as some imagine, because the visible
Church was translated from the Jews to the Gentiles, which Paul would never so
ambitiously have affected, as in respect of that Romans 9. 3.
To be contented to become Anathema, that his countrymen might enjoy the
glorious smoke of such an outward privilege (I speak in comparison of
election to everlasting life:) but for that the Lord would give over his people
the Jews, and not choose (ordinarily) out of them, heirs of his heavenly
kingdom, as before he had done. We see, and rejoice at the sight, that the
Lord of his great mercy, calls out some few from amongst that desperate
multitude of the Jews, as before he did out of the Gentiles, but the gates are
now set open, for the Gentiles, and a small posterne for the Jews.

But what if I should grant you, that this prophecy may also be expounded of
the outward profession of Religion, must the Church then needs be visible at
all times to all men? The maine reason of the gates continual standing open,
is signified by the Prophet to be this: That the strength of the nations, and
their kings may come into the Church. But this was long ago fulfilled, by the
judgment of your own writers. The strength of the nations, that is the most
warlike nations says Vatablus: which (says Vatabl. ad Esaias. 60. 11.
he) was fulfilled; when the Romans were added to the Church. The opening of
the gates, Lyra. ibi.
Lyra refers to Constantines time, and therefore in his judgment, they were
shut more then 300. years after Christ. And so far is he from once thinking
on the visibilitie of the Church, prophesied of in this place, that he brings
three other interpretations, and not mentions your conceit. The gates shall be
open: because (says Lyra) Constantine commanded, that the Church gates should
be opened, which before were shut, and that new Churches should be built. This
also may be expounded (says he) of spiritual opening, because the Church is
always open, to receive them, that repent. And because, since Constantines
time, men began to flock to the Church of Christ without fear. The strength
of the nations was brought, because (says the same Author) by the example of
Constantine, many Potentates and kings came to the faith of Christ. The gates
of the Church (said Hieron. ad Esaias. 60 li. 17.
Jerome, before Popery was hatched) shall always be open to them, that desire
to be saved, that entrance may not be denied, either in prosperity or
adversity, to them that will believe. Thus this place of Esaias will not prove
the visibilitie of the Church, to all men at all times.

A. D.. 7.
Sixthly, the only reason and ground, by which heretics hold the Church to be
invisible, is, because they imagine the Church to consist only of the elect,
or only of the good. But this is a false ground, as appears by the name of
Church in Greek Ecclesia, which even by the Etymology of the word, does
signify the company of men called: now sure it is, that more are called then
elected, as our Savior says, Multi vocati, pauci electi. Again, this ground
is showed to be false, by those parables, in which the Church is compared to a
Math. 20. Math. 3. Math. 23. Math. 13.
floare, wherein wheat and chafe are mixed. And to a marriage, to which came
good and bad. And to a net, wherein are gathered all sorts of fishes good and
bad. And to ten Virgins, whereof five were foolish, and excluded from the
celestial marriage. This ground is Mat. 25.
also showed to be false out of Saint Paul, who commands the Corinthians,
to expel an incestuous person out of the Church. Ergo, 1. Cor. 5.
before this expulsion, there was such a person in the Church, and therefore
the Church does not consist, only of those, that be good.

A. W.
Because your own reasons are not strong enough, to prove the point in
question, you think to help the matter by overthrowing the ground, whereupon
only, as you confidently avouch, we build our denial of the Churches
visibility at all times. But neither is that our only ground, and if it were,
you are not able to shake it. Concerning the former, we deny the visibilitie
of the Church, as it is understood in those places, where our Savior promises
spiritual graces to it, and as it is taken in the Creed; because that Church
is the mystical body of Christ, and therefore can consist of none but those,
that are truly justified and sanctified, as none but the elect are. But we
farther deny the same visibilitie, because you would have us believe that the
Catholic Church is visible. To which we answer, that this Catholicknesse (let
the Church be what it will) makes it invisible: because Aristot. and omnes
logici.
that which is Catholic, is general, consisting of many particulars: and we
have learned, that universals are not subject to sense, but only to be
conceived by the mind, as having no outward shape, which can be seen or
known by any of the five senses. Moreover, if we take the question, in the
most reasonable sort that may be, (and so it is very seldom handled by you)
Whether there must always be some one or other company of men, that may be
famously known of all the world, to be a true Church of Christ: Still we
continue in denying that visibilitie. First, as it is propounded by you, for an
Article of Faith, and an essential property of the, or a true Church.
Secondly, because we are taught in the Scriptures, that the true Church, that
is, the professors of Christ's true Religion, shall be feign to fly into the
wilderness, and so must needs be out of the sight of (at least) the greatest
part of the world. I am loath to repeat these things so often, but you drive me
to it: my help is to do it, as shortly as I can.

All the forces you bring to ouerturne the ground, upon which our denial of the
Churches visibilitie stands, are divided by you into two bands, with the
former whereof, thus you set upon us.

The company of men called, consists not of the elect only. The Church is
the company of men called. Therefore the Church consists not of the elect
only.
I deny your Minor: many men are called, that are not of the To the assumption.
Church, which consists of such only, as being called, are also elect. It is
true that the word Church is sometimes so generally taken, that it compriseth
all such, as make profession of faith in Christ, but this is not the Church, of
which the Creed speaks, and to which our Saviors promises apppertaine: yea
besides this Church, there is the true Church of Christ, whereof he is head,
whose body has never a rotten or dead member, such as over many, perhaps the
greatest part of them, that make profession of belief, commonly are. In a
word, the whole course of your Treatise fails in this point, that whereas the
word Church is diversely taken, you apply that to it, in the general meaning of
the word, which was spoken of it by our Savior, the Prophets and Apostles, in
that special signification, by which it contains none but the elect.

To your proof I answer farther. First that the word (...), in the very
nature of it, does not signify The company, that is any certain company
called, but generally a company, that is any such company whatsoever. Secondly
I add, that the word is also sometimes taken for a company, whether called or
not called: as, Psalm. 26. 5. (...).
I have hated the company of the wicked. Where the Prophet speaks not of any
company called together, but absolutely of the wicked, howsoever assembled, or
not assembled. Thirdly, I say it is enough, in respect of the nature, and
Etymology of the word, that the Church be a company of men called, neither can
it any way be enforced from the signification of it in Greek, that the Church
must needs comprehend all, that are in any sort called. Indeed the elect only
may Romans 8. 30.
truly be said to be called, in an especial manner: because they have besides
the outward sound of the preacher, the inward voice of the spirit, and are not
only called to believe the truth of the Gospel, but also to believe truly in
Jesus Christ to salvation:

This is your rereward, with which you charge us afresh, and that as it were,
both with foot and horse. First you throng together many places of Scripture,
as if your confidence were greater in your number, then in vour valor: Let us
encounter you.

That, which is compared to a floare, wherein wheat and chafe are mixed. To a
marriage, to which come good and bad. To a net, wherein are gathered all sorts
of fishes, good and bad. To ten virgins, whereof five were foolish and shut out
from the celestial marriage, consists not of the elect only. The Church is
compared to such a floare, marriage, net, virgins. Therefore the Church
consists not of the elect only.
A very hot assault: but your bullets fall a great way short of To the
syllogism.
the mark, you do, or should aim at. For all you prove by this reason is
only this, that the Church, taken for the whole company of them, that make
profession of the Gospel, consists not only of the elect. Who ever dreamed
it did? You are so far from ouerturning our ground, that you never once come
near it, for all this brave show you make.

In particular, I deny your Minor. The Church we speak To the assumption.
of, is not compared to any such things. The Church (says August. epist. 48.
ad Vincent.
Austin) which grows in all nations, is preserved in the lords wheat, and
shall be so preserved to the end, till it have taken possession of all, yea
even the most barbarous nations. The floare (in August. vbi supra.
Austins judgment) is not the Church, but the place rather, in which the
Church is kept: for that (as he truly says) is the wheat. And in the same
Epistle he speaks yet more plain of an other of your parables. That is the
Church, (says Vbi supra.
Austin) which swimmeth in the Lords net with naughty fishes, from which in
heart and behavior, it always is separated. Could any thing be spoken more
direct? The floare and the net are, in a general sense, the Church; but the
true Church indeed is, in the one the wheat, not the chafe, in the other, the
good fishes, that swim among the naughty ones. I may also farther except
against these Parables, because they are otherwise applied, then they are
intended by our Savior; who never meant, by any one of them to teach, that the
Church consists not of the elect only. Who (says August. ad Vincent. epist.
48.
Austin) can, without great impudency, go about to prove anything for his
purpose, by interpretation of any Allegory, unless he have manifest
testimonies, whereby those matters, that are obscure in it, be cleared?

This is your last charge, to as small purpose, as either of the former.

If there may be an incestuous person (say you) in the Church, then it
consists not only of those, that be good. But there may be an incestuous
person in the Church. Therefore the Church consists not only of those, that
be good.
It is apparent that by good, you understand those, that cannot be charged with
any gross outward sin, as Incest, or such To the syllogism.
like. In which sense, I say your conclusion is nothing to the purpose. For we
do not affirm, that no man is of the Church, which by any occasion falls
into some grievous sin: so should we exclude Peter, Mat. 26 70.
when he denied his master; David, 2. Sam. 12. 9.
when he committed adultery and murder; Noe, Genesis 9. 21.
when he was drunk; Abraham, Genesis 12. 23. and 20. 5.
when he lied, and many other: who for all these sins, held fast their faith
in the Messiah, and continued true members of Jesus Christ, according to Gods
election, howsoever those sins of theirs deserved separation from Christ, and
damnation. The Church may consist of some, who for the present, are in regard
of some great sin, not good, and yet consist of the elect only, as the former
examples show.

Farther, I deny the consequence of your Mayor. It is not To the proposition.
all one to be in the Church, and of the Church, that is, to be an outward
professor, and to be a true believer. And that the Church is the company of
the elect, in the judgment of the ancient writers, these testimonies show.
Ambros. ad Ephesians. 3.
Ambrose makes the Church, the people, whom God has vouchsafed to adopt.
Whereas the Church (says August. de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27. and
lib. 6. cap. 3.
Austin) is so described in the Canticles, that it is called a fenced garden,
my sister, spouse, a fountain sealed up, a well of living water, a paradise
with fruit; I dare not understand this but of the holy and righteous. The holy
Church (quoth Greg. in Cant. and in Job 28. cap. 9.
Gregory) is a garden, because when it begets many to the faith, it sends forth
fair flowers, like a good ground. And it is well called a fenced garden,
because it is fortified round about with the trench of charity, that no
reprobate may come into the number of the elect. If the spouse of Christ, which
is the Church, be a fenced garden (says Cyprian. ad Mag. epist. 76. sect. 2.
Cyprian) being shut up, it cannot lie open to the profane and strangers. But
what should I recite several testimonies? Look Origin. and Bernar. in can.
sermon. 78.
Origin, Bernard, and other writers upon the Canticles, and you shall easily
see, that the spouse of Christ is the company of the elect.

A. D.. 8.
Lastly, the ancient Fathers did teach, that the Church is visible. Hom. 30. in
Mat.
Origin says, Ecclesia plena est fulgore ab orient vsque ad occidentem: The
Church is full of brightness from the East to the West. Ecclesia (says S.
Cyprian) Domini luce persusa, radios suos per orbem spargit: The Church being
bright with the light Lib. de Vnitate Eccles.
of our Lord, does spread her beams throughout the world. Facilius est (says
S. Chrysostom) solemn extingui quam Ecclesiam obscurari: Lib. 4. in cap. 6 Isa.
It is more easy that the Sun should be extinguished, then that the Church
should be obscured, that is to say, darkened and quite without light. Saint
Augustine also alluding to (or rather expounding) those words of our Savior,
Non potest ciuitas abscondi supra montem posita, says, Ecclesia supra montem
constituta, Lib. 3. co^tr. epi. Parm. cap. 4.
abscondi non potest: The Church being built upon a mountain, cannot be hid.
And again in another place he says, Quid amplius dicturus sum quam caecos,
qui tam magnum montem non vident, Troct. 2. in ep. Joan.
qui contra lucernam in candelabro positam, oculos claudunt? What shall I say
more, but that they are blind who do not see so great a mountain, who shut
their eyes at the candle set upon the candlestick?

A. W.
These and such like speeches of the Fathers, were uttered by them for the most
part, concerning the Church, as it flourished in their days; and not of the
perpetual estate thereof, from time to time. Neither speak they properly of
the Church, which is indeed the spouse of our Savior the bridegroom: but of
the multitude of them, who hold the truth of doctrine against all cauils and
oppositions of heretics; amongst whom only the Church of the elect ordinarily
was preserved. Your reason then is little worth.

The Fathers say, the Church is visible. Therefore it is always visible to all
men.
The consequence of your Enthymem is naught, as well because it might be visible
in those times, and not always; as also for that it is not all one to say it is
visible, and it is visible to all men at all times. Now to the particulars.

First I answer to Origin. in Mat. hom. 30.
Origens testimony, that he speaks not of the Churches visibilitie, but
affirms that the truth (which is the brightness or light he mentions) is in
the Churches every where, East and West. That this is his meaning, it is plain
by the beginning of that homily, and the whole course of it, to the very place
you allege. Origin expounds there that place of the Gospel, As the lightning
comes out of the East. This exposition begins thus. We must know (says
Origin) that the brightness of the truth does not appear in one place of
Scripture, and cannot be defended by another, but that it may be maintained out
of all parts of Scripture, the Law, the Prophets, the Gospels, and the Apostles
writings. And this truth arising from the East, that is, the beginnings of
Christ, shines to the very time of his passion, in which was his setting or
fall. A little after: We may also thus understand it, that Christ appeared to
be the word, and the truth, and wisdom, from the beginning of the creation of
the world, to the last writing of the Apostles, that is from Genesis to the
Apostles books; after which there are none of like authority or belief. Or
thus, that the Law and the Prophets continued till John, in whom the
brightness of truth was. The East was the Law: the West, John, the end of the
Law. Now only the Church neither takes away the word and sense of this
brightness, nor adds any thing else as prophetical. The place you bring,
lies thus: Every doctrine professing it self to be truth, when it is not
truth, either among the Gentiles, or among the Barbarians, is in some sort
Antichrist, going about to seduce, as truth, and to sever us from him that
said, I am the truth. Therefore we must not give ear to them which say, Behold
here is Christ; but do not show him in the Church, which is full of brightness
from the East to the West, which is full of the true light, which is the pillar
and ground of truth, in which whole Church, the whole coming of the Son of
man is. Now the coming of the Son of man, is before expounded by him to be
the word of truth. Doubtless if you had not taken this proof upon Bellar. de
Eccles. milit. lib. 3 c. 12.. Vltim^
Bellarmines, or some other man's credit, you would never have brought it to
prove the visibilitie of the Church to all men at all times.

What says Cyprian. de unit. eccle.. 4.
Cyprian in the place alleged, but that the Church is dispersed over the whole
world? Does this prove, that it is at all times visible to all men? Or has
Cyprian any such purpose in that place? Is not his whole drift to show, that
there is but one Church, because the truth they profess is but one? The title
of his book, is Of the unity of the Church. The place you bring, concludes,
that howsoever the beams are scattered or spread here and there, yet the light
is but one. The Church, that is true believers, were in this land in the days
of persecution, and is now in Spain, Italy; and perhaps in Rome it self. This
proves not a perpetual visibilitie.

What need we any other answer to this testimony of Chrysostom, then that
which your own exposition affoords us? Chrysostoms meaning is, that the Church
cannot be quite without light, say you. What the^? Must it needs be visible
then to al men? The Moon is never wholly darkened, no not in the greatest
eclipse, nor in the change, but is always in the one half light: and yet he
were mad that would conclude hereupon, that therefore it may be seen at all
times of all men. Indeed Chrysostom speaks of the continuance of the Church,
not of the visiblenesse thereof. That may appear by his saying, that the
Church has her root in heaven rather then in the earth. This argues
stabilitie, not visibilitie. And what Church has rooting in heaven, but only
the Church of the elect? The Church (says Chrysostom. in cap. 6. Esai. homil. 4.
Chrysostom in the same place) is more honorable then heaven, because heaven
is made for it, not it for heaven. Is heaven made for any Church, but that of
the elect? Besides, it was not the visibility, but the being of the Church,
against which those tyrants whom Chrysostom there mentions, so mightily
labored; which yet continued in despite of them all.

These and such like places of Austin, show the flourishing estate of the
Churches in those times, and convince the Donatists, against whom Augustine
writ, of woeful blindness, who would see no church, but their own heretical
assembly in a part of Africa. But they neither were intended, not can with any
reason be applied to prove that the church is always visible to all men.
August. con. epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 5.
The former of the two places, as I showed before, is interpreted by the
Fathers, of the Apostles: That the Apostles (says Hieron. ad Math. 5.
Jerome) should not hide themselves for fear, but freely show themselves, he
teaches them to preach boldly, when he says, A city set upon an hill, cannot
be hid. But let us take it to be meant of the Church. It must needs be a
monstrous hill, that can show a city set upon it to the whole world. A city
standing on a hill, is the easier and the farther to be seen; but there is no
hill high enough to be seen over the whole world. I would farther know,
whether every particular Church be not a city upon an hill or no. And yet is
no such Church to be seen of all men.

Concerning August. in 1. loan tract. 2.
the latter place, Austin worthily calls them blind, that could not, or rather
(as he truly says) would not see that great mountain, upon which the Church
then stood, but would shut their eyes against the light that shined upon them.
Yet who is so ignorant, that he knows not, or so shameless, that he will not
confess, that there were many alive at that very time, which had no knowledge,
that there was any Church in the world? But there neither were, nor could be
any such among the Donatists, or other like heretics, who forsook the Church
to follow their own fantasies. Revel. 1. 20. and 2. 5.
The candle is the Minister or the word, shining by his ministry; the
candlestick is the particular Church, where that ministry is: if any living
in or near the place where such a candle burns bright, will not see the
light of it, he may well be called wilfully blind. So may not they which are so
far, that the beams of the light cannot shine unto them.

Now the sum of that which has been answered, concerning the perpetual
continuance and visiblenesse of the church, is this: that the church, to which
that continuance is promised, is the number of the elect, and not any one
outward company of men, succeeding one another in a famous and visible
profession of Christian Religion. Yea farther, though we do not undertake to
affirm, that there has not bin at all times some one company or other of
true Christians known to them, among whom they lived, to be professors of the
Gospel: yet we doubt not to say, that there can be no sufficient proof
brought out of the Scriptures, that there must of necessity be always such a
company: as if our Savior Christ's promises to his church were not performed,
unless the world might at all times perceive where such a company were to be
found.

A. D.
CHAP. XIII. How we should discern and know which is the true visible Church
of Christ.

A. W.
It may perhaps seem needless that I should proceed any further in the
confutation of this treatise, because still the maine point, that there is such
a Church, is presupposed, and not proved. But howsoever it be true, that there
is indeed no one visible church of Christ, which may challenge or bear the
name of the whole church; yet it will be worth the doing, to find out the
marks or signs, by which we may discern which congregation is a true church
of Christ, and which is not. Let us therefore proceed in examining this
discourse.

A. D.. 1.
Hitherto I have showed that the rule of faith (which all men ought to seek,
that by it they may learn true faith) is the doctrine of the Church of Christ:
and that this Church does continue, and is always visible, that is to say,
such as may be found out and known. Now the greatest question is (since there
are diverse companies of them that believe in Christ; every one of which,
challenge to themselves the title of the true Church) how every man may come to
know assuredly, and in particular, which company is indeed the true visible
Church of Christ, whose doctrine we must in all points believe and follow.

To this question I answer, that every company which has the name of
Christians, or which challenge to themselves the name of the Church, are not
always the true Church. For of heretics we may well say, as S. Austin does:
Non quia Ecclesiae Christi videntur habere nomen, idcirco pertinent ad eius
consecrationem: They do not therefore pertain to the consecration of the
Church of Christ, because they seem to carry the name of the Church of Christ.
For (as the same S. Austin says in another Lib. contr. epist. Parm. cap. 7.
place) heretics are only whited over with the name of Christians; when
indeed Si haeretici sunt (as Tertullian says) Christiani esse non possunt: If
they be heretics, the cannot be true Christians. Lib. de praescrip.
The reason whereof, the same Tertullian insinuates to be, because they follow
not that faith which came from Christ (to his Apostles and Disciples, and which
was delivered by them, from hand to hand to our forefathers, and so to us) but
they follow that faith which they chose to themselves: of which election or
choice, the name of heretic and heresy did arise.

A. W.
Hitherto you have labored to prove the mayor of your maine syllogism,
propounded in your preface, namely that the faith, which the authority of the
true Catholic Church commends unto us, is to be held for the true faith. What
success you have had in this proof, let them say that have compared your
arguments and my answers together. Now you are to proceed to the proof of your
maine assumption, that they only are the true Church, which make profession of
the Roman faith. Your syllogism is thus framed.

They only are the true Church, to whom the certain marks, by which the
Church is to be known, belong. But they that profess the Roman faith, are
they to whom those marks belong. Therefore they only that profess the Roman
faith, are the true Church.
The proposition or mayor of this Syllogism is not expressed by you, but
necessarily implied in this thirteenth Chapter: where you say, that the way to
discern which is the true Church, is first to set down, which be the certain
marks whereby all men may easily know the Church. The assumption or minor you
endeavor to prove in the five Chapters following by a Syllogism thus concluded.

They only who are one, holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church, are they to whom
the certain marks of the true Church belong. But they that profess the
Roman religion, are they who are one, holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church.
Therefore, they only that profess the Roman faith, are they to whom the
certain marks of the true Church belong.
Your proposition or mayor is in the two next Chapters; your assumption or
minor in the sixteenth. In handling the proposition, first you labor to
disprove the marks of a true church, which we assign: and that in Chapt. 14.
then you assay to propound and confirm other of your own; as we shall see
hereafter, if God will, when we come to Chap. 15.

Whereas you expound what you mean by a visible Church, viz. such a one as may
be found out and known: you straighten the question, and auow that which no
man denies. For the question betwixt us, is not whether the Church may be
found out or no, but whether it be so visible and famous a congregation, that
it may at all times be known of all men. If this be not that you should prove,
what will become of your grand reason, that therefore Cha. 5. and 12
there must always be a known Church, the doctrine whereof every must rest
upon in all matters of faith, because otherwise it cannot be universally true,
that God will have all men to be saved?

It is indeed a matter worth the enquiring, which companies of them that
profess Christian Religion, are the true Churches of Christ. For that all are
not, it is apparent by your Antichristian Synagogue: and that all true
Christians are bound (as much as lies in them) to become members of some true
church of Christ, it is manifest, because else they cannot ordinarily perform
the duties of his true outward worship, which are no where done but in his true
churches.

If the choice of any doctrine not received from Christ, be sufficient to make
men heretics, and churches heretical; what may the world think of your
synagogue, which is not ashamed openly to profess, that she holds many
points of doctrine, which have not proof out of the written word of God? For
whereas to shift off the matter, you come in with delivery of I know not what,
from hand to hand by the Apostles and your forefathers: who sees not that this
conceit of yours both condemns the Scriptures of insufficiency, and makes
the reports of men the rule of the true faith, and opens a wide gate to let
in all devices of man's corruption? What auailes it, to know, that all doctrine
is heresy, which comes not from our Savior Christ, if we must believe that
all came from him, which your Pope and his Council tell us, they have received
by tradition? why should we not rather hearken to Occham in opere 90. dieru^
your Occham, who truly affirmed that heresy is an opinion chosen by a man,
contrary to the holy Scripture? Surely there is great cause to suspect them of
heresy, who refuse to make trial of their doctrine by Scripture, whatsoever
they talk of tradition from the Apostles by their forefathers.

A. D.. 2.
The way therefore to discern which is the true Church, is irst to set down,
which be the certain marks, by which all men may easily know the Church: and
then to examine to whom these marks do agree. The which, that I may the
better perform in the Chapter following, here I think good, first briefly to
note what belongs to the nature of a good and sufficient mark.

Note therefore that two things are required in every sufficient mark. The
first is, that it be not common to many, but proper, and only agreeing to the
thing, whereof it is a mark. As for example, it is no good mark whereby to
know any particular man, to say he has two hands or two ears, because this is
common to many, and therefore no sufficient note or mark whereby one may be
distinguished or known from all other. But a mark, whereby we may discern
one special man from all other, must be some one thing, or more, which he
has, and others have not. As if he were longer, larger, or fairer then the
rest; or if some others were Taller, bigger Tall. Fair.
as long, and other some as fair, yet none were long, and fair both, but
only he. The second thing, required in a good mark, is, that it be more
apparent, and easy to be known, then the thing. For example, If I were to
describe and make known a certain man, who were otherwise unknown. I must
not think it sufficient to give the definition of his essence, or to assign
the secret disposition of his heart, liver, and other inward parts, which are
commonly harder to be known, then the man himself. But I must declare some
apparent thing in his face, hands, or some outward part of his body: or in his
voice, apparel, behavior, or such like; which agreeing only to that man; and
being easy to be known, may be a means to make us know the man we seek for.

A. W.
He that professes to set down certain marks, whereby all men may easily
know the true Church, that is, which Church indeed holds the true religion of
Jesus Christ: undertakes that, which he will never be able to perform. For it
is a matter not easily to be discerned by natural men, no though we should
admit those for sufficient marks of it, which are falsely propounded by you,
to that purpose.

Bellar. de Eccles. mil. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Bellarmine, from whom you took this, as (in a manner) all the rest of your
Treatise, assigns three properties of your marks: those two, that you name,
and a third, that they must be inseparable from the true Church. Now such
plain men, as we are, have conceived by the first and last properties, that no
mark is to be taken for a note of the true Church, but that, which cannot be
common to it, with any other Church, But you having learned of Gregor. de
Valent. Analy. fid. lib. 6. cap. 7.
Gregory de Valentia, or discerned your self, that the four marks you give,
are not such, if we consider them severally; tell us here before hand, that we
must take them altogether, or else we mar all. So that, whereas afterward you
seem to make a show of teaching us Chap. 15.
four certain marks, to know the true Church by, when all comes to all, we
have but one mark made of those four botched up together.

But let us take a view of these two things, that you require, in every
sufficient mark; the former whereof is, that it be proper to the thing, of
which it is a mark.

This, you say is true, but not sufficient: For some mark may casually be
proper to a thing at this time, which an other time may neither be proper to
it, nor belong to it at all. Witness your long and fair man, who may lose his
legs, and his beauty, or be ouergrowen by some other, and so can by no means
be known, for the longest and fairest. Persecution was sometimes a mark,
whereby the true Church might be discerned: for it was proper to it; no men but
Christians being killed or punished for religion. Yet I think no man would
give this for a mark to know the true Church by. Once Bellar. de notis Eccles.
lib 4. cap. 18.
your Cardinal Bellarmine, is so far from it, that he makes the outward
prosperity of the Church, one of his fifteen notes, Lib. 4. cap. 3.
whereby he would have the true Church discerned. Therefore every sufficient
mark of the Church must be such, as is always to be had in the Church, not
now present, an other time absent. Generally, to make a mark truly proper to a
thing, it is required: first that it always agree to the thing: Secondly, that
it never agree to any other thing whatsoever.

This second property of a mark, that it must be more apparent, and easier to
be known then the thing, I acknowledge to be true: so you tie not this always
to outward sense, whereof you bring example. For that greater apperancie to
sense, is there only required, where the thing we seek for, is to be judged
by sense: but it is not requisite, that in matters which we can not know by any
outward token, the mark, whereby they are to be known, should be outwardly
more apparent: it is sufficient, if by search, and discourse it may more easily
be discerned.

A. D.. 3.
Wherefore, when we will assign some good marks, by which, all sorts of men
may, in some sort, discern, which particular company of men is the true
Church, we must have special regard to assign those things, which in some
matters may be apparent to all sorts of men; since all sorts of men had need to
seek out, and according to their capacity discern which is the true Church:
we must also assign those things, which agree to no other company, but that
which is the true Church; to the intent that when a man shall see all those
things, which be assigned as marks, to agree to any company, he may
straightwaies conclude, that company to be the true Church: as on the
contrary side, if he perceive, either all, or any one of them to be wanting,
in any company, he may be sure, that, that company is not the true Church.

A. W.
In the former part of this chapter, you told us, that the way to discern,
which is the true Church, was to set down, which be the certain marks, by
which all men may easily know the Church. Here in the conclusion, you mince the
matter, I know not how, that All sorts of men may in some sort discern, and in
some matters, may be apparent to all sorts of men. If it be enough to discern
in some sort, that is, to give a blind guess, which is the true Church, what
should certain marks need: or why may not some common signs serve the turn?
Neither will it fit your purpose, that the notes be such, as that all sorts of
men may by them discern the Church: but they must be so apparent, by your
doctrine, that every man of every sort may easily, and as it were, with
playing, be able to judge which is the true Church. Your last clause, that the
marks in some matters, must be apparent to all sorts of men (that I may freely
profess my dullness) passes my understanding. What is the meaning of these
words, in some matters? If they signify no more, but in some sort: it had been
good, you had spoken plain, and not vexed your Readers with a needless labor
of gessing at your meaning. Especially since (for all your fair promise of I
wot not what easiness in discerning, which is the true Church) all men may
see, they must be driven to bestow much time and pains, in examining the
marks, you will set down: because they are such as do not singly every one
by it self, show which is the true Church, but must all be joined together to
breed this knowledge:

A. D.
CHAP. XIIII. That those marks of the Church, which Heretic assign, be not
good marks.

A. W.
This is a very general title, implying, as a man would guess, by the words,
that you meant to refute all marks, that ever were set down by any Heretics.
But if we should take your meaning, in that sense, your discourse would not
answer our expectation. Besides, if all marks assigned by heretics be
naught, yours cannot possibly be good, which are brought by the grand heretics
of the world, the vowed vassals of the great Antichrist, the Pope of Rome.

A. D.. 1.
Out of that which in the former chapter, I briefly noted, about the nature of
a good mark, we may easily gather, that those marks, which some heretics
assign, to wit, the true doctrine of faith: and the right use of the
Sacraments, are no good marks, by which all sorts of men may come to know,
which is the true Church, but are means (as Heretics use them) to cast a
mist over the whole matter, when as they know, that they can, most easily,
convert all the Sacraments, and holy words of Scripture, Ad imagines
phantasmatum suorum, unto their own imaginations and fantastical opinions
(as out of Saint Austin we may gather, that the manner of heretics is,)
especially when the authority of the Church, (which should correct those
deprauations and false expositions) is not first, by other marks, known and
admitted.

A. W.
You would seem to have an especial gift of making things easy: by your
marks the Church may easily be discerned: out of the former Chapter we may
easily gather. But I think it will prove to be so easily gathered, that a
weak man may easily make you lose your labor in gathering.

That place of Austin does so fit you Papists, as if he had spoken it of you by
name. For to go no farther, then the matter in hand, who ever wrested the
Scriptures, more to their fantasies, then you Papists, who are not ashamed nor
afraid to apply the most gracious and comfortable promises of our Savior
Christ to his mystical body the Church, to an heap of profane misbeleeuers,
so Bellar. de Eccles mil. lib 3. cap. 10.
they make outward profession of the Gospel in obedience to the Pope of Rome?
It is enough, by your doctrine, to make a man a true member of the mystical
body of the Son of God, if he profess, as I before said, though he have no
part of the life of Jesus Christ in him.

A. D.. 2.
The doctrine of faith, therefore (I say) and the right use of Sacraments, be
not good marks, whereby men may discern which is the true Church.

This I prove. First, for that by the true doctrine of faith (which they
assign for a mark of the Church) either they mean, true doctrine in some
points only, or in all. True doctrine in some points only, is no good mark,
because the heretics teach the truth in some points. This therefore being not
proper to the Church, but agreeing rather to heretics, can be no good mark
of the true Church: because it wants the first condition of a mark, which
is, to be proper, and agreeing only to the thing, whereof it is a mark. True
doctrine also in all points, although it be proper (if we join to it the right
use of Sacraments, with obedience to lawful Pastors) and agree only to the
true Church, yet it is no good mark: because it fails in the second
condition, which is requred in a good mark, that is to say, it is not apparent
or easy to be known of all those, who should seek out the true Church. As I
may easily prove, because to know which company teaches the truth in all
points, requires first learning, whereby one may understand the terms, and
state of the question, or controversy: besides, judgment to discuss and
weigh prudently the worth and sufficiency of the authorities and reasons of
both parts, that upon this pondering of reasons, he may prudently conclude
which is the better part. Moreover one had need to have a supernatural light
of Gods grace and assistance of his spirit, whereby he may discern and see
those things, which be above all natural rules and reasons. Ad haec quis
idoneus? Who can say that himself is sufficiently furnished with these helps?
Who can be infallibly sure, that he has all these, in such sort, as is
requisite, for obtaining, by his own industry, true and infallible faith, in
all points? Surely, at least, the unlearned must needs confess, that in diverse
mysteries, they do not so much as understand the terms and state of the
question: and much less are they able, to examine sufficiently the worth of
every reason: neither are all such as can persuade themselves, that they are
singularly enlightened, and immediately taught of Gods spirit: neither, if they
did thus persuade themselves, could they be infallibly sure, that in this their
persuasion they were not deceived; since it is certain, that some of them, that
most strongly persuade themselves to be thus taught, are in this their
persuasion deceived: neither can the unlearned sufficiently know the truth, in
every particular point, by giving credit to some one, or other learned man, or
any company of the learned: unless that company be first known, to be of the
Church, and consequently to be guided in their teaching, by the holy Ghost, as
I proved before. So that it is most hard or rather impossible for a man, and
especially for an unlearned man, in all points, Liquidam a tot erroribus
discernere Li. 3. con. Faust. cap. 13.
veritatem, to discern the plain truth from so many errors, as S. Austin
says. It is also most hard for a man of himself to judge, which use of
Sacraments is right, if he be not first taught by the Church: sub this is a
principal point of the true doctrine of faith, which is (as I said) very hard
or rather impossible to be perfectly known by a man's own self. But to know,
first, which company is the true Church: and then, by giving credit to it, to
learn which is the true faith, and which use of Sacraments is right, there are
not so many things required, nor any great difficulty, as shall be declared.
For the Church is that direct way, which Isaias speaks of, when he says:
Haec erit vobis directa via, ita vt stulti non errent per eam. Isa. cap. 35.
This shall be to you a direct way, so that even fools, (to wit simple and
unlearned men) may not err in it.

A. W.
These are the two only marks, whereby the true Church may be known, or to
speak more plainly, whereby we may judge of any company of men professing
Christian Religion, whether they be a true Church of Christ or no. For the
better understanding whereof, we must know, that howsoever we join the
Sacraments with the word, in this matter: yet we do not think them to be
absolutely of equal necessity with it, to the being of a true Church. The
true preaching of the word is so simply necessary, that whersoeuer it is, it
makes the Church, in which it is, a true Church of Christ: and whersoeuer it
is not, there is no true visible Church. We deny not, that in time of
persecution, many true Christians may be without opportunity of meeting
together, for the true worship of God in hearing his word, and calling upon his
name, which always accompanies true preaching, and yet still continue true
members of Christ's mystical body the Church. But we say, that these men
cannot be truly called such a visible Church of Christ as we now seek for. Yet
if these men shall ordinarily assemble themselves together, to offer up prayer
to God, and by mutual conference to edify each other in knowledge and
obedience: though they have no certain minister appointed for the performance
of these duties: there can no reason be alledgd, why they should not be held
for a true Church, though not perfect and complete; or why men should not join
with them, having no means to become members of any complete congregation,
properly being a Church. The word then, in our opinion, is simply necessary:
and of it self sufficient, (as Luther. de Council. and eccl.
Luther truly says) where no other sign of a Church can be discerned, to
convince a man's conscience, that there is a true Church, where he finds the
word truly preached. Now the administration of the Sacraments is not so
necessary, but that there may be a true Church without it, upon occasion: as
Ios. 5. 5.
the Jews had no circumcision amongst them, all the forty years, when they
traveled through the wilderness. The reason of this difference is assigned to
be this: that the word is as it were, the cause efficient of the Church, so
that without it, there can be no Church: but the Sacraments are only seals of
Gods mercies, and helps for the increasing of those graces, which are received
by the ministry of the word. Now these seals and helps are not requisite
simply, to the being of that they seal and help us in, but only to the
better being, and increase of them. But if I may be bold, with reverence of
other men's judgment, to speak my poor opinion, I think this reason shows
the different necessity of the word, and the Sacraments, rather to the making
of particular men true Christians, the^ to the giving of this or that company
the true being of a visible Church. And therefore (under correction) I would
rather say, that the truth of doctrine delivered in the ministry of the word,
and prayer are absolutely necessary, and the administration of the Sacraments
not so altogether: because the former are such parts of Gods service, as may
and must always be performed, when the Church is assembled, but the
Sacraments, neither can always, nor need, at all such meetings, to be
administered. Which we speak not, as if the true use of the Sacraments, were
not a necessary part of Gods service, to be done, upon all opportunities, with
reverence and willingness; but for that (as before I noted) there cannot be
(at all times) such opportunity. Yea it may fall out, that in some true Church
of Christ, there shall be no occasion to administer the Sacrament of Baptism
in many years. This then is that, which we hold concerning the marks of a
true Church: First, that wheresoever we see the word of God truly taught, and
the Sacraments truly administered, there we may be sure, there is a true Church
of Christ: Secondly, that wheresoever the former of these is wanting, there is
no true Church, whatsoever show, or mark otherwise there be. Thirdly, that
wheresoever the word of God is truly preached, and accordingly professed, there
is a true Church, though the Sacraments upon occasion as is aforesaid, be not
there administered: so that they be not neglected, upon any contempt, or
erroneous conceit of their not being necessary.

To disprooue our doctrine, concerning the marks of the, or rather of a
Church, you bring this reason.

If true doctrine be a mark of a true Church, then either true doctrine in
some points, or true doctrine in all. But neither true doctrine in some
points, nor true doctrine in all, is a mark. Therefore true Doctrine, is not
at all a mark of a true Church.
I deny you Minor. True doctrine in all points is so certain a To the
assumption.
mark of a true Church, that wheresoever we find that, we may be sure there
is a true Church. But because we enquire after such a mark, as may not only
assure us, which is a true Church, but also teach us to know every true
Church: I answer more particularly, that true doctrine in some points, viz.
such as are fundamental, is so necessary a mark, as that there is no where
any true Church, but where there is such true doctrine; and that there is
undoubtedly a true Church, wheresoever that truth is taught and held.

Your Minor you prove thus, first, that true doctrine in some points is no
good mark.

That which is not proper to the true Church, but agrees rather Proof of the
Assumption.
to heretics, is no good mark of the true Church. But true doctrine in some
points only, is not proper to the true Church, but agrees rather to
heretics. Therefore true doctrine in some points only, is no good mark of
the true Church.
Again I deny your minor, taking it in the best sense: for if I To the
Assumption.
should take it in the worst, your whole syllogism would be nothing to the
purpose. My answer shall (I trust) make both these points plain to every man.
I say then, that true doctrine in all the fundamental points of religion, is
proper to the Church: so that no heretics hold all such points, though some
have held many of them. Or if any company do hold them all, and yet for some
error in other points of less moment, be counted, and be heretical, their
heresy is not such as may make them cease to be members of a true Church, Thus
much of your assumption in the best sense.

By true doctrine in some points only, you may mean that it is not a
property belonging to the true Church, to believe truly some points only, and
not all: and this indeed is rather proper to heretics, then the true Church,
because it is the duty of all true Churches to believe all things that the
Lord has taught in the holy Scriptures; whereas heretics take up conceits of
their own, which they mingle with the truth of God, either ignorantly or
deceitfully. I have reason to suspect this meaning, because you thrust in this
word only. In this sense your conclusion fights with a shadow. For we do not
make it a mark of a true Church to believe some points only, but say it may
be, and is a true Church, though it err in some points, so it hold the
fundamental points soundly and truly.

This is the proof of the second part of your minor, that true doctrine in all
points is not a good mark of the true Church: and it is thus concluded.

Every good mark of the true Church is apparent, or easy to be known of all
those who should seek out the true Church. But true doctrine in all points is
not apparent or easy to be known of all such as should seek out the true
Church. Therefore true doctrine in all points, is no good mark of the true
Church.
Your mayor is false. It is not required that every good mark be To the
proposition.
apparent or easy: if it may be at all found, though with difficulty and
labor, that hardness cannot hinder it from being a good mark. Do not your
self acknowledge afterward, that there is some difficulty in learning to know
which company is the true church, and which use of sacraments is right? What
else mean you, when you say, there are not so many things required, nor any
great difficulty? Indeed (as I doubt not but to make it appear) there is
never a one of those four marks you assign, but asks great labor, and
requires many things to the true and perfect knowledge of it. How then should
all four be apparent or easy to be known? Yea, I will say more; some of them
are such, if not every one of them, that a man can never come to the certain
knowledge of them by any labor whatsoever. And therefore if this be a
sufficient exception against the doctrine and sacraments, why they may not be
marks, either you must devise some easier and plainer marks then you have yet
propounded, or do propound any where in this treatise, or else there will be no
certain means to know which is a true church of Christ, and which is not.

The rest of your long discourse concerning this first proof, To the
Assumption.
is spent in proving that which no man ever denied, viz. in confirming your
minor, that true doctrine in all points is not easy to be known: which we all
grant, and so pass over to the next point of the sacraments.

It is most hard (say you) for a man of himself to judge, which use of
sacraments is right. What mean you by saying of himself? If he be not first
taught by the Church: what needs this by the Church? It is hard indeed for a
man of himself, without any teaching, to judge of any such matter: but it is
not hard for any man of reasonable understanding, to discern by a little
teaching, what is right in this point, what wrong. For he may easily learn
with small help, the institution of both the Sacraments out of the Scriptures,
wherein all things are set down which belong necessarily to the right
administration of them. As for matters of circumstance, which appertain not to
the being of the sacraments, a man shall not need to make any so great
question, whether they be rightly administered or no, as long as he sees the
substance kept whole and sound, according to our Sauiors institution: as if the
sacraments were not truly sacraments, and such as may be taken, though some
matters in the administration of them, be not so well ordered as they might and
ought to be. That the sacraments be in all substantial points rightly
administered, it is a matter of necessity, whenever they be administered: and
that may be judged of, without giving credit to whatsoever the church will
teach in that behalf: which is your teaching by the Church, and on which you
still harp, though very vntuneably.

You fall now from simple disprouing of our mark, by reason of the hardness
to know what is true doctrine in all points, to procure a dislike of it, by
comparing it with the easiness of yours: but of this I spoke somewhat before,
and must say more when I come to examine your marks, so much commended. In the
mean while, I may not forget to show the poorness of the proof you allege
for this surmised easiness. The matter you undertake to prove, is, that to
know first which company is the true Church, and then by giving credit to it,
to learn which is the true faith, and which use of sacraments is right, is a
point of no great difficulty. This you would prove by that place of Isay: This
shall c Isa. 35. 8.
be to you a direct way, so that even fools shall not err in it. But what a
weak proof is this? First, how shall I know that the Prophet speaks here of
the Church? You say so. Would any man dispute so loosly?

If the Church (say you) be that direct way I say speaks of, then to know
first which company of men is the true Church, and by giving credit to them,
to learn what doctrine, and what use of the sacraments is right, is a point of
no great difficulty. But the Church is that way he speaks of. Therefore to
know first which company of men is the true church, is a point of no great
difficulty. To the proposition.

First I deny the consequence of your proposition. For though the Church were
that way the Prophet speaks of, yet might it still be an hard matter to know
where that way lies. Put case I cannot miss when I am in the way; will it
follow hereupon, that therefore it is a point of no difficulty to find it?

Secondly I deny your minor also: The Church is not that way. To the
assumption.
Was it not mere you should have proved a matter of so great importance? Your
bare word is a poor proof; and yet that is all you bring us. I omit the error
of the translation, and the variety of translations. There is a note Edit.
vulgar. apud Vatabl.
in the margin of your vulgar edition, as it is printed with Vatablus, that
expounds the way to be Christ. Is not this interpretation of as great credit
as your word? Vatablus speaks much to the same purpose. The way (says
Vatabl. ad Isa. 35.
he) that leads to God by Christ, shall be so certain, that even they who
have no skill in traveling, shall not stray out of it. Your Gloss. interl. ibi.
Gloss, by the way, understands the faith of Christ. And so does Tertul cont.
Marcion. lib. 4 cap. 24.
Tertullian, who also in the translation differs much from your vulgar. The
meaning is (as these interpreters have truly said) that the doctrine of the
Gospel is a sure and plain way to life everlasting: in which way the simplest
soul that believes in Jesus Christ, shall be safely conducted by God
spiritually into heaven: as the Israelites (to which story the Prophet seems
to allude) were guided by him corporally into the land of Canaan. This is that
which the same Prophet speaks of in Isa. 30. 21.
an other place: Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the
way, walk ye in it. Whereby the gracious direction of God is signified,
teaching his children by that spirit Ier. 31. 31.
which he gives them, to go forward in the right way that leads to
everlasting life. Who ever expounded these places of the Church?

A. D.. 3.
Secondly I prove the same, because when we seek for the true Church, we seek
it principally for this end, that by it, as by a necessary and infallible
means, we may hear and learn of it the true faith in all points, which
otherwise in itself is hidden, obscure and unknown to us: according to that
of S. Paul: Animalis homonon 1 Cor. 2.
percipit ea quae sunt Spiritus Dei: The sensual man does not perceive those
things which are of the Spirit of God. For since none by the only power of
natural wit (which in understanding uses the help of outward senses) can
obtain the supernatural knowledge of divine mysteries, which we believe by
our faith: neither does the Spirit of God (who as the principal cause,
infuseth this gift of faith into our souls) ordinarily instruct any man in the
knowledge of true faith, immediately by himself alone, or by an Angel sent
from heaven: we must needs if we will have true faith, seek first for that
which it pleases Almighty God to use, as the ordinary instrument and as a
necessary means by which men may learn true faith; the which is no other but
the preaching and teaching of the true church, according to that saying of S.
Paul: Quomodo credent ei quem non audierint? quomodo audient sine praedicante?
quomodo Romans 10.
praedicabunt nisi mittantur? How shall they believe him, whom they have not
heard? how shall they hear without a Preacher? how shall they preach, unless
they be sent? Therefore the true Church, which only has preachers truly sent
of God, must first be found out, that by it we may hear and know which is the
true faith. Therefore of the two, the true Church is rather a mark, whereby we
may know the true preaching, and consequently the true doctrine of faith, then
contrary, that (as heretics say) the doctrine should be a mark, whereby all
men must know, which is the true Church.

A. W.
Belike, as you had good cause, you suspected your ability, to prove simply,
that the true preaching of the word in all matters fundamental, and the right
administration of the sacraments, are not a good mark of a true Church. And
therefore you rather chose to prove, by way of comparison, that the true church
is rather a mark to know true doctrine, then true doctrine a mark to know the
true Church by. For so runs your conclusion directly.

If the end of seeking the true Church (say you) be principally, that we may by
it, as a necessary and infallible means, learn true doctrine in all points,
to which otherwise we cannot attain, then the true Church is rather a mark to
know true doctrine, then true doctrine a mark to know the true Church by. But
the end of seeking the true Church, is principally that we may by it, as a
necessary and infallible means, learn true doctrine in all points, which
otherwise we cannot attain to. Therefore the true Church is rather a mark to
know true doctrine, then true doctrine a mark to know the Church by.
Though the conclusion as I said, be not directly to the question, To the
Syllogism.
which is not comparatiue but simple, whether true doctrine be a good mark to
discern a true Church by, or no: yet I will take it as it is, and answer to
the parts of it.

Your mayor in the antecedent may have a double meaning: First, that we cannot
in any point learn true doctrine but by To the proposition.
the Church; and then I deny the consequence. For true doctrine in the
fundamental points of Religion may be a good mark of the true Church, though
we seek the true Church, because there are many points which we cannot learn
without it.

But howsoever you understand the mayor, the minor is evidently To the
Assumption.
false. First, because the principal end of seeking the true Church, is, that
we may truly worship God in the assembly of his children, to his greater
glory, and our farther assurance of his love to us; as we may see Psalm. 42. 1.
2. and 47. 5. 6. and 48. 8. 9. and 84. 1. 2. 10.
every where in the book of the Psalms. Secondly, because we are not to
learn of the true Church, as a necessary and infallible means, but of the
ministers thereof, who are appointed by God to give us knowledge of the means
of salvation, by expounding the word of God to us; not to bind us to belief,
by their authority.

Your minor you offer to prove in this manner.

If no man without faith can obtain the supernatural knowledge of divine
mysteries, and faith be not to be had, but by the teaching of the true Church;
then the end of seeking the true Church, is principally that we may learn by
it, as a necessary and infallible means, true doctrine in all points, to
which otherwise we cannot attain. But no man without faith can obtain the
supernatural knowledge of divine mysteries: nor faith be had, but by the
teaching of the true Church. Therefore the end of seeking the true Church, is
principally that we may by it, as a necessary and infallible means, learn the
true faith in all points, to which otherwise we cannot attain.
The consequence of your mayor is naught. It does not follow, To the
proposition.
that we seek the true Church, to learn of it as a necessary and infallible
means; because we cannot know the mysteries of Religion without faith, which
comes by the teaching of the true Church: For there may well be teaching and
learning, without any such authority in the Church that teaches.

Your minor is very doubtful, as I will show in answering severally To the
Assumption.
to the parts of it.

First then, whereas you say, that no man without faith can obtain the
supernatural knowledge of divine mysteries: if you mean that a man cannot
acknowledge the truth of such mysteries without faith, your minor in that part
is true: but if your meaning be, that a man cannot understand what the means
of salvation appointed by God, are, without faith; I take your minor to be
false. For though those means be indeed such, as no discourse of man ever
could devise or think on, being utterly supernatural, yet it is possible for
a mere natural man to learn what they are out of the Scriptures, and that
without faith: because the Scriptures may be understood by such helps of the
tongues and arts as humane learning does afford us; though to the saving
knowledge thereof, the especial grace of God be absolutely necessary.

The other point, that faith cannot be found but by the teaching of the true
Church, may also have a double sense. The first, that faith cannot be wrought
in any man's heart but by the preaching of some man authorized to that purpose
by the true Church: and this as I showed before, is not always true: for faith
may be, and has been begotten in some by Chap. 3.
the reading of the Scriptures, where the ministry of the word was not to be
had; and by the teaching of ordinary Christians, not set apart to preach the
Gospel. The other meaning is this, that faith cannot be attained to, but by
our harkening to the voice of such a Preacher as we already know to be sent by
the true Church. And this indeed specially fits your purpose, but has no
likelihood of truth in it. For they that came to faith by the Apostles
preaching, did not believe them as men autorized for their instruction by the
true church, but as being convinced in their consciences by the evidence of the
truth they delivered, without any regard or knowledge of their being sent by
the true Church.

This weak minor of yours is underpropped in each part with a pillar of the holy
Scripture: the former thus.

No sensual man can obtain the knowledge of divine mysteries. Every man
without faith is a sensual man. Therefore no man without faith can obtain the
knowledge of divine mysteries.
If by obtaining the knowledge of divine mysteries, you mean assenting To the
syllogism.
to the truth of God concerning salvation, I grant your whole syllogism: and
in this sense it was needless to prove that part of your minor.

In the other sense, that a man cannot attain to the knowledge of them but by
faith, which the words manifestly import, I deny To the proposition.
the mayor, for the reason before alleged: but whatsoever your meaning be, the
1. Cor. 2. 14. Anselmus. ibi.
Apostle says no more, but that a natural man, without the grace of God, can
neither once imagine any such means of salvation (and other there is none) nor
acknowledge those means as true and sufficient. Of the former, the Apostle
speaks in the ninth verse, affirming that the means of salvation prepared by
God for men, are such as neither eye verse. 9.
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor ever entered into any man's heart. Of the
latter is the place alleged by you, where the word signifies verse. 14.
rather an approving and (...).
receiving, then a perceiving: and the spiritual man, whom he there opposes
to the natural, is said to discern of spiritual things, rather by
acknowledging the verse. 15.
truth of them, then by understanding the meaning of the word preached
concerning them.

Your translation (which I touched before) where you term hominem animalem, a
sensual man, is senseless. For who knows not, that by a sensual man, we
mean a voluptuous man, given up to his pleasures and sensuality? But the
Apostle speaks not of such only, but even of the wisest and most virtuous
that ever were amongst men, without grace: so that in his meaning, as well
temperate Xenocrates and learned Aristotle (called for his knowledge Naturae
genius.
natures darling) virtuous Socrates and wise Solon, as Sardanapalus, Thersites,
Nero, and such like, are natural men: that is, such as have no grace of God,
but that shadow of it, which remains in all men, by nature; and is helped by
education and humane learning. It is true, that Fernel. Physiol. lib. 4. c^. 7.
Animalis and naturalis, is not all one in nature: yet does Natural better
express the Apostles meaning, then sensual; and generally, August. de not.
and gra. Sotus de not. and gra.
all writers have made an opposition, in this sense, betwixt Nature and Grace,
not betwixt Sensualnesse and Grace: as you may see throughout Austins,
Prospers, Ieromes, and your own Schoolemens writings. Neither will it help
the matter to say (as you do) that Natural wit in understanding uses the
help of outward senses. For sensual signifies not him that uses his senses,
to the understanding of this or that, but him that is drowned in Sensuality.
Besides, natural wit does not use the help of the outward senses, always in
understanding; yea, there are many, and the most excellent points of
Philosophy, in which, Sense has nothing to do, as in the discourse of
Reason, and the knowledge of Logic; with all those hard, and worthy
Questions of the Soul, and of God himself, as far as they are to be
conceived of, by the light of nature. If you will say, that we learn these
things, partly by reading and hearing: I answer, both that we find out many
things in Philosophy, of our selves by study, without any help of Sense
(which rather is an hinderance to the soul in the search of such points,) and
also, that the knowledge we have of divine mysteries, is first brought to us,
and continually increased in us, by the same Senses of seeing and hearing: else
were your Church as good be without those preachers you so much brag of.

The other part of your Minor, that faith cannot be had, but by the teaching of
the true Church, you prove, or rather endeavor to prove in this sort.

If no man can believe without he hear, nor hear without one preach, and no
man can preach except he be sent, then Faith cannot be had, but by the teaching
of the true Church. But no man can believe, without he hear, nor hear without
one preach, and no man can preach, without he be sent. Therefore faith cannot
be had, but by the teaching of the true Church.
I deny the consequence of your Mayor, and affirm that faith may be had
without the teaching of the true Church, though To the proposition.
no man can believe without he hear, etc. For Chap. 3.
I have showed that some countries have been brought to belief without any
such teaching by authority from the true Church. I also refer the Reader to
my answer to your Minor.

That place of the Apostle concerns not the ordinary ministry To the
Assumption.
of the word, but the knowledge of the means of salvation: which (as Romans 10.
14.
the Apostle truly says) could never have been thought on by any man, if it
had not pleased God, to give notice thereof to the world, by men appointed and
authorized to that purpose by himself. But of this place and matter I spoke
sufficiently before, in this, and Chap. 3.
in a former chapter.

A. D.. 4.
Thirdly, true faith is included in the true Church, and as it were enclosed in
her belly; as Saint Austin says, upon those words of the Psalm, Errauerunt ab
vtero, loquuti sunt falsa. In ventre Ecclesiae In Psalm. 57.
(says he) veritas manet; quisquis ab hoc ventre separatus fuerit, necesse
est, vt falsa loquatur. Truth remains in the belly of the Church, whosoever
is separated (to wit by difference in doctrine) from this belly of the Church,
must needs speak false. Therefore like as, if a man had Gold in his belly, we
must first find the man, before we can come to see the gold it self: so we
must first by other marks, find out the true Church, which has the gold of
true faith, hidden in her belly, before we come to see the gold of true faith
it self. Since especially, we cannot see it, unless she open her mouth, and
deliver it unto us, and that we cannot (being spiritually blind) certainly
know it to be true, and not counterfeit, but by giving credit to her testimony
of it. According as the same Saint Austin says, Euangelio non crederem, nisi
me Ecclesiae authoritas commouerer. I should not believe the Gospel Lib. con.
Ep. Fund. cap. 5.
it self, unless I were moved by the authority of the Church. For if we had
not the testimony of the Church, how should we have been infallibly sure, that
there were any Gospel at all? Or how should we have known, that those books,
which ^eare title of the Gospel, according to Saint Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, are true Canonical Scripture; rather then those books, which are
written in the name of Nicodemus, and Saint Thomas, bearing the same title or
inscription of Gospel?

A. W.
Your third reason is thus to be framed.

That which is shut up in the belly of the Church, so that we cannot see it,
unless she open her mouth, and deliver it to us, nor certainly know it to be
true, but by giving credit to her testimony of it, is not a good mark to know
the true Church by. But true doctrine is so shut up in the belly of the Church,
that we cannot see it, unless she open her mouth, and deliver it to us, nor
certainly know it to be true, but by giving credit to her testimony of it.
Therefore true doctrine is no good mark to know the true Church by.
Your Minor is false, in both parts of it. First, it is untrue, To the
Assumption. Part. 1.
that true doctrine is so shut up in the belly of the Church: yea many a true
Church may hold some errors, and many an heretical Church some truth; only
the fundamental points are necessary to the being of a true Church. Secondly
though true doctrine be in the belly of the Church, as indeed there is no true
Church, in which it is not: yet is it not so shut up in it, as you imagine. For
it is first and principally in the Scriptures, where it may be found without
any such authority of the Church, as you dream of: yea I have showed, that
the Apostles themselves did not beget faith in the hearts of them, to whom they
preached, by any authority of the Church, but by evidence of the truth it
self, which they taught. Concerning your proof from August. in Psalm. 57.
Austins authority; I first answer, that he expounds not that place
according to the literal meaning of the Prophet, who speaks not of any belly
of the Church, but says that those lewd men, of whom he speaks, have always
been given to naughtiness, from their mothers womb. These wicked ones
Vatablus ibi,
(says Vatablus) have gone astray ever since, they came forth of the womb,
they they have erred, ever since they were borne. Yea Austin himself, as your
August. in Gloss. interlin.
Gloss says, sometimes expounds it otherwise then here: God (says Austin
(foreknew sinners, even from the womb: as he said to Rebecca. So does Hieron.
ad Psalm. 57. and
Jerome also understand it; so Theodoret. ibi.
Theodoret. But let us take it, as Saint Austin does here mystically expound
it: what will you prove by it? That truth is so shut up in the belly of the
Church, that we cannot see it, unless she deliver it by her mouth? There is no
such word in him, no such thing to be gathered out of him. His conclusion is,
that therefore they, which differ from the true Church in doctrine, are in
error: which is certainly true, concerning fundamental points, and very
probable, in all other points whatsoever.

The other part of your Minor is, that true doctrine is so shut up 2. Part.
within the Church, that we cannot certainly know it to be true, but by giving
credit to her testimony of it. For the disproouing whereof, it shall be
sufficient, to call to mind that, which I have often answered, concerning
those who believed by the Apostles ministry, without any consideration or
thought of their being sent by the true Church: but only being convinced by
the manifest truth of that which they delivered, concerning forgiveness of
sin by our Savior Jesus Christ.

Your proof out of Austin is insufficient, as it may appear in this sort.

If Austin say, that he should not believe the Gospel, unless he were moved
by the authority of the Church, then true doctrine is so shut up within the
Church, that we cannot certainly know it to be true, but by giving credit to
her testimony of it. But Austin says so. Therefore true doctrine is so shut
up in the Church, that we cannot certainly know it to be true, but by giving
credit to her testimony of it.
I deny the consequence of your Mayor. First, because (as To the proposition.
August. cont. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31.
Austin himself says of Cyprian) we are not bound by the authority of
Austins judgment, as if his writings were Canonical. We do Cyprian no wrong
(says Austin) when we distinguish his writings whatsoever they be, from the
Canonical authority of the divine Scriptures. And again, I take not Cyprians
writings for Canonical, but consider of them according to the Canonical: and
allow of that, with his commendation, which agrees to Scripture, but, by his
leave, refuse that which disagreeth from Scripture. This mind carried August.
ad Fortun. epist. 111.
Austin to other men's writings, this mind he desired other men should carry
to his. Secondly, I deny the same consequence, because Austin might be moved,
by the authority of the Church, to acknowledge the Gospel for true, and yet,
without the same authority, learn out of the Gospel so acknowledged, which
is true doctrine, which false.

Concerning Austins testimony, first, it is manifest, that he To the
Assumption.
delivers not a rule, for all men to follow, as if by should not believe he
meant, that a man ought not to believe the Gospel; nor shows an
impossibility of believing it, unless a man be moved, by the authority of
the Church: but at the most, declares, that the authority of the Church,
prevailed with him so far, as to make him acknowledge the Gospel for true,
which else he had either not known, or doubted of. Secondly, it is observed
according to the rest of his writings, that the Latin word he uses, in the
African dialect, signifies Had not believed: so that the sense is, I had not
believed the Gospel, as the truth of God, if the authority of the Church, had
not moved me thereunto. The first motive was the authority, that is, the
learning, consent, holiness of so many worthy men, as from time to time had
held, and did hold the Gospel, to be the truth of God. Upon this ground Austin
gave himself to the study of the Scriptures, and by the evidence of truth
delivered in it, discerned that it was the word of God, according to the report
and reputation commonly held of it. This sense agrees with Austins purpose,
who to refute the Manichees, that took their master Manes for the Apostle of
Christ, thus reasons against them. I believe not (says Austin) that he is
Christ's Apostle, and then demands of the Manichee what course he would take
to prove it to him. Perhaps (says he) you will read the Gospel to me, and
assay to prove Manichaeus person out of it: But what if you should light upon
one, that does not yet believe the Gospel? Then follow the words alleged by
you, I truly had not believed the Gospel, if the authority of the Church had
not moved me. This is yet more clear, by that which Austin writes afterward.
First (says he) we believe, that which yet we cannot discern, that being made
stronger in faith, we may attain to the understanding of that we do believe,
not men now, but God himself, confirming and enlightening our mind within.
But howsoever we understand it, Austin speaks not of true doctrine shut up in
the Church, so that it cannot be known to be true, but by giving credit to the
Churches testimony, which is the point in question: but only of acknowledging
the Gospel, to be the word of God. Now the same Church, or party, which
assures us, that the Gospel is true, may notwithstanding err in the meaning
of some points in it; and a man may discern these errors, by the light, which
shines in the Scriptures, thus acknowledged.

First it is here confessed by your self, that Austins speech is not of all
fundamental points of true doctrine, but only, (as I said) of knowing the
Scripture to be the word of God: for so only you reason out of it, and thereby
show plainly to all, that will see, that it cannot prove the matter, for which
you brought it. Secondly you proceed farther to prove the point by an other
reason, but faulty like the former.

If (say you) without the testimony of the Church, we could not have been
infallibly sure, that there is any Gospel at all, nor have known that the
Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are true Canonical Scripture,
rather then those of Nicodemus and Saint Thomas; then we cannot know true
doctrine to be true, but by giving credit to the Churches testimony of it. But
we could not have known those things without the testimony of the Church.
Therefore we cannot know true doctrine to be true, but by giving credit to the
Churches testimony of it.
A man that is so full of his compound syllogismes, as you To the proposition.
are, might learn to make better consequences in his Mayor, then you commonly
bring us. Let us grant you, that we could not know that there is any Gospel,
or which is the Gospel, without the testimony of the Church. All that will
follow thereupon, is this, that we cannot know these two points of doctrine to
be true, without giving credit to the testimony of the Church. Yea if I were
disposed to trouble you, I would yet farther deny your said consequence,
because though we cannot know these matters, without the Churches testimony:
yet we might know them without resting upon the Churches authority. For the
testimony of the Church may be had by the ministry thereof, without any such
absolute authority of enioyning belief, or giving credit to that she
affirms, as an undoubted truth.

This Minor, as the former in this chapter, consists of two To the
assumption. Part. 1.
parts, and is false in both of them, as I will show particularly. First you
say, that without the testimony of the Church, we could not have been
infallibly sure, that there is any Gospel. Your meaning is, that we could not
have known this certainly, but by giving credit to the report of the Church,
as a certain truth. First, for the doctrine of the Gospel to salvation, it
has been had, and may be had without any testimony of the Church at all:
taking the testimony of the Church as you do, for the preaching of men
publicly authorized to this duty, by a company of men so qualified, as you
before describe your Church. I shall need no better proof, then to put you in
mind again of those nations, many and great, who attained to faith and
salvation, by the teaching of the Apostles severally, without any such argument
of the Churches absolute authority. Secondly taking the Gospel, for the 4.
books of the Evangelists, I answer, that there may be true faith and true
Churches, without the knowledge of those books, yea without the very being of
them: as it is manifest by the former example, many thousands being converted,
and many Churches settled, without the knowledge, and before the publishing, or
penning of them. But to come to the very point, I answer further, that it is a
gross absurdity to make men believe, that there can be no certain knowledge
had, that there is any Gospel, but by giving credit to the Church: whereas no
man can know, that there is any such authority in the Church, or any Church at
all, but by the authority of the Scripture. It is more then ridiculous for me
to believe, that there is a company of men infallibly taught of God, which is
the truth, with authority to enjoin obedience to all men, in whatsoever they
will teach, if I have no better proof of it, then their own word. For since
God has endued man with reason, it is both simpleness and sin for him, to
believe that, which is utterly against the light of reason, if he have no
warrant from God so to do. But warrant he can have none, to believe such a
conceit of any company, but from the scriptures; as it is evident by your own
Chap. 5.
course, who make a place of scripture the ground of your whole disputation.
Therefore whereas you teach men first to know the Church, and then by the
Church, the Scriptures; we say this course is utterly unwarrantable, having no
foundation, either in reason or revelation. Yea contrariwise we truly affirm,
that the Scripture must first be known, at the least in that point, of the
authority of the Church; and then the Church by the Scripture. And this is
Austins judgment directly. Let us not hear (says August. de unit. Eccles.
cap. 3.
he) this I say, this you say, but let us hear, this says the Lord. There are
the Lords books, to the authority of which both of us consent, both of us
give credit, both of us yield obedience: there let us seek the Church, there
let us discuss our question. And afterward, I will not have the Church to be
showed by men's doctrines, but by the Oracles of God. And again, Chap. 16.
Let us seek the Church in the Canonical Scriptures. The like speeches are
every where in that book. Whether we be schismatics, or you (says the same
August. cont. lib. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 85.
Austin) let neither you, nor me, but Christ be asked, that he may show us his
Church. But where shall we know, what our Savior says concerning his Church,
and how he would have it known, but in the Scriptures? Yet I deny not that
the ministry of men is necessary to give notice, that there are certain
books, in which it has pleased God, to reveal the means of salvation to
mankind; though I acknowledge not any authority in the Church, whereby men
should be bound to believe this their report, when as yet they are ignorant,
that there is any such Church. You will say then, what shall we do? or how
shall we know that there is any Gospel? If you will give me leave, I will show
you what course is to be taken. When you understand that there has bin, and is
still an opinion, that there are certain books written by Gods authority and
appointment, to teach men the way to salvation, do as any reasonable man would
do, in a matter of such importance. Get the books, read and study them, with
a true desire to see whether they be such as they are reported to be, or no.
And because thou know by nature that there is a God, and that he only is
all-sufficient to discover the truth of his own purpose, touching the estate
of his creature, call upon him, though in ignorance and weakness, that it
would please him to direct thee in this enquiry after the means of thy
salvation or happiness. This done, thou shall be sure to find, by the evidence
of truth manifested in those books, that they are sent from God, and not
devised by man. If thou live in such a place as affoordeth the interpretation
of these books by the ministry of men, use that singular blessing of God with
reverence and care to understand, and thou shall by the merciful teaching of
God, acknowledge these books to be the word of God, ordained for the salvation
of thy self and other. This (will some man say) may perhaps breed a
persuasion, that these books are from God, but how shall we come to be
infallibly sure of it? How else, but by the work of the spirit of God in thy
heart? What (say you) must we run to revelations? 1. Cor. 2. 10.
Who knows the secrets of God, but the spirit of God? The truth it self
discerned by that light which the spirit kindles in our hearts, works
assurance of belief; to which the testimony of the spirit is added for our
further confirmation. Neither is this any other revelation, then you Papists
require in this case. For according to your doctrine, no man can be persuaded
infallibly of the truth of the Scripture, either for the text, or the
interpretation, but by the especial teaching of the spirit: otherwise he has
not faith, but opinion of these matters. See my answer to 12. art. part. 1.
art. 3.
Only herein stands the difference betwixt us, that you say, the argument
whereby the spirit persuades us to acknowledge the Scripture, is the authority
of the Church: we affirm it is the evidence of truth, which he makes us to
discern, by our understanding enlightened, and to approve by our will thereto
inclined, through his mighty and gracious work upon our souls.

The second part of your minor, is, that we could not have Part. 2.
known the Gospels of the four Evangelists to be canonical Scripture, rather
then those of Nicodemus and Thomas, if we had not the testimony of the Church.
Of the falsnesse of which opinion, I shall need to say little, because it is
refuted in my answer to the former part. For this knowledge is not bred in us
by resting upon the Churches authority, but by yielding to the evidence of the
truth, discovered to our hearts by the teaching of the holy Ghost. Concerning
the authority of the Church in this point, it were a presumptuous and
unreasonable thing for any man (without very good proof, or great likelihood of
reason) to deny or doubt of that which has bin avouched so many years by the
whole Christian world. But to make question of the books of Scripture, whether
they be the word of God or no, and to deny that there is any means to know
them for such, but the authority of the Church, is the next way to open a gap
to Atheism, and to lay open Religion to the scorn of the world. Can I not
know the Scripture to be of God, but by the authority of the Church? How shall
I then know it at all, since it is not reasonable to believe there is any
Church that has such authority, but by the warrant of the Scripture? They do
all they can, to turn reasonable creatures into beasts, who teach us, that we
must believe the Church cannot err, because the Scripture says so: and yet
deny that we can know there is any Scripture but by believing it, because the
Church says so. This is to dance in a circle, as if a man were coniured, that
he could not get out of it. How shall I know there is a Church? by the
Scripture. How shall I know there are any Scriptures? by the Church. Would your
proud Clergy thus make fools of Christian men, if they did not despise them,
as void of all reason? I wonder how your Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, and the rest
of your Clergy, can for bear laughing when they look one upon another, and
remember how they cosen, and (if I may use the word in a matter of such
importance) gull the world with such palpable fooleries. But Revel. 17. 2
your strumpet of Babylon has made the Kings of the earth, and all nations
drunk with the cup of her fornications, exalting her self above all that is
called God, and making her self Gloss. ad extra. Joan. 22. de verb. signif.
cap. quum inter.
the God of her slavish vassals. But the Lord is just, who (according to 2 Thessalonians 2. a 1
the Apostles prophefie) has sent the world strong delusions, that they should
believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. And certainly if there were not a great
measure of 12. blindness and sottishness in the hearts of men, that Gods
purpose might take effect, it were impossible that reasonable men should so be
lead by the nose to error and destruction.

A. D.. 5.
Fourthly, if the true doctrine of faith, in all particular points, must be
foreknowne as a mark, whereby to know the true Church, then (contrary to that
which has bin proved) the authority of the Church should not be a necessary
means whereby men must come to the knowledge of the true faith. For if before
we come to know which is the true Church, we must by an other means, have
known which is the true faith; what need then is there, for getting true faith
already had, to seek or bring in the authority of the same Church?

A. W.
This fourth reason and the next, labor to prove that part of your first
assumptio^ in this Chapter, which we deny not, that the true doctrine of faith
in every particular point, is not a good mark of the Church. It would
therefore be but lost labor to spend much time in the examining of them; yet
somewhat I must say, and first to the former.

If the true doctrine of faith in all particular points, must be foreknowne, as
a mark to know the true Church by: then is not the authority of the true
Church a necessary means to know the true doctrine of faith by. But the
authority of the true Church is a necessary means to know the true faith by.
Therefore the true doctrine of faith must not be foreknowne in all particular
points, as a mark to know the true Church by.
Your conclusion is no more then we grant; the consequence To the Syllogism.
of your mayor, about which you take some pains, needs not your help for the
proof of it. Your minor is false. That which you brought before to prove it,
before was answered.

A. D.. 6.
Fifthly, if before we give absolute and undoubted credit to the true Church, we
must examine and judge whether every particular point of doctrine which it
holds, be the truth, with authority to accept that only which we like, or
which seems in our conceit right and conformable to Scripture, and to reject
whatsoever we mislike, or which in our private judgment seems not so right
and conformable: then we make our selves examiners and judges over the church;
and consequently we prefer our liking or disliking, our judgment and censure
of the interpretation and sense of Scripture, before the judgment and censure
of the Church of God. But it is absurd both in reason and religion, to prefer
the judgment of any private man (be he never so witty and learned, or never
so strongly persuaded in his own mind, that he is taught by the Spirit)
before the judgment and definitive sentence of the Church of God; the which is
a company of men, many of which, both are, and always have been, virtuous,
wise and learned, and (which is chief) is such a company, as according to the
absolute and infallible promises of our Savior, has undoubtedly the holy
spirit among them, guiding them and teaching them all truth, and not permitting
them to err, as before has bin proved.

A. W.
There is the same fault in this fifth argument which was in the former, that it
is brought to prove a proposition, which we deny not.

If before we give absolute credit to the Church, we must judge whether every
particular point it holds be true or no, then we may make our selves judges
over the true Church. But we may not make our selves judges over the true
Church. Therefore we must not judge whether every particular point the Church
holds, be true or no, before we give absolute credit to the Church.
This conclusion supposes that which can never be proved, To the syllogism.
that we are, first or last, to give absolute credit to the Church: whereof in
this Chapter there is no question. The point you undertake to disprove, is,
that the true doctrine of faith, in every particular point, is a good mark of
a true Church. This therefore you should have concluded, though indeed it make
nothing against our opinion, who require not for a mark of the true Church,
truth of doctrine in every point, but in all points fundamental.

Your proposition is deceitfully propounded, as if we granted Of the syllogism.
a company to be the true Church, and yet would take upon us to receive and
reject what we list: whereas we hold that we cannot acknowledge any true
Church, but we must withal yield, that it maintains all substantial points
of Religion, from which we may not vary. Secondly, for a man to make himself
judge over the Church, is to take authority upon him to censure, reprove and
condemn the Church: whereas all that we desire, is, that it may be free for us
to discern that the doctrine held by this or that Church, is agreeable to the
Scriptures, before we acknowledge it to be a true Church.

It is mere absurd and unreasonable, to prefer any private To the Assumption.
man's judgment before the definitive sentence of the church of God. But it is
agreeable both to reason and Religion, that every private man, whose salvation
lies upon his true or false believing, should consider whether that which he
is enjoined by men to believe, be warrantable by the word of God or no. Mat.
15. 14.
The Scribes and Pharisees were the leaders of the people in the matters of
Religion, yet were they blind guides: and the blind people, by depending upon
their judgment, were carried headlong into the same pit of destruction with
them. Were not the men of Beroea commended Act. 17. 11.
by the holy Ghost, for searching the Scriptures, that they might see whether
the doctrine delivered by Paul were agreeable thereto or no? And yet shall it
be a fault in us to enquire of the same Scripture, concerning the doctrine of
your Apostaticall synagogue? I say farther, it is against reason and Religion,
to prefer any one man's judgment before the definitive sentence of many wise,
virtuous and learned men; such as the Church has usually some amongst the
members thereof. But it is most reasonable and religious, to prefer the truth
of God manifested by one simple man, before the contrary determination of all
that ever have bin, or shall be of the Church, though never so wise, virtuous
and learned. This is that which we teach concerning this matter: First, that no
man is bound to take any thing for a matter of faith, but that which is proved
to him by the Scriptures, the rule of faith. Secondly, that no man is to
condemn any thing held by the Church, unless he have evident proof on his
side out of the Scriptures. Thirdly, that every man, in matters not
determinable by Scripture (none of which are necessary to salvation) should
yield to the judgment of the Church, whereof he is a member; and every Church
to the judgment of the Christian Churches other where, unless there be some
good reason to the contrary. It is very possible for wise, virtuous and learned
men to err (for your privilege of not erring has bin found to be
counterfeit) who oftentimes follow the opinion of some one man, whose learning
and piety they cannot choose but admire. Sotus de not. and great. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Domingo a Soto affoords us an example of this matter, where having alleged a
sentence out of Austin, he adds these words: By reason of this saying of
Austin (quoth Soto) all the Fathers afterward, and the whole multitude of
Divines have by good right delivered it as a truth, that the glorious Virgin
never committed any actual sin; though Chrysostom, auncienter then he, were
of another opinion. Let it be then unlawful, as it is, for a private man to
prefer his own opinion before the judgment of a whole Church; and in this
sense I grant your minor: yet is it not unlawful for him to examine what any
or all Churches teach, or to dissent from it, if he have the Scripture for his
warrant.

A. D.. 7.
But you may perhaps say, that in Scripture we are willed, not to 1. John. 4.
believe every private spirit, but to try spirits, whether they be of God or
no: and that therefore we must examine and try the spirit of the Church, by
looking into every particular point of doctrine which it teaches.

I answer: that in that place of Scripture, it is not meant, that it belongs
to every particular man to try all spirits; but in general the Scripture
gives the Church warning, not to accept every one that boasts himself to
have the Spirit, and wills that they should try those spirits: not that
every simple or private man should take upon him to try them, but that those
of the Church, to whom the office of trying spirits does appertain, to wit,
the Doctors and Pastors, which Almighty God has put in his Church of purpose,
Vt non circumferamur omni vento doctrinae, that we may not Ephesians. 4.
be carried away with every wind of doctrine: and Vt non simus paruuli
fluctuantes, that we may not be little ones, wavering with every blast of
those that boast themselves to be singularly taught by the spirit. So that this
trying of spirits, is only meant of those spirits, of which men may well
doubt, whether they be of God or no: and then also this trial belongs to the
Pastors of the true church. But when it is certain that the spirit is of God,
we neither need, nor ought doubtfully to examine, or presumptuously to judge
of it, but submitting obediently the judgment of our own sense and reason, we
must believe the teaching of it in every point. Now it is most certain, that
the spirit of the true visible Church, is of God, as out of holy Scripture has
been most evidently proved. And therefore our only care should be to seek
out those marks, by which all men may know, which particular company of men
is the true Church of Christ: whose doctrine, we neither need, nor lawfully may
examine and try in doubtful manner, but must obediently and vndoubtfully in
all points believe, as the only assured and infallible truth.

A. W.
For the better strengthening of your minor, you assay to make, and answer an
argument, which our Divines use to allege against it: and this it is.

They that are willed in Scripture not to believe every spirit, but to try the
spirits, whether they be of God or no, may judge whether every particular point
the Church holds, be true or no. But every Christian is willed in Scripture
not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they be of God
or no. Therefore every Christian may judge whether every particular point the
Church holds, be true or no.
The Assumption of this Syllogism, we prove by 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
that place of John, Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God. To this our proof, you answer two ways:
First concerning the spirits to be tried; then concerning them that are to make
trial. Of the former, your answer is, that this trying of spirits is only
meant of those spirits, of which men may well doubt whether they be of God or
no. First, this answer cannot be warranted by the text, which is general: Try
the spirits, that is, all spirits that come to preach unto you, if we apply it
to the teachers, rather then to the doctrine they deliver. And surely if the
Apostle had meant as you expound him, he would not have said, Try the spirits,
but try some of them. Believe not every spirit, but try those of which you
may well doubt: but he says generally the spirits. Secondly, what may we
imagine to be a cause of doubting? If want of lawful sending, which is the
great point you always urge; either we must know the spirits we may doubt of,
to be unlawfully sent, and then (by your doctrine) we must utterly reject them
without any farther trial: or else the trial we are to make, if we doubt, is
whether they be lawfully sent or no: for till that appear, we may not hear
them. But our Apostle appoints us to make trial by their doctrine. Thirdly,
the reason and end of this exhortation, is, that we might take heed of false
Prophets and false Apostles, which were crept into the Church. Many false
Prophets were stirred up by the devil, faining that they had Apostolical
doctrine to deliver. Therefore (says Didym. Alex. ad 1. Joan. 4.
Didymus) the gift of discerning spirits is necessary. Now these false apostles
were not such as came without any calling; for the devil must needs have
known, if he had been then acquainted with your doctrine, that it was not
possible for him to prevail by men not authorized by the Church; but as the
Apostle teaches us, they were such, as had gone from amongst the true
Christians, not by schism, in refusing communion with them, so much as by
heresy, in departing from the truth of doctrine, in maine points of religion.
Fourthly, false teachers do so nearely resemble true, and Mat. 7. 15.
come (many times) with such show of holiness, that a man cannot tell whom he
should trust or suspect, but as he finds his doctrine to be suitable, or
contrary to the word of God. Therefore Ferus a writer of your own, and one of
no mean account, understands by spirit, doctrine. The Apostle warnes us
(says Ferus ad 1. Joan 4. 1.
Ferus) that we believe not every spirit, that is, every doctrine and
persuasion. To which purpose he alleges also that of Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians 5.
21
Try all things, hold fast that which is good: alleged by Thomas ad 1. Joan.
4.
Thomas, in the same matter. To make this your answer the more likely, you tell
us, that when it is certain that the spirit is of God, we neither need, nor
ought doubtfully to examine, or presumptuously to judge of it: as if we thought
any such doubtful or presumptuous course lawful. Yet in this case there is a
difference to be observed: If we know the preacher to be sent of God, in such
sort, as the Apostles were, that he cannot err, then every least doubt of that
which he delivers, is presumption and sin. But otherwise, though it appear
to us, that he be authorized by God, we may safely take liberty to examine
whatsoever he teaches, without any presumption to judge, or needless doubting
of that he delivers. In a word, if we hear such a man, it is our duty not
to suspect his doctrine, but where we have some good appearance of Scripture for
our suspicion. In which case we are to search the word of God, and to open our
doubts to him, that we may be satisfied. If the matter be such, as we cannot
clearly prove to be false by Scripture, we are with all reverence and
humility, to suspect our own judgment, rather then his, whom God has
appointed and authorized to be our teacher: so far must we be from
presumption.

Your second exception is against them, that are to try the spirits, who are
not (say you) every simple or private man, but the Pastors of the Church, to
whom the office of trying spirits does appertain; as being put by God in his
Church of purpose, that we may not be carried away with every wind of
doctrine. That this exhortation belongs to all Christians, it may appear by
these reasons. First, we have the like general admonitions in other places of
Scripture to all Christians, not only to Pastors and Doctors. Mat. 7. 15.
Beware of false Prophets (says our Savior to all men) which come to you in
sheeps clothing. Try all things (says 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21
the Apostle) and hold fast that which is good: which latter place, as before I
noted, is brought by Vhi supra.
Thomas of Aquin and Ferus, to expound this text of Saint John. Secondly, the
whole Epistle is written to all in general, without any particular
instruction, or exhortation to this or that kind of Christians, as teachers,
learners, masters, servants, or such like. Thirdly, it is 1. Pet. 2. 18. and 3.
1. 7 Ephesians. 5. 22. 25 Col. 3. 18. 19.
the course of the Apostles, where they descend from generals to particulars,
to give some special notice of that change by naming severally the estates, to
which they speak, and not continuing only the common titles of beloved or
brethren, as the Apostle in this place does. Fourthly, himself professes,
that his Epistle is written in general to all men, yea even to young men and
babes in Christ. Neither does he, in this exhortation, restrain his words to
them, that are teachers. Fifthly, if it be not lawful for private men to try
the spirits, then are they to receive whatsoever is taught by any particular
Doctor or Pastor; and so be bound to believe mere contradictions, if it fall
out, as sometimes it does, that one man preach contrary to that, which an
other has taught. Sixthly, the Lord has imparted the scriptures, and enjoined
the search of them, as well to private men, as to Pastors and Doctors.
Seventhly, and last, blind people shall perish everlastingly, with their
blind guides: and therefore it cannot be, but that God has given Holkot. in
2. q. 4. ad r. arg. princip.
them liberty to try the spirits, that they that will not, may have no excuse
for their erring, but be justly damned.

The place you bring out of the epistle to the Ephesians. 4. 14.
Ephesians, does not prove that Pastors and Doctors only are to examine
spirits, though this belong in special sort to them, Act. 20. 28.
whom the holy Ghost has made overseers of the flock of Christ. Gods end, in
appointing them, is, that we should not be carried away with every blast of
doctrine: but we must needs be so carried, if we receive without choice,
whatsoever is delivered. They are helpers of our faith, not Lords over it.
Their duty it is, to teach us, how to discern of true doctrine, and to
persuade us to embrace it, not to enforce us to give credit to all they say.
Thus have I answered all those arguments, that you thought good to propound:
all which notwithstanding, our conclusion stands sound and firm, that true
doctrine in points fundamental, is a certain, and necessary mark of a true
Church of Christ.

A. D.
CHAP. XV. That these four, Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica, that is to
say, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, are good marks, by which men may
know, which is the true Church.

A. W.
The second maine part of your whole treatise is this, that they which profess
the Roman faith, are the true Church. Your proof is, that To them only, the
certain marks, whereby the Church is to be known, belong. Which that you
might make clear unto us, you reason in this sort.

They only, who are One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church, are they to
whom the marks, by which the true Church may be known, belong. But they only
that profess the Roman Religion, are they who are One, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic Church. Therefore they only, that profess the Roman Religion,
are they to whom the marks, by which the true Church is to be known, belong.
The Mayor of this syllogism you seek to prove, in this Chapter by showing,
that these properties are good marks to know the true Church by. Now
properties, if we shall speak properly according to Logic, are Accidents or
Adjuncts agreeing to every particular of that kind, whereof they are
properties, and that always: never at any time, to any thing of any other
kind. Therefore the properties of a true Church, must be such, as agree to
every true Church at all times, and at no time to any other Church or thing,
but to a true Church only. These the Logicians call Propria adiuncta, or
propria quarto modo. Whether these four alleged by you be such or no, taking
the^ according to your sense, we shall see in examining your proof. That in
some sense they are certain marks of a true Church, we make no question.

A. D.. 1.
Since our Savior Christ has thought good to plant a visible Church upon
earth, which he would have to continue, until the worlds end, for this
special intent and purpose, that all men in all ages, by means of it, may
learn the doctrine of the true faith: the true worship of God: the right use
of the Sacraments: the wholesome laws of good life: and generally all good
things that appertain to the glory of God, and the salvation of our souls;
we have not any reason to doubt, but that the same our Savior (for the
exceeding love, which, of his part, without exception or respect of persons, he
bears to all mankind) has ordained some marks or notes, by which all sorts,
and consequently even simple men may sufficiently discern which company
(among many which challenge to themselves the title of the true Church) is
indeed the true Church. For since, he would have every one to hear, and learn
things necessary to salvation, only of the true Church: we must needs think
his wisdom and goodness to have marked this his Church with such manifest
signs and properties, that all men may easily know it, and discern it from
others, whom he knew would take upon them (though falsely) the title and
profession of the true Church.

This seems to have been expressly foretold by the prophet Isaias, when he
says: Scietur in gentibus seme^ eorum, and germen eorum in medio populoru^.
Omnes qui viderint eos, cognoscentillos, Isay. cap. 61.
quia isti sunt semen, cui benedixit Dominus. Their seed shall be known in the
nations, and their of spring in the midst of the people; all that shall see
the^ shall know them, because these are that seed, which our Lord has blessed.
Which is as much, as if he should say, that the Church shall have such manifest
marks, that it shall be easy for every one to know them to be the true
Church.

Some of these marks are set down by Saint Austin, who calls them bands or
chains, which do hold a faithful man in the Catholic lib. con. Ep. Fund.
cap. 4.
Church; although for the slownesse of his wit, or for some other cause, he
does not evidently see the truth of the doctrine in it self.

A. W.
Ere you come to prove that which you have propounded, you fall into an
unnecessary discourse, about the marks of the Church: wherein first you prove,
as you can, that our Savior has left certain marks, whereby all men in all
ages may know the true Church. Secondly you set down some names of these
marks, given them according to the effects they work in men.

The proof of your former point lies thus.

If our Savior have planted a visible Church upon earth, to the end that all
me^ in all ages, might learn of it only all good things appertaining to the
glory of God, and their own salvation, the^ he has ordained marks, by which
every man may know the true Church. But our Savior has to that end, planted a
visible Church. Therefore he has given marks, by which every man may know etc.
Though there be nothing in this proof, which has not been answered already
yet I mull be feign to say something to it. I To the Minor.
deny the Minor, having showed in answer to Chap. 5.
the fifth chapter, that it never was Gods purpose to have every particular man
partaker of salvation by Jesus Christ. Now it is needless to add that our
Savior being Mat. 3. 17. Joan. 5. 30. and 6. 38.
sent by God, with perfect knowledge of his purpose, would not intend any thing
contrary to the will of his Father, or otherwise then he was directed by his
commission. Joan. 17. 9.
I pray not for the world, but for them, that thou have given me out of the
world. Romans 11. 5.
All this present time there is a remnant, according to the election of grace.
Therefore visible Churches (for to dream of any one universal visible Church
is against reason, not only against Scripture) were ordained properly (as the
ministry of the word, and Heb. 2. 14.
the service of Angels) for their sakes that are to be saved, according to the
election of God. Secondly, and as it were accidentally, for the hardening of
them, that will not believe, to leave them without excuse. To make your matter
the more likely, you tell us of our Saviors love to mankind, which in your
divinity is without exception, or respect of persons. How then can it suit with
the purpose of God his Father, Romans 9. 11. l Tit. 2. 4.
who has chosen some to glory, and refused other, merely of his own just
will, without respect of difference in the parties so chosen and refused? As
for I that love of mankind, whereupon some men conclude, that either all, or the
greatest part of men are loved by God to eternal life, it is not to be
understood by comparison of men to men, but partly of men to the Angels that
fell; in which respect the Apostle amplifies the mercy of God to us, Heb. 2. 16.
He took not the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham: partly of men, to
all other creatures; none of which, besides man, is vouchsafed the honor to be
joined in unity of person with the Son of God, and so to be made heir of
everlasting glory.

It is needless to repeat what I answered before to this place of Isay, only
I will say thus much of your exposition, that though all, that see the Church,
may know it: yet it does not follow, that therefore all men may see it: which
you make the end of planting a visible Church, that every man may learn how
to be saved. We deny not, that the marks of the Church, are such as that any
man, who has the means, and will use them with conscience and diligence, may
come (by the grace of God) to the acknowledging of it, and by the ministry of
it, to salvation. Such is the truth of doctrine, wherein every man may be
instructed, who will submit his reason to the evidence of truth contained in
the holy Scriptures, and not wilfully resist, or carelessly neglect the work of
the spirit in the ministry of the word.

The bands and chains, August. cont. epist. Fundam. cap. 4.
Austin speaks of, are not said to draw a man out of the world unto the
Church, but to hold him in it, that is in already. And surely he were
unreasonably absurd, that being borne in the profession of Christianity, or by
any other occasion, brought to join himself unto this or that Church, would
not continue his belief upon those grounds, that Austin there mentions, as
long as there could be no sufficient reason brought to the contrary, yea
though he could not discern the truth of many points, which he held as he had
been taught. But Austin in the same place professes, that the marks, he
names, and all other whatsoever, whereby he is held in the Catholic Church,
are nothing worth in comparison of truth manifestly proved out of the
Scripture. But of this matter I shall have occasion to speak again hereafter,
where you propound some of Austins words more at large.

A. D.. 2.
Of these marks, diverse authors have written at large. I (for brevity sake)
have chosen out only these four: Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica: One,
Holy, Catholic, Apostolic: because I hope these will be sufficient, and
because I find these especially, set forth in Scriptures: commended by
Councels: and generally admitted, of all sorts, both Catholics and
Protestants, as now I am to declare.

First, for the general admittance of these properties of the true Church, I
need no other proof, but that both Catholics and Protestants allow of the
Nicene, and Constantinopolitane Creed, wherein we profess to believe the true
Church, the which Church, is there described with those only four properties
which before I named, as though by those only, every man might sufficiently
know that Church, which in every point, they are bound to believe. Now if
besides this proof, out of the generally received Counsels, some precise man
would have me prove these properties to agree to the true Church, out of the
Scripture it self, this also I may easily do.

A. W.
So many and diverse are the marks of the Church, propounded by Bellar. de not.
Eccles. li. 4. cap. 3.
your Popish writers, that you had good cause, to give some reason, why you
cull these four out of all the rest. First you allege brevity: whereof if you
had been so desirous, you would not so often have repeated the same matters.
You add the sufficiency of these, their being mentioned in the Scripture,
commended by Councels, and generally admitted by all sorts, both Catholics
and Protestants. All which, taking them in your sense, are generally false, as
shall appear in the particular handling of them. But indeed the true cause is,
though you will not be known of it, that Bellarmine out of whom you have
patched up your whole discourse, though he bring fifteen: yet confesses that
they may all after a sort, be reduced to these four.

There are two faults in this proof, whereby you labor to persuade us, that
these properties are generally admitted, both by Protestants and Papists.
First, though both admit them, yet in diverse senses; we according to the true
meaning of those Councels; you according to those fantasies you have devised,
for the establishing of your Apostaticall Synagogue. Secondly, we admit them
not all as marks of the, or a visible Church, but as hidden properties of the
Catholic Church, the mystical body of Jesus Christ, which are not to be
discerned by the eye of the body, but by the light of faith, as all other
articles in the same Creed are. What though there be no more properties, but
those four there set down? will it follow thence, that therefore they are
named, as though by those only; every man might sufficiently know the Church?
Is that the use of those points which are delivered concerning the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost? Or rather, are they not set before us, as principal
matters to be believed, of them? So are also these properties of the Church.

If any man be so simple, as to take your former proof for good, whereas it
fails in the chief point you would, prove by it, as I have showed; he is
fitter to be pitied then instructed. But, is it a note of preciseness, to
desire proof, for matters of faith out of the scripture? Doubtless it was
then no less preciseness, to appoint the scripture for a rule of our faith;
and as great, for our Savior Christ and the Apostles to confirm their
doctrine out of the scripture. For this course of theirs makes us the bolder to
require the like of you, whose authority we more doubt of: whereas if they had
stood upon their privilege, and never troubled themselves with proouing that
they delivered, or leaving their doctrine in writing, we should easily have
persuaded our selves to rest upon men's authority, and not to look for any
proof by scripture. But give me leave a little to consider of this course of
yours. The question is, whether the true Church be with you or with us. You
tell us we shall know that, by seeing whether you or we have the marks of the
true Church: we accept of this trial. How shall we inform our selves what
these marks are? Tush (say you) for that matter you must be ruled by the
Councels. Why? but the Councels, as you would make us believe, were wholly for
you, and consisted of Popish Bishops: what reason have we then to stand to
their judgment, in a controversy betwixt you and us? You will answer that we
say, they were not Popish. We say so indeed, and have proved it in diverse
points, as occasion has been offered. But we add further, that these Councels
might err, you deny it. How will you persuade us the contrary? When all is
done, we must come to trial by the Scriptures, or else take your word for it.
And is it for all this, preciseness to require proof out of the Scriptures,
of those marks you would prove your Church by? I have showed before, that
there is no means to know certainly there is any Church of Christ, or any
Christ, but by the Scriptures. Are not the Scriptures then the fittest means
to teach us by what marks this Church may be known? The Councels tell us, what
they are. Who told them? the holy Ghost. Let it be so. But how did he tell
them? by some revelation, utterly beside the Scriptures, or by truth in the
Scriptures? If the former; we ask how we may be so persuaded? The church tells
you so. Yet again the church? How knows the church that they had such
revelation? What help now, but about again to the scriptures? Think not much
then, if in this question concerning the marks of the church, we desire to be
taught by the Scriptures what those marks are; especially since (as you
profess) you may do it so easily: but I am afraid you will do it with more
ease then truth.

A. D.. 3.
The true Church is signified to be one, by those words of the Canticles, Vna
est columba mea; if we will believe the exposition The first mark Vna proved
out of Scripture. Cant 6. Cypr. l. de unit. Ecclisiae. August. l. 6. in Joan.
Job. c. 10. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 10. Ioh. 17.
of Saint Cyprian and S. Austin. Also we may gather the same out of those words
of our Savior, in which he calls his Church vnum ouile, one sheepfold. Also
by those places of S. Paul, where he terms the Church vnum corpus, one body.
Moreover, Christ our Savior praying for his Church, did specially entreat,
and without doubt obtained, vt omnes vnum sint, that all the members thereof
should be one thing, to wit, that at the least they should all profess one and
the same faith, all partake of one and the same baptism, and other sacraments,
all live under one and the same Lord, in due subordination and subjection to
that uniform and orderly government of lawful pastors, ordained and appointed
in the Church by him. The true Church of Christ therefore is one.

Contrary, the conuenticles of heretics are destitute of this mark of unity,
according as Tertullian affirms, saying, Denique penitus inspectae haereses
omnes, in multis deprehenduntur cum auctoribus Lib. de Praescr.
suis dissentientes: Finally all heresies, if they be well looked into, are
found to differ in many things from their first founders. And the reason of
this disagreement among heretics, the same Tertullian assigns very well in
the same place, saying, Variant inter se Ibidem.
haeretici, dum vnusquisque pro suo arbitrio modulatur quod accepit,
quemadmodum ea pro arbitrio composuit ille qui tradidit. Heretics do differ
(in points of doctrine) among themselves, while as every one takes upon him to
fashion the faith which he received, according to his own liking or fancy:
like as he that first delivered it unto them, did invent it according to his
own will and pleasure.

A. W.
We are now come to the very point, for proof of your mayor, that they only
who are one, holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church, are they to whom the marks,
by which the true Church is to be known, belong.

To make this proof good, you dispute in this manner.

If One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, be good marks to know the true Church
by, then they only who are One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church, are they
to whom the marks by which the true Church may be known, belong. But those
four properties, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, are good marks by which
the true Church may be known. Therefore they only who are One, Holy,
Catholic, Apostolic Church, are they to whom the marks, by which the true
Church may be known, belong.
The consequence of your mayor is but weak. For these To the proposition.
four properties may be good marks to know the true church by: that
wheresouer we see them, we may be sure there is a true church: and yet there
may also be some true church, where they are not. I dispute not, whether the
true Church may be without these; but deny, that because these, where they
are, are good marks, therefore there is no true Church where these are
wanting. This proposition, though your proof be lame without it, you wholly
omit, and so propound us a reason which we need not yield to, though you were
able to prove the minor never so sufficiently.

Your minor, as before I answered, is true, if we rightly understand To the
Assumption.
the meaning of those several properties. But the proof you bring is scarce
warrantable.

All properties of the Church, belonging only thereto, and apparent This
syllogism is gathered out of the conclusion of this Chapt. sect. 7.
to be seen where they are, are good marks to know the Church by. But these
four properties are such. Therefore these four are good marks to know the
Church by.
There is a third thing omitted by you, necessarily required To the proposition.
to make any property a good mark, viz. that it be such as always agrees to
the Church. For otherwise it can serve, as I answered to your former
proposition, but only for the half duty of a mark, because at some times I
may see the Church, and not know it for all this mark. If I find these
properties, I may assure my self that I have found the true Church, because
these never are but in the true Church; yet if the true Church may at any time
be without these, as it may, for ought contained in your mayor, then missing my
mark, I shall be unable to discern of the true Church.

This minor, for the first part of it, is true, in such sense as I To the
assumption.
granted the former: these properties rightly understood, belong only to the
true Church. If the latter part also be true, that they are apparent to be
seen, doubtless truth of doctrine, which makes the Church one, must needs be
a certain mark of the true Church, though you deny it that prerogative. Let
us now see how you prove the parts of your minor, with this prouiso, that
though you do prove them, yet you are little the nearer, because diverse former
propositions, upon which this depends, remain still unproven by you.

It is a property belonging only to the true Church to profess one Proof of
the Assumption. Part. 1.
and the same faith, etc. But to be one, is to profess one and the same faith,
etc. Therefore to be one, is a property belonging only to the true Church.
I deny your mayor: professing one and the same faith, is not To the
proposition.
proper only to the Church; but common to it, with some false Churches which
have for a long time continued in one and the same heresy, as the Mahometans
above a thousand years, the Arians above 1200. Secondly, if this mark be
proper to the Church only, then as long as heretics continue in one and the
same heresy, I may conclude that they are a true Church. But to make your
proposition true, you must say instead of one and the same faith, one and the
same true faith, which is the mark we set up, to know the true Church by: and
the reason why the Church is said to be one. There are (says Theodoret. ad
Psalm. 47.
Theodoret) infinite and innumerable Churches in the Isles and in the
Continent: but generally all of them are made one by their agreement in true
doctrine. The Church is said to be one (says Ferus ad Ioa. 10. 16.
Ferus) because of the unity of faith, hope and charity.

Your minor also is false, unless you add true, to profess one and the same
true faith: as the place whero^ you ground your large To the Assumption.
exposition, might have taught you. For our Savior did not pray that his
Church might profess one and the same faith at adventure, as if he had not
cared what it professed, so it always professed the same faith; but that it
might always profess the true faith, which he delivered to his Apostles, and
taught by his spirit.

But indeed John. 17. 20.
that prayer of our Savior was not made for any company of outward
professors, but only for those, and particularly for every one of them that
attain to true faith in him. As for the profane and reprobate, what is it
less then blasphemy, to say that our Savior prayed that they might be one
with him and his Father, as they are one? especially since in the same chapter
he denies that he prays for the world; verse. 9. verse. 20.
and namely restrains his prayer to them who by the ministry of the word
believe in him, that is, rest wholly and only upon him, not only make
profession of believing the Gospel, which is enough without any inward grace,
to make any man a member of your true Church. Thus have I spoken of this mark,
as you should have propounded your argument, according to the course of your
disputation. Now that I may leave nothing of any moment unanswered, I will
speak to it as it is set down by your self. The matter you assay to prove,
is, that the Church is signified to be one, or is one. To prove this, you
allege four several places of Scripture. The first is this, Cantic. 6. 8.
My Dove is one. Where by Dove, you understand the Church: by being one,
professing one faith, etc. To this I answer, first, that it is no good course
of disputing, to prove a matter in controversy by a place that is figurative
and allegorical: because such texts (as Thom. in Boet. q. 2.
Thomas says) afford no certain arguments: yea (as August. epist. 48 ad
Vincen.
Austin says) it is impudency for a man to expound any allegory to his
purpose, unless he have manifest testimonies for the clearing of that which is
doubtful. Secondly, this interpretation of yours, is directly contrary to
Cardinal Bellar. de eccles. milit. lib. 3 cap. 7.
Bellarmine, and by him refuted, who makes this Dove to be the soul of a
Christian in the state of perfection, and delivers it as a certain ground,
that those things in the Canticles which are spoken of the Spouse, are not
necessary to be understood of the Church, but may also be expounded Psellus
apud Theod. in Cant.
of the Virgin Marie, or of every perfect soul. Thirdly, if we take it to be
spoken of the Church, as it is generally, and (as I am persuaded) truly
expounded; yet does it not signify any outward company, but the true Church
of Christ, the company of the elect, called to the knowledge and profession of
the Gospel: every one of which is in his place and measure, that perfect soul
whom the spouse of Christ so commends. Know (says Origin. in Cant. hom. 1.
Origin) that the Bridegroom is Christ, the Bride the Church, without spot or
wrinkle; of which it is written, that Ephos. 5. 27.
he might make it glorious, etc. And Hieron. prooem. in Cantic.
Jerome, who translated that commentary of Origin, says, that the church
spoken of in the Canticles, cleaves and is joined to Christ above the heavens,
as being made one spirit with him. So does Epiph. haer. 33
Epiphanius understand the place, affirming that the Church is perfect, because
she has received from God grace and knowledge of our Savior Christ by the
holy Ghost. Bernard. in Cant. ser. 98.
Bernard, no enemy to your Church, says in plain terms, that the spouse is
the Church of the elect: which is said to be one: because all together are the
spouse of Jesus Christ, one chaste virgin. Joan. 10. 16.
The sheepfold our Savior speaks of, is the same spouse, in respect of the
spiritual feeding, which the sheep have in this life from him: or to speak
more directly, it seems to be that state of grace, into which the shepherd
Christ leads his sheep, that they may be folded up, and safe from all
spiritual dangers, which might destroy them. Once, that he means not an
outward profession, common to sheep with goats, it may appear by the whole
course of the Chapter before, wherein all the sheep of that fold, are not only
said to be Christ's sheep, but also to hear his voice, yea so to hear it,
that they will not hearken to a stranger. His sheep hear verse. 4. 5. 8.
his voice (says August. in Joan. tract. 45.
Austin) and he calls them by name: for he has their names written in the book
of life. Hereupon says 2. Tim. 2. 19.
the Apostle, The Lord knows who are his. This sheepfold then is that estate
into which Christ the true Shepherd brings his elect, by the profession of
his truth in the visible Church. If any man had rather apply this text to the
outward estate of the Churches, I will not strive with him, so that withal he
remember, first that in these outward Churches the elect only are the sheep,
one with Christ their shepherd, as members of his mystical body. Secondly,
that this one sheepfold is not to be considered in regard of the Churches being
one in profession, but in respect of the Gentiles admitted to have place in
Christ's mystical body, as well as the Jews, all difference betwixt people and
people being taken away. In Romans 12. 5. 1. Cor. 10. 17.
the next two places the church is compared to a body (note that the
comparison is chiefly of particular Churches, in respect of the several
members thereof) because of the mutual conjunction and help which each part
has with other, and is to afford to other. So does Lomb. Gloss. interlin.
Lyra, ad Romans 10. and Catharin. ibi.
Lombard truly expound it, so you Gloss, so Lyra. If we stretch it farther,
the chief cause why the church is one body, is assigned by Cardinal Caietan.
ibi.
Caietan to be the spirit of Christ. For Christ (says he) is as the soul,
giving life, by the holy Ghost, to his whole mystical body. But the holy
Ghost quickens only the elect, not the reprobate too. 1. Cor. 10. 17.
In the latter of the two places, Caietan. vbi supra.
the same Cardinal expounds that being one, in respect of charity: and
Catharin. vbi supra.
Catharin a learned Popish Bishop, understands this body to be the holy Church
consisting of them that are predestinate and called, and justified, and
glorified, holy and faithful. Of the last place I spoke sufficiently Joan. 17.
20.
before. Agreement in the truth, is the mark we look at.

This you add to prove, that to profess one and the same faith, that is, to
be one, is proper to the true church. Your proof is, that Tertul de praescr.
cap. 42.
Tertullia^ says, that all heresies, if they be well looked into, are found to
differ in many things from their first founders. Tertullian might truly say so,
of al heresies then known; and yet there may have bin some since his time,
perhaps that have kept always the same errors, without any change, worth the
speaking of. But (as I noted before) since all heresies for a time hold their
first errors, continuance in the same profession, can be no good mark of the
true church, unless you can set down a certain number of years, during which
they must continue in one and the same faith, or else be held for heretics
because of their changing.

Now in conclusion of this first mark, I must observe a few points for the
Readers instruction. First I desire it may be noted, that whereas unity is
made a principal mark by your writers; they understand as well unity of love
as of faith: you require but the one of them, and so give us but half a mark.
Secondly, let it be observed, that this mark is either no mark at all, or all
one with ours; so that whereas you trouble us with more then this, you make it
much harder then we do, to find out the true Church. In the third place it
would be considered what you mean by one and the same faith: I press you with
your own argument, Chap. 14.
Continuing in one and the same faith, in regard of some points only, is no
good mark, because heretics continue in some points of truth. Continuing in
all points can be no good mark: for it is not only hard, but impossible for a
simple unlearned man to be assured that any church has always continued in
profession of one and the same faith, in every point: yea this is infinitely
harder, then to discern of all truth, because the one is to be learned out of
the Scriptures: the other cannot be known, but by searching the records of the
church from time to time. Of the one there is certain knowledge to be had,
because the Scriptures are the word of God: of the other, the best assurance we
can have, is but the testimony of men, that might err by ignorance or
partiality. Whatsoever doubts or difficulties you can imagine concerning the
false translation or misunderstanding of the Scriptures, the same will
accompany all the writings of men, touching the doctrine of the Church in all
ages. Then let any reasonable man judge, whether you or we show them a better
mark to know the true Church by.

A. D.. 4.
The true Church is also proved to be holy, by that of S. Paul: The second
mark, sancta. 1. Cor. 3.
Templum Dei sanctum est, quod estis vos: The temple of God is holy, which
temple you are. By which place notwithstanding S. Paul did not mean to
signify, that every one of this company was holy. For a little after in the
same Epistle, he says to the same company: Omnino auditur inter vos
fornicatio, and talis fornicatio, qualis 1. Cor. 5.
nec inter gentes: There is plainly heard fornication among you, and such
fornication, as the like is not among the heathen. He does not therefore (I
say) mean that every one of the Church is holy, but that the whole company is
to be termed holy, because the profession thereof does of it self wholly tend
to holiness: the doctrine being such as withdraws from all vice, and
instructs and moves men to virtue: the Sacraments also do not only
signify, but in the virtue which they have from Christ his passion, they also
work in us (as isntrumental causes) true and inward sanctity. Wherefore
although every one that is in the Church, be not holy, yet no doubt, always
some are: the which their holiness, it pleases Almighty God to testify and
make known sometime by miracle; and ordinarily he uses to make it apparent
enough by the light of their virtuous actions, which at all times in many
members of the true Church, do so shine before men, that by it men are moved to
glorify God, and sometimes to imitate in their own life that, which in others
they admire. And whatsoever member of the Church fails from this holiness of
life, it is evident that the fault is only in himself, who lives not
according to the prescript of his profession, nor uses in due sort those means
which it has of the holy Sacraments, which (as I said before) are effectual
instruments of sanctification.

Contrariwise, no sect of heretics is truly holy; neither was there ever any
person that did invent, or obstinatly adhere unto any sect of heresy, which
had in him true sanctity. And no marvel, because the very profession and
doctrine it self of every heresy, is opposite to the very roots of true
sanctity; the which roots be true Christian faith and humility. For how can
he be truly holy and just, who being possessed with the spirit of heresy, must
needs be deprived of true faith, without which the just man cannot live?
according to that saying of S. Paul: Iustus ex fide viuit. Or how can he be
holy, that does not only Hebr. 10. Mat. 18. 1. Pet. 2.
not humble himself like a little one, submitting himself to every humane
creature, for Gods sake: but does proudly oppose himself against the
universal Church it self, whom God has willed and commanded us to hear, no
otherwise then himself? For wanting Luke 10.
this humility, and consequently the grace of God, which is denied to the
proud, and given to the humble, there is no doubt but that howsoever Jam. 4.
such a man seems in his outward behavior, he can have no true sanctity
within him: the which true sanctity failing inwardly, it is hard for him to
bear himself so, but that sometime or other, by one occasion or other, he
shall even outwardly manifest this his inward want; as in these our days,
heretics commonly do, in such apparent manner, that it is no hard matter to
discern, that they be not (as some of them would have the Church defined) a
company of Saints.

A. W.
Having showed before, that this discourse proceeds not orderly, as it
should, to the proof of that which is propounded by you, and denied by us; I
will not stand to lay out the fault, in every particular, but content my self
with having done it once for all. It is your purpose in this place to prove
that the Church is holy. A labor that might well have been spared: for who
ever denied it, or doubted of it? But let me again put you in mind, that when
you have proved the Church to be holy, you have got nothing: because every
quality of the Church is not by and by a mark* whereby it may be known. It
may be proper to the Church, so that it can never be found but in the Church,
and yet not be always there to be found. It may also be true always, and yet
not be always visible. But let us see your proof.

The Temple of God is holy. The Church is the Temple of God. Therefore the
Church is holy.
The holiness you mean, as you expound your self, is true and inward
sanctity, which you say is wrought by the Sacraments. And this indeed is the
holiness, which only can make a man a Christian. For ( Thomas opus. 6. in
expos. symboli. sect. Sanctam Ecclesiam.
Thomas truly says) He that is not anointed with the grace of the holy Ghost,
is not a Christian. Hereupon, before I answer to your Syllogism, I will make
it manifest, by your own argument, that holiness is no good mark to know the
Church by.

Every good mark of the Church must be easier to be known, then the Church
it self. True inward sanctity is not easier to be known, the^ the Chapter it
self. Therefore true inward sanctity is no good mark of the Church.
The Mayor is yours, in plain words generally delivered: Chap. 13.
The second thing required in a good mark is, that it be more apparent, and
easy to be known, then the thing is. The Minor is proved by these words of
yours in the same place. The secret disposition of a man's heart is harder to be
known, then the man himself: how then shall true inward sanctity be easier
to discern, then the men in whom it is?

If by Temple you understand the whole company, as you plainly To the
proposition. s1. Cor. 3. 17.
avouch, and by holiness true inward sanctity, I deny your Mayor. Because the
whole company makes not one person or subsistence, wherein only there is
place for such habits or qualities. True inward holiness is a quality no
where resident, but in some special substance, and therefore if the whole
company of the Church, have not a general soul as Auerrois dreamed of the
world, it is impossible it should have true inward holiness. It should seem
also you saw as much your self, and therefore give us an other exposition of
the place, that the whole company is to be termed holy. In this sense you must
conclude thus.

The Temple of God is to be termed holy. The Church is the Temple of God.
Therefore the Church is to be termed holy.
But this proves not, that the Church is holy. Do you think, that the Nicene
Council, when it delivered it as an article of faith, that we are to believe
One holy Church, meant nothing, but that the Church was to be termed holy? Yes:
they meant to teach us, that the true Church is truly holy, being purged from
the guilt of sin, by the sacrifice of our Savior Jesus Christ, and endued
with true habitual righteousness by the spirit of sanctification. It is a
poor mark to know the Church by, to tell us, it is a company that is to be
termed holy. What then is the Apostles meaning, when he says the Temple of God
is holy?

Chrysostom. ad 1. Cor. homil. 9. and ibi Ambros. and. Theophyl.
Many interpreters take this whole passage of the Apostle, from the beginning
of the 16. verse, to be a reproof particularly of the incestuous person, and
generally of all unclean livers: and they by Temple understand several
Christians, sanctified by the Spirit of God, who dwells in them, and makes
them holy. Thus do Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 4
Cyrill, Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Irenaeus, and Cypr. testim. ad Quirin. lib. 3. sect 27.
Cyprian apply the place. Lombard. Thom. Lyra. Caietan. Catharin. ad hunc locum.
Other, whose judgment in this text I rather follow, think that the Apostle
in these verses continues his former discourse, concerning the ministry of
the word, diversely used by diverse teachers: some building upon the foundation
gold, silver, and precious stones; other laying on it timber, hay, or stubble.
A third kind destroying the foundation by false doctrine, of whom the Apostle
here speaks, threatening them destruction, because they destroy the Temple of
God. The reason whereof Catharin. ibi.
one of them gives in these words, The Temple of God is holy. To defile that
which is holy (says Catharin) deserves destruction even among the heathen.
For if any man hurt the walls of the City, which the heathen accounted holy,
he was to die for it. Now if this law were executed for the profaning of
walls, and temples made with hands, how much more ought the destroying of
Christians, who by faith and love have received the Lord Jesus, be so severely
punished? Even so much more (says Lyra. ibi.
Lyra) as spiritual things are to be preferred before corporal. By the Temple
of God then, the Apostle means the congregations or Churches of professed
Christians, such as that of Corinth was. These (he says) are holy: that is,
either consecrated to the worship of God, which is the professed end of
Christian assemblies: or truly holy, in regard that they make profession, and
so in charity are to be taken (but where the contrary evidently appears) of
being justified and sanctified by the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
You give two other reasons of their being termed holy; the one that the
profession of religion, of itself, wholly tends to holiness. How can this be
a good mark to know the true Church by, when every company will say, their
doctrine has the same end, and he that will believe it of any company, must
know and be able to judge of every point they maintain? Your second is, that
the Sacraments work in us (as isntrumental causes) true and inward sanctity.
I will not enter into the question about the Sacraments, what or how they
work: it is nothing to the purpose. But to the point: what heretical Church
will not, or may not say the like? whether truly or falsely it skils not:
because that will ask a new examination, such as every one that must know the
Church, cannot make. Therefore this mark of holiness is not a good mark, to
know the true Church by, being inward and claimed by all companies of
Christians.

Not only some, but all the members of the true Church of Christ, are inwardly
and outwardly holy, being purged by his blood and spirit. And this their
holiness is so manifest ordinarily, that there need none of your counterfeit
miracles for the countenancing thereof: especially since God never took that
course in his Church, to approve any man's holiness, by the gift of miracles,
the use whereof is to confirm doctrine, when need requires: neither can any
man from miracles conclude, that he which works them, is inwardly truly
sanctified. Mat. 10. 8.
Was not Judas one of them, to whom power was given even over the devils? Yet
was he Joan. 12. 6.
a thief, Luc. 22. 48.
a traitor, and Joan. 6. 70.
a devil. Many will say unto me in that day (says Mat. 7. 22. 23
our Savior) Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast
out devils, and by thy name done many great works? And then will I profess to
them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

But it is strange that you should make true inward sanctity, the mark of the
true Church, and so confidently affirm, that no doubt in the Church there are
always some holy: when as you maintain, that Bellar. de Eccles. mil. lib. 3.
cap. 10.
it is enough to make a man a true member of the true Church, that he profess
outwardly, though he have no one virtue within him at all. If all the members
of the Church may be void of holiness, how is holiness a good mark of the
Church? Certainly it is (at the most) but accidental, and such as the Church
may have, or lack, without being, or ceasing to be a Church thereby. He is
well help up no doubt, that must learn how to know the true Church, of such
teachers.

You have proved after your fashion, that the Church is holy; now you will
prove, that no company, but the Church is holy.

No sect of heretics is truly holy. All companies of Christians (besides that
of the true Church) are sects of heretics. Therefore no company of Christians
(besides that of the true Church) is truly holy.
If by heretics you understand only those, that err in some To the
proposition.
fundamental points of religion: I grant your Mayor, and Minor. As for the
conclusion, I am resolved of the truth thereof, without any proof from you.
But if you acount all heretics, who in the error of their judgment, dissent
from other Churches of Christ, in matters not fundamental, though true, I
deny your said Mayor: and affirm, that diverse Churches may differ in opinion
one from another, and continue in that difference, and maintain it
confidently, so they do it not against their knowledge and conscience; and yet
all of them be true Churches of Christ, and truly holy. For as long as the
opinions a man holds, do not cut him off, from being a true member of the
mystical body of Jesus Christ, they make him not cease to be a true
Christian, truly justified and sanctified. But he that believes truly in Jesus
Christ, and holds no fundamental error, continues by faith a member of our
Saviors mystical body. For as the just lives by faith, so wheresoever there
is true faith, there is life also: but, there is no life out of the body of
Christ, because the spirit of Christ is not to be had, but in his body. And
therefore he that by faith remains a member of Christ's body, is a true
Christian, truly justified and sanctified, though not perfectly holy.

Here we have the proof of your Mayor, such as it is.

If the doctrine it self of every heresy be opposite to true Christian
Proof of the proposition.
faith, and humility, the roots of true sanctity; then no sect of heresies
is truly holy. But the doctrine it self of every heresy is opposite to true
Christian faith and humility, the roots of true sanctity. Therefore no sect
of heretics is truly holy.
If by true Christian faith, you mean any particular truth (as To the
proposition.
a Christian ought to believe every truth of God, though not so, as that
ignorance, or misbeleeuing of every point can make him cease to be a true
Christian) I deny the consequence of your Mayor.

I deny your Minor: Not every heresy, but that which is against the
foundation only, is opposite to true Christian faith and humility, To the
Assumption.
understanding by Christian faith, such a faith as is necessarily required,
that a man may be a true Christian, by which only he lives: not by believing
every truth, though that be required of him, as a duty of sanctification. And
so your proof also is answered. A man may have that faith, by which a
Christian must live, though he be ignorant, or misinstructed in diverse points
of doctrine.

I have severed this part concerning humility from the former, because it
seems you took it to be of more importance, and therefore labor more in the
proof of it.

He that does not humble himself to every humane creature for Gods sake, but
proudly opposes himself against the universal Church, cannot be holy. But no
heretic does so humble himself, and every heretic so oppose. Therefore no
heretic can be holy.
I showed before, that there is no such universal Church, as you often name,
but never prove: and therefore this argument To the proposition.
grounded upon opposing against that which is not, in regard of such a
commandment, as God never gave, is idle and vain. More particularly I answer
concerning your Mayor: that although pride be always a sin, yet it may
sometimes be found in in a man truly sanctified, and that in opposition against
men in a matter of doctrine. But your proposition in regard of the former part
of it, as you understand it, is utterly false. For it is (no way) against
holiness, for a man not to believe every doctrine that men will propound. Gal.
18.
If I or an Angel from Heaven preach any otherwise to you, then we have
preached, let him be accursed. 1. Joan. 4. 1.
Try the spirits, whether they be of God or no. As for that place of the
Apostle which you allege, your own interpreters expound it, not of the
Church, but of the civil Magistrate. He calls the office of a King, a humane
creature (says Caietan. ad 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14
Caietan) because a King is created by the voices, or consent of men: and he
adds every, that he might take away all distinction betwixt Heathen and
Christian kings, in respect of obedience to them. Rhem. Test. ad 1. Pet. 2. 13.
14.
The Rhemists are yet more against you. So he calls the temporal magistrate
(say they) elected by the people, or holding their sovereignty by birth and
carnal propagation, ordained for the Worldly wealth, power, and prosperity of
the subject, to put a difference (directly against your interpretation) betwixt
the humane superiority, and the spiritual Rulers, and regiment, guiding and
governing the people to a higher end. But what need we any other expositor,
since 1. Pet. 2. 13 14.
the Apostle in the next words, directs us how to understand it? Whether it
be unto the King, as unto the superior, or unto governors, as unto them that
are sent of him, Romans 13. 3. 4.
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
But let us take it as generally as you will, if it be against humility, not to
be subject to the Church, it is also against it, not to be subject to the King.
Yet I hope no man is so mad, as to say, that he refuses to be subject to him,
that does not absolutely obey him in all things. How then can this place prove,
that it is against true Christian humility, not to believe the Church,
whatsoever she propound to be believed?

None but heretics do so humble themselves; and many To the assumption.
dissenting from their brethren in diverse opinions, neither deserve to be
counted heretics, though they cannot be reclaimed from their errors, nor to be
held for schismatics, as long Thomas. 2. 2. q. 39. art. 1.
as they break not off communion with the^, which yet may be done by
ignorance, without pride.

If many heathen men have so demeaned themselves, as that they could hardly, or
not at all be charged with any gross outward fault, doubtless it is possible
for heretics to do the like. At the least, what a gay mark of the Church is
this holiness, which (for a long time) may be, for ought men can discern, in
an heretic: who, all that while, may be taken for a true Christian? Besides,
if truth of religion be to be judged of by holiness of conversation, as a
certain mark (for that within cannot otherwise be seen) why may not a man
change his conceit of any religion, when he sees any notable professor
thereof fall into any grievous sin, as 2. Sam. 12. 9.
David, and Mat. 26. 70.
Peter did?

As for us, whom you term heretics at your pleasure, if our worst Protestants
be not far past in villainy by your Papists, for treasons, murders, and
generally all kind of uncleanness; I will confess, that you live better then
the grounds of your religion require, and we worse then ours. But I leave this
point till I come to examine your Assumption, concerning the holiness of your
Church of Rome.

A. D.. 5.
The true Church is proved also to be Catholic, that is to The third mark.
Catholica. Isay. cap. 59.
say, universal; first, in time, by most plain prophecies and promises of the
Scripture, as I have already showed in the eleventh chapter; unto which here I
will only add those words of Isaias: Hoc foedus meum cum eis dicit Dominus:
Spiritus meus qui est in te, and verba, quae posui in ore tuo; non recedent de
ore tuo, and de ore seminis tui, and de ore seminis seminis tui, dicit Dominus
amodo vsque in sempiternum: This is my covenant with them, says our Lord: my
Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy seed, and from the mouth of
the seed of thy seed, says our Lord, from henceforth for ever.

It may also be easily proved to be universal in respect of place, by these
plain testimonies of holy Scripture. Conuertentur ad Dominum vniuersi fines
terrae, all the bounds of the earth shall be Psalm. 21. Psalm. 71.
converted to our Lord. Dominabitur a mari vsque ad mare, and a flumine vsque
ad terminos orbis terrarum. He (to wit Christ) shall rule and have dominion
from sea to sea, and from the flood, until the furthermost limits of the earth.
Omnes gentes seruient ei. All nations shall serve him. Upon all which places
and some other, see Saint Ibidem.
Austin in his exposition of the Psalms; and among other things, which he
speaks to the purpose, note his interpretation of those words a flumine vsque
ad terminos orbis terraru^. Which words (says he) do signify, that the
dominion of Christ began a flumine Iordano, from the flood of lordan, where he,
being baptized, was made manifest, by the descending of the holy Ghost, and the
sound of his Fathers voice: from whence he began to choose his Disciples: and
from Aug. in Psa. 71
hence (says he) Doctrina eius incipiens dilatatur vsque ad terminos orbis
terrae, cu^ praedicatur Eua^geliu^ regni in vniuerso orb, in testimoniu^
omnibus gentibus, and tunc veniet finis. His doctrine beginning is dilated or
spread abroad, unto the furthest parts of the earth, when the Gospel of the
kingdom is preached over the whole world, for a testimony to all nations,
after which done, the end (of the world) shall come. See also the same S.
Austin in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae, especially in the ninth and tenth
chapters, where he eiteth and urges that place of S. Luke, where our Savior
says, Necesse est Luc. 24.
impleri omnia quae scripta sunt in lege, Prophetis and Psalmis de me, etc.
quonia^ sic scriptum est, and sic oportebat Christum pati and resurgere a
mortuis, and praedicari in nomine eius poenitentia^ and remissionem peccatoru^
in omnes gentes, incipientibus ab Ierosolyma: It is needful that all things
should be fulfilled which are written of me in the Law, the Prophets and
Psalms, etc. for so it is written, and so it was needful that Christ should
suffer, and rise again from the dead the third day, and that penance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name throughout all nations,
beginning from Jerusalem. By which place, and diverse others, he shows
plainly, that the true Church of Christ cannot be contained in a corner of the
world, but must be universal, that is, diffused and spread throughout the
whole world: as the same S. Austin, beside his other proofs, gathered out of
the very name Catholica, the which name (says he) was imposed on the Church by
our forefathers, vt ex ipso nomine Aug. l de unit. Ecclesie.
ostenderent quia per totum est, secundum totum enim Catholon Graece dicitur:
that by the very name they might show that the Church is throughout the whole
world. For (says he) the word Catholon in Greek (whereupon Catholic is
derived) signifies a thing which is general or agreeing to the while.

But we must note here, that when we say the true Church is Catholic or
diffused throughout the whole world, it is meant, that at least by succession
of time it has been, or shall be dilated more and more in every nation, till
it have gone throughout the whole world. Moreover it is termed Catholic, not
only because it shall be spread over the whole world in process of time, but
also because even in every age it has bin, and shall be always in very many
nations: and indeed in every nation, where any Christian religion is; which is
in a sort to be spread over the whole world. This does S. Austin in his book
de vnitate Ecclesiae, most diligently prove out of the Scriptures themselves.
The effect of his argument is this: The Church must be such as it is described
in Scripture. But in Scripture it is described to begin at Jerusalem, and to
proceed into all Iewrie, and to go forward Act. 1.
into Samaria: and to stretch it self further and further, vsque ad vltimum
terrae, even unto the uttermost of the earth. And (says he) the seed of the
Gospel once sown in the field of the world, fructificat and crescit, does
(not universally or for the most part Coloss. 1.
perish, but) fructify and grow or increase, in omni mundo, in the whole
world, and does continue to grow or increase, vsque ad messe^, until the
harvest of the consummation of the world, as our Savior Math. 13.
signifies: the which consummation will be when this seed is come to the full
growth: praedicabitur Euangelium in vniuerso mundo, Math. 24.
in testimonium omnibus gentibus, (says our Savior) and tune veniet
consummatio, the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, for a testimony
to all nations, and then the consummation shall come. This is S. Austins
discourse, by which he proves that the true Church of Christ is not contained
in a corner of the world, but must be dilated and spread in a sort over the
whole world.

On the contrary side, the congregation of heretics is not Catholic, neither
in time nor place. And first for time, it is evident, because true doctrine was
first preached and believed, as the good seed was first sown in the field, and
afterward the cockle, that is false doctrine, was over sowed. Saint Paul did
for three years space teach the Ephesians the true doctrine of faith, and had
conuersed among them like a lamb, seruiens Domino cum omni humilitate, serving
our Lord with all humility: but after his departure, he said, Act. 20.
he knew that ravenous wolves would enter in among them, not sparing the
flock; and that even out of their own company, there would arise
viriloquentes peruersa, vt abducant discipulos post se, men speaking perverse
things, that they may lead away disciples after Ibidem.
themselves. And as this happened at Ephesus, so doubtless in all other
places, where there has bin any alteration of Christian doctrine; first the
true faith was planted by some Apostle or Apostolic man, and afterward the
contrary was brought in by some speaking perverse things, thereby leading away
disciples after themselves. So that it is certain, that no heresy is so
ancient as the true faith: neither is any one of them of so long continuance
for the time to come, as S. Paul signified, when having described heretics of
the latter days, he adds, sed vltra non proficient, insipientia enim eoru^
manifesta erit omnibus: but they shall prosper no further, for their 2. Tim. 3.
folly shall be manifest to all. The same does S. Austin aptly express,
expounding those words of the Psalm: Ad nihilum deuenient tanquam Aug. in
psalm. 57
aqua decurrens. Non vos terreant fratres (says he) quidam fluuij qui dicuntur
torrentes; hyemalibus aquis implentur, nolite timere, post paululum transit,
decurrit aqua, ad tempus perstrepit, mox cessabit, diu stare non possunt.
Multae haereses, iam emortuae sunt, etc. My brethren, let not certain floods
called land-brookes terrify you; they are filled with winter waters, fear
them not, after a while the water does pass and run down, for a time it
makes a noise, but it will cease by and by, those floods cannot stand long.
Many heresies are now already dead, etc. Now if we will have respect of place,
it is certain that no heresy is by process of time to spread it self
absolutely over the whole world, as I have proved that the true Church shall
do, and the reason hereof may be assigned, because as S. Austin says, diu
stare non possunt, they cannot continue so long, as were needful to get them
so universally spread over the whole world; especially considering that as S.
Paul says, when they have continued a while, Insipientia earum manifesta fit
2. Tim. 3.
omnibus, their foolishness is made manifest to all, and so no marvel, si
vltra non proficiant, if they prosper not, nor make no further progress.
Neither ordinarily in any one age is heresy so universal in place as the true
Catholic religion, but for the most part it is contained in one or two
countries, as it were in a corner of the world. So that of heretics we may well
say, as S. Austin does, that they are those which say, Ecce hic est Christus,
ecce illic, Behold Christ is here, behold Aug. l. de Unit. Eccles. cap. 3.
he is there, (that is to say, the true doctrine of Christ is only truly
preached in this country or that country) of which kind of people our Savior
gives us warning, and bids us, saying, nolite credere, Mat. 24.
believe them not. We may well say also of these, as the same S. Austin does,
Quaecunque congregatio cuiuslibet haeresis in angulis August. l. de. Symb. cap.
10.
sedet, concubina est, non matrona: Whatsoever congregation of what heresy
soever sits in corners (that is to say, is but in few provinces, and in the
rest of the Christian world, either is not at al, or at the least is not
manifestly known to be) is a concubine, not a matron, to wit it is not the
spouse of Christ, nor the lawful mother of the children of God. Wherefore since
there is this difference betwixt heresy and true Christian religion, that as
the same Saint Austin says, Singulae haereses in multis gentibus vbi Ecclesia
est, non inueniuntur: Ecclesia autem, quae vbique est, etiam vbi illae sunt,
Aug. l. de Unit. Eccles. cap. 3.
inuenitur: Heresies are not found in many nations where the church is: but the
Church, which is every where, is found in those nations where heresies are.
This difference (I say) being betwixt heresy and the true religion, we need
not doubt, but that to be Catholic, or universally received in the Christian
world, especially at all times, is a note of the truth: And that therefore the
company which professes the faith, which at all times, and in a sort, in all
places, has bin received of Christians, is undoubtedly the true Church of
Christ.

A. W.
What if the true Church be proved to be Catholic, will it follow thereupon,
that therefore it is always Catholic: so that a man cannot know which is the
true Church, but by knowing which Church is Catholic? For such must every good
mark be, proper to, and al times present with that whereof it is a mark. But let
us see a little better, what Catholicknesse this is, which you deliver for a
mark of the Church.

If you mean by the name Catholic, as if that were the true Church, which
calls it self the Catholic Church, what is more easy then for any false
church to take unto it self that name? Did not Theudas and Judas profess
themselves Act. 5. 36. 37.
to be the Messiah? Has not Mat. 24. 24.
our Savior forewarned us, that there should arise false Christ's and false
Prophets? Yea the Donatists, who shut up the church in a corner of Africa, were
not ashamed to call themselves the Catholic Church. And (as Aug. epist. 48.
ad Vincent. and contr. epist. fundam. cap. 4.
Austin says) All heretics would be called Catholics.

If you urge the thing signified by the name: first, not one of your Papists
among a thousand, understands what this word Catholic means; but only that
it is the name of every one that holds of the Church of Rome. Secondly, if by
Catholic Church, you mean such a church as has bin ever since the coming of
our Savior Christ, and shall be at all times, and over all the world (as you
expound your self:) how can it be a good mark of the true Church, when as it
is an impossibility, that every man should be able to search and know, which
church has always bin, which has not: which has bin every where, which
only in some places? and much more impossible is it (if there be degrees of
impossibility) that every either learned or unlearned man should certainly
know, which church shall always continue, till the end of the world. A man may
find in the Scriptures, that the true Church of Christ shall never fail: but
which outward company of men is this true Church, no man by this mark of
future continuance can by any means discern. Whereupon I conclude, that your
Catholicknesse is neither for the name, nor for the thing, any good mark of
any true Church whatsoever.

That by Catholicknesse universality of time should be signified, you presume,
but prove not: and yet I am persuaded, you are not able to allege any one
ancient author but late Papists, that by the Catholic Church understands a
company that has bin always since the beginning of the Christian Church, and
shall always continue till the second coming of our Savior Christ. I doubt
not that the true Church spoken of in the Scripture, and the creed, has so
bin, and shall be: but I say that no man conceiues this property to be
signified by the word Catholic. The ground of my opinion is, that having
found diverse reasons alleged by the Fathers, why the Church is said to be
Catholic, I could never light upon that, concerning the time. Aug. de Genesis ad
lit. cap 1. Epist. 170. ad Sever in.
Austin ordinarily restraines Catholicknes to place: as also Optat. contra
Parmen. lib. 2.
Optatus does. Pacian. ad Sympr. epist. 1.
Pacianus where he purposely enquires the reason of the name, never once
mentions it: no more does Cyril. Hiero. catech. 18.
Cyril, who yet assigns six several respects, in which the Church may be
said to be Catholic. And surely, if by Catholicknesse, universality of time
be signified, I see no reason, neither (I think) can you show me any, why it
should not as well include the time before our Saviors coming, and so the
Church of God that then was, as that which has bin since his coming, and
shall continue till the end of the world. So does Thomas understand Thom. in
expos. Symb.. Sanct. Eccles.
the Catholicknesse of the Church, stretching it from Abels time to the end of
the world. But your great master Bellar. de Eccles milit. li. 3. cap. 16.
Bellarmine utterly denies that the Church before our Saviors coming was
Catholic, restraining this Catholicknesse to the Church of the Christians.
But because I acknowledge the truth of the doctrine, I will not strive about
the word, though you should have proved the sense of the word, and not have
given too much credit to Bellarmine, who brings a place of August. de unit.
Eccles. c. 6. apud Bellar. de Eccl. milit. li. 4 cap. 7. Sunt autom.
Austin to prove that universality of time is required to make the Church
Catholic; whereas there is not a syllable or a letter touching that matter in
the place alleged. No more is there in that other place of Bid, (which also
he brings) but rather we may prove thence, that Catholic belongs to place.
It is therefore Beda exposit. in Cant. lib. 5. ad cap. 6.
called Catholic (says Bid) because it is edified in one and the same
faith, over all parts of the world. In the sentence next before, he speaks
thus: Whence the Church is called Catholic, he teaches, saying, All the
Churches through all Iewry, Galilee and Samaria had peace. So does your Canon
expound Catholic: Did. 11. cap. Catholica. Durand. in rat. divine. offic. li.
1 cap. 1. nu. 2.
so Durand, though he add also two other reasons of the name: but not that you
bring,

As for Isa. 59. 21.
the place you quote to prove a needless question, what does it concern the
visible Church, being spoken (as Hieron. ad Isay. li. 16. c. 59.
Jerome shows at large, and proves out of Romans 11. 26.
the Apostle) of the Church of the elect Jews, or (at the most) of the elect
in general.

Before I examine that which you have here delivered, touching the Catholicknes
of the Church in respect of place, I hold it very needful to consider what was
intended by the name Catholic, and how it has bin understood of ancient
writers. And because this latter point may be a means to give us some light
for the discerning of the former, I will begin with it in the first place.
Whether the word were in use in the time of the Apostles or no, so that any man
was called a Catholic, Pacian. ad Sympro. epist. 1: de Cathol. nom.
Pacianus seems to stand in some doubt; yet he lets it pass as granted, that
no man was then so called. Once it is out of all doubt, that it is no where in
the Scriptures applied to any church, or to any man, or at all used. As for the
title Catholic given to the Epistles of James, Peter, the first of John, and
Jude, it came not from the holy Ghost the inditer of those Epistles, but was
added afterward by some man, when the books of the new Testament were
gathered together into one volume: which may better appear by the titles of
the other Epistles also, (...), etc. of Saint or holy Paul: which inscription
questionless never was of the Apostles own setting down. That which I would
have observed, is, that this name Catholic was devised and applied to the
Church not by God in the Scriptures, but by man: and therefore it is of less
importance, and more uncertainty; yet no doubt, not given at adventure, but
upon good ground, and to good purpose. For the original of it, it is Greek,
(...) of (...), through the whole, or all: which we commonly call by two Latin
names, universal or general: so that the Catholic Church, and the general
or universal Church are all one. To auow the antiquity of this title given to
the church, the confession of faith, which is commonly called the Apostles
creed, may be alleged; wherein we profess that we believe the holy Catholic
Church. That this creed is very ancient, it is out of question; but that it was
penned or indicted by the Apostles themselves, we have no certain proof. But
to leave this point, and to return again to the meaning of the words Catholic
Church: the auncientest authors in whom I find them (for they are not in
Dionysius, Ignatius, Martialis, Polycarpus, nor in Iustine, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Origin, or any man within the first 200. years) are Clem. Alexan
Stro^. li. 7. anno 200.
Clemens Alexandr. about the year 200. and Anno 250.
Cyprian about the year 250. After them it grew very common, especially in the
Latin Church. Cyprian himself has not (that I know of) any where delivered
the reason of that title Catholic. But Pacian. de Cathol. nom. vbi. supra.
Anno 380.
Pacianus Bishop of Barcelona in Spain, purposely disputes the question
against Sympronia^ a Nouatian heretic, assigning two reasons of the name, in
this sort: If (says he) I must give a reason of the word Catholic, and
express the Greek in Latin, Catholic is every where one; or (as the
learneder think) obedience to all Gods commmandements: so that by his
interpretation the Catholic Church must be the company of them who in all
places, here and there, profess one faith, and live in obedience to all the
commandments of God. This unity of true faith Cod. de sum. Trin. c^nctos
populos. Anno 372.
the Emperors respected, Valentinian, Gratian and Theodosius, when they
commanded that all they should be called Catholics, who follow the faith that
S. Peter delivered to the Church of Rome. To this purpose is that of Cyril.
Hier. catech. 18.
Cyril, where he says: The Church is called Catholic, because it teaches
all things necessary to be known. This interpretation of the word, and reason
of the title, August. ad Vincen. epi. 48. Breuic. collat. 3 diei. cap. 2.
the Donatists gave, saying that the Church was not termed Catholic, because
of the communion that one Church has with another, throughout the whole world,
but because it observes all the commandments and sacraments of God. To make
short, the reason of the title Catholic attributed to the Church, in the
judgment both of Greek and Latin writers, is, first the universal dispersion
of the church through all part, of the world. The Church (says Cyril. Hiero.
catech. 18.
Cyril of Jerusalem) is Catholic, because it is spread all over the world. It
is called Catholic (says August. ad Se uerin. epist. 170.
Austin) because it is dispersed through the whole world. See brethren (quoth
Aug. ad Psalm. 65.
the same Austin in another place) how the universality of the Church spread
over the whole world is commended. The Church (says August. de Gene. ad lit.
cap. 1.
he) is called Catholic, because it is universally perfect, and fails in
nothing, and is spread over the whole world. Where, though he seem to
acknowledge the Donatists interpretation, yet he adds the other as more
principal. And in Augus. Breuic. collat. 3. diei. cap. 2.
the conference betwixt the Catholics and Donatists, the true Christians proved
themselves to be Catholics, and so rightly called, because they held communion
with the Church spread over the face of the earth. This is that unity which
accordingly was implied in the title of the Catholic Church, signifying an
agreement in matters of faith, which was betwixt the several true Churches in
all places. Hitherto may we reasonably refer that of Pacianus, who says that
Pacian. vbi. supra.
Catholic is every where one. The unity is signified, in that so many
several congregations make but one church, in regard of that one faith which
is common to all: the vniuersalnesse of this church in the particular
assemblies, is noted to us by the word Catholic. The Fathers in the Nicene
council thought good to express that unity by professing to believe one
Church, to which they added also Catholic. So says Alexander in ep. ad
Alexand. Constant. episc. apud Theodor. hist. eccl. l. 1 c. 4.
Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, who was in the time of that Council: We
acknowledge one only Catholic and Apostolic Church. So Theod. ad Psalm. 47.
Theodoret afterward: There is one Church scattered over sea and land,
wherefore we pray, saying, For the holy and only Catholic and Apostolic
Church. And in another place: Paul (says Theod. in Cant. lib. 3. ad cap. 6.
he) names many churches, not by any division of spirit, but severed by
distance of place. It appears then, that by Catholicknes, the vniuersalnesse
of the Churches being in all places is signified. But what was the reason why
this title was added to the church? In all likelihood it was first devised and
applied to the Church, to signify the breach of the partition wall, which
sometimes stood betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, till by our Saviors death it
was cast down. This I speak upon this supposition, that the word Catholic
was as ancient in the Church, as the time of the Apostles. But if it were
brought in afterward (as I could easily persuade my self, but for reverence of
other men's judgments) we may very well assent to Pacian. vbi supra.
Pacianus, who writes of it in this manner. When after the Apostles times,
heresies sprung up, and men went about to pull in pieces the dove of God, that
same Queen the Church, by diversity of names (as every several heresy had a
proper name:) did not the Apostolic people (they that followed the doctrine
of the Apostles) require a surname for themselves, whereby they might make
difference of such as remained uncorrupted (with heresy,) lest the error of
some should rent in pieces the unspotted virgin of God? Was it not meet that
the principal head (the true Church) should have a proper name to be known
by? It appears by these words, that the reason of the name Catholic was, at
the first, that there might be a title, to distinguish sound Christians, and
true Churches, from heretics, and heretical assemblies. To which purpose,
that he might auow the use of this name, he signifies, that it had before been
used by Cyprian. And afterward he affirms directly, that the true Christian
people are divided from the heretical, when they are called Catholic. But
you will perhaps demand, why Catholic should be applied to make this
distinction. The reason thereof (as I think) is this. The Gospel by the
preaching of the Apostles, was spread far and near over the face of the
earth, and accordingly diverse Churches in diverse places established: all which
agreed in the unity of the same faith and doctrine. But Satan, Mat. 13. 25.
who is always watching to sow cockle, and darnell among the wheat, stirred up
here and there Act. 20. 30.
certain perverse and trouble some men, who set abroach errors to corrupt the
truth of Doctrine. Now these teachers being discovered, that there might be a
difference of name betwixt true Christians and them (for the name of christian
was common to both) so that every man might learn, by the very name to avoid
the heretics; it was thought meet by the learned and careful governors of
the several Churches, that heretics should be called by some special name,
either of their author, or of some point of error, which they held: and the
true professors should have the title of Catholics, because they maintained
the truth of that doctrine, which was generally professed by the Churches of
God. In this sense Pacian. vbi supra.
Pacianus says, that Christian was his name, and Catholic his surname. He
that shall advisedly consider the use of the word in Cyprian. ad Cornel. Epist.
41. Epist. 45. Sect. 10. Epist. 71. ad Quintum.
Cyprian, shall perceive that Catholic is opposed by him to schism and
heresy; and that said by him, to be done against the Catholic Church, which
is done contrary to the practice of the several Churches in all countries. So
Clemens Alexandr. Stromat. lib. 7.
Clemens says, that heresies labor to rend the Church in pieces: and he
calls the Church Catholic, because of the unity of one faith, generally
received, as may be gathered out of him: though indeed the chief thing, which
he respects in the unity of the Church, is, that All the elect are made
partakers of one and the same salvation, according to the covenant of God,
which in all ages has been one and the same. Wherein he seems to apply the
term Catholic to time: but the reason of the name by the general and
constant judgment of the ancient writers, is rather the generality of the
Church, professing the same doctrine in all places. Therefore your great Bishop
Canus loc. Theol. lib. 4. cap. postre.
Melchior Canus, expounding this title, says that the Church is called
Catholic, because in every country, people, and nation, sex and condition,
it is spread far and near. And by this difference (says he afterward) it is
distinguished, not only from the Synagogue (or Jewish Church) but also from
the conuenticles of heretics. So does your Catechis. Council. Trident. in
expos. symb.
catechism of Trent, set out by Pius Quintus, understand Catholic. The
Church is called Catholic, because it is spread, in the light of one faith,
from the East to the West, receiving men of all sorts, be they Soythians, or
Barbarians, bond or free, male or female. Then follows, the universality of
time, containing all the faithful, which have been from Adam even till this
day, or shall be hereafter till the end of the world, professing the true
faith, and being built upon Christ, upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles. If then we restrain the Catholicknesse of the Church, to
universality of place, wherein (as we have seen) persons are also contained,
The Catholic Church is nothing else, but the company of the elect, taken now
ordinarily not only out of the Jews, as heretofore till the coming of our
Savior, but also out of all nations and people whatsoever. If we stretch it
farther to universality of time also, which can hardly be proved out of the
ancient writers, it comprehends all the elect that have been, are, and shall
be, from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof. And thus much of the
Catholic Church, concerning the meaning; and reason of the word.

Now to your proof, as it lies, not by way of refutation, but of explication.
We grant (as I have said often) that the Church is common to all people, and
places, not shut up any longer within the land of Iewry, nor appropriated to
the Jews; and we condemn them of error, who teach (as sometimes the Donatists
and Rogatians did) that it is enclosed in Afric or Europe, or Asia, or
America, or any of these, and not common to every one of them, as well as to
any of them. But this is not so to be understood, as if the Church of Christ
must needs be in all these, or many of these at once in any one time. It is
enough that we acknowledge the universality of it de iure, though we deny it to
be here, or there de facto: To speak plain, it belongs to the nature of the
Church of Christ, to have all places open to it, and it is no more tied to Rome
or Jerusalem, then it is to London or Paris, yea it has spread it self over
the face of the whole earth, and has been, or shall be in every particular
country: but this largeness, has not been, nor perhaps shall be, at any one
time, but by succession, as it has pleased God to afford the means of the
Gospel, and give a blessing to it, sometimes in one place, sometimes in an
other, as your self presently acknowledge. But this does not prove, that it
is a mark to know the Church by.

This reason of the name Catholic, is a mere devise of your own, and without
warrant of antiquity. I say more, it is false too, understanding it as you do,
not of the Church of the elect, but of a company of men making known
profession of the true faith. For in Act. 2. 1. 2.
the beginning, when the Church of Christ was as pure and as glorious, as ever
it was since, it stretched not it self beyond the borders of Iewrie, but was
for a time shut up within the walls of Jerusalem: Act. 8. 4.
till the Lord by Herod's persecution, made way for it to pass into all the
world. From that time forward it grew mightily, and settled it self in many
countries, yea it ceased not to multiply till the revealing of Antichrist, who
by little and little, corrupted the truth of doctrine, even in the fundamental
points, and so destroyed the Church of God out of these parts of the world;
where it had flourished some hundreds of years. Yet was not the world left
without a true Church, no not in these western countries: but such was the
state of it, as that it remained in a few chosen servants of God, who were
hidden, 1. Reg. 18. 13.
like those fifties in Israel, from the eyes of your ravenous wolves, the
bloudthirsty Clergy of your Romish Synagogue.

Saint Austin in that book, you allege, had to do with the Donatists, who
insolently and wickedly rent themselves from the union of all the christian
Churches then in the world, allowing no other Church of Christ, but that
faction of their own in a part of Africa. Aug. de unit. Eccle. cap. 12.
They neither could, nor did charge the Churches, which they condemned, with
any gross error in doctrine: but confidently affirmed without all ground of
truth, or likelihood of reason, that the Churches planted by the Apostles, were
vanished out of the world: for supply whereof, I know not by what miracle,
their Church forsooth sprung up upon a sudden in that corner of Africa. This
ridiculous conceit of theirs Austin refuteth, by showing that the Church is to
be sought and found in the Scriptures, and not in the devises and dreams of
men. Let us not hear (says Vbi supra. cap. 3.
Austin) this I say, this you say, but let us hear, this says the Lord: The
Lords books are to be had, to the authority whereof both of us consent, both
give credit, both of us obey. There let us seek the Church, there let us try
our cause. And a little after, I will not have the Church showed me by men's
devises, but by the Oracles of God. And again afterward, when the heretics
expound the performance of the promise made to Abraham. Genesis 15. 5.
Thy seed shall be as the sand of the sea, and as the Stars of heaven; as if
it had been fulfilled in Donatus and his company, Vbi supra. cap. 6.
Austin answers: Read us this, out of the Law, out of the Prophets, out of
the Psalms, out of the Gospel it self, out of the Apostles writings; read
it, and we believe it. This foundation being laid in the five first chapters,
Austin proceeds to prove the vniuersalnesse of continuance of the Church,
out of the Scriptures; out of the old Testament, Out of the Law. cap. 6. Out of
the Prophets. c. 7 Out of the Psalms. c. 8.
in the three next chapters, out of the new in the test. So that the argument
you speak of, begins at the sixth chapter, the Mayor or proposition is in
the first chapters to the sixth, the Assumption or Minor in the other that
follow. But because you leave those three chapters, that show what the Church
should be out of the old Testament, I will follow your course, and begin at the
ninth: where Austin shows that the Church was to begin at Jerusalem, and so
to pass into Samaria, and from thence to spread it self through the whole
world. To this he brings in the Donatists thus answering. These things (say
they) we believe, and confess that they are fulfilled: but afterward the world
fell away, and only Donatus company remained. What does Austin reply? Let
them read this to us (says Chap. 12.
Austin) as they read of Enoch, of Noe, and of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
of the Tribes which remained, the rest rending themselves away, and of the
twelve Apostles, who continued faithful, when all other fell away. These
examples the Donatists had brought to countenance their schism. Austin wills
them to prove their steadfastness, when all other Churches failed, by the same
Scriptures, which were to bear witness of those, whom they alleged. He goes
forward to refute other arguments of theirs in the chapter following, still
pressing them with this, that they should show out of the Scriptures, that the
Church founded by the Apostles was to vanish away, and their faction only to
remain sincere. This was his course, and indeed, what other course could he
have taken? The heretics, as before I have noted, did not accuse the
Catholics of any error, against the foundation, whereby they might prove,
they had ceased to be of the Church: but only urged very absurdly a dream of
their own, that all, but they of Donatus part, were fallen away. What is this
to the question betwixt you and us? We show evidence of Scripture, to prove
that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. See D Abbot and D. Downam of Antichrist.
there was to be a defection, that Antichrist, the head of that defection, is
to be the chief governor of the Ecclesiastical state, that his seat is to be
at Rome: yea we manifestly convince your Apostaticall Church of many and gross
heresies: some of them directly overthrowing the foundation of our Savior
Christ's mediatorship, for the whole punishment of all our sins, and the love
of God in choosing us to everlasting life, without respect of any thing on our
part, whereby we, and not he, make difference of our selves from other: that is,
we prove that the doctrine of your Church is utterly false, in the maine
points of predestination, and justification, without the true belief whereof,
there can hardly be any true religion: because the greatest part of Gods glory,
which is the end of all religion, is overthrown, or hidden by such errors, as
your Church maintains in these matters of justification and predestination.
But to the matter. This general ground of Austins disputation we acknowledge
to be good and sound: as for that which he adds, and you especially urge, I
answer with Austins good leave, that the place he brings, proves not a
continual increase of the Church, from Anselmus ad Col. 1. 6.
time to time, but only, that when the Apostle writ, there had been a good
growth of the seed of the Gospel, as among Col. 1. 6.
the Colossians, so in the whole world. And whereas he does assay to prove,
that there must be an increase of the Gospel, till the end of the world,
because our Savior in the Parable says, that Mat. 13. 30
the good seed must grow till that time: we crave leave to dissent from him,
till it be proved, that the Parable is so to be understood, and that the
Apostle so intended that speech of his. For Parables, Austin himself has
taught us, in this very question against the Donatists, Aug. ad Vincent.
epist. 48.
that no man may apply any thing out of a Parable, to prove his purpose by,
unless he can show evident and clear reason for his interpretation. But this
evidence seems to be wanting in this exposition of the Parable. For the scope
of the Parable is not to prove, that the Church shall continually increase
till the end of the world: but to show that in the outward congregations, good
and bad shall be always mingled together, and so does Aug. contr. epist. Parm.
lib. 1. cap. 7. and lib. 2. cap. 2. Contr. lit. Petil. lib. 3. cap. 2 Contr.
Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 35 Contr. Donat. post. Collat. cap. 6. 8
Austin himself every where expound the place. And surely if from hence we may
prove such a continual growth of the Church, may we not from the same place
conclude the like of heresies? Mat. 13. 38
Let them both grow together until the harvest, says the text. But what
should I make many words about this Parable? Our Savior himself expounds it
verse. 37
afterward, and makes no such collection of the Churches increase, til the
worlds end. And Hieron. ad Math. 13
Jerome wills us not to be over hasty to guess at the meaning of the
Parable, because the exposition of it in the text, is deferred from the 13.
verse to the 37. but to wait til our Savior give us the interpretation; who
has given us to understand, that the good seed are the children of the
kingdom, not as in the Apostle, the Gospel: how then are they all one? Beside,
the Parable speaks not of the outward Church, that is, of all professors, all
which are members of your Church, if they hold of your Pope; but of the true
Church indeed, the elect of God, called verse. 43
the children of the kingdom: all the good seed (says our Savior) are just
men, and shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father: So shall not
all your Church do, many of your number, by your own confession, being wicked
and reprobate, neither just, nor to have any place in heaven. But the decay of
your own Popish Church (me thinks) should sufficiently refute this conceit.

Math. 24. 14
The other place alleged to prove that the propagation of the Gospel must
increase till the end of the world, is neither rightly understood, nor of any
force to the matter in question. To speak of the latter point in a word. Let
us grant, that by the end, the end of the world is signified. What of that? Our
Savior does not say, that the Church shall grow greater and greater till the
end of the world, but that the Gospel shall be preached in all places, before
the world have an end: so may it be, though after it is once preached for some
few years, it be out of the world for many years together, and afterward be
again begun: and this may befall it oftentimes for all that prophecy. Let us
further yield, that it shall always continue in the world, (as doubtless it
shall;) yet is there not hereupon any such necessity of this growth to be
inferred. For it may be preached in all places, and yet lose more in one
country, then it gets in three, passing along with a small retinew, from
one land to another. Now for the other point, it is apparent that our Savior,
at the least in that former part of the Chapter, prophecieth of the destruction
of Jerusalem; before which (says he) the Gospel shall be preached through the
whole world. The end (says Chrysostom. ad Mat. hom. 76.
Chrysostom) namely the end of Jerusalem. And he proves that the Gospel was
so preached by Romans 10. 18. Col. 1. 6.
two places of Scripture, the one whereof is, that out of the Epistle to the
Colossians. Of the same opinion is Thophyl. ad Mat. 24. and ibi Gloss. ordin.
and Lyra.
Theophylact, and your ordinary Gloss, and Lyra, who undertakes to show,
that the Gospel had been preached in the three known parts of the world,
Africa, Asia, and Europe, before Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus and
Vespasian. Iansen. harm. cap. 22.
Iansenius Bishop of Gaunt disputes the point, and concludes, for all Austins
authority, and reasons, that it seems we are rather to hold with
Chrysostom, that our Savior speaks of the end of Jerusalem. Which (says
he) is evidently gathered from this, that after our Lord had said; Then comes
the end, he presently adds: when therefore you shall see the abomination of
desolation, etc. For, the bringing in of this signifies, that he observes the
order of things to come, and teaches, what was to be done, when the end
whereof he spoke, should come.

All this part of your discourse, to prove that heresies are not Catholic,
either from time or place, might very well have been spared. For who ever
imagined, that error was before truth, when as it is nothing else but a
straying from the truth? Yet have some heresies been of long continuance, as
Arianisme for a great while; which was also so universal for a time, that (as
Hieron. dialog. contr. Lu^^fcrian.
Jerome says) the world wondered at it self, that it was become an Arian. But
what should I waste time and labor about these things, wherein we are of one
mind? Let it be enough for me again to put you in mind, that this
Catholicknesse can be no good mark to discern the Church by, from heretics,
because it wants your second property of plainness and easiness to be
known: yea there is a mere impossibility that any man should know, that any
heresy shall have an end before the end of the world: or that it shall not
spread far and near over the world: yea it passes the reach of ordinary men
to know certainly, that any heresy has not been since the beginning of the
Gospel, because this matter requires some special knowledge of story,
whereof most men are ignorant.

The Church in August. lib. 4. de Symb. c. 10.
Saint Austins time, by the blessing of God was so enlarged, that it had
possession of many parts of the world; and in comparison of it, heresies (yea
the Arian heresy) was but in corners. In this goodly estate continued it for
the most part, till (as before I observed) Antichrist brake out, and overthrew
the very foundation of faith. But if any man will so far press Austins
authority, as to make universality a certain mark of the church; how will
he credit the holy Ghost affirming by 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Saint Paul, that there must be a general falling away; and by Apoc. 12. 6.
Saint John, that the church must fly into the wilderness, and there lie
hidden a long time?

The August. de unit. eccl. cap. 3.
other testimony out of Austin, you translate falsely, to make it serve your
turn the better. For Austin says not, that Heresies are not found in many
nations, but that every several heresy is not found in many nations where the
Church is. But admit there were some churches without any heresy for a time,
and never any heresy but where there is also a true church; yet g Singulae
haereses.
does not Augustine say, that every man may easily discern the true church
from heretical assemblies: because it may fall out, as it has done, that
heresy, as Arianisme, shall be more general then true Religion. Let us father
grant, that whatsoever has universally bin received in the Christian world,
especially at all times, is true: yet cannot this Catholicknesse be a good note
of the church, because (if I shall make bold to repeat the same again) it is
hardly possible for any man to understand what points have bin so received. But
you forget your self very much: for by this rule you appoint them that will
judge which is the church, to enter into such a maze, as they shall never get
out of, if they shall not acknowledge any church for true, but that which
holds all things that have ever generally been held in the Christian world.
But of Catholicknesse this may suffice.

A. D.. 6.
Lastly, the true Church is also Apostolic, that is to say, such as has her
foundation from the Apostles, according to that saying of the Apostle S. Paul:
Non estis hospites and aduenae, sed estis Ephesians. 2.
ciues sanctorum and domestici Dei, superae dificati supra fundamentum
Apostolorum and Prophetarum, ipso summo angulari lapide Christo Jesus: You are
not strangers and forreiners, but you are citizens of the saints and the
domesticals of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the highest corner stone. This we may gather out of
that which is already said. For if the Apostles were they which were appointed
by our Savior, to be under him the founders of his church, which by their
preaching began at Jerusalem, and from thence by Act. 1. Act. 2. Aug. l. de
Pastor. cap. 8.
them, and those that received authority from them, tanquam vitis crescendo
vbique diffusa est, (as S. Austin speaks) like a vine by growing was spread
abroad every where: and being thus first planted and spread abroad, was
afterward by the ministry of lawfully succeeding Pastors and Doctors
continued without interruption till now, and shall be also continued till the
worlds end: there is no doubt but that this company (descending thus lineally
from the Apostles, and depending of them as their lawful progenitors, and
being built upon them, as (after Christ himself) upon principal foundations)
may well be called Apostolic, that is to say, such as derive their pedigree
from no other author or founder, later then the Apostles themselves. All this
does Tertullian briefly, but pithily comprehend in this short sentence:
Apostoli apud vnamquamque ciuitatem Ecclesias condiderunt; ab his autem
ciuitatibus seu Lib. de praescrip
Ecclesijs ab Apostolis constitutis, traducem fidei, and semina doctrinae,
caeterae exinde Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, and quotidie mutuantur vt Ecclesiae
fia^t, ac per hoc and ipsae Apostolicae deputabuntur, vt soboles Apostolicarum
Ecclesiarum: The Apostles (to wit, either immediately by themselves, or by
means of others) founded Churches at every city: from which cities or
Churches being thus founded by the Apostles, other Churches afterward did
borrow, and do daily borrow the offspring of faith, and the seeds of doctrine,
that they may be made Churches, and by this means these also shall be
accounted Apostolic, as being the issue of the Apostolical Churches.

Contrariwise, no conuenticle of heretics can be Apostolic, by reason that
heresy (being an vpstart novelty, contrary to the former received faith of
the Church) cannot have any Apostle or Apostolic man for author and founder,
but is forced to acknowledge some other, of whom as it received the first
being, so most commonly either the doctrine or the men that follow it, or both,
receive also their name, as of Arius came Arianisme and the Arians, of Montanus
came the Montanists and Montanisme; and there was never yet heretic, which
could derive the pedigree of his congregation by uninterrupted succession from
the Apostles: which makes Tertullian to urge them so earnestly, saying: Edant
haeretici origines Lib. de praescrip
Ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum, ita per successiones
decurrentes, vt primus ille Episcopus, aliquem ex Apostolicis viris, qui tamen
cum Apostolis perseuerauerit, authorem habuerit and antecessorem: Let the
heretics show the beginning of their Churches (or, as they had rather say, of
their congregations) let them unfold the order of their Bishops or
superintendents, so running down by successions, that the first of them shall
have for his author in doctrine, and predecessors in place, any Apostolic
man, who did persevere, and did not forsake the Apostles. Thus did Tertullian
urge them, because he knew well that they could never make this proper note of
the true Church to agree to their company.

A. W.
This last part of your discourse, should prove the fourth point of your former
assumption, that, to be Apostolic, is a property belonging only to the true
Church, and not hard to be discerned in any company wheresoever it is. If all
this were proved, yet were your syllogism nothing worth, because I justly
excepted against the consequence of your proposition, which remains still
without any confirmation. But to let that pass: how idle is this proof of
yours, wherein the latter part of that you should prove, is quite omittted,
that it is no hard matter for any simple man to discern which Church is
Apostolic, which is not? If you make not this clear, you prove nothing: and
yet every man may see, that it is a matter of no small study, nor short time,
to examine what Churches were first founded by the Apostles, and have had an
orderly succession without interruption from time to time: yea when a man has
made the best search he can, what has he to rest himself upon, but the report
of men, who might deceive, and be deceived? And yet this ado every poor soul
must have before he can tell to what Church he may join himself for his
spiritual instruction in matters concerning everlasting life. You will ask,
what course we take for a man's direction in this case? Surely the very same
which the Scriptures testify we ought to follow. We propound out of the
Scriptures the means of salvation: we give our people liberty to examine that
we deliver, by the touchstone of truth, the same Scriptures of God: we desire
not to have any credit given to that we teach (as a matter of faith) but so far
forth as we can prove it manifestly by the word of God. Thus we begin with men,
thus we continue; leaving the success of our poor ministry to the blessing
of Gods Spirit, in the hearts of them that vouchsafe us the hearing. But for
better direction in the trial of our doctrine, we give this rule, that true
religion first respects the glory of God, and then the present comfort and
everlasting salvation of them that profess it. Whether course, yours or ours
be more reasonable, and more agreeable to Scripture, I leave it to the
consideration of al men whom it does concern, and return to the examining of
your proof: whereof there are these two parts, that the true Church is
Apostolic, that no conuenticle of heretics can be Apostolic.

Of the former thus you dispute: If every true Church must have such a
foundation as the Church of the Ephesians had, and she had her foundation from
the Apostles; then every true Church must have her foundation from the
Apostles. But every true Church must have such a foundation as the Church of
the Ephesians had, and she had her foundation from the Apostles. Therefore
every true Church must have her foundation from the Apostles.


I would make no question of any part of your Syllogism, if To the Assumption.
by foundation from the Apostles, you understood nothing but Apostolical
doctrine, which is indeed the maine foundation of all true Churches: but you
afterward expound your meaning, and acknowledge no foundation from the
Apostles, but by the ministry of such as can derive their succession from the
Apostles, without any interruption. In this sense therefore I deny your minor,
because the former part of it is false. For every true Church has not, nor
need have, to make it a true Church, such foundation as the Church of the
Ephesians had. Yea though we doubt not, but that the Ephesia^s were converted
to the faith by some of the Apostles, and perhaps by the Act. 18. 19. Ephesians. 2.
12.
Apostle Paul: yet we do not believe that the Apostle, in the place alleged
by you, speaks of any such foundation, but of the truth of doctrine taught by
the Apostles. This may appear, because the Apostle makes the Prophets their
foundation, as well as the Apostles. But certain it is, that neither the
Prophets, nor any by succession from them, laid the foundation of the Gospel
amongst the Ephesians. He means (says Theodo. ad Ephesians. 2. Tertull. contra
Marcio^. lib. 5. cap. 17. Ambros. ad Ephesians. 2.
Theodoret) the Prophets of the old Testament, not of the new: lest you should
cavil about the name Prophets. Besides, the foundation of the Apostles must be
conceived, as our Savior Christ is the corner stone to the Ephesians: not
because he preached to them, but for that they rested upon him as a corner
stone, the doctrine of the Apostles being the foundation. And if we will tie
this to the persons that deliver Thomas in exposit. Symb.. Sanct. Eccle.
the doctrine, then to be the foundation is so proper to the Apostles, as that
it cannot agree to any other man whatsoever, how Apostolic soever he may be
imagined to be. For Apoc. 21. 14.
this was their special honor above all other Christians. Thus do the best
interpreters expound the place: Upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, that is (says Ambros. ad Ephesians. 2.
Ambrose) upon the new and old Testament. For that which the Apostles preached,
the Prophets foretold. As for the Prophets of the new Testament, They (says
Ambros. ad Ephesians. 2. 20.
Ambrose) are for the ordering of the Church founded, and not for the founding
of it. Upon Christ (says your Gloss. interl. ad Ephesians. 2. 20.
Gloss) or upon the doctrine of the Apostles. So Lyra. ibi.
Lyra, Upon the doctrine of the new and old Testament. With whom Lombard. ibi.
Lombard agrees, though he expound it also of Christ. So does Thomas ibi.
Thomas: Upon their doctrine. So does Caietan. ibi.
Caietan understand it; that a man may wonder at your ignorance or boldness,
in going against the stream of your own Doctors, without any show of reason
for it.

Wherefore if your minor intend no more, but that every true Church is builded
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, in respect of their doctrine,
no exception could be taken against it. For 1. Cor 3. 11.
other foundation no man can lay but Jesus Christ: according to the preaching
and prophesying of the Apostles and Prophets. This foundation had the Church of
Ephesus, Ansel. ad Ephesians. 2.
and in this must every true Church agree with it. But you apply this to I know
not what dependence of succession, which has no kind of warrant from that
place of the Apostle.

To supply your want of proof from the Scriptures, that every true Church must
have her foundation from some Apostle, or some man who can fetch his pedigree,
without interruption, from the Apostles: you seek to draw in Tertullian for a
witness of your error. Let us hear his depositio^. The Apostles (says
Tertul. de praescrip. cap. 20.
Tertullian) founded Churches in every city. Here to help your self, you
add this gloss: To wit, either immediately by themselves, or by means of
other. What reason is there, that he that is a party in the suite, should have
the expou^ding of the witnesses meaning? Tertullian says, the Apostles founded
Churches: you tell us, he means they did so by themselves or by others. How
shall we know, that you are so privy to his meaning? If you ground your
exposition upon those words (in every city,) whereas the Apostles came not in
diverse cities that were then in the world: I pray remember that there were at
that time many cities, into which we are not sure that the Gospel had before
Tertullians time bin received. The learned man may speak in general, and yet
with special relation to those places which were then known to be Churches
founded by the Apostles, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, Alexandria, Ephesus, etc.
He adds farther, that From these Churches founded by the Apostles, other
Churches afterward had borrowed, and (in his time) daily did borrow the
Traducem.
propagation of faith, and seeds of doctrine. I make bold to alter your
translation: let the skillful Reader judge whether I have cause or no. But what
of all these? Tertullian does not say, that no Church is to be accounted
Apostolic, but that which can without interruption show her descent from the
Apostles; nor that every Church is true, that can make such proof of her
original. But Cap. 13.
whereas the heretics, against whom he there deals, rejected and received
Scripture at their choice and would never leave wrangling; Tertullian appeals
to the judgment of those Churches which were known to be founded by the
Apostles, and in which the truth was most likely to be found. As for your
argument of succession, you shall hear Tertullians judgment of it. Let
heretics (says Tertull. de praescr. cap. 32.
Tertullian in the same book) feign a succession from the Apostles: they shall
get nothing by it. For their doctrine compared with that the Apostles taught,
by the diversity and contrariety thereof will declare, that it came not from
any Apostle or Apostolic man: because as the Apostles would not teach
contrary one to another: so Apostolic men would not deliver doctrine contrary
to the Apostles, unless they were such as were fallen away from the Apostles,
to preach otherwise then they did. So then the chief trial of a true Church,
is by the doctrine of the Apostles and their successors in the truth, because
it is possible for heretics to show their descent from the Apostles, or some
Churches which had their beginning from the Apostles or Apostolic men. Yea
Scor. hist. l. 1. cap. 3.

Augu. de haer^s. cap. 91. 92. 51.


it is manifest, that the greatest heresies (as the four maine ones condemned
in the four first general Councels) had their beginning of them who could
show their pedigree step by step from the Apostles, in respect of outward
succession.

We have soon how weakly you have proved that personal succession is a thing
belonging to the true Church: it remains that you prove it to be proper to the
church, and not common to it with heretics. To which purpose you thus reason:
No vpstart novelty contrary to the former faith of the Church, can have any
Apostle or Apostolic man for founder thereof. Every heresy is an vpstart
novelty, contrary to the former faith of the Church. Therefore no heresy can
have any Apostle or Apostolic man for the founder thereof.


How much more truly and reasonably spoke Tertullian of To the proposition.
the like matter, when he said, that Tertull. de praescr. cap. 32.
no Apostolic man taught contrary to the Apostles, unless he were such a one
as was fallen from the Apostles? He saw and acknowledged, that it was possible
for a man instructed by the Apostles themselves, to forsake the truth of
doctrine, and become an author or maintainer of heresy. Does not 1. Ioa^. 2.
18. 19
Saint John speak of some, who being bred up in the church, by heresy
departed from it? What should I name 1. Tim. 1. 20.
Hymenaeus, Alexander, 2. Tim. 1. 15.
Phygellus, Hermogenes, Apoc. 2. 6.
Nicolas, and such like? Hardly can you name me any heresy that ever took
rooting, but the first plant of it sprung up in the nursery of the Church.
Therefore your mayor is altogether untrue, being understood as it is, of
Apostolic men, in respect of personal succession, not of succeeding the
Apostles in truth of doctrine.

But you think to make good your proposition by Tertullians Tertull. de
praescr. cap. 32.
authority, who challenges the heretics to show the beginning of their
Churches from some Apostolic men. Is it possible you should either write or
read that sentence of Tertullian, and not perceive that it cuts the very
throat of your cause? Does not Tertullian in the sentence alleged by you,
directly confirm our opinion, and overthrow yours? Let them show us their
beginning (says Tertullian) from some Apostolic man. Is that enough? I: if
we believe you, who define Apostolicknes by personal succeeding the Apostles.
But what says Tertullian? He in plain terms requires such an Apostolic man
as perseuered with the Apostles, and forsook them not. Now that by this
perseuering with the Apostles, and not forsaking them, he means agreement in
doctrine; I prove it evidently by that which follows in the same Chapter.
First, Tertullian shows that it is in vain for them to plead succession in
place, if their doctrine be found contrary to that which the Apostles
delivered: I set down the sentence before. Secondly, he doubts not to say,
that by the heretics disagreeing from the Apostles in doctrine, those Churches
which cannot prove themselves to be Apostolic, by naming any Apostle, or
Apostolic man, as the first founder of them, may yet convince them not to be
Apostolic; and are themselves to be counted Apostolic, because of their
consent in doctrine, with the Apostles. This is the sum of Tertullians words:
the words themselves run thus. To this trial (namely by doctrine, as the next
sentence before shows) shall the heretics be called by those Churches; which
though they cannot allege any Apostle or Apostolic man for their founder, as
being of late, and now daily planted: yet agreeing in the same doctrine are
nevertheless counted Apostolic, by reason of their Consanguinitate doctrinae.
agreement in doctrine. Do you not see, that Tertullian disputes for us,
against your pretended succession? That he confesses, heretics may allege
personal succession? That he acknowledges those Churches for true, which
cannot derive their pedigree from the Apostles, or any Apostolic man? That he
makes the truth of doctrine agreeing with the Apostles, a certain and
necessary mark of the true Church? And are you not ashamed, for all this, to
bring Tertullian for an author of so gross an error? Were you so blind that
you discerned not this your self, or did you so despise your Readers, that you
presumed, they would never have the wit to see your ignorance or craft? It is
now discovered sufficiently, and yet this one point more must be added: that
Tertullian requires this show of their Churches beginning, not of all
heretics, as you deceitfully allege him (if you read him your self, and
took him not upon credit, at some other man's hands) but only of those, who
plead their continuance from the time of the Apostles. If any heresies (says
Tertullian) dare fetch their continuance from the Apostles time, that therefore
they may seem Apostolic, because they were, while the Apostles lived; we may
say, let them show the beginning of their Churches, let them unfold the
succession of their Bishops, etc. With such learning and conscience do you
Papists allege the Fathers, that he must needs be honester, and wiser then
you, that will not believe you, upon your bare word. We see then, that to be
Apostolic, in your sense, is no good mark of a true Church: because
Heretical Churches may so be Apostolic, and true Churches not Apostolic;
and contrariwise, that to be Apostolic in doctrine, as we expound it, is a
most certain note, whereby a true Church may be known, and the same, that we
only allow of.

A. D.. 7.
It appears therefore plain enough, that these four properties, One, Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic agree only to the true Church; and since it is no
hard matter for any to see or know, which company of Christians has these
properties (as in the next Chapter I shall declare,) it is also plain, that
these four, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, (being proper to the true
Church: and apparent enough) are good notes or marks, by which men may
discern, which company of those, which have the name of Christians, and which
profess (as every company professes themselves) to teach the true doctrine
of Christ, is indeed the true Church, which doubtless teaches in all points,
the true doctrine of Christ.

A. W.
Nay rather it has evidently appeared, that never an one of these, nor all of
them together, as you understand them, are any good marks of the true Church:
because every one of them is such, as that either a true Church may be without
them, or at the least, that no ordinary man is able to judge, which Church
has these properties in it, and which has not. Whereupon I may safely
conclude, that your grand syllogism in this Chapter, which any man may gather
out of this last part of it, is neither rightly applied to that, which you were
to prove, as I showed in the beginning; nor true it self, either for the
Mayor, or Minor, as by my answer to it, has bin proved. And whereas you add
in the end, that the true Church, doubtless, teaches in all points the true
doctrine of Christ: we have had too much trial of your weakness in judging,
and boldness in affirming, to believe this Cuckowes song of yours, though you
chaunt it over never so often.

A. D.
CHAP. XVI. That the Roman Church is One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, and
therefore the true Church.

A. W.
Although the Roman Church were One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, in such
sense as you understand these titles, yet were it not therefore the true
Church: because there is never an one of these properties, except it be
holiness, (which can be a mark of the Church to no man, because no man can
judge of it) but may, for the nature of it, agree to some heretical assembly.

A. D.. 1.
Thus far my discourse has gone along all in generalities, in showing the
necessity of true faith: and that this faith is to be learned of the true
Church: and that this Church continues always, and is visible, as being a
visible company of men professing the true faith of Christ: partaking his
Sacraments: and living under the government of lawful Pastors his substitutes:
and that, (whereas diverse companies of men take upon them the title of this
Church, whereby same do stand in doubt, which company is the true Church)
there be certain marks, by which the true Church may be certainly known, and
discerned from all other companies or congregations: and finally, that these
marks be those four, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, which are certainly
known to be the properties of the true Church, both by the Nicene Creed, and
also by plain testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers.

A. W.
This general discourse of yours has been generally so weak, and so little to
purpose, that you are now as new to begin, as you were at the first. Shall I
run over these particulars here mentioned? Chap. 1.
True faith is necessary to salvation. But not such a faith, as you require,
which must be Chap. 4.
entire, whole, and sound in all points, so that the misbeleeuing of any one
should be damnable. 2. This faith is to be learned (ordinarily) of the
ministers of the true Church: but not to be taken upon their credit, without
any examination of that they deliver, by the word of God. 3. Chap. 5.
There is no such Church, and much less any such Chap. 11. and 12.
continuance and visibilitie of it, as you imagine, though it may be said,
there is one Church: because all true Churches agree in the same doctrine of
the Gospel, as far as is necessary to salvation, so that none of them
overthrows the foundation. Chap. 13.
There are also certain marks, by which true Churches may be discerned from
false: but Chap. 15.
those you name, as you understand them, neither are to be found in every true
Church, and (to the uttermost of man's judgment) may be in heretical Churches.
Now whereas you say, that those four One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, are
certainly known to be the properties of the true Church; there is no certain
knowledge which are good marks, either by the Nicene Creed, or by the Fathers,
but only by the Scriptures: and neither that Creed, nor the Fathers do
approve of these for marks of a true Church, in such sense as you urge them.

A. D.. 2.
Now it will be good to see, if we can by these general grounds conclude,
which particular company of men is the true Church of Christ: a conclusion of
exceeding great consequence, as touching all matters in controversy concerning
the doctrine of faith, as may appear, by the drift of all my former discourse.
For the framing of which conclusion, we shall not need to bring in comparison,
all the companies or sects of diverse religions, that have been and are in the
world: because every one can easily discern of themselves, and especially by
the help of that which has been said, that neither Turks, nor Jews, nor
whatsoever other infidels, can be the true Church of Christ; because these
neither have the name of Christians, neither do they profess to have the name
of Christ. Neither am I now to meddle with heretics and schismatickes of
former ages, the which as they have bin condemned, by the general consent of
the Church, so in continuance of time, they have bin worn out by the same
Church, in so much, that even the memory of them (God be thanked) seems to
be perished with them.

A. W.
Out of all doubt, if your general grounds be true, it is possible to conclude
by them, which particular company, or rather companies, are true Churches of
Christ. For neither can the marks of a true Church agree to a false: neither
are they such, as cannot be discerned where they are.

Of Jews and Turks indeed there can be no question: but what say you to the
Greek Churches, and their Patriarckes, who plead all these points for
themselves, as well as you do, and are able to make as good proof of their
Unity, Holiness, Catholicknesse, and Apostolicknesse? Yet are you far from
acknowledging these to be true Churches of Christ, because forsooth they will
not come under the slavish yoke of your Romish Antichrist. Concerning the
heretics, and schismatics of former ages, I would to God Christian Churches
were as free of them, as we desire. But Satan, who in the beginning of the
Gospel labored p to choke the good seed with his cockle and darnell, though
for a time he continued in security, and like a strong man armed at all
points, possessed his house in peace, having procured a general subjection to
his eldest son Antichrist your Pope; yet when in this, as it were second
birth of the Gospel, he saw his kingdom again in hazard, he betook himself
to his former shifts, and spread abroad the poison of heresy in diverse
countries; that he might give you his vassals occasion to slander the doctrine
of the Gospel, as if from it these heresies had risen. This is one of his
delusions, whereby he deceiues and misleades many to damnation, though the
children of God perceive his subtilty, and rest upon the manifest truth of the
Scripture, for all Satan's practices to discredit it by this and such other
inconveniences, with which he endeauours to have the preaching of the Gospel
accompanied, for the disgrace thereof. This course also he took in the first
beginning of the Gospel, as it is manifest by the multitude and grossness of
those heresies, which brake out within the first 400 years, and were never
since equalled, for number or haynousnesse, in twice so long a time: that the
likeness of Satan's dealing may be an argument of the like truth, he now
laboreth to overthrow or discredit.

A. D.. 3.
My chief question and comparison therefore shall be betwixt the Roman Church
(that is to say, that company which communicates, and agrees in profession
of faith, with the Church of Rome, and lives under the obedience (as touching
spiritual matters) of the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops and Pastors under
him,) and the Protestants (that is to say, that company, which from Luther his
time hitherward, have opposed themselves against the Roman Church) either all
or any one sect of them; my question (I say) or comparison shall be, to which of
those two, the four forenamed marks agree, and consequently, which of them is
the true Church.

A. W.
Here you propound the matter, and argument of this chapter, which you call a
comparison: as if the question were, whether of the Churches be beautified with
those four properties, and consequently, whether of them is the true Church.
But to speak properly, there is no comparison intended therein. For our
question is not, whether your Synagogue, or our congregations, come nearer the
state of true Churches (which seems to be implied in making a comparison
betwixt them) but whether of them are indeed true Churches? If I should compare
your Church of Rome, with the Synagogues of the Jews, the profession of the
Mahometans, or the companies of Anabaptists, or other Heretics, I might find
that your doctrine came nearer to the truth, in many points, and so were more
likely to show me the true Church, or that these four properties agreed better
to you then to them. But this comparison would not settle me in the knowledge
of a true Church. The point is, as before I showed, the proof of your Minor,
that the Church of Rome is she, to whom those properties belong. For the
further confirmation whereof, you undertake to prove, that our congregations
have no interest to these titles, and this you do, not by way of comparison,
but by an argument of contraries. But let us take it, as it is, and fall to the
examination of your proofs, yet still with this prouiso, that the Church of
Rome, cannot be concluded to be the true Church, nor our congregations false
Churches, though you had, and we wanted all these marks, as you understand
them.

A. D.. 4.
. SECT. I. That the Roman Church only is one.

First I find that the Protestants Church is not perfectly One, or uniform in
dogmaticall points of faith, but variable, according to the variety of times
and persons, now holding one thing, then an other; and that the learned men
thereof, are so much at jar among themselves, in matters of faith, that it is
hard to find three, in all points, of one opinion, and (which is chiefly to
be pondered, as principally appertaining to the mark of Unity) they have no
means to end their controversies, so to return to Unity, and to continue
therein. For while as they admit no rule of faith, but only Scripture: which
scriptures diverse men expound diversely, according to the diverse humors and
affections, opinions and fantasies of every one, never one admitting any one
head or chief ruler, infallibly guided by the holy Ghost in his doctrine to
whose censure in matters of faith, every one should of necessity submit
themselves, Vt capite constituto, schismatis tollatur occasio: that, (as Saint
Jerome speaks) a Lib. 2. cont. Iouin.
head or chief ruler being ordained, occasion of schism or division may be
taken away. Whilst they do thus (as they all do thus, all proclaiming to be
ruled by only Scripture, and yet almost in every one, in one point or other,
expounding Scripture diversely, and one contrary to an other, according to the
diverse seeming of every ones sense; and never one admitting any one superior,
infallibly guided by the holy Ghost, to whose definitive sentence he and the
rest will be bound to submit their doctrine and expositions): whilst (I say)
they do thus, it is impossible that they should In fidei occurrere vnitatem,
S. Hier. in cap. 4. ad Ephesians.
meet (as Saint Hierome counsels) in the unity of faith. The which unity
in profession of faith notwithstanding, is one principal thing pertaining to
the unity of the Church: and unity of the Church, is one chief mark, by
which we must discern which is the true Church.

Contrariwise the Roman Church is always one and uniform in faith, never
varying, or holding any dogmaticall point contrary to that, which in former
times, from the beginning it did hold. The learned men thereof, though
sometimes differing in opinion, in matters not defined by the Church, yet
inmatters of faith all conspire in one. And no marvel, because they have a
most convenient means to keep unity in profession of faith, since they do
acknowledge one chief Pastor appointed over them (to wit the successor of
Saint Peter) to whose definitive censure in matters concerning religion, they
wholly submit themselves, knowing that to Saint Peter (and Matthew. 16.
his successors) Christ our Savior promised the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven: and that he would upon him (and his successors) as upon a sure rock,
build his Church. Knowing also that the same our Savior did specially pray for
Saint Peter (and every Luke. 22.
one his lawful successor) that this faith should not fail (at least so
far, as to teach the Church a false faith) to the intent, that he might be
always able to confirm his brethren, if at any time, they should fail in the
doctrine of faith. Knowing lastly, that to Saint Peter and his successors
(which word I add, not without sufficient Chrysostom. lib. 2. de Sacerdotio. S.
Leo Ser. 2. de anniuers. assumpt. suae ad Pontif. Joan. 21.
authority and reason) Christ our Lord gave most ample power over his
universal Church, saying, Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep: that is to say,
Rule or govern as chief Pastor under me, my sheep; that is, all those that
pertain to the sheepfold, which is the Church; giving him and his successors
charge to feed them, with the food of true doctrine of faith: and consequently
binding these his sheep, to receive obediently this food of true doctrine of
faith at their hands: and consequently tying himself so to assist him, and his
successors, with the guiding of the holy Ghost, that they should always
propose unto the flock of Christ (which is his universal Church) the food of
true faith, and that they should never teach (ex Cathedra) any thing contrary
to true faith: since if he should not thus assist, but should permit them to
teach the Church errors in faith, then the Church, which Luke. 10. Matthew. 23.
Matthew. 16. John. 16.
he has bound to hear this Pastor in all points, might contrary to his
purpose, err, nay should by him be bound to err, which without blasphemy
cannot be said. All Catholic learnedmen therefore knowing this, do
acknowledge that the definitive sentence of this chief Pastor (either alone,
or at least with a general Council) must needs be always an infallible and
undoubted truth; and that therefore they may safely, yea they must necessarily
submit all their judgments and opinions, either in interpreting scripture, or
otherwise in matters concerning religion, to the censure of this Apostolic
seat. The which while they do, (as they must always do, if they will be
accounted Catholic men, and will not cast out themselves, or be cast out of
the company of Catholics) how is it possible that one should dissent from
another in matters of faith, or at least obstinately (as heretics do) err in
any point of Faith?

So that this difference may be assigned betwixt any sect of heretics and the
Roman Church, that heretics are a company not united among themselves by
any link, which is able to contain and continue them in unity of faith:
whereas the Roman Church is Plebs sacerdoti adunata, and grex Pastori suo
adhaerens, as S. Cyprian says, a Church should be a people joined to their
Priest, and a flock cleaving to their Pastor, whom whilst it hears, as it is
alwaie Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 9.
bound to do, it is impossible, but that it should retain the unity of faith:
like as on the contrary side, according to the saying of Saint Cyprian: Non
aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut nata schismata, Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
quam inde quod sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus
Sacerdos, nec vnus iudex vice Christi cogitatur: Not from any other root have
heresies and schisms sprung up but from this, that men do not obey the Priest
of God, neither do they consider how that in the Church there is one Priest and
one Judge, for the time, in steed of Christ.

A. W.
In propounding these matters against us (of your proof I will speak
afterward) there are a few things worthy observation, that your dealing may be
manifest to all men. First, you talk of the Protestants Church, as if we (like
you) fancied to our selves some one church, beside which there should be none
in the whole world: whereas we acknowledge several Churches in diverse
countries to be entire in themselves, without dependence of any one upon any
other. Yet do we not deny, that there is a certain communion betwixt and
among all true Churches, which consists in their agreement in doctrine, about
all matters of the foundation, and the mutual helps of prayer, and of other
Christians duties to be performed by one congregation to and for another. In
this respect there is one Church of Protestants; and whatsoever company holds
not the foundation, is no true Church, nor to be counted a member of the
Protestants Church.

Secondly, I would know why you require that our Church should be perfectly
one: since you mentioned no such matter, in setting down and expounding the
first property of the Church. If you answer, that to be one, and to be
perfectly one, is all one: I pray you remember, that this term perfectly
should either have bin put in before, or bin left out now. Otherwise, seeing
you never tell us, that it is all one, whether a Church be one, or perfectly
one, why should we not make our advantage of your words, and presume that our
Church is held by you to be one, though it want somewhat of I know not what
perfection imagined by you: which yet you forget, when you come to show that
your church is one.

Thirdly, how does this strange speech, uniform in dogmaticall points of
faith, agree with that plainness which you profess, for instructing of the
simple? But in good earnest, what mean you by dogmaticall points? It had bin
very fit you should have used other terms, or atleast have expounded these for
the understanding of the ignorant. But this dark speech makes more for you,
because it may perhaps afford you some starting hole, if you be hard driven.
Yet a man may guess at your meaning, because when you come to prove that the
Church of Rome is one, you seem to interpret dogmaticall points to be matters
of faith defined by the Church. If we take it in this sense, I marvel how you
can charge our Churches with variableness in this respect? What one point was
ever defined by the general consent of our Churches, which has bin since
altered by like consent? If you can show none, as I may well presume you
cannot; till you do, then are our Churches in dogmatical points of faith, as
perfectly one, as yours so much bragged of.

Now to your argument, which is thus to be concluded: That Church which is
variable, according to the variety of times and persons, etc. the learned men
whereof are at jar among themselves in matters of faith, etc. and have no
means to end their controversies, is not one. But such is the Protestants
Church. Therefore the Protestants Church is not one.


I deny your mayor: variety of opinions, differences of learned To the
proposition.
men, without means to end their controversies, do not prove any Church, not
to be one, unless the matters, about which they differ, be of the foundation:
so that the ignorance of them, or error in them, be in it self damnable. To
make my answer plain, I will handle as shortly as I can, the several points of
your proposition. The Apostles, disciples and other believers, in our Saviors
time were (doubtless) the true Church, and so always continued in general,
though some of them happily fell away: being the true Church, they were also one
by your own confession; yet did they not always hold the same dogmaticall
points of faith, but varied in matters of very great moment. For a time, yea
all the time of our Saviors Christ's life, Act. 1. 6.
till his ascension, they believed that his kingdom was not only spiritual,
but also of this world. Mark. 16. 11.
They were ignorant of that high point concerning his resurrection, Romans 4. 25.
1. Cor. 15. 14. 17
without which there is no justification. Yea after the descending of the holy
Ghost upon them, Act. 10. 15.
they held it unlawful to impart the Gospel to the Gentiles. Put case now,
that some of those who followed our Savior, had continued in these opinions,
and that you had bin to give sentence, whether they and their company had bin
the true church, or the Apostles and people that claue to them: surely you must
needs, according to this first part of your reason, have condemned the
innocent, and justified the wicked. For the Apostles Church was not one,
because it had varied from some opinions formerly held by it, which the other
company still retained. As for your odious manner of propounding the point,
according to the variety of times and persons, it is but a froth of words, and
might in regard of the change, have bin charged in like sort upon the Apostles.

As for the dissent of learned men one from another, neither was the Church
ever so happy as to be without it, and you acknowledge it among your own
writers, though not in matters of faith; the contrary whereof I will show when
I come to that place. But if by matters of faith, you meant such points as are
fundamental, I could somewhat the rather hearken to you. And yet what shall it
hinder a Church from being one, that the learned men of it make question of
such maine matters, as long as the Church is not tainted with their private
errors? Did the Churches of Corinth or Galatia cease to be true Churches,
because some among them (and as it should seem no small number) 1. Cor. 15. 11
in the former denied the resurrection of the flesh; Gal. 3. 4. 5.
in the other joined the works of the law with faith to justification? yet
were both these fundame^tall errors, the continuance wherein without repentance,
must needs bring certain damnation. But your matters of faith are all points,
though never so frivolous or false, that your Church has determined by her
lawless tyranny: whereas many matters of far greater importance, not so
decreed, are left free for every man to err in, or to be ignorant of, without
any danger of damnation, or breach of unity.

This last point (as you say) is the principal matter appertaining to unity,
that there be means in the Church to end controversies. But why, or how should
this be so principal, when as the Church may agree in the same points of
doctrine, though private men dissent from each other? Indeed to the procuring
of an outward peace, it is very requisite that particular men be not suffered
to preach or write one against another. But neither is this peace so much
worth, as that for it the Church should be corrupted with errors: and the
chief power for the remedying of this inconvenience, is in the hands of the
chief Magistrate, whose duty it is to provide that his subjects 1. Tim. 2. 2.
may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.
Therefore neither does this disagreement among the learned, make the Church
cease to be one, though there be no means to end it; which yet are not wanting
in the true Churches.

Your minor also is false in every part of it. Variableness in points of faith
according to the variety of times and persons, is when To the Assumption.
(in regard of these two) the doctrine of the Church is altered. Now who is so
shameless as to charge us with having altered, and daily altering our
judgments in respect of either of these? What necessity or occasion can
variety of time bring for the change of doctrine? But for persons, what sect,
profession, church or company in the world, ever was or could be freer from
depending on any man's person, then we are, who absolutely disclaim all men's
authority over our faith? Are not you they, that 12. Art. Part. 1. art. 2.
charge us with leaving the interpretation of Scripture, and consequently the
belief of every man to his own private humor? And yet you are not ashamed,
to accuse us for variableness in our doctrine, according to the variety of
persons. If malice were not blind, it were impossible you should slander us,
with so manifest contrarieties. You are the men, whose faith depends upon the
persons of your Popes, whom you follow blindfold, whither soever any of them
leads you. We attribute to our teachers no impossibility of erring, though
we have a reverend opinion of their knowledge and faithfulness; in regard
whereof we do not lightly reject any doctrine, or exposition delivered by them,
unless it be apparently false. Yet do we not tie our selves to take
whatsoever they teach, as a matter of faith, though we are ready to yield to
any thing which is plainly proved to us out of the word of God, how contrary
soever it be to our former opinions. For we know, that men are subject to
error, and that God does not miraculously reveal all truth at once to any man;
but as it seems good to his gracious wisdom, piece by piece enlighteneth the
understanding of his servants with the knowledge of his will and word,
according to their sincerity in depending on him, faith in calling upon him,
and diligence in searching the Scriptures, the only sufficient means of
instruction. The second part of your slander is, that our learned men so jar
in matters of faith, that it is hard to find three in all points of one
opinion. Remember what you call matters of faith, points of doctrine defined by
the Church: and forbear blushing if you can, when you read this your
accusation against us. What other refutation shall I need to use, then the bare
naming of the harmony of our confessions, wherein the most partial Reader of
your side may discern your shameless hyperbole, that I may give it a
cleanlier term then it deserves. To requite your kindness, I challenge you
to name me (if you can) any one of your schoolmen, that has not refuted some
of his own fellows in some points, or been refuted by them. I confess there
are many of them, that I have not read: but I am so well acquainted with their
courses, and contradicting of one another, that I may venture without
adventure, to make this challenge.

Last of all your minor affirms, that See my answer to 12. art. part. 1. art.
5.
our learned men have no means to end their controversies. If you speak of
the event, that our means are not sufficient de facto, to make them that
strive, to agree in one opinion, or to make all men to be of one mind: I grant
that you say to be true; but I add withal, that we may have, when we will, as
good means to this purpose, as your Church has. For it is no more but to
appoint some man, to whose judgment we will stand in all matters of
controversy. What heretical Church may not have the same means of unity, if
it please? But if you deny that, de iure, we have means sufficient for the
ending of all questions: I say your minor is utterly false, because we have the
Scriptures appointed and blessed to that end by God himself. Now as the
ministry of the word is most sufficient for the begetting of faith, and
saving of men, though it have not this excellent effect in all: so the
Scriptures are of absolute sufficiency to cut off all controversies, howsoever
men will not always be ruled by them.

Your minor (as we have seen) contains a grievous accusation of us in three
points of no small importance. To which we plead not guilty, and look to
hear what evidence comes against us, to prove the enditement. But you,
rather like the foreman of the grand enquest, then the plaintiff that endites
us, instead of proving, come in with I find that the Protestants Church is not
perfectly one. This will not serve the turn: we must know how you find it, or
at least be assured that you have found it. Who would not laugh at such an
evidence? But though you leave the two former points to the credulousnesse of
your Popish followers, yet you attempt the proof of the last by this
Syllogism.

They that admit no rule of faith but only Scriptures, and allow no infallible
interpreter thereof, to whose judgment they will stand, have no means to end
their controversies, and return to unity. But the Protestant Churches admit
no rule of faith, but only Scriptures, and allow no infallible interpreter
thereof, to whose judgment they will stand. Therefore the Protestant Churches
have no means to end their controversies, and return to unity.
I deny your mayor: for the Scripture alone contains all truth necessary to
be believed, and that so plainly, that without any To the proposition.
such sovereign judgment of any man, it is possible for a reasonable man to
discern truth from falsehood. But if any man will be contentious, we have the
sword of the magistrate, and the censure of excommunication to bring him into
order, or to cut him off if he be incurable, that the unity of our Churches be
not dissolved either by heresic or schism.

But to confirm your proposition: you allege Hieron. adu. Iouin. lib. 1.
Ieromes authority, that there must be a head or chief ruler, that occasion
of schism may be taken away. The danger of schism that Jerome speaks of in
his first book against Iouinian (not as your Printer quotes it, in the second)
was not in respect of doctrine, but of outward peace. Neither was this course
held from the beginning (as Jerome says) but in discretion appointed upon
occasion. Before that, by the malice of the devil (says Hieron. ad Tit. cap.
1.
Jerome) the Church was divided into factions, and one man held of Paul,
another of Apollo, another of Cephas, Churches were governed by common consent
of the Presbyters; but after that every man began to think, that those which
he had baptized were his and not Christ's: it was decreed over all the world,
that one chosen from among the Presbyters, should be set over the rest, to whom
the whole care of the Church should appertain, and that the seeds of schisms
might be taken away. Out of which sentence of Jerome, we may observe these
points: First, that this means of procuring unity, belongs not
(necessarily) to the nature of the Church: for then it must needs have been as
ancient as the Church. But Jerome tells us, that there was a time when the
Church was without it, and that in her best estate while the Apostles lived. By
little and little (says Hieron. vbi supra.
Jerome afterward) that the plants of dissension might be plucked up, the whole
care was laid upon one. Secondly, whereas in the place alleged by you, Jerome
acknowledges such a superiority in Peter above the other Apostles, in respect
of age, for which (as he says) he was preferred before John: yet there is more
heed to be taken to his judgment in this place, where he disputes the
question without all passion, then to that which he speaks in the heat of
disputation against Iouinian. But what need we any better proof of this
point, then Saint Paul affoords us? He blames the Corinthians, because some
held of Paul, some of Apollos, some of Cephas. Cephas or Peter is the last: why
not the first rather, if he were (as you say) the head? Or why should the
Corinthians be reproved for cleaving to him especially, if he were appointed to
be the chief? It might be a fault to depend on Paul or on Apollos, who were
(in your judgment) underlings: but it was a great virtue to hang upon Cephas
the head. How forgetful was the Apostle Paul both of his duty to Peter his
head, and of so ready a means to end that schism, that would not tell them
that Peter was appointed head, to the end all occasion of schism might be
taken away? Thirdly, we are not so to understand Jerome, as if he had said,
that there was one head appointed over the whole world, but that in all places
where there were multitudes of Presbyters, order was taken that some one chosen
from among the rest, should be chief and principal in that Diocese, as I may
speak, and over all them which were in some sort accounted to be but one
body. This agrees with the practice of those times, and with that of Cypr. ad
Corn. epist. 55.. 6. Vide ibi Goulact. ad annot. 17.
Cyprian: Here of spring heresies, and schisms arise, that the Priest of the
Lord is not obeyed. Which Cyprian speaks of every several Bishop in his
Diocese. Whereunto also belongs that of Hieron. ad Rusticum.
Jerome: There be several Bishops of Churches, several Archbishops, and
several Archdeacons, and all the Ecclesiastical order is stayed by the
governors. Whereby (says Gloss. ad 7. q. 2. c. in apib^^s
the Gloss) Jerome proves that there may not be two or more Bishops in one
Church: but that there must be a several Bishop in every several Church. To
which purpose I may farther allege another place of Jerome: Unless (says
Hieron. contra Luciferian.
Jerome) the Bishop have a special power above other, there will be as many
schisms in the Church as there be Priests. This course then of authorizing
some one of the Presbyters above the rest, was for the preserving of order, and
keeping out of schism, not for the determining of controversies in Religion,
as if all must have stood to one man's judgment in questions of Divinity:
which either may be ended by the authority of the Scriptures, if they be
necessary to be determined, or if they be not, may be forbidden to be proceeded
in, without any danger to the Churches liberty. So that the Protestant
Churches fully agree in matters of substance, and want not means to settle
peace in questions of less importance: or if they did, might easily have as
good means as your Church, by appointing a Pope over themselves, as in policy
you have done. But as yet they find no such need, especially where the remedy
is worse then the disease, as it must needs be in so lawless a tyranny. Is it
not more for the glory of God, and good of the Church, as I have said Answer to
12. Art part. 1. art. 5.
otherwhere, that there should be continual disagreement in some matters of
Religion, then that all should believe and maintain false doctrine? Were not
our Savior Christ better have a troubled church, the^ none at all? Honorable
war is to be preferred before dishonorable peace, in the judgment of any wise
statesman. And can it be more glorious to God, to have outward quietness in
the Church with heresy, yea with Antichristianisme, then truth with contention?
True Christian unity consists principally in truth of religion, without which
the greatest agreement is but a conspiracy against God.

We are now come to the principal point of your Minor, wherein it stands you
upon to play the man, and to make good those four properties on the behalf of
your Church of Rome. I must needs say, it would grieve a man to take so much
pains to so little purpose; because if you prove all that now you undertake,
all that is as good as nothing, till your Mayor and your former syllogismes be
better confirmed. But yet if you quit your self well in this, your Church
shall be more beholding to you, then it was ever yet to any of your fellows,
in this question. To begin withal, you propound the question somewhat
favorably, that the Roman Church holds not any dogmaticall points contrary to
that, which in former times, from the beginning it did hold. It were much
indeed, your Church should teach contrary doctrines to those it has
heretofore taught, and I think you can hardly name me any heresy so gross, as
to fall from one contrary to an other. Your schoolmen have set up a mint,
wherein they coin us every day new distinctions, to color matters in such
sort, that your new opinions shall never appear to be contrary to your old
doctrine. Having thus pitched the state of the question, it seems you thought
there needed no proof thereof; once it is apparent you offer not (directly) to
bring any in this whole discourse: but rather endeavor to show us the reason of
this their agreement, because forsooth they acknowledge, that the definitive
sentence of the Pope, (either alone, or at least with a general Council) must
needs be always an infallible undoubted truth. Of which in due place. But to
take your matter as it lies.

That Church (say you) which holds no dogmaticall point contrary to that,
which informer times from the beginning it did hold, is always one. But the
Church of Rome holds no dogmaticall point contrary to that, which informer
times, from the beginning, it did hold. Therefore the Church of Rome is always
one.
The question is not, which Church is always one, in regard of To the
proposition.
not varying from that, which first it held, but which is always one,
according to the meaning of the Nicene Creed, that is, which Church continues
in the truth of the Gospel. For otherwise an heretical Church might be
acknowledged to be one, and so a true Church, because it remains obstinate in
that heresy, which at first it embraced. Therefore your Mayor is not true
simply, but only upon this supposition, that your Church at the first held the
truth. But because we gladly acknowledge, that the Church of Rome was at the
first sound in faith, I will leave your Proposition, and come to your
Assumption.

Your Minor is excepted against by us (as you cannot choose but know) in very
many points, and some of them concerning To the Assumption.
the foundation of Christian Religion. For trial whereof we appeal to the
Epistle to the Romans, about matters of Faith, Grace, Justification, Free
will, Predestination, and other that necessarily depend upon these. Here are
you as dumb as a fish, and like a man that had neither ears nor eyes, pass
by this exception, without taking any knowledge of it. Is this a direct way
(according to your promise in your title) to settle men's minds in all doubts,
questions and controversies, concerning matters of faith? You might as well
without all this ado, have told them in one word, that the Church of Rome is
the true Church, and cannot err. For in effect what do you else, when after
many circumstances, the question is brought to this issue, whether the Church
of Rome hold the same doctrine, which in the Apostles time she professed? You
tell us she does, without any proof of that you say, or answer to our manifold
exceptions. I will not enter into particulars, as well because I see my answer
grows greater then I intended or like of, as also for that the several
controversies betwixt you and us, are so many several exceptions against this
Assumption.

For very pure shame, you are driven to confess, that there are differences
of opinion, among the learned of your side. But to help the matter withal,
you qualify it with sometimes. Sometimes say you? Either your reading must be
very little, or your boldness exceeding great, that you mince the matter in
this sort, with sometimes. Answer my former challenge, if you can, concerning
the wars among your schoolmen; or do but look into Cardinal Bellarmines
controversies, and then tell me, whether these differences be but sometimes, or
no. What learned writer almost is there of any fame on your part, whom
Bellarmine does not dissent from, in one point or other? I might give many
instances, but there is no man that reads him, ignorant of that I say, and you
have found a shift for this matter, by interpreting dogmaticall points of
Faith, to be matters defined by the Church. Wherein we are first to consider
how absurdly you limit matters of faith: Secondly to show, that eue^ in these
matters so limited, there is not always agreement amongst your writers.

The use and office of faith (as it is only an assent) is to give undoubted
credit to the whole truth of God, by acknowledging it both to be from God, and
to be true. For proof of this, if any man desire it, I refer him, Chap. 3.
and 4.
to the third and forth Chapters of this treatise, where you speak of the
infalliblenesse and entirenesse of faith. But though this be the duty of
faith, it has pleased God to deal graciously with men, touching the means of
their salvation, and not to exact upon absolute necessity, an acknowledging,
or knowledge of every particular point of his truth. Some things are such, as I
showed before, as that without them there is no possibility of salvation, but
that whosoever is ignorant of them, Ignorantia. Pr^uatiua. Negatiua.
either by neglecting the means of knowledge, or by having no possibility to
attain unto it, he is utterly shut out (for ought we know) from the kingdom
of heaven. Other points there are, which every man must labor to know, and
believe, because they are to that end revealed by God; but yet the simple
ignorance of them, so it be without contempt or carelessness, does not deprive
a man of salvation by Christ. The former of these two kinds are more properly
matters of faith, being absolutely necessary to salvation. You speak of
matters of faith, as though not the points in themselves, but the determination
of the Church should make a necessity of them to salvation. So that the not
believing of the least matter of ceremony enjoined by the Church, shall be
more damnable then the ignorance of the greatest point of Divinity, being not
so determined. But I would feign know of you, how I shall understand what is to
be accounted determined by the Church? You confess afterward, that it is
questionable whether the chief Pastor, that is the Pope alone, or he with a
general Council, be the Church which cannot err. Doubtless, if it be (as you
Chap. 4.
taught us before) of necessity to salvation, that we believe entirely all
points of faith, without misbeleeuing any one; what hope of salvation shall be
left to any Papist, who cannot by any means know what is determined by the
Church, and what is not? Or if he may be sure that matters defined by the Pope
and a Council, are decided by the Church; yet since it is not so determined,
whether the Pope alone be sufficient to determine of points in controversy, he
may refuse to obey some constitutions of the Pope, or to believe some questions
decided by him; and thereby shut himself out of heaven, for not giving credit
to the determination of the Church, if that authority of determining be in the
Pope, and he command men so to believe. But if this determination of the
Church be jointly in the Pope and Councels, and that nothing is a matter of
faith, but that which is so determined to be, then was there almost no matter
of faith at all in the Church, till within these last 800 years. For it is
more then evident to any man, that will not be wilfully contentious, that the
Pope never bare any extraordinary sway in Councels, till he had proclaimed
himself universal Bishop, which was by the grant of the murderer Phocas, six
hundred years after the beginning of the Gospel. What shall we think of the
Churches in the Apostles times, and so forward, Anno. 325.
till the Council of Nice, in which the Popes supremacy was not heard of? Had
Christians then no matters of faith to believe? How should they, if all depend
upon the Pope and a general Council? Let me grant that those Councels in Act.
15. 29.
the Acts were general: what was there determined, but that the Gentiles were
to abstain from things offered to Idols, and blood, and that which is
strangled, and from fornication? Was nothing a matter of faith, but these few
points: which also till this time were not matters of faith? Either show some
good reason, why matters of faith were not, at this time of the Apostles
living, to be tied to general Councels and the Pope, and yet now must be; or
confess the truth to the glory of God, that matters of faith have their
authority, to be matters of faith, from the word of God, and not from the
determination of Pope or Council, or both. Neither think to shift of the
matter, by saying they are indeed matters of faith in themselves, but not to
us. For so it will come to pass, that we shall say, the first Christians had
no points that were matters of faith to them, because they had none determined
by the Church in a Council, which opinion is I know not whether of more
absurdity or impiety.

Now that you agreement in matters of faith, after the determination of the
Church, is not so great, as you would make the world believe; it may appear by
the very ground of religion, the Canon of the Scripture: which was determined
of (by your judgment) in Council. Carthag. can. 47.
the Council of Carthage: wherein the Apocryphal books (say you) were
allowed for Canonical: yet (says Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect.
Hactenus.
Bellarmine) Nicholas Lyra, Denis the Carthusia^, Hugo de sancto victore, and
Cardinalis Caietan.
Thomas de Vio, both these (at least the last) Cardinals, follow Ierom in
rejecting the^, as Apocryphal. But if this Council may be excepted against,
sure (in your judgment) the Council of Trent may not, Council. Trident. Sess 4.
which has received those books into the cano^ of the scripture. Yet for all
that, Sixtus Sene^sis. biblioth. sanctae. lib. 1. and 8.
Sixtus Senensis keeper of the Popes library, makes bold to deny the^ such
authority, even since that Counsel, as Bellar. vbi supra.
Bellarmine himself confesses. And Arias Mo^tanus praef ad biblia interlin.
Arias Montanus, since that time, doubts not to say, that the Orthodoxe or
true Church, following the Canon of the Hebrews, accounts those books of
the old Testament, written in Greek, to be Apocryphal. What say you to your
Bishop Catharin, who being one of the Council of Trent, after the
determination of the Council, against assurance of salvation, Sotus in Apolog.
contra Catharin.
defends that such assurance, (notwithstanding that decree of the Council)
may ordinarily be had by them that believe? You would persuade us, that it is a
ruled case of your Church, long ago, that the Scriptures are not sufficient
without tradition. What says Scotus prolog. in 1. senten. q. 2.
Scotus in this case? Whatsoever pertains to heavenly and supernatural
knowledge, and is necessary to be known of men in this life, is sufficiently
delivered in the holy scriptures. The holy scripture (says Joan. Gerson. sermon.
in die circumcis. co^sid. 1.
Gerson) is sufficient for the government of the Church: or else was Christ an
imperfect Lawgiuer. I might run on in the like course, touching other points,
but these shall serve for a taste: and so I pass over to your proof, that the
learned on your side, cannot possibly dissent one from another.

They which acknowledge, that the definitive sentence of the Pope is to be
rested upon, as an undoubted truth, cannot possibly dissent in matters of
faith. But all Catholic learned men acknowledge, that the Popes sentence is
such. Therefore no Catholic learned men can possibly dissent in matters of
faith.
All you conclude is, that in matters determined by the Pope and a Council,
your learned men cannot disagree, To the syllogism.
because they hold, that such a determination is certainly true: yet for all
this (as I have showed) your Church may be rent in pieces with contrary
opinions in matters of as great moment, as most are in religion: and if, for
all this, it cease not to be a true Church, why should not the Protestants have
the like privilege, who have the same opinion of the Scriptures, that you have
of the Pope? Be not so injurious to reason, or blasphemous against God, as to
avouch that no controversy can be ended by the word, because diverse men will
expound it diversely. For it is contrary both to religion and sense, to imagine
that the Lord would give his people such a Scripture as cannot be certainly
understood in all points necessary to salvation, but by I know not what
revelation to some one man.

More particularly I deny your Mayor. They that acknowledge To the proposition.
such an authority in the Pope, may yet differ in opinion about matters of
faith. I bring you example in that point of assurance, wherein Catharin
disputed against that doctrine, which Sotus and your writers generally since
the Council of Trent, affirm to have been the certain decree of the
Council. Yet were they both present in the Council, and none of the meanest
there assembed. The reason of that their dissent, and the possibility of the
like betwixt other men, arises from this, that decrees of Councels and Popes,
being set down in writing, may be diversely interpreted, and so the meaning of
them mistaken, as Catharin. tract. 2.
Catharin says, that he foresaw some men would misunderstand the Council of
Trent in that point. This is all the inconveniences, you can allege in
admitting the Scripture for Judge, and this follows the decrees of Councels
and Popes at the least, as much as the writings of the holy Ghost: who was as
able, and as careful to speak so, that all whom it concerned, might
understand him, as the holiest of your Councels or Popes.

I can hardly persuade my self, that any man of learning, let To the
Assumption.
him be never so Catholic, as you term him, can believe, that the Pope
alone, or the Pope, and a Council cannot err. But it is an opinion devised
and retained in politic discretion, to keep things in an outward quietness,
and to advance the estate of your Clergy. I may not enter into the discussing
of this privilege you claim: for it would ask much time, and a long
discourse, but I will touch it, as far as you give me necessary occasion, and
so proceed to that which follows. And first concerning the Popes own person;
which seems to be your best plea, being alleged in the first place, and
almost wholly stood upon: you cannot be so ignorant, as not to know that diverse
learned men on your side, confess and maintain, that the Pope may err. Many
Popes (says Lyra. ad Mat. 16.
Lyra) have been found to have been Apostataes from the faith. The Pope (says
Ambros. Catharin. ad Galat. 2. conclus. 1
Catharin) may err, and fall utterly from the faith. And although in Conclus.
2.
his second conclusion he tells us, that the Pope, as Pope, that is sitting (you
call it ex Cathedra, out of his chair) and lawfully, (according to the rite of
using the key of knowledge particularly committed to him) determining a matter
of faith, cannot err; so that he shall define any thing against faith: yet he
adds afterward that the Pope may decree, by way of a commandment, or Law,
some false, or unjust thing: so that (says he) there are many decrees of Popes
found to be diverse, and contrary one to another. And can every learned man,
think you, judge, which decrees the Pope made, as Pope, and which as a man?
What idle and uncertain fooleries are these distinctions? I do not believe
(says Alfons a Castro. contr. haeres. lib. 1. cap. 4. Christoph. de ca. font.
de necess. cor. theol. schol. fol. 53. b.
Alfousus) that the Pope has any flatterer so impudent, to grant him this
prerogative, that he can never err, nor be deceived in expounding Scripture. I
have learned of the school Doctors (says a late Archbishop of yours) that any
Pope may err as a Doctor, or as a man, but not as a Judge. And this he
speaks of a decree of Pope Eugenius the fourth, which many Divines (as
himself confesses) take to be a decree of the Council of Florence. Yet
Bishop Catharin boldly affirms, that there are many things, in the said
decree, which if they be strictly taken, and according Apud Christoph. vbi
supra.
to the proper meaning of the words, will be found to be false, and therefore
(as he says) need a favorable interpretation. Yea the same Archbishop is not
afraid to refute (as he pretends by the authority of the Council of Trent)
the judgment and determination of three Popes, Eugenius the fourth, Clemens
the Eugen. in decr. Clew. and Pius. in praefat. ad. Missa. Roman.
eight, and Pius the fifth: the two last having set out their Missals since the
Council of Trent, and yet (as he thinks) resolving concerning the words of
consecration, contrary to the judgment of the Council. It may appear also
by his Epistle dedicatorie, that a fourth Pope Sixtus the fifth, to whom he
writes that Treatise, was of the same opinion in that matter, with those his
predeceslors, from whom the Archbishop makes bold to dissent, as he does from
Thomas of Aquine and all his followers. But what name I private men, although
excellently learned? Let us hear a whole general Council speak. We condemn
and depose (says Council. Basil. sess. 34.
the Council of Basil,) Pope Eugenius a despiser of the holy Canons, a
disturber of the peace, and unity of the Church of God, a man notoriously
scandalous to the universal Church, a Symoniack, a for sworn man,
incorrigible, aschismaticke, fallen from the faith, and an obstinate heretic.
And for the auowing of this their act, they speak thus Council. Basil. inter
epist. Syn.
in another place: We have heard and read, that many Popes have fallen into
error and heresy: it is certain that the Pope may err. The Council has
often condemned and deposed the Pope, both for his heresy in faith, and his
lewdness in life. I might add hereunto the authority of the Council. Constable.
sess. 4.
Council of Constance, which binds the Pope to be obedient to the decrees of
Councels. But that which I have said, may suffice to show, that all learned
Papists do not know, the Pope cannot err. But you undertake to prove they do
know it, because of certain places of Scripture, wherein our Savior makes a
promise of not erring to Peter and his successors. To all which I answer in
general, that those learned men and Councels before alleged, did know that
these places were brought to prove the Popes privilege of not erring, and
notwithstanding held it for an undoubted truth, that he might err: you may
bear with us then, though we make question of it.

In particular I answer to the places alleged, concerning Saint Peter's
privilege. Math. 16. 19.
The keys signify nothing but power to open and shut heaven, to bind and
loose, by retaining or remitting the sins of men. The plain sense of those
words (says Bellar. de Romans Pont. li. 1. cap. 12.. Veru^.
Bellarmine) is this, that first the authority is promised, or the power noted
out by the keys; then the actions and office are expounded by those words, to
bind and loose. And in the verse before, he finds fault with Caiet. de insti.
and author. Romans Pont. cap 5.
Caietan for endeavoring to stretch that grant, to I know not what farther
matter. I forbear to set down any proof of this exposition, because it is
clear enough of it self, if we compare this promise with the performance of
it in John's Gospel: Ioa. 21. 22. 23
Receive the holy Ghost (says our Savior) whose sins soever ye remit, they
are remitted unto them: and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained.
Secondly I say, that Bellar. vbi supra.. Dices.
this power was not peculiar to Peter, but common to him with all the Apostles,
yea with all ministers, who are their successors in preaching the Gospel,
shutting and opening, binding and loosing. We affirm (says Bell. vbi supr..
His igitur.
Bellarmine) that in those words, Math. 18. (which are of the same nature with
the other, Math. 16.) nothing is granted, but only it is there declared and
foretold, what power the Apostles and their successors were to have. Those
things (says Maldonat. ad Math. 18.
Maldonatus) that are here promised to Peter, agree not only to him, but to
all Apostles, Bishops, and Priests. Whereupon Theophyl. ad Mat. 18.
Theophylact says, that although it was said to Peter only, I will give thee
the keys: yet the keys were granted to all the Apostles: when? when he said,
whose sins you forgive. Therefore this promise of giving the keys, conueyes no
other privilege to Peter then to all the Apostles, yea to all true ministers
of the Gospel, by the judgment of your own Jesuits.

But Luc. 22. 32.
Christ prayed especially for Peter, that his faith might not fail. And good
reason, not without need: for he knew that Satan would tempt him shreudly, and
give him a fouler foil then ever he gave any of his other Apostles. Yet
August. de verb. Dom. secund. Lucam. sermon. 36.
Austin brings in our Savior speaking in general: I have prayed the Father
for you all, that your faith might not fail. As for your Gloss, that our
Savior prayed for him, that his faith should not fail, (at least so far, as
to teach the Church a false faith:) what one word is there in the text, to anow
any such conceit? Beside it is apparent, that our Savior spoke not Luc
Brugens. ad Luc. 22.
of his Apostleship, but of his faith, as he was a Christian, wherein he had
failed finally, if our Savior had not mightily vpheld him: and in this faith
was he fit to confirm his brethren, as Heb. 4. 15. and 2. 17.
having had so extraordinary experience of Satan's temptation. But if this
prayer were made for Peter, that he might not teach false doctrine, belike
either he was more subject to that danger then the rest of the Apostles, or
they were left by our Savior in a continual danger of erring: which opinion
is a very near neighbor to blasphemy. But what a pitiful consequence is
this, Our Savior prayed that Peter's faith might not fail; therefore the Pope
cannot err? All the hold you have left, is in the charge given to Peter, Joan.
21. 15.
to feed Christ's sheep: that is, to be painful and faithful in preaching of
the Gospel. And this interpretation is agreeable to reason, that our Savior
requiring a proof of Peter's love, should charge him to make it manifest, by
taking pains to feed his sheep. But your exposition is absurd, whereby you
would have livery and seisin of sovereign authority in the Church given to
him by these words: If thou love me (says our Savior, according to your
exposition) take upon thee the sovereign government of the Church. This were
a poor proof of Peter's love, which is there demanded. You will say, the
charge of feeding was common to all the Apostles; but here the Lord speaks
particularly to Peter. He does indeed. And do you not see the reason of it?
Peter, because of his grievous fall, had need of such a charge, both for his
better autorizing, and his greater care. He speaks chiefly to Peter (says
your friar Joan. Ferus ad Joan. 21. 19
Ferus) and to him escecially commends his sheep, that he might utterly
abolish the remembrance of his denial. For because he had fallen more
grievously then the other, and had more obstinately denied Christ, he stood in
need of peculiar charge, lest by the remembrance of his denial, he might
suspect that the common charge of the Apostleship belonged not to hm. He
remedies his denying thrice, by his confessing thrice, says Theoph. ibi.
Theophylact: the like has Aug. in. Joan. tract. 123.

Hieron. in epit. Fabiola.


Austin. Peter blatted out his three denial. (says Jerome) by his three
confessions. So then all that you have said of Peter's not erring in matter of
doctrine, is nothing worth: yet do we thankfully acknowledge that Peter could
not err in matter of faith: but we say, that this was no privilege peculiar
to him, but common also to the other Apostles, by virtue of their Apostleship.
Wherein if no man succeed them, as questionless there are now no Apostles, no
man can claim a privilege of not erring by any right from them, or any
promise made to them.

It is needless therefore to make many words concerning any successor of S.
Peter: only I will signify how uncertain your Religion must needs be, that
depends upon such points as these. You tell us the Pope cannot err. We believe
you not, because we know he is (at the best) but a learned man, oftentimes not
so much, sometimes Alfons. a Castro.
scarce able to understand his grammar. You prove he cannot err, because he is
Peter's successor. We deny the consequence. Because he may succeed Peter in
place, and yet not in office of Apostleship, whereby Peter had that privilege.
But principally we deny your antecedent, that the Pope is Peter's successor. Now
we look for some certain and evident proof. But alas there is none to be had.
We therefore thus except against this imagined succession: First we say, there
is no word of scripture to prove that ever Peter came at Rome. How then can it
be a matter of faith, to hold that he was Bishop of Rome? Do not say, you must
believe the Church: for the question is, whether you be the true Church or no.
Secondly, we say farther, that it is somewhat uncertain, even in humane
stories, whether ever Peter were at Rome or no: and if it were certain, yet it
were nor a certainty of faith, but of opinion. But that the force of your
argument, and the truth of my answer may the better appear, I will propound
your reason in form, and my exceptions against it.

Peter's successor cannot err. The Pope is Peter's successor. Therefore the Pope
cannot err.
To the Mayor I answer, that he which succeeds Saint Peter To the Proposition.
in his whole right, or in all his privileges, and namely that of his
Apostleship, cannot err; but any other successor of his may err, because his
privilege of not erring is a property of his Apostleship. The proof of your
Mayor is thus to be framed: Proof of the Proposition.


He to whom the keys are promised, for whom Christ prayed, that his faith
might not fail, whom he charged to feed his sheep cannot err. But to Peter's
successor Christ promised the keys, for him he prayed that his faith might not
fail, him he charged to feed his sheep. Therefore Peter's successor cannot
err.
I deny the Mayor, if you take it in such sense, as though the To the
proposition.
power of not erring had been conveyed to Peter, by reason of this promise,
prayer and charge: otherwise notwithstanding by him, Peter, I grant that he to
whom this promise was made, that is Peter, could not err; yet was he not free
from error by virtue of this promise, prayer or charge, as I showed before.

The Minor is utterly false: the promise was made in general to all the
Apostles; the prayer and charge were peculiar To the Assumption.
to Peter's person, for such especial reason as I showed before, concerning his
temptation to deny Christ, and his denial of him. But you tell us, that you
do not apply that charge of feeding the sheep to Saint Peter's successors,
without sufficient authority and reason. Then questionless you must be able
to show us some warrant for your doing out of the Scriptures. For the
testimony or opinion of man, is too weak a ground to build a matter of faith
upon. And yet you bring us nothing but the word of a man to persuade us, and
scarce that too. For whereas you allege Chrysostom. li. 2. de Sacerdot.
Chrysostom to countenance the matter, it is but a copy of your countenance,
rather to fear then hurt us. Chrysostom says, that our Savior shed his
blood to purchase those sheep, the care whereof he committed to Peter and his
successors. But who are these successors? All ministers, or (at the least) all
Bishops. If you have read the place, I need not prove it to you. Chrysostom
had caused Basil to be preferred to a Bishopric against his will. Hereupon
Basil complains of unkind dealing. The other to excuse himself, undertakes to
show that he had not only not hurt him, but also done him a pleasure, because
he had thereby given him occasion and opportunity to manifest his love to
Christ, by feeding of his flock, which he had committed to Peter and his
successors. Now if Basil (in Chrysostoms judgment) had not been one of Peter's
successors, this had been a poor reason to persuade him that Chrysostom had
not done him wrong. For then had he not received that charge, nor discharged
that duty, to testify his love to Christ, since the love was to be testified
by feeding the flock committed, according to that charge of our Savior.

Leo sermon. 1. de anniuers. assump. sua ad Pontif.
Leo indeed makes the Bishop of Rome Peter's successor. But he is too partial
a man to be judge in his own cause. I deny not, but that he was ancient and
learned, and I am persuaded, a holy man too; but yet there appear in him every
where apparent marks of ambition, for the advancing of his own sea: which may
perhaps be excused by humane frailty, but cannot serve to prove a matter of so
great importance.

Your principal minor is false also, that the Pope is Peter's successor. To the
principal assumptio^
It was true of the first Bishops of Rome, that they were Peter's successors in
the ministry of the Gospel, wherein they labored faithfully and carefully.
But this point of succession died long since, with the care to discharge that
duty. For these last 800 years and upward, the Popes (generally) have
succeeded the first revealed Antichrist, Boniface the third, in pride,
tyranny, idleness, riot, and all kind of excess, no way resembling Saint
Peter, either in truth of doctrine, or painfulnesse in preaching.

That which you add, of I wot not what necessity lying upon God, to teach the
Church all truth, and preserve it from erring, because he has enjoined all men
to hear it, without excepting or doubting, is an idle fancy of your own,
without any likelihood of truth; as has appeared in my former answers.

But howsoever the Pope alone may err, yet in a general Council he cannot. I
hear you say so, but I see no proof of it, not indeed any show of reason for
it. Whence arises this impossibility of erring? Not from the Pope: For no man
will flatter him so shamefully (says Alfons. a Castro. lib. 1. ca. 4.
Alfonsus) as to make him believe he cannot err. Perhaps then it rests in
the Council. That cannot be neither. For Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. ca. 11.
Bellarmine tells us, that Councels, be they never so general, and never so
lawfully assembled; may err, but only so far as they follow instructions
given them by the Pope. But the Pope may err in giving instructions: and how
can freedom from erring ensue upon his instructions, if he himself were not
certainly freed from erring in giving them? And that this power of not erring,
is wholly from the Pope, no way from the Council, it is evident by this, that
Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 5.
particular Councels are as free from error as general, if they follow the
Popes direction, or be confirmed by him. But this will be yet more evident, if
we consider the course that is to be held in Popish Councels. First, the Pope
sends his Legates (says Bellar. vbi supra. cap. 11.. Quod vt melius.
Bellarmine) instructed concerning the judgment of the Apostolic sea (that
is, with knowledge of his mind, in all points that shall be handled) and that
upon condition, that if the Council iumpe in opinion with the Pope, then they
may proceed to make decrees; if it do not, then no decree may be made until
the Popes pleasure be further known. Secondly, Confirm. Council. Trident. Vide
Council. Tria. Sess. 25. c. illustrissim.
when the Council is ended, certain of the Cardinals bring the decrees
thereof to the Pope, and entreat him, that it will please his Holiness to
confirm them; which, if he like them, he does; if not, they are utterly dashed.
This being the course, how can it be imagined, that the Pope should be any more
exempted from erring with a Council, then without one? I grant he has better
helps to discern of the truth, if matters be orderly and thoroughly debated;
but we look for an impossibility of erring, which cannot be conveyed from the
Council to the Pope, because it is not in the Council, but so far as they
follow the Popes instructions: neither can it be imparted to the Council by
the Pope, because he has it not in himself alone: neither lastly can it be in
Council and Pope together, because then neither can be above other; but all
Papists are of opinion, that there must needs be a superiority in the one,
though they cannot agrtee in whether, howsoever Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. ca.
13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
Bellarmine takes upon him to determine it. I say then, it is merely
impossible, that any Papist, learned or unlearned, should know that the Pope
with a Council or without a Council cannot err, as well because the thing in
it self is false, as also for that there is no agreement about the point
amongst them: and therefore the Papists have no certain means to keep them
in any true unity.

If you will assign a difference betwixt sects of heretics and the Roman
Church, you must say, betwixt other sects of heretics and the Roman Church,
which is of all other, indeed, the most heretical. But your difference is
nothing worth. For many sects of heresies have at least for a time bin a flock
cleaving to their pastor, and holding certain grounds true or false, whereby
their Church was to be determined. As for us, whom you strike at, we have the
most sure bond that may be, to tie us all together, even the truth of God, and
are in our several Churches people cleaving to our pastors: and such must
every true church be, where there is a true Pastor: without whom how far a
company may have the name of a Church, and in what respect, I showed before.

The testimonies alleged out of Cypr. ad Pupian. epist. 68. sect. 7.
Cyprian, are not delivered by him, concerning your Roman Church, but spoken
of himself and his flock, and so generally to be applied to all other
Churches in like sort. Pupianus, to whom he writes that epistle, charged
Cyprian with dispersing the flock of Christ, by his over great severity
against them, that had fallen into idolatry in time of persecution. Cyprian
answers in his own defense, that though some stubburne and disobedient people,
refusing to show themselves truly penitent for so grievous a sin, left his
communion and congregation: yet the true Church was not thereby scattered, but
continued steadfastly, cleaving to their pastor, namely himself. The chafe
only (as Cypr. ad Cornel. epist. 55. sect. 6.
he said before) not the wheat, can be severed from the Church, for saking
their lawful Pastor, without any just cause. The other place also is of
particular Bishoprics, not of your imagined universal Church, as before.

A. D.. 5.
. II. That the Roman Church only is holy.

Secondly, I find that the Protestants congregation is not holy: because not
only most of their men be evidently more wicked then men, which both in old
time and in latter years lived in the Roman Church; as those can tell which
have seen both, and is confessed by Luther himself, who says thus: Sunt nunc
homines magis In postilla super Euang. Dom. primae adue^tus
vindictae cupidi, magis auari, magis ab omni misericordia remoti, magis
immodesti and indisciplinati, multoque deteriores quam fuerunt in Papatu: Men
are now more reuengefull, more covetous, more unmerciful, more immodest and
unruly, and much worse then when they were Papists. The like testimony you may
find given by another of their Doctors, called Smidelinus, which for brevity
Conc. 4. super cap. 21. Luc.
sake I omit. But chiefly their company is not holy, because there was never
yet Saint or holy man of it: neither is their doctrine such as may of it self
lead the most precise obseruers of it to holiness, but does (by diverse points
which have bin taught) rather incline men to liberty and loosnesse of life. As
for example, it inclines them to break fasting days, and to cast away secret
confession of sins to a Priest: both which are known to be sovereign
remedies against sin. Also it inclines them to neglect good works, for they
hold them either not to be necessary, or not meritorious of life everlasting,
which must needs make men less esteem the practice of them. Also it makes
men careless in keeping Gods commandments, because diverse Protestants (if
not all) hold them impossible to be observed; and (as it is said) impossibilium
non est electio. No man chooses or labors to atchieue that which he
thinks to be altogether impossible. It makes men also not to fear, or not
to be careful to avoid sin, because it is held among them that whatsoever we
do is sin, and that we cannot choose but continually sin, and that all
sins are of themselves mortal: which whosoever thinks, how can he be
afraid to sin, since stultum est timere, quod vitari non potest, it is
foolishness to fear that which no way can be avoided? Finally their doctrine
of predestination is able to make men careless or desperate in all actions and
consultations, since some of them hold all things so to proceeds of Gods
eternal predestination, that man (in matters of Religion at the least) has no
free will to do well, or to avoid ill, but that God himself is author, and
moves them effectually and forcibly, not only to good works, but in the same
sort unto the act of sin. Lo whither this doctrine leads a man, which
gives grounds, which of themselves incline a man, to neglect all endeavor, in
the study and practice of virtue, and to cast away care of avoiding sin and
vice: and consider whether this can be a good tree, which of Mat. 7.
it own nature brings forth so badde fruit. And see whether this company,
which teaches and believes such points of unholy doctrine, can possibly be
a Holy Church.

In the Roman Church, I confess there be some sinful folk, all in it are
not good. For the Church is called nigra and formosa, Cant. 1.
black and fair: in it are mixed good and bad, as out of diverse parables of
our Savior I proved before. But there are two differences betwixt the
sinful, which are in the Roman Church, and those which are among Sectaries.

The first difference is, that among heretics there are none, which we may
call truly holy, of which, as of the better or more worthy part, their
congregation may be termed Holy: as the Roman Church may. It may be perhaps,
that one may find diverse of them, who abstain from gross outward sins, as
stealing, swearing, etc. And that some of them do many works morally good, as
to give alms to the needy, and that they live at least in outward show, in
upright and moderate sort. But alas, these be not sufficient or certain
signs of sanctity; all this, and perhaps far more, we may read of heathen
Philosophers. These outward actions may proceed of natural, and sometime of
sinful motives: and consequently, they may be very far from true holiness,
which must be grounded in true charity; for as Saint Paul says, to
distribute all that one has to feed the poor, or to give ones body to burn,
does nothing avail without 1. Cor. 13.
charity: which charity must proceed de cord puro, and conscientia bona, and
fide non ficta, out of a pure heart, and a good 1. Tim. 1.
conscience, and an unfeigned faith. The which things being most inward; and
consequently hidden in secret, cannot sufficiently be showed to others, by
those outward actions, which may come from other causes as soon as from these.
Nay, they cannot be known certainly of the party himself. For nescit homo
vtrum odio vel amore dignus sit, a man knows not whether he be worthy of
hate or Eccles 9.
love: and quis potest dicere, mundum est cor meum? Who can say, my heart is
clean? but these things are reserved to him only, Prou. 20.
qui scrutatur corda, who searches the hearts, to with Almighty God, and it
cannot be perfectly known of men, who have them truly, and consequently who be
truly Saints, unless it please him to reveal it by miracle, or some other
certain way unto us. But hitherto See Staphil. in absolut. respo^s. Cochlae.
in actis Lutheri.
it was never heard that Almighty God did by miracle, or any such certain
way, give testimony that either Luther or Calvin, or any of their fellows or
followers had in the^ this true holiness, or that they were saints: but rather
while as they presumptuously attempted to work Anno. 1523. Bolsec. in vita
Calvin. cap. 13.
miracles, it has pleased God, by giving either none, or evil success, to
testify that they were not Saints. Whereas on the contrary side, it has
pleased God to give testimony by miracles of the faith and holiness of life
of diverse, which professed the Roman faith; of which sort I might bring in
many examples, but I will at this time only name Saint Bernard, Saint
Dominicke, Saint Francis, who on the one side, were certainly known to have
been professors of that religion, which was then, and is now professed at Rome;
as may appear, both by that which is left written of their lives, and also by
this, that they were chief fathers and founders of certain Religious orders
of Monks and Friars, which yet continue there: and on the other side, they are
certainly known to be holy men, partly by their sober, chaste, and virtuous
life, partly by the gift of miracles, in so much, that even Luther himself,
and other of our adversaries confess them to have been Saints. The which being
confessed of Luther. lib. de capt. Bab. Philip in Apol. art. 5. and 17
these, must needs infer the like confession of the sanctity of mante other,
who were also professors of the same Roman faith, whose names we may find
registered in the Calender, even in books set out by Protestants, and whose
virtuous life, holy death, and miraculous deeds, we may find in good Authors.
See Saint Athanas. in vita S. Antonij apud Surium. S. Bernard. in vita S.
Malachiae. S. Antoninus 3. part hist. titulo 23. and 24. Surius throughout his
large volumes of the lives of Saints, and others. Now this being confessed,
that diverse whom we know to have been members of the Roman Church, are Saints:
we may well infer that at least, some part of this Church is holy, and that
therefore of this part (per synecdochen) the whole may be termed Holy:
especially considering that the faith of this part, (which was a principal
root, out of which their holiness did spring) is all one in substance with
the faith which we all profess: and therefore we may say that our faith and
profession inclines and leads to the same holiness of life that theirs did.
And therefore though many, through their own fault, fail in the practice of
virtue and holiness, yet our profession (being all one with the profession of
these holy men) is to be termed holy, as theirs was. Of which holy profession
in some sort, all our whole company may be called Holy, as of the art of
painting or any other art, all that profess them are commonly termed by a
name proper to their profession, though it happen that diverse of them, be not
very skillful, nor do not much exercise his art.

And from hence rises the second difference betwixt Protestants and us, to
wit, that the very doctrine it self, which Protestants teach, does (as I
showed before) induce men to liberty, and consequently to lewd life: whereas
the Roman faith, which we profess, both expreslie for bids all vice, and
prescribes laws contrary to liberty and looseness of life; and contains
most sovereign means, to incite and move a man to all perfect virtue, and
holiness of life. As for example. It teaches, that notwithstanding the
prescience or predestination of Almighty God, man has free will, wherewith
(being aided by Gods grace, which grace, through the merit of Christ's Passion,
is ready for all, that with humble, devout and perseuerant prayer will ask,
and by frequenting in due sort the holy Sacraments, will seek for it) he may
avoid sin, and embrace virtue, the which takes away despair of shunning
evil, and doing well, which easily follows of the contrary opinion. It
teaches also that Gods commandments be not impossible to be observed; nay
nor hard (through help of grace, which is always at hand) to be observed of
one, which has but a good will; according as Saint John 1. Ioh. 5.
says, Mandata eius grauia non sunt, his commandments be not heavy; yea
that they may by the same grace, be easily observed, according to that of our
Savior, Iugum meum suaue, and onus meum Mat. 11.
leave, my yoke is sweet, and my burden light. The which moves a man to
conceive great hope of eschewing evil and living well, which hope, (and
consequently heart) to do well, a man cannot have, who persuades himself,
that Gods commandments be impossible to be observed, as I showed before.
Again it teaches, that as a man may by grace avoid sin, and easily keep
Gods commandments, and by doing good works, live well: so this good life is
pleasing and acceptable unto God, and these good works (as proceeding from
grace, and receiving virtue from the merits of Christ, of which this grace does
depend) are meritorious, and such, for reward whereof, God will give to them
that perseuerantly do them, everlasting bliss in the kingdom of heaven. The
which doctrine will, doubtless if it be duly considered, breed in a man's mind
great love and delight to do well; as the contrary must needs breed, at least
a coldness in devotion, if not a contempt and loathing of good deeds, and
specially of those good deeds, which have any difficulty annexed to them. It
teaches also that for sinners are prepared exceeding great punishments in the
next life; and that though there be means in the Church to get remission of
sin, and pardon of the pain, yet it teaches that a man cannot ordinarily be
absolutely certain, that he has so used those means, as that he has thereby
gotten that remission or pardon; which is a great motive to make men wary not
to fall into sin, and to move them, Cum metu and tremore operari salutem,
with fear and trembling to work their salvation: whereas Philip. cap 2.
Protestants upon supposed certainty of salvation cast away this wholesome
fear, and so may easily become careless of avoiding any sin. Furthermore it
prescribes wholesome laws and customs of fasting and prayer, and of other
exercises of virtue and piety, whereby the flesh may be subject to the spirit,
and the spirit to God. It maintains also secret confession of sins to a
Priest; as being a thing necessary, and commanded by our Savior himself,
the which both is a great bridle to hold men back from sin (as experience
teaches) and is a special means, whereby the Pastors of the Church, knowing
the inward conscience of their flock, may better apply fit remedies to their
spiritual diseases, and prescribe to every one fit exercises, for their
practice and progress in virtue. Finally the profession of this Church is
such, that even simple Protestants, when they see any Catholic do a thing
amiss, will ordinarily say, You should not do thus, or, a man of your
profession should do otherwise. So that those which be sinful in the Roman
Church, cannot in any sort, ascribe their sins to any defect, or peruersitie
of the doctrine of the Church, but must needs acknowledge them to proceed from
their own frailty or malice, contrary to the teaching of the Church, and
sometimes even contrary to their own conscience, and actual knowledge.

Wherefore I may conclude, that although there be some sinful men in the
Roman Church, yet it may well be called Holy; because the doctrine which it
believes and professes, of it own nature, inclines and directs a man to
the true holiness, and consequently is of it self Holy: and also because
there be many holy persons in it, some of which are certainly known in
particular to be such, by proof of miracle. Others are only known by this
probable reason, to wit, that they hold the same faith, which was holden by
those, who have been certainly known be holy men; and holding the same faith
(which must needs be the true faith, since none are truly holy, or can possibly
please God, without the right faith, which is but one,) they have in them a
root, out of which true holiness is apt to spring. And therefore, when we see
no apparent evil fruit, whereby we may discover some evil root, but only
good, which is apt to spring of this good root; and especially when we see the
fruit of their good works, to be conformable, and like to the works of those,
which are known Saints; we have great cause to judge, that they also are just
men, and in some sort holy, if not perfectly Saints. Since therefore many men
which have been and are members of the Roman Church, have been and are known,
either by absolute proof of miracle, or at least in this other manner to be
holy; of these as of the better, more worthy and principal part, the whole
may be (as I said before) termed Holy; as a tree that having a root apt to
give life to the branches, some of which being dead, others have life, is
absolutely said to be alive; which if we should see to have a corrupted root,
and could not perceive it to have any living branches, we should have cause to
affirm absolutely, that it were dead, and not alive.

A. W.
He that does not find that you are a shameless slaunderer, looks very
slightly into your report of the Protestants congregation. You find it is not
holy. No doubt you are a man of great intelligence, and have made diligent
inquiry after the matter. But it well becomes the Pharisaicall pride of your
Romish Synagogue, to boast of your own righteousness, and in comparison of
your selves, to despise all men.

Let us see what evidence you bring to prove so grievous an accusation. Most
of our men (you say) are evidently more wicked then men which lived both in old
time, and in later years in the Roman Church. How evident you make this, we
will consider by and by. For the present, I say no more, but that you speak
craftily to deceive us, in comparing most of our men, with I know not what men,
that have lived in the Roman Church. There is no question, but that (generally)
the most are the worst, every where: because all men are naturally evil, and
none good, but by the especial grace of God working in them. But if you would
have dealt plainly, you should have showed, that most men in our Churches are
more wicked, then most men that have lived in your Romish Church, since it
became the body of Antichrist revealed. For we acknowledge, that the Church of
Rome was sometimes a true Church of Christ, yielding many worthy martyrs,
confessors, and other holy men and women, to the honor of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; yea we deny not, but that even at this day, there are some true
Christians in your Churches: and that the general sort of Protestants, are
inferior to some amongst you, in regard of outward holiness: as for true
inward sanctity, neither the one, nor the other, have any part of it; I mean
neither ordinary Protestants, nor the best of your side, who continue in the
whole doctrine of your Church.

To prove that you say against our Church, you bring us in two kind of
witnesses: first generally those men, that have seen the conversation of your
Papists, and our Protestants, then particularly Luther and Smidelin: In the
former, consider how vain a flourish it was for you to compare our men now with
Papists that lived in old time, and to appeal for proof to them that have
seen both: as if you were able to show us some men of 700, or 800. years old,
or of 300. or 400, who have known and considered the behavior of your men and
ours. As for them, that by traffic or travail otherwise, have had sight and
experience of both, I dare stand to their judgment, in comparing our lives
with yours, for all parts of outward carriage. In which matter, I have been
credibly informed by them, whose credit I have no cause to suspect, that the
abomination of your Clergies, and peoples lives, has partly bred, and settled
in them a resolute abhorring of your religion, to which otherwise they were
indifferently affected.

But you press us with Luther and Smidelin, who in their earnest exhortations
and reproves, accuse our men for increase of sin, after the preaching of the
Gospel. Is this strange? Does not Romans 6. 1. 14:
the holy Apostle tell us, that the Gospel in his time, was abused to
wantonness, profane men (which yet made profession of religion) taking
advantage of Gods gracious mercy preached in the Gospel, to provoke
themselves to sin? Besides, the greatest part at the renewing of the Gospel,
claue unto Luther, rather in a detestation of your religion, the falsenesse
whereof was most evident to them, then in a certain knowledge of the truth of
that, which he taught them. But of whom spoke Luther and Smidelin? Of all
Protestant Churches? How can that be, when they knew not the one half of them?
Is it a good reason then to condemn all Protestant Churches, or the
Protestants Church in general, because Luther and Smidelin complain against
the congregations, in which they taught? And yet, what say they more then the
Apostle Paul does, who charge 1. Cor. 1. 1. and 15. 12. and
the Corinthians with many gross errors, and grievous sins, yea 5. 1. and 6.
1. 5.
with such fornication, as was not to be heard of among the Gentiles? What say
you to that sore accusation even against the ministers of the Gospel; Phil. 2.
21.
All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's? A man of your
humor and wisdom would by and by conclude hereupon, that the Church of God
in the Apostles time, was an unholy congregation. If you Jesuits and Priests
(what you are in particular, I neither know nor care) bestowed as much pains
in preaching, as you do in plotting treason, and hearing consessions, such
speeches would not seem any thing strange unto you. But that you may the
better perceive the weakness of this your reason, hearken a little, what is
said of your Church. What one can you name me (says Bernard. in Cant. ser. 77.
Bernard) among all those, that are (spiritual) rulers, that does not take
greater care, how he may empty the peoples purses, then how he may root out
their sins? You say the most of our men are wicked. Bernard, to quit you for
it, pronounces, that there is not one of your Clergy, that makes any
conscience of discharging his duty. Have you forgotten what a Bishop of yours
said in the late Council of Trent, (least any should think that you are
better now, then you were in Bernardes time?) The people (says Cornelius.
Bitonti. Episc. in Council Tridet.
the Bishop) are fallen away from Christ to Antichrist, from God to Epicurisme;
and the Priests have been their ringleaders, to all kind of lewdness. Yea
Adrianus in instruc. ad Cler.
Pope Adrian the sixth, (I am sure you will believe him) speaking of your
Prelates, says, that All of them (he puts in himself too) Declinauimus.
were declined, cuerie one to his own ways: And that there had been none of
them, a great while, that had done any good, Non fuit vsque ad vnum.
no not one of them. If such were, and be the state of your Clergy, guess
you, what the common people be. Compare your witnesses and mine, and tell me
whether we ouermatch you or no, both in number and weight.

Never any Saint of our Church? Why do you not refute that which we allege for
our selves against this slander? We plead that Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and
all the holy men named in the Scriptures, with the Martyrs and confessors,
since our Savior Christ's coming in the flesh, that all the Apostles (except
Judas, whom we leave to your Simoniacall congregation) yea that many Bishops of
Rome were of our Church. To all this you reply not so much as one word; but tell
them that will believe you, that there never was any Saint or holy man of our
Church. I cannot greatly blame you, though you bind your followers to give
credit to you, without looking for proof of that you deliver. For if you
should be put to that, all were marred. But I will render you a reason, why we
lay challenge to all those men, as members of our Church, and not of yours.
They agree (say we, disprove us if you can) with us in the substance of
doctrine, concerning salvation by Jesus Christ, and other points of the
foundation. If you were able to show the like (which is impossible) yet would
it not follow that they were of your Church: because no man is, in your account
a member of your Church, but he that agrees with you in all matters defined by
your Church; wherein I confidently anow (and am ready to justify it) there is
no ancient writer in the first thousand years, that is of your opinion; though
in some one point or other they may agree with your doctrine. But indeed we have
no saints canonized by our Church, and made mediators betwixt God and us, to
rob Jesus Christ of his office, and God the Father a See my answer to 12. art.
part. 1. art. 4.
of thanks due to him for granting our requests. And if this want make our
Church unholy, the Church in the time of our Savior himself and of his
Apostles was most unholy, in which there never was any such practice or
doctrine. Indeed this is the maine holiness, whereby Bellar. de notis Eccles.
lib. 4 cap. 11.
the learned of your side seek to prove the truth of your Church, and not that
other of particular men's conversation.

And what say you against our doctrine in this behalf? Forsooth, that it
cannot of it self lead the most precise obseruers of it to holiness. The
particulars of our doctrine accused by you, shall be defended in their several
places: now a word or two only in general. How does any doctrine lead to
holiness, but by propounding the rules of true obedience to God, wherein all
holiness consists? How do the arts of Grammar, Logic, Arithmeticke and
Geometry lead a man to speak, reason, number, and measure well, but by
delivering the true rules to these purposes, which in themselves direct to
perfection in every one of these professions? And can our doctrine be said to
be insufficient, which acknowledges the scriptures of God to be the rule of
all righteousness, and all men bound to live in obedience to the will of God,
contained and revealed in them? Do not we teach men, that upon pain of
damnation they must labor to keep all Gods commandments whatsoever? Are not
our expositions of the commandments as large in duties prescribed, and sins
forbidden, as yours are? Do we, or you, persuade men that there are some
venial sins, small breaches of Gods law, not to be regarded: whereas we show
that every least transgression of the law is damnable? But because you charge
us with particular points, which incline men (as you say) to liberty and
looseness of life, I will come to the examination of them severally, yet but
shortly, for that I have answered them all in Answer to 12. Art part. 2. art. 4.
another treatife against certain articles propounded by one of your Popish
faction.

It is utterly untrue, that our doctrine inclines any man to break fasting
days: nay rather we enjoin all men to observe days lawfully set apart for
fasting, with all care and good conscience, both for preparation to, and
carriage in the action. As for your days of abstaining from flesh, we hold the
institution of them to be void of Religion, and unlawful, as making them in
themselves a part of Gods service: whereas a man, for all your fasting, may
glut and gorge himself with wine and all dainties, so he eat no flesh, and
yet keep your Popish fast, without danger of any censure for transgressing
your law of fasting.

Confession of sins to a minister, we neither command as a necessary duty,
nor forbid as a sin, but leave it free to every man's conscience, as he
finds need of instruction or comfort. It is so far from being a remedy of
sin, as it is used by your church, that it rather prouokes men to sin,
because they have so ready and easy a means to disburden their consciences
(as they think) when they have sinned. A worthy gentleman that has seen the
experience of this matter, doubts not to avouch as much as I say: that
Relation of religion in these Western parts. sect. 7.
your people sin, that they may have somewhat to confess: and confess, that
they may return to sin: yea I can name, and if need be, bring forth one, who
has been feign in confession to accuse himself of sins which he never
committed, because his ghostly father would not be persuaded but that being a
young man, and living in one of your Popish countries, he must needs be defiled
with the corruptions of the place and age.

There is no one point, wherein you more bewray your selves to be servants, and
not sons of God, then this confession against your own souls, that you would
neglect the doing of good works, but that you look to merit everlasting life
by them. This motive to good works is so base, that no man of a free nature
would yield unto it. The very Philosophers could teach you, that virtue is to
be loved for virtue, and not for any outward respect or consequent that may
follow thereupon: and God is more dishonored by your opinion of meriting, then
honored by any your supposed good works whatsoever. If you had ever felt, what
a sharp spur to holiness of life the assurance of forgiveness of sins
is, you would never think that the practice of good works is lightly
esteemed, where the mercy of God has brought peace to the damned conscience.
And yet we want not that other help, expectation of reward, which we are sure
shall be given to the least of our good works, though not upon their desert, but
of the mere mercy of God in Jesus Christ. That wicked opinion of merit,
either before or after grace, does puff up the pride of man's nature, and
diminish the glory of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ. Wages upon desert, is the
hire of servants; reward bestowed in love, is the gift of a kind father to a
gracious son, who has showed himself willing to perform duties of obedience.

What men does it make careless, but those proud Pharisees that stand at the
staves end with God, and think scorn to labor in keeping the commandments,
unless they may so keep them, as to claim heaven upon desert by keeping of
them? Is it not enough to stir up any poor Christian soul to obedience, that
God will accept of his weak endeavors, being performed in truth and
singleness of heart, and reward them with an unspeakable measure of glory?
There is no man, unless he be more desirous of his own glory then Gods, but
will be content and glad to confess his inability to perform the whole will
of God perfectly, and yet strive from time to time to do as much as his
corruption will give way to. It seems, that not divinity only, but also
common reason fails you. Shall I be careless in bearing my horse head, and
holding him up from falling, because I am sure he treads never a sure step, but
will stumble or trip continually, do the best I can? Put case we said, as you
slander us, that whatsoever we do is sin: are there therefore no degrees in
sin? or is it all one, to sin by infirmity and wilfulness? What if a sick
man cannot by any means recover his perfect health again? shall he therefore
refuse to keep a good diet, and grow to as much strength as for his weakness
he can attain to? But what Protestant ever said, that whatsoever we do is
sin? It is one thing to say (as we do) Answer to 12. art. part 2. art. 2.
that sin by our corruption cleaues fast to our best works, another thing to
avouch (as you falsely charge us) that all we do is sin. Neither is it
foolishness to fear that which cannot be avoided, if by our fear we can make
it less hurtful to us. Yea it is a point of great discretion, to labor all
we can against sin, though we cannot wholly rid our selves of it, because by
this means our actions shall be free from the imputation of those sins, and
receive an undeserved reward at the hands of God, our merciful Father in Jesus
Christ.

You undertook to prove, that the doctrines of our Church are unholy: now you
tell us that some Protestants hold this and that. Is this to make good that you
propounded? But what Protestants can you name, that ever taught that God moves
men effectually and forcibly, not only to good works, but in the same sort
See my answer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 5.
to the act of sin? Is it your ignorance or your malice, that makes you
charge us with that which we always deny and refute? We say, there is no
force or coaction either in good or evil actions, and distinguish betwixt
necessity and constraint. All things come to pass necessarily, in regard of
the event, according Vide Durandi^s in 2. did. 25. q. 4. n. 7. and ibi Lomb.
et Thom. in 1. did. 38 q. 1. et Capreol. in 1. did. 38. q. 1. art. 2. ad 2.
pro 4. conclu.
to the providence and predestination of God. But this hinders not the working
of secundary causes, according to their several natures. Besides, though we
hold that there is a necessity of infallibility, as well in good actions as
in sins, so that whatsoever God has decreed (and he has decreed all things
that come to pass) shall certainly fall out according to his decree: yet we
make a great difference betwixt good and evil actions, by teaching that the
one are done by the work of Gods spirit in our hearts, the other by the
corruption of our nature, without any warrant or motion in us from God.
Further, in those good actions which we perform, the Lord does not only work
by us, as by instruments without sense or reason, but according to our nature,
enlightening our understanding, and sweetly inclining our affection, without
any force against our nature, to the approving of that which he would have us
do, and following us by the persuasion of his spirit, till he have brought us
ineuitably to the performance of that which he has decreed. So that we do
nothing, but willingly: but to good we are made willing by God, both for the
power and act: to evil we need no assistance, but the corruption of our own
hearts, and the temptations of the devil.

Lo whither the malice of Antichrists vassals drives them: both to avouch that
for truth against the Church of God, which is utterly false; and to gather lewd
consequences of true doctrine: and consider whether they have cause to brag of
holiness, who will do nothing that is good, but for hope of hire, and advance
their own deseruings above Gods bounty; and then tell me, if you can persuade
your conscience, that such a company of Pharisaicall merit-mongers are likely
to be the true Church of God.

You confess there be some sinful folk in the Roman Church: but your
confessions (if a man might have the hearing of them) would testify that there
are none but sinful folk amongst you. It is rehearsed by the secretary of
Sixtus 5. for a singular commendation of Pius the fifth, that the Cardinal of
Theano, and Girol. de Catena in vita de Pio 5. page 33.
the Bishop of Bagnarea, who had bin his confessors many years, affirmed, that
he never accused himself in confession of any mortal sin. And do you come
out with There are some sinful folk, and all in it are not good? Call to
mind what I alleged before out of Bernard, against your whole Clergy, that
is, as you count, your whole Church. Or let that pass, and hear him speak
more generally: From the head to the foot (says Bernar. de conuer. Pauli.
ser. 1.
Bernard of your Church) there is no part whole. And again: The whole
multitude of Christian people has conspired against Christ. In In Can. ser. 33
another place he says, that a filthy contagion had spread it self over the
whole Church. The law (says Breidenb. in hist. peregr. suae.
Breiden bachius) is departed from the Priests, justice from the Princes,
counsel from the ancient, faith from the people, love from parents, reverence
from subjects, charity from prelates, religion from Monks, good order from
young men. Neither was it thus only in places far distant from your holy
Fathers sight, but in his court, under his nose, in his bed chamber and study.
There (says Bern. de consid. ad Euge^. l. 4
Bernard of your Popes palace) the wicked grow forward, the godly grow
backward. Whatsoever perfidiousnesse and deceit (says Petrarc. epist. 19. See
Petrarkes sonet. 92. 107. 108.
Petrarke, who lived in Rome perhaps, secretary to the Pope) whatsoever
unmercifulness and pride, whatsoever impiety and lewdness of behavior the
world has, or has had scattered here and there, all that you may see and find
heaped up together in the city of Rome. Giouan. Boccac. nouel. 2.
John Boccace, who lived at the same time, complains, that not only the
courtiers, but also the Pope, Cardinals and Prelates lived most filthily, and
sinned not only by natural lust, but by that too, which is against nature,
without bridle, remorse of conscience, or shame. I forbear to set down any
particulars, whereof Platina and other that write the lives of your Popes, are
full: because I take no pleasure in laying open your shame, and it is already
performed John Bale Eng. votaries. D. Downam of Antich. lib. 1. cap. 6.
in diverse of our writers. Only I must needs say, that I cannot sufficiently
wonder at your boldness, who talk to Englishmen of your holiness, when there
is no man of our nation so young, or so ignorant, but is able to convince the
Pope himself, and his Priests and Jesuits of horrible rebellions and treasons
against our late Queen of blessed memory, and our whole estate. But what shall
I need to seek far off? Was there ever the like monstrous and unnatural
example of treason and murder (among the most savage of the heathen) to that
incredible attempt of your holy ones, for the destruction of King, Queen,
Prince, Nobility, Counsel, Judges, Gentry and Commons, all at one blow?
Sueton. in Neron.
Barbarous and bloody Nero is abhorred by all men, because he did wish that
all the Senators of Rome had but one neck, that he might cut them all off at
once. But your savageness iustifies his cruelty: he was but a pidler to your
Jesuits and Papists, who with one crack would have taken away both Senate and
people. There is more cause of fear, that posterity will never believe the
true report of this execrable attempt (it is so like rather to a devise of a
Poet, then a discourse of an history writer) then that they will condemn your
whole congregation of more then Turkish, or any other heathenish
barbarousnesse. And do you, with a shameless brazen forehead, come upon the
stage to brag of holiness? Despise not so much the long suffering of God, as
to make a show of religion, after so many abominable treasons and murders,
arising (directly) from the principles of your profession, and agreeing exactly
with the ordinary plots and courses of your holy Father: See Girol. de Caten.
in vita di Pio 5. page 112. 113.
who in the reign of our late gracious Sovereign, practiced diverse treasons
by his wicked instruments. For proof of that I say, let them which understand
Italian, read the report of his Secretary, who propounds diverse of them to
the commendation of his masters zeal, for laboring to reduce to the Church,
them that were fallen from the obedience thereunto. But the memory, and in a
manner the feeling of that horrible treason, Nouemb. 5. 1605. is yet so fresh
and green, that he deserves not to be held either for a Christian, a true
hearted Englishman, or a reasonable man, that looks for fruits of holiness
from trees planted in the Popes orchard.

Alas, this proof might well have been spared. For there is no doubt but your
Church of Rome has store of wicked men: and that you bring out of the
Canticles, neither belongs to your Church, nor concerns the ungodly. The
Church spoken of in that excellent song, is the spouse of Christ, one flesh
with his holy majesty: the company of the elect, called to true faith in the
Son of God. Among these there is not one profane Esau or bloody Cain; such as
See Platina in Syluest.
diverse of your Popes have been, not only your ordinary Papists. But this
blackness and beauty, how contrary soever they seem (as Bern. in Can. Ser.
25.
Bernard truly says) belong to one and the same person. Will thou have me
show thee a soul (says he) that is both black and beautiful? 2. Cor. 10. 10.
His epistles, say they, are of some worth, but his bodily presence is weak,
and his speech contemptible. The blackness is outward in men's sight, the
beauty in ward, seen of God. Therefore he adds Bern. ubi supr. Origin. in
Can. homil. 2.
a little after, that A true Christian soul is black in the judgment of the
world, but fair in the sight of God and of his Angels. The spouse (says Bern.
in declam. Ecce nos reliqu. omnia.
Bernard in another place) is black, but beautiful. The Apostles are men full
of sorrow, yet always rejoicing. Christ himself if you look upon him with
such eyes as the Jews did, had neither form nor beauty. Other refer this to
the estate of men, before and after their calling: before they are black,
afterward fair. Other ( Theod. in ca^t. Tres patres apud Theod.
for allegories afford variety of interpretation) apply it to the Church,
mixed of Jews and Gentiles: which is black because of the Gentiles, who before
knew not God. Psellus a pud Theod.
Psellus makes the blackness to arise from our estate in Adam, the beauty
from our righteousness in Christ. Gloss. ord. ibi. Bern. in Canti. Ser. 25.
Thom. in Cant. cap. 1. lect. 3. Gloss. interlin.
Many understand by blackness, the outward affliction of the Church. None that
I have seen, but Lyra in Cant.
Lyra, expound it of the wicked; and yet he also rather likes of that other
interpretation, which makes this blackness to be according to the conceit of
the world. But I will not greatly strive about the true sense, which is so
doubtful: only I take that exposition which you bring, to be the worst,
because it cannot agree to the true Church of Christ, the company of the elect
called; among whom there are none black, that is, wholly wicked, though all be
black in regard of their nature, and fair in their head Christ.

You have labored to show that the Protestants Church is not holy, because it
has no holy men in it. From that point you posted over to prove your own
Church to be holy. Here you return again to the disgracing of our Church, as
if your holiness were so dark in it self, that it needed ours to be laid
under it for a foil, that it might show the better. But let us examine your
proof in this comparison.

If that Church be holy, some members whereof have been holy; that unholy, no
members whereof have been holy: and some members of the Roman Church have been
holy, none of the Protestants Church; then the Roman Church is holy, the
Protestants Church unholy. But that Church some members whereof have been holy,
is holy: that unholy, no members whereof have been holy: and some members of
the Roman Church have been holy, none of the Protestants Church. Therefore the
Roman Church is holy, the Protestants Church unholy.
Your Minor is false, in both parts of it. For the former, if by To the
Assumption.
holiness, you understand true inward holiness, Chap. 15.
according to your former exposition, no company may be counted truly holy,
because some few among them are holy. For true holiness is a quality proper
to them, in whom it is, and such as cannot be communicated to any multitude
jointly considered, nor affirmed of it, unless the greater part be truly holy.
If any man will press me with the Apostles authority, who calls, 1. Cor. 1.
2. and 2. Cor. 1. 1.
the Corinthians, and all Christians in Achaia Saints: I answer, that the
reason of his so calling them, is not because some among them were truly holy,
but because they all made profession of true faith in Christ, which is always
accompanied with sanctification. According to this profession of theirs, the
Apostle charitably judges of them, and terms them 1. Cor. 1. 2.
Saints by calling; as if he should say, that they are Saints, because they
profess themselves called to holiness of life. This appears the rather,
because Ephesians. 1. 1. Coloss. 1. 2.
otherwhere, to be Saints, and to be faithful is all one: where faithfulness
is ascribed to whole congregations, professing the faith of the Gospel.
Therefore the holiness of some few, makes not all the Church truly holy, no
more then Eliah, and those seven thousand reserved by God, made the whole
Church of Israel holy in the sight of God; which was an idolatrous
congregation, and unholy, for all these holy men were in some respect outwardly
members thereof.

But let us grant, that the holiness of foam few may privilege all for this
title of holiness: yet in the second place, we may justly except against the
stretching of this privilege to all that ever shall be, by succession, of that
company. Were it not ridiculous trow you, for you Romans that now are, to
claim the reputation of valor, or the Jews the opinion of holiness, because
the estate of Rome, and the Church of the Jews had many valiant and holy men
some hundreds of years since? How then can it be true, that a Church is holy,
because it has had, I know not how long ago, some holy men members of it?

The other part of your Minor I acknowledge to be true, that no Church is holy,
which has not some holy men members of it. But I see not how this can stand
with your doctrine, Bellar. de Eccles. milit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
that it is enough to make a man a true member of the holy Catholic
Apostolic Church, that he make outward profession of believing the Gospel,
and obeying the Pope, though he have not Christian virtue in him, no not so
much as that faith, he makes show of. For if this serve to give us the right
of being true members, the Church may well be quite without inward holiness,
as a matter not appertaining to the essence, or nature of it.

The last part of your Minor is false the, Protestants Churches have had many
thousand holy men, even all that ever held the truth of the Gospel, according
to the Scriptures: and your Church never had, nor shall have any one truly
sanctified, that was wholly a member thereof, after your account, that is,
which agreed, or agrees with you in all points of Antichristianisme. But I
will follow you in your courses, and of this say more afterward. First you
prove the latter part, and dispute against our Church in this sort.

That Church which has had no members of it revealed to be holy by miracle,
or any other certain way from God, has had no members of it holy. But the
Protestants Church has had no members of it revealed to be holy, by miracle,
or any other certain way from God. Therefore the Protestants Church has had no
members of it holy.
I deny your Mayor, because it will follow upon granting it, To the
proposition.
that no man is truly to be counted holy, but he that is declared to be so, by
miracle or some other certain way from God. For your whole discourse shows,
that this is your meaning, where you tell us, that No man can be known to be
holy, but by Gods testimony of his holiness by miracle, or some other
certain way: Of miracles by and by: In the mean while I would feign know,
what these other certain ways are, which God uses, to give us assurance of
this, or that man's holiness: will you tell us a tale of I know not what
revelations, out of your Legends and books of examples, which are full of such
fained apparitions? Legend. aurea, and speculum exemplar. passim.
Put case those lewd lies were true tales, and that the miracles devised by
some of your accomplices, were worthy of credit: surely the number of them that
have been truly holy, Gabriel. Biel. in Can. miss. lect. 49.
has been very small, if no more have been holy, then can plead such
miracles or reuelatio^s for proof of their holiness. As for those, that have
testimony of their holiness from God in the Scriptures, both they are very
few, in comparison, for so many thousand years: and that means of showing who
are holy, ceased above one thousand four hundred years since.

Now concerning Miracles, why should we in these days, Mat. 16. 3. 4.
gape after them, like the unbelieving Jews, for the confirmation of any man's
holiness, since we have no warrant, nor example of Scripture, to apply them to
any such purpose? Bring me one example, if you can, out of the whole Scripture,
of any miracle wrought, to prove any man to be holy. The use of miracles is
the confirmation of doctrine, or rather the auowing of men's calling from God,
that their doctrine may be received. If I do not the works of my Father (says
Joan. 20. 37. 38.
our Savior) believe me not: but if I do, then though ye believe not me, yet
believe the works, that ye may know, and believe that the Father is in me, and
I in him. Joan. 20. 31.
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is that Christ the
son of God. To that end did our Savior furnish his Apostles with power to
work miracles: Mat. 10. 7. 8
As ye go, preach, saying, the kingdom of God is at hand. Heal the sick,
cleanse the leaprous, raise up the dead. Therefore does Pacian. ad Sympro. Epi.
3.
Pacianus require miracles of the Nouatians, because they brought in a new
Gospel. And why (I pray you) do Mat. 24. 24.
false Prophets that arise, show many great signs and wonders? To prove
themselves to be holy? No surely: if they desire an opinion of holiness, it is
that their doctrine might the rather be received.

But to proceed yet further; if no man be holy, that has not miracles, to
testify his holiness, I doubt much, whether any man may be thought holy or
no. For it is out of question, that wicked men have wrought miracles, either
truly, or at least (which I rather believe) in show, so that men could not
discern the contrary. Shall I need to name Exodus 7. 21. 22. and 7. 8.
Pharaoes sorcerers? Does not Mat. 24. 24.
the Scripture tell us, that false Christ's, and false Prophets shall show
signs and wonders? Does not 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
the Apostle forewarne us, that Antichrist shall come with signs, and lying
wonders? Your own schooleman, Gabr. Biel. in Can. Missae. lect. 29.
Gabriel Biel tells us, that miracles are wrought often times, by the
operation of devils. And Lyra. in Dan. cap. 14.
Lyra is not afraid to say, that Now and then there is great deceit used in the
Church, by miracles fained by the Priests, or some that are about them, for
their worldly commodity. Your Church affoordeth us examples of notorious lies
in this kind. I will name two of your principal Saints. Tom. 2. opusc. tract.
de concept. virg, ca. 5.
Saint Bridget avouches that it was revealed to her, that the Virgin Marie was
preserved from Original sin: Kather. ser. 5.
Saint Katharin of Syena had a quite contrary revelation. From whom rrow you
came these miracles? Many miracles (says Theophyl. in Luc. 9.
Theophylact) have been done by the devil. And August. de unit. Eccles. cap.
16.
Austin speaking of such wonders alleged by the followers of Donatus,
rejects all such, as devises of lying men, or illusions of deceitful
spirits. Let us hear your great Master Bellarmines judgment of this matter,
where he maintains miracles, as a mark of the Church. Till the Church has
approved those things that are done, for miracles, (says Bellar. de notis.
Eccles. lib. 4 cap. 14. sect. Est autem.
Bellarmine) it is not evident or certain, by assurance of faith, of any
miracle, that it is a true miracle: His reason follows. That it is not
evident, it appears, because then faith should be evident. That it is not
certain by assurance of faith, it is manifest, because it is not clear to us
by such assurance as cannot be false, that the thing done is not an illusion of
the devil. For though the devil cannot work any true miracle, yet can he in
show do any thing never so wonderful. If then there be no means to judge any
man holy, but by miracles, nor any certainty but by the testimony of the
Church, to know which are true miracles; doubtless you can never prove, that
your Church is holy, because there have been holy men members of it, till you
have first proved it to be the true Church. But of your proof enough.

To your Minor I answer, that Bellarmine, out of whom you To the Assumption.
took all this, makes the holiness of your men, and their miracles two
several proofs, though under the note of holiness I Bellar. de notis Eccles.
lib. 4. ca. 13. 14.
of life. Out of him I say farther, that the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles,
yea all that ever were holy, were members of the same Church with us, holding
the same doctrine that we do, for the substance of it. You bid me prove it.
But by your leave the duty of proving lies upon the replier, whose place you
have taken, not upon the answerer, whose person in this case, I sustain.
Besides I bring you the same proof, that Bellarmine brings for himself,
that is, I say they were all of our Church. If it be absurd to do so, let your
Cardinal learn to dispute better. It were long to enter into particulars, yet
if I had brought the argument, I would for shame have said some what in proof
of it: but let it pass as it comes for this once. Against whom make you all
this discourse, to prove that it is not possible to know certainly, who are
holy, and who are not? Surely not against the Protestants, who confess as
much. If hereupon you conclude, that our Church has had none holy, because it
has had none certainly known to be holy, the Mayor of your syllogism will be
false, as before: viz. That Church which has had no members of it revealed to
be holy by miracle, or any other certain way from God, has had no members of
it holy: and I will answer to your Minor, as I did, that the Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles were members of our Church, certainly known to be holy
by revelation from God.

But whereas you say, that no man can tell, whether himself be truly
sanctified or no, you afford me proof of that, which before I affirmed, that
the Apostles were of our Church. Prove your selves (says 2. Cor. 13. 5.
the Apostle Paul) whether you be in the faith: examine your selves: know ye
not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates?
And how does Romans 8. 16.
the spirit of God, bear witness to our spirit, that we are the children of
God, if it be not possible to discern his voice, from the delusion of Satan?
God has given (says Bernard. sermon. 1. in septuag.
Bernard) certain manifest signs and tokens of salvation, that it cannot be
doubted, but that he is in the number of the elect, in whom those signs
continue. And Bernard. Juper. Cant. ser. 8.
in an other place, whatsoever soul among you (sath the same man) has at any
time felt in the secret of his conscience the spirit of the Son, crying Abba
Father: let that soul presume, that he is loved with a fatherly affection,
which feels himself endued with the same spirit, which the Son had. Be
confident, whosoever thou art, be confident, nothing doubting. By the spirit of
the Son, know thou art the daughter of the Father, the spouse and sister of
the Son. Do you name Bernard for a principal Saint of your Church, and go so
directly against his doctrine? As for that place of Eccles. 9. 1.
Ecclesiastes, what proves it, but only, that See defense of the reformed
Catholic. Page
no man can truly judge, whether he be in Gods favor or no, by the outward
things of this life, or at the most, that an ordinary natural man can give no
true judgment of the matter? This place (says Alfons. Salmero. in 2. cor. 12.
disp. 14.
Alfonsus Salmero, no mean Jesuit) does not prove that, which some men draw
from it, that a man knows not the love of God toward him: because it
follows in the text, he knows not whether he be worthy of hatred. But the
wicked know that they are most worthy of Gods hatred, by reason of their
grievous sins: The other place, that Prou. 20. 9.
No man can say his heart is clean, makes nothing against the point, you
would disprooue. For what though every man be tainted with natural
corruption, which has even the nature of sin in it, may be not have,
withal, assurance, according to his measure of Gods love in Christ? Yet if
want of a pure heart, be all the hindrance, your doctrine teaches us, that the
Council. Trident. sess. 5. cap. 5
party baptized, before he fall into some deadly sin, is wholly clean,
original sin having lost in him the nature of sin. But the knowledge of
the favor of God depends not upon the measure of our holiness, but upon the
truth of it. Wheresoever Romans 8. 9. 10
the spirit of God has begotten true faith, there he has begun true
sanctification, which according to his divine power and pleasure, be will in
time bring to full perfection.

As if our Church had been begun with Luther, and not Thom. in expos. Symb.
sect. sancta^ Eccles.
rather with Adam, and the world; continued in the Patriarchs and Prophets,
and at last showed most gloriously in the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior
Christ? As long as God has given testimony of the holiness of these
worthies, our Church cannot be said to have had none certainly known to be
holy. But though we build not upon any such ground, tell me what it wanted of
amiracle, that a poor Friar should set himself against the Pope, and the
whole state of your Church: and for all the malice and persecution of the Pope,
the Emperor, and generally all the estates of these western parts, as well
civil, as Ecclesiastical, except a Prince or two in Germany converted by him,
continue and grow so many years, and leave behind him, (after a peaceable and
godly death) so many heirs of his doctrine, daily increasing and multiplying?
It is enough that the word of God bears witness to the truth of his
doctrine, though we have neither miracle, nor revelation of his holiness. But
you would make the world believe, that he and Calvin attempted to work
miracles. If it had been so, it was not to breed an opinion of their holiness,
but to auow the truth of their doctrine. But to whom can it seem likely, that
they which denied, that any miracles were to be looked for, and taught that
Antichrist should come with signs and wonders, would go about such a
needless, and doubtful piece of work? What tell you us of the Apostata
Bolsec, or Staphylus, who sold themselves to lie for the Popes advantage? At
the least name some likely men, though partial, and not such known enemies
and Sycophants.

I marvel you prove not this point of holiness by the examples of your
Popes, in whose persons holiness is invested, and from them derived to all
other, as honor is in, and from temporal Princes. If the Popes holiness, be
not extraordinarily holy, what should a man look for of inferior Papists? Who
would not rather name the Sun, then any star of the first magnitude, or the
Moon her self, to prove that there is light in the sky? But you knew how
filthy that fountain of your holiness is. Well, let them go as they are: you
have named us three: the ancientest of whom is not yet six hundred years old.
What say you of them? First, that they were certainly known to have been
professors of that same Religion, which was then, and is now professed at Rome.
To whom is this certainly known? How many of our men have showed that the
Religion of the Church of Rome is altered in diverse points, since Bernards
time? The Council of Trent is the pit, out of which the religion of your
present Church is dug. I refer the Reader, for this point, Doct. Field of
the Church lib 3. cap. 7.
to a Treatise lately written by a learned Divine, wherein many particulars to
this purpose are delivered. Bernard was indeed a member of the Church of Rome,
as then it was: yet either he dissented from the doctrine of that Church, in
the fundamental points of justification, or rather your Church now is fallen
away from the truth, in that matter. Thou (says Bernard. in Cant. ser. 61.
Bernard to our Savior Christ) art made unto me of God righteousness: shall I
fear lest that one be not sufficient for us both? It is not a shore cloak
that cannot cover, it will cover both thee and me largely, being both a large
and eternal Justice. As for our righteousness, Bernard altogether (as we do)
acknowledges it, to be true but imperfect: Bernard. in ser. 5. de verb. Esaiae.
Our humble righteousness, if there be any, is true perhaps (says he) but not
pure, unless perchance we think our selves better, then our forefathers, who
said no less truly, then humbly, all our righteousness is as the clouts of a
menstruous woman. For how can there be pure righteousness, whereas yet there
cannot be fault wanting? We will not strive greatly with you for Francis or
Dominicke, though many absurd doctrines, which your Church now holds, were not
in their days, nor before them, defined by any Council, nor acknowledged by
many of your Divines.

To prove that these three were of your Church, as it is now, you allege that
which is left written of their lives, and the religious orders of Monks and
Friars founded by them. What is written of them, and by whom? Does any man in
penning their lives, affirm, that they held the same things in all points that
your Church now holds? I trow not. But if he do, who told him so? If he lived
in their times, he was no prophet to foresee what would be maintained in your
Church some hundreds of years after his death. If he be a late writer, what
reason have we to give credit to him in such a matter, farther then he is able
to make good that he says, by showing such an agreement betwixt their
doctrine, and that which now you teach? That they have left certain orders
behind them, we deny not; which may serve to prove, that they thought it
needful to have people instructed in the knowledge of the Gospel by
preaching, and some trained up of purpose to perform that duty, which was the
first end of monasteries. But it is no easy matter to show that your Monks
and Friars are now governed according to the rules appointed by them, nor any
inconvenience for us to grant that they were of your opinion touching Frieries
and monasteries, which are matters far from the foundation of Religion, as long
as there is no opinion of merit or perfection annexed thereunto.

The second thing you affirm of them, is, that they were holy men, certainly
known to be so. We are willing in charity to think the best we may, and
therefore are not hasty to condemn them we know not. But this our judgment is
not of certainty, unless we may have better proof for it then this you
bring. Their lives (you say) and miracles testify as much. But first, who
shall assure us that they lived so holily, and wrought such miracles? We must
have certain knowledge that they were holy men, who writ and reported these
things, ere we can upon their credit believe, that they so behaved themselves.
Secondly, put case that their lives were as they are said to have been: have
you forgotten what you writ a little before? It cannot be perfitly known of
men (say you) who have truly a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith, and
consequently who be truly saints, unless it please God to reveal it by
miracle, or some other certain way unto us. Thirdly, if you think to strike
it dead by the report of their miracles, Biel. in Can. Misslect. 29.
Biel has taught us, that they are oftentimes wrought by the devil, or show
made of them by Priests, as Lyra in Dan. cap. 14.
Lyra says. And Bellar. de notis eccles. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Bellarmine resolves, that we cannot be assured which be true miracles, which
false, but by the judgment of the Church. Then are we very far from certain
knowledge that these men were holy: I mean such knowledge as you speak of,
that may be a ground of faith, to teach us infallibly which is the true Church,
by the holiness of the members thereof.

But Luther and other of our men confessed them to have been saints. It had
been plain dealing to have said holy men: whereas you craftily say saints, as
if Luther had given some approbation of your saints canonized. But do Luther
and Melanckthon hold them for saints, because of their miracles, or as a thing
certainly known to them? How could they understand what they were, but by
report? They judged charitably of them, according to the opinion that was of
them in the world. And for my part, I am persuaded of Bernard, that he was a
man of a sincere heart, and true sanctification. But for Francis, if the report
of his five wounds be true, I will not doubt to affirm, that he was either a
wretched hypocrite in faining that miracle, or a silly idiot to be so abused by
the devil. The tale lies thus: that this same Saint Francis forsooth should
have in his side, hands and feet, such wounds as our Savior had, which
continued always green, and were made in his body by I know not what streams
that issued from the Crucifixe, from the side, hands and feet thereof, to his
side, hands and feet. This matter being cunningly carried by this Pope-holy
saint, a woman saint, one Katharine of Seen counterfetted the like, and with
like success. Afterward Relacion de la santidad yllagas de la etc en Seuilla
1589.
even of late years there was the like practice by one Marie a Prioresse in
Portugal, of Saint Dominicks order: who carried the matter very cleanly for a
time, till it pleased God to discover her cousinage by means of certain of
the Nuns, who thought scorn that she should be a saint rather then they; and
therefore watched her so narrowly, and gave out such suspicious speeches of
her, that at last the whole pack of her dissembling was opened, and she
enjoined favorable penance of fasting and praying, etc. There is extant a most
abominable treatise of Saint Francis conformity to Christ, Barthol dePists
conform. S. Francisci.
wherein he is at the least equalled, if not preferred before him. But because
this was none of Francis own doing, let it be as it is, the blasphemous sin
of your Church. Dominicke was little better then his fellow Francis, as his
Legend shows.

Upon these premises thus weakly proved, you bring in two conclusions: the
former, that this holiness being confessed of those three, must needs infer
the like confession of the sanctity of many other, who were also professors of
the same Roman faith. If their profession had been the cause of their
holiness, then you had not gathered much amiss. But their holiness (if the
two latter had any) arose from their true faith in Christ, wrought in them by
the holy Ghost, the author of that faith. But there were many in their times,
as resolute maintainers of the Romish Religion as they, who never attained to
any such opinion of holiness: and the faith you Romanists now profess, is in
maine points of justification and free will, other then that which Bernard
taught. For though I have followed you in saying their holiness, yet I
acknowledge none of the three to have been holy, but only Bernard. Neither are
our Kalenders any evidence to prove the holiness of the rest of your Saints,
though their names are continued by Almanacke writers; because many old deeds
and evidences are dated by their names, and not by the days of the month. The
Saints Athanasius and Bernard write of, were none of your Church, and yet (by
your judgment) both of them might be deceived in determining who were Saints.
As for Antoninus and Surius, two of your Popes vassailes, their testimony is
little worth, in any indifferent man's opinion.

Your latter conclusion is, that some part of your Church is holy, and that
therefore the whole may be termed holy. But, as I have said, whatsoever
holiness was in any of the professed members of your Church, it sprung from
another root then grows in your church. Neither is there any reason to term
your whole company holy, because a few among them are holy; who in regard of
their holiness, are indeed none of your company. That which they have common
with the rest of you, makes them not holy, but rather unholy; namely their
profession of subjection to your sea of Rome, and their erring with you in
diverse points of doctrine: their holiness grows from a true acknowledgement
of salvation by faith only, and a resting upon Jesus Christ accordingly,
without any opinion of merit in their own actions, either before or after
grace; together with a belief and feeling, that not they themselves by their
free will enlightened, but God by his mercy and grace made difference betwixt
them and other, vouchsafing them the gift of faith, and not bestowing it upon
other. Your similitude of painting, painteth out the fondness of your conceit.
For being a Christian, answers to being a painter, in this similitude, and
being holy, to being skillful. Now as every man that is free of that Company,
is by his freedom a painter, but not thereby skillful: so all that profess
Christian Religion, are thereby Christians, but not therefore holy. Neither if
one or two, or a few of these painters were skilful, would any discreet man
say, that the whole company might be termed skillful, because all make
profession of the same art of painting, wherein some of them are skillful.

How falsely our doctrine was slaundered by you, with inducing men to liberty,
I showed in my answer to your accusation: now let us see wherein yours is
better. First you propound two general points, that it forbids expressly all
vice, and prescribes laws contrary to liberty. And are you able to charge us
with the contrary? Do we not more strictly interpret the laws of God then
you do? Are we not further from idolatry, allowing no religious Homily against
peril of idolatry. par. 3. page 94.
use of any image? Do we not more abhor swearing, and expound the third
commandment against your profane oaths of Mass, Marie, Lady, and all your
Saints, which you account matters of small moment? Who teach men to keep the
whole Sabbath, you or we? Who make a maine point of Gods law, the love of our
enemies, a counsel, and not a commandment; we or you? Who maintain
aequiuocation and officious lies, but you? Are not you they that hold murdering
of Princes, yea even of your own Sovereigns, to be meritorious works? What
should I name particulars? You are the men that make the corruption of our
nature to be nothing else but the want of righteousness, that ought to be in
us. You are the men who teach us, that original sin in the regenerate, is
not properly sin; that unclean, unnatural, unruly, ambitious, covetous,
murderous, and such like thoughts and motions are no sins, unless we yield
to them, or delight in them. Do not you persuade men, that many sins are not
mortal, but venial; and so make men rush into them, without fear or shame?

Your second point is, that your religion contains most sovereign means to
incite men to perfect virtue and holiness of life. What, more sovereign, then
God has appointed in his word? You will not dare to say so, for very shame of
the world. It remains then, that you show what means we neglect of al them
that God has commanded us to use. Do we not minister the sacraments to our
people? Do we not offer up prayers, supplications, and intercessions to God for
them? But, that I may not run through all particulars at once: let us see
what you bring piece by piece.

This first point gives a taste of that maine difference, which may be observed
betwixt your Religion and ours. You so carry the matter, that you always
provide for the freedom of man's will, whatsoever become of the glory of God.
We make it our chief care to advance Gods glory, though thereby we take
somewhat from the pride of man. Let us make this manifest in the particular
question we have in hand. Wherein first we grant as much as you affirm: that
Gods predestination does not take away man's free will. But herein lies the
difference betwixt you and us: you teach that God does only give a man
ability to believe, and do good works, leaving it to himself, to believe or
not to believe, to do good, or not to do good. We contrariwise avouch, that
God, besides this ability, does also incline our hearts to believe, and do,
according to his own holy purpose: yet do we not any way imagine, that a man
is forced to believe; but only teach, that whereas any man believes it was
fore appointed by God, that he should believe: neither could it in the event
otherwise fall out, though he did believe willingly, and by his own choice.
See my answer to 12. art part. 2. art. 4.
Your doctrine makes a man more beholding to himself then to God, for his
faith and good works: because God did no more for him, then he does ordinarily
for many other men, who are yet utterly cast away. God indeed gave him
ability to believe, if he would; but for all that, he might have refused to
believe, and so have been damned. Therefore whereas he does believe, and is
saved, he may thank himself, and not God. Thus you provide for man's free
will, with the impeachment of Gods glory. We on the other side acknowledge,
that as we have power to believe, from the grace of God, so it is he that
works our hearts to believe, and certainly and necessarily in regard of the
event, though freely in respect of our will, brings us to believe in Jesus
Christ. So that you by this opinion, give man the glory of his salvation: we
leave it wholly to God.

Now for the despair of shunning evil, and doing well, which (in your
conceit) ensues upon our opinion: there is no such matter. Who shall be in
despair of shunning sin, by this doctrine? No man that has grace. For with
him the spirit of God is always present, to provoke and incline him to well
doing. And this must needs encourage him thereto much more, because he is the
abler to perform any good action. As for him that is still in his natural
estate, I hope you grant, that there is no good to be looked for at his hands:
I mean such good, as may further him to everlasting life. But (say you) he can
have no hope to obtain faith and grace, because it is not within the compass
of man's free will to make choice of it, when it is offered. What though it be
not? Do not we teach withal, that every man, to whom God affoordeth the
means of faith, that is the ministry of the word, may and ought to assure
himself, that the spirit of God will be get faith in him, if he will show
himself willing to be instructed and inclined, as he may do, if he will
advisedly consider what his estate is by nature, and what offer is made him by
God? only he cannot feed his natural pride with a conceit of being the
chief procurer of his own felicity.

It is not impossible to observe the law, but to keep it perfectly, so that a
man cannot be charged with the breach of it in any point. Why does Psalm. 143. 2.
David cry out, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord: for in thy
sight shall none that lives be justified? Why does Dan. 9. 20.
Daniel confess his sins to God? See my answer to 12. art. part. 2. art. 4.
It is very like, that many of your Friars are able to perform that, in which
these worthies of the Church failed. The commandments of God indeed are not
grievous to any man regenerate by Gods spirit, because (as Romans 7. 21.
the Apostle says) he delights in the law of God: and by reason of his love
to God, thinks nothing too heavy or too hard: as Oecum. ad 1. Joan. 5. 3.
Oecumenius expounds the place of John. But it does not follow thereupon,
that therefore the whole law may be perfectly kept. Yea Hieron. ad Math. 11. 30.
Jerome upon that place of Matthew, directly affirms, that many things are
commanded in the law, which (says he) the Apostle most fully teaches us,
cannot be fulfilled. Beda. ibi.
Bid makes this burden and yoke, not the commandments of the law, but the
doctrine of the Gospel.

What? cannot a man have any heart to do well, unless he puff up himself
with a proud conceit of being able perfectly to fulfill the whole law? How did
David and Daniel? These are the Pharisaicall thoughts of you Papists, who
think scorn to be beholding to God for his mercy, in forgiving your sins
after baptism, without your own satisfaction: and who will have all of
desert, in the rigor of justice. Is it not enough for a poor soul, who is
privy to his own grievous infirmities, many slips and great corruptions, that
the Lord vouchsafes to accept of his weak endeavors, and will crown them
with reward of glory, for all their imperfections; but that he must also
presume of his power to keep the whole law? You are the men that value the
pride of your corrupt nature, at an higher rate, then the glorious riches of
Gods mercy in Jesus Christ.

Here you manifestly bewray the pride of your hearts, and o See my answer to
12. art. part. 2. art. 7.
your servile nature, who will do nothing in thankfulness to God, but upon
persuasion of meriting by that you do. We acknowledge, that our imperfect
obedience is acceptable to God, and that he will certainly reward every least
good work of any of his children, with a great measure of glory in heaven.
Only the doctrine of the scriptures, the knowledge of our own imperfections,
and our desire to give all glory to God, makes us to renounce all opinion of
merit, and to appeal to Gods gracious promise only for our reward. If these
respects be not of sufficient force with any man (as with none of you that are
grounded Papists, they are) but that he can contemn or loathe doing of good,
for all them; what should I say, but that he shows himself to be a servant,
and not a son: and therefore can have no claim to the kingdom of heaven,
which is the inheritance of children? Luc, 12. 32.


Whereas, to deceive your own hearts with an opinion of desert, you ascribe
the merit of your works to the merits of Christ, and teach that they are
meritorious, by being dipped in his blood: you show either your ignorance or
your dallying. If you think as you speak, you bewray your ignorance: if
otherwise, you dally with our Savior and his blood. Are you able indeed to
keep the commandments perfectly? what need have you then of Christ's blood,
to dip your works in? For the perfect observation of the law, brings of it
self everlasting life, without any merit of Christ. Let it be from his merits,
that you have this ability to perform the law. Upon the performance of it,
the hire of eternal happiness is absolutely due unto you. Why do you then
trifle thus with our Savior, as if you would make him believe, that you think
your selves more beholding to him, then indeed you can do? If you need Christ's
blood, your works are imperfect: if they be perfect, you need it not. Leave this
halting betwixt Christ and your selves, lest he be avenged of your dallying.

To what purpose do you mention this your teaching, that exceeding punishment
is due to sin in the next life? Do not we teach this more effectually then
you? We make the least sin liable to everlasting condemnation: you teach,
that Bellar. de amiss. great. lib. 1. cap. 3.
there are many venial sins, which Vbi supra. cap 13. Bonauent. in centiloq.
cap. 6. Thom. in 4. did. 85. art. 3. Rhem. Test. ad Math. 10 v. 12 Extra. de
paenit. and remiss. cap. omnis vtriusque in Glossa.
deserve little or no punishment: in so much, that a knock on the breast, or a
sigh, or the saying of one Aue-Marie, makes satisfaction to God for it. But
the point is, that you persuade men, there is no assurance to be had of any
forgiveness of sins committed after baptism. We teach the contrary, that
as many, as in the sight of their sins, with true sorrow for them, cast
themselves upon Christ by faith to be justified by him, both obtain pardon of
all their transgressions, and also receive every one in their measure, and
time, assurance that they are pardoned.

Your doctrine (you say) makes men wary, not to fall into sin. It
restrains mortal sin only. For venial sin cannot be punished but in
Purgatory, unless a man be guilty of mortal also: and if a man can make
friends to the Pope, as it is no hard matter to do, especially if he be well
monied, he may easily avoid all those exceeding great punishments. Or if he can
but have a Priest to sing mass for him every Vide speculum exemplar. passim.
day (and masses are not very high rated) he shall be sure to be delivered,
within a short space. If the worst come to the worst, Purgatory cannot out
last the world, and then he goes up to heaven, without any more ado. But yet
men are kept in awe from committing of deadly sins. Never a whit. For it is
generally preached by your Friars and Priests, that confession purges all
sins: and your people (ordinarily) are not so skillful (no not one among a
thousand) as to distinguish betwixt sins in this sort: but they believe, that
upon their confession, and absolution (if they do the pennaunce appointed by
their ghostly Father) they are as free from all their sins, as when they were
newly baptized.

Now concerning our doctrine, though we teach men, that assurance is to be had;
yet we withal instruct them, that it is never in this life absolutely without
doubting, at all times: and s See my answer to 12. Art. part. 1. art. 5.
that no man can be assured that his sins are forgiven, but he that with
fear and trembling makes conscience of falling into sin; which are
especial means provided by God to keep men from sinning; and without which,
sin will so overtake us, and the sense of Gods wrath so follow, and vex us,
See my answer to 12. art. part. 2 art. 1
that a man were better fry a year in your Purgatory, knowing that he shall
one day get out of it, then lie one month under the heavy hand of God,
pressing him with the remembrance of his sin, and for the time hiding his
gracious countenance from him. If you never fealt this, offer not to judge of
the extremity thereof, for you will never come to give any reasonable guess of
the terriblenesse of it.

To prescribe laws of fasting, and prayer as you do, that A man refrain, upon
such and such days from flesh, or patter over a number of Paternosters, Aues,
and Creeds, is so far from teaching men to avoid sin, that it thrusts them
necessarily into it. For both the opinion and doing of it as a service of God,
is a grievous sin, as if the Lord hated flesh more then fish, or cared
Durand. ratio^. lib. 6. cap. 7. n. 22.
for such vain lip-labor; and also the very conceit that men have, of doing
such extraordinary service, makes them presume, that God will bear with
them, though they chance to sin against him. The like I say of confession,
but of these two I spoke before in defense of our doctrine. See my answer to
12. art. part. 2. art. 4.
With what fitness your remedies are applied, or rather penance is enjoined,
the veriest child may see; when for the most part they are such, as I named ere
while, abstaining from flesh, mumbling up a certain number of prayers, going
on pilgrimage to some shrine, or such like. As for true comfort in affliction
of conscience, or good direction in time of temptation, or wise instruction for
a man's spiritual behavior, few of your ordinary Priests, Sir John's
Lacke-Latine, have any knowledge or care of them.

This last point concerns you, no more then us. For who knows not, that we
continually teach, that God has called Christians to holiness, whereof they
make profession, and wherein, if they do not daily exercise themselves, they
can have no sufficient assurance, nor reasonable persuasion, that they are
justified by the blood of Christ. Because as many as have any part of
redemption by him, Gal. 4. 4. 5.
have received his spirit, and Romans 8. 9. 11
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in us, our
mortal bodies shall be quickened by the spirit dwelling in us. Only it may
seem, that your disgrace, and danger should be the more, if you live not
holily: because you brag, that you are able perfectly to keep the Law, and
your Plea for heaven, is the desert of your good works, together with the
inward grace of faith, hope, and charity.

Because there is nothing in this glorious conclusion, but a heaping up of
those false assertions, which I have already confuted, I will never make the
Reader more work then needs, by repeating of that which has been formerly
delivered.

A. D.. 6.
III. That the Roman Church only is Catholic.

Thirdly I find that the Protestants company is not Catholic, that is to
say universal, neither in time, nor in place; for it came up of late, and is
but in few places of Christendom: neither in points of doctrine; for their
doctrine consists chiefly of negatiues, that is to say in denying diverse
points, which have been generally held in former ages: as appears by the
Chronicles of the Magdeburgenses their own Doctors, who confess that the
ancient Fathers held this and that, which they now deny. And there is no
learned Protestant (unless he be too too impudent) but he will confess, that
there cannot be assigned a visible company of men (professing the same faith,
which they do) ever since Christ his time, continuing without interruption till
now. And therefore, will he, nill he, he must confess, that the Protestants
Church is not universal, and therefore not Catholic, as out of Scripture, I
showed Christ's true Church must be.

But the Roman Church is Catholic. For first, it has been continually
without ceasing since Christ and his Apostles time, still visibly (though
sometimes in persecution) professing the same faith which is received from the
Apostles, without change till this day. It is therefore Catholic or
universal in time. It has also had, and has at this day, some in every
country, where there are any Christians, (which is almost, if not absolutely
every where) that communicates and agrees with it, in profession of faith.
Therefore it is also Catholic or universal in place. It teaches also an
universal and most ample uniform doctrine of God, of Angels, of all other
creatures, and specially of man, of man's first framing, of his final end, of
things pertaining to his nature, of his fall by sin, of his reparation by
grace, of laws prescribed unto him, of virtues which he ought to embrace, of
vices which he ought to eschew, of Christ our Redeemer, his Incarnation, life,
death, resurrection, ascension, and coming again to judgment, of Sacraments,
and all other things, that any way pertain to Christian religion. Neither does
it at this day deny any one point of doctrine of faith, which in former times
was universally received, for a verity of the Catholic Church. The which if
any man will take upon him to gainesay, let him show and prove if he can, what
point of doctrine the Roman Church does deny, or hold contrary to that,
which by the Church was universally held before: as we can show diverse points
that the Protestants so hold or deny. Let him (I say) show and prove by
setting down the point of doctrine, the author, the time, the place, and what
company did oppose themselves against it, and who they were that did continue
(as the true Church must still continue) in the profession of the former faith,
lineally, without interruption, till these our days: as we can show and prove
against them. Let him also show what country there is, or has been, where
Christian faith either was first planted, or afterward continued, where some,
at least have not holden the Roman faith: as we can show even at this day,
diverse places where their religion is scarce heard of, especially in the
Indian, Iaponian, and China countries, which were not long since, first
converted to the Christian faith, only by those, who were members of the
Roman Church, and chiefly by Jesuits sent thither by the authority of the
Pope. And to go no further then our dear country England: we shall find in
the Chronicles that it was converted by Augustine a Monk, sent by Saint
Gregory the Pope, and that it continued in that faith, without knowledge of
the Protestants religion, which then, and for diverse See the History of Saint Bede, lib. 1. cap. 23.
hundred years after, was never heard off, as being then vnhatched. The like
record of other countries converted by means of those only, who either were
directly sent by the Pope or Bishop of Rome, or at least, communicated and
agreed in profession of faith, with him, we may find in other Histories.
Lastly let him show some space of time, in which the Roman Church was not
since Christ and his Apostles time, or in which it was not visible and known:
as we can show them many hundred years, in which theirs was not at all. Let
him (I say) therefore show and prove, (which never any yet did or can prove)
that ever the Roman Church did either fail to be, or to be visible: or being
still visible, when the profession of the ancient faith, which it received from
the Apostles, did fail in it, and when, and by whom the profession of a new
faith began in it. As we can show when, where, and by whom, this new (no) faith
of theirs began.

Certain it is that once the Roman Church had the true faith, and was a true
Church, to wit, when Saint Paul wrote to the Romans saying, Vestra fides
annunciatur in vniuerso orb, your Romans 1. In ration. redditis academ. ra. 7.
faith is renowned in the whole world. When therefore, I pray you, (as the
learned and renowned Master Campian urges) when (I say) did Rome change the
belief and profession of faith which once it had? Quo tempore? quo Pontifice?
qua via? qua vi? quibus incrementis vrbem and orbem religio peruasit aliena?
Quas voces? quas turbas, quae lamenta ea res progenuit: Omnes orb reliquo so
piti sunt, dum Roma, Roma inquam, noua Sacramenta, nouum sacrificium nouum
religionis dogma procuderet? Nullus extitit Historicus, neque Latinus, neque
Graecus, neque remotus, neque citimus, quirem tantam vel obscure iaceret in
commentarios? At what time? under what Pope? what way? with what violence or
force? with what augmentatio^ or increase did a strange religion ouerflow the
City and the whole world? What speeches or rumors? what tumults or troubles?
what lamentations (at least) did it breed? Was all the rest of the world
asleep, when Rome (the Imperial and mother City, whose matters for the most
part are open to the view of the whole world) when Rome I say, did coin new
Sacraments, a new sacrifice, a new doctrine of faith and religion? Was there
never one Historiographer, neither Latin nor Greek, neither far off nor
near, who would at least obscurely cast into his commentaries, such a notable
matter as this is?

Certainly it is not possible, if such a thing as this had happened, but that
it should have been resisted, or at least recorded by some. For suppose it were
true, (which the Protestants imagine) that some points of the faith and
religion which Rome professes at this day, were as contrary to that which was
in it, when Saint Paul commended the Roman faith, as black to white,
darkness to light; or so absurd, as were now Iudaisme, or Paganism (as one of
their Holinshead in the description of Britanie. Fol 11.
Historiographers accounts it worse, saying, that indeed Augustine the Monk
converted the Saxons from Paganism, but as the prouer be says (says he)
bringing them out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun:) Suppose, I say, this
were true. Then I would demand, if it were possible, that any Prince in any
Christian City, and much more that the Pope in Rome the mother City, could at
this day bring in any notable absurd rite of Jewish or Paganish religion; for
example, to offer up an Ox in sacrifice, or to worship a Cow as God: and not
only to practice it privately in his own Chapel, but to get it publickely
practiced and preached in all Churches, not only of that City, but also in
all the rest of the Christian world: and that none should in Christian zeal,
continually oppose themselves, that no Bishop should preach, no Doctor write
against this horrible innovation of faith, and the author thereof; that none
should have constancy to suffer martyrdom, which Christians have been always
most ready to endure, rather then to yield to a profession and practice, so
contrary to their ancient faith; that there should be no true hearted
Christians, who would speak of it, or at least lament it, nor no
Historiographer that would so much as make obscure mention of it. Could all be
so asleep, that they could not note, or so cold and negligent in matters
concerning their souls good, as generally, without any care to yield unto it?
No certainly, though there were no promise of Christ his own continual
presence; no assurance of the infallible assistance of his holy spirit: yet it
is not possible that such a gross error should arise among Christians, and
ouerwhelme the whole world, without some resistance. The Bishops and Pastors
could not be so simple, or so unmindful of their duty, but they would first
note such an evident contrariety, to the ancient and universally received
faith; and noting it, they would, doubtless with common consent, resist,
contradict, and finally, according to Saint Paul his Gal. 1.
rule, accurse it. If therefore this could not happen now, nor ever heretofore
was heard, that any such absurd error or heresy did or could arise, without
noting or resisting; what reason can any man have, to say, that this has
happened at Rome? Not being able to allege any writer, that did note the
thing, the person, the time, and what opposition was made and continued against
it, as in all heresies that have sprung up of new, we can do. If there could
not a little ceremony be added to the Mass, but that it was set down in
history, when and by whom; how could the whole substance of the Mass, (which
consists in consecration, oblation, and consumption of the sacred Host) be
newly invented, and no mention made, when or by whom, or that ever there was
was any such new invention at all? If also Historiographers were not afraid to
note personal and private vices of the Popes themselves; which they might well
think Popes would not willingly have made open to the world: why should they
have feared to have recorded any alteration in religion? Which if it had been,
had been a thing done publicly in the view of the whole world; or if there
were any fear or flattery, which might tie the tongues and pens of those,
that liled near hand, that they durst not or would not mention such a matter:
yet doubtless others, which lived in places further off, should not have had
those causes, and consequently would not have kept secret such an open and
important a thing as this. If lastly the histories which make mention of these
private vices of Popes, and other Christian Princes, could not only first come
out, but also continue without touch, till these latter times: what reason can
any have to doubt or dream, but that the like would have been set out about
the alteration of religion, if it had happened? And that, if any such History
reporting any true accident of alteration or change of religion, had come out;
it should partly by Gods providence, partly by humane diligence, have been
preserved till these our days: especially considering, that such records had
been so requisite, for discerning the ancient, unchanged, true Christian
Religion, from vpstart novelty, which must needs be false.

So that we may well conclude; that if Christian Religion had, since the
Apostles time, altered in Rome; it would have been recorded in histories, as
other things, and especially such notable alterations are recorded: and those
histories would have been preserved till this day, as other Christian monuments
have been preserved, even in time of persecution, yea even then, when the
persecutors made particular inquiry for Christian books, to burn or consume
them. But in those ancient Histories, there is no mention made of any such
alteration of Religion in Rome. Wherefore it follows that there was no such
alteration or change at all. No such alteration being made, it is evident that
the same faith and Religion, which was in Saint Paul's time, has always
continued, and is there now. That which was there then, was the true faith and
Religion, as appears by that high commendation, which Saint Paul has left
written of it. Therefore that which is there now, must needs be the only true
holy and Catholic faith; and that company which professes it, must needs be
the Only true Holy and Catholic Church.

Neither can I see what answer can, with any probability, be forged against
this reason. For to say, that the errors of the Church of Rome crept in by
little and little, and so, for the littleness of the thing, or for negligence
of the Pastors, were not espied; is an idle fiction already refuted. For
first those matters, which the Protestants call errors in the Roman Church,
be not so little matters, but that less, even in the like kind, are
ordinarily recorded in stories. Nay, some of them are in the Protestants
conceits, (and consequently if men of old time had been Protestants, they would
have been also in their conceits) as gross superstition as Paganism it self,
namely to adore Christ our Savior, as being really and substantially present
in the Blessed Sacrament; the which Sacrament Protestants hold to be, (really
and substantially) but a bare piece of bread. Also the Protestants account the
use of the Images to be Idolatry, and say (very ignorantly or maliciously)
that we adore stocks and stones, as the Paynims did. The which things could
not so have crept in by little and little, but they must needs be espied:
Neither could the Pastors of the Church, at any time, be so simple and
ignorant, so sleepie and negligent, but they must needs have seen: and seeing
must needs in some sort have resisted, as before I have said. For to imagine
all the Pastors, of any one age, to have been in such a deep Lethargicall and
deadly sleep, that they could not only not perceive, when the enemy should
over sow Cockle in the hearts of some; but also when this Cockle of false
belief should grow to outward action, and especially to public practice, the
which could not be but most apparent: to imagine (I say) all the Pastors to be
so simple and sleepie, not then to mark, or not to resist, is rather the
dream of a proud man in his sleep, who is apt to think all men fools beside
himself, then a iudictall conceit of a waking man of any understanding; who
ought to think of things past, either according to the verity recorded in
stories, or when this fails, by comparing the likelihood of that which he
thinks was done by men of that time, with that which most men of their
quality would do in like case. Finally, if these things were so, and that the
church did by this means, for so long space, in such important matters,
universally err, Neglexerit Lib. de praescrip
officium Spiritus sanctus (as Tertullian speaks, refuting the like cavil of
heretics) the holy Ghost should have neglected his office: which is (as I
have proved before out of Scripture) not to permit the universal Church to
fall into error, but to suggest unto it all things that Christ said unto it,
and to teach it all John 14. John 16.
truth.

A. W.
Catholicknesse especially as you understand it, is not such a property of the
Church, but the Church may be without it: as it is plain by that Church which
was in our Savior Christ's time, only in the land of Iewrie; and after his
death, Act. 8. 4.
till the Church was scattered abroad in the world.

Yet let us see what you bring to prove, that our Church is not Catholic.

If there cannot be assigned a visible company of men professing the same
faith which the Protestants do, ever since Christ's time, continuing without
interruption till now: then the Protesiants Church is not Catholic. But there
cannot be such a company assigned. Therefore the Protestants Church is not
Catholic.
I deny the consequence of the mayor: First, because that To the proposition.
may be Catholic, which is not visible: as the Church of the elect is
dispersed in all places, and yet no where to be seen. Secondly, because
Catholicknesse belongs neither to time nor doctrine, but to place and persons.
Thirdly, because it is not required, that the same faith in all points should
be professed, (which you mean by the same faith) but only the same in matters
fundamental.

I grant your minor, that we cannot assign you any such company, Of the
Assumption.
though we doubt not but that there was always such a company greater or
less, as appears by them which from time to time have by their writings or
sufferings maintained the substance of that doctrine which we now profess.

To prove that our doctrine is not universal, you say, See my answer to 12.
art. part. 2. art. 4.
it chiefly consists of negatiues: whereas you cannot be ignorant that we
hold all the articles of the creed, and that in the same sense as you do, save
only in some few differences, about the understanding of belief, what it is
to believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; and what it is to
believe the Church, and in what respect the Church is called holy and
Catholic, and what the Church is that we believe. But we deny some things
that some ancient writers have held. Do you follow them in all points? You
will not say so for very shame. But our Church is truly Catholic, because it
is not tied to the Jews or Jerusalem, no nor to any other place or persons,
but common to all that will believe in Jesus Christ.

What get you if you prove your Church to be Catholic: since that alone,
without the two former points already disproued, cannot make any company a
true Church? But neither can you prove your Church to be Catholic: let your
argument speak.

That Church which is universal in time, place and doctrine of the Aposiles,
without change, is Catholic. The Roman Church is universal in time, place
and doctrine of the Apostles, without change. Therefore the Roman Church is
Catholic.
If to make a Church Catholic, it be required that she continue Of the
proposition.
in the doctrine of the Apostles, how did you before deny that the doctrine of
the Apostles is a necessary and certain mark of the true Church? But if you
leave this out, and affirm that Church to be Catholic which is universal in
doctrine, and think it not needful, that the doctrine professed be the
Apostles: I deny your mayor. The reasons of my denial, I delivered in the
former Chapter, when I showed, that truth of doctrine was the most proper and
true mark of the Church.

But whatsoever your mayor be, your minor is evidently false To the Assumption.
in every part of it. The very foundations of the doctrine of the Apostles, are
overthrown by your Church, in the heresies you hold concerning predestination,
justification, free will, the insufficiency of the Scriptures, and the
headship of Antichrist your Pope. Neither do you only fail in the doctrine of
the Apostles, but in your universality of time. For how can that doctrine be
said to have bin always, which was not taught by our Savior and his Apostles?
As for universality in regard of the ample uniformity of your doctrine; if
you speak of your Churches determination, many points of great moment are not
as yet defined by it: for example take those maine questions, whether the Pope
be above the Council or no: whether he have without a Council privilege of
not erring or no: whether there be any merit of congruitie or no, and such
like. Yea your Church denies the chief point of all, which in the Apostles
time was held by all true Christians, that justification is by faith, without
the works of the law. I forbear to show the reasons of that I affirm,
because any man may setch them out of my former answer in this and the last
Chapter.

I looked for proof of your minor: but you were too wise to undertake a matter
so impossible: and therefore in stead of that, you challenge us to show and
prove the contrary, forgetting that it is the repliers part to prove, and not
the answerers. But I pray you tell me in earnest, did you never hear of any
particulars, whereby we except against your doctrine as none of the Apostles?
What a vain flourish is this then, to demand new proofs of us, and never
once assay to answer those we have already brought? But I have made answer to
your challenge in my refutation of your proof, that your Church is one. Yea
our men's books are full of these points and proofs, both out of Scriptures
and Fathers. As for your brag, of being able to show diverse points that we hold
or deny, otherwise then the true Church did in the time of the Apostles: it is
well known, that in most controversies betwixt us, you are feign to fly from
the Scriptures of God, to the writings of men, and devise interpretations to
serve your turn. In some points we deny not, but that we dissent from the
opinion of some writers of former ages; but that we go against the judgment of
the whole Church before it became Antichristian, neither we grant, nor you can
prove. And even for those times of error, we want not the testimony of learned
men to avouch our doctrine against your heresies. But you call upon us to set
down the point of doctrine, the author, the time, the place, what company did
oppose themselves against it, and who they were that did continue in the
profession of the former faith. What needs all this ado? Will it not serve the
turn, if we make it manifest, that your doctrine is contrary to that the
Apostles taught, unless we can show you when every one of your errors was
first hatched? What if the Scribes and Pharisees had demanded the like
questions of our Savior Christ, touching their errors reproved by him? There
is no doubt, but that as he was God, he could have declared every one of these
particulars; but do you think he would have fed their foolish humor in this
case, and not have contented himself with showing that it was not so from the
beginning? D. Abbot against D. B. P.
Some of our Ministers have truly and wittily refuted this conceit of yours, by
showing how absurd it is for a man that is sick of the plague, a surfeit, or
any such disease, to deny that he is so diseased, because the Physician cannot
tell him at what time, and in what place, upon what occasion, in what company
he first took the infection, or distempered his body by ill diet. Is it a
good plea against plain and sound evidence, whereby I prove that such a
Lordship ought to be mine, that I cannot show when and how I lost the
possession of every several close and meadow, farm and cottage? But to take
away all just excuse from you, our writers have showed the first beginnings of
many of your errors, and might have done of more, if al were extant that has
bin written; and your inquisitors and censurers had not (as you call it)
purged, indeed corrupted and maimed the writings of former ages, wheresoever
they made against you, if you could light on them before they were too well
known in the world.

This challenge has as much reason as the former. We must prove that there
have not been some in every country, where the Gospel has been professed,
that have held your Roman faith. Or rather must not you prove your
Catholicknesse by such induction? But we confess it to be likely, that the
devil has from time to time sowed some of your tares amongst the Lords
wheat. But that your whole faith, as now you hold it, was ever maintained any
where, till the last Council of Trent, we challenge you to prove if you can.
Surely the Greek Church even till this day, dissenteth from you in many, and
some no small matters, as your Popes supremacy; that I may not name those
Christians who are in precious John's country, in Armenia, Jean. Belul.
and other parts of the world: to whom your doctrine is as little known in a
manner, as ours is to those Indians you spoke of. Amongst whom, for ought you
can prove or know to the contrary, there may be, and in all liklihood are some,
to whom the Lord has given grace to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ for pardon
of their sins, without any mingling of their own works with Christ's, to
procure them the inheritance of heaven. All such we challenge to be of our
Church, though they agree with you in many of your errors, through their
ignorance of the Scriptures. As for our country of England, which 1. Reg. 3.
26.
like that harlot, you call dear, as often as you conceive hope of bringing it
into subjection to the Pope, but otherwise wish it wholly destroyed, as she
did the child; it neither was converted by your proud Monk Austine, but
perverted rather: and long before he was borne, had many congregations in it,
who held the same faith that we now do. You confess they were not of your
Church: for then what needed, or how could they have been converted by Austine?
That the Gospel was here long before that time, even in a manner from the
first preaching of it, Poly. Virgil. hist. Angl. lib. 2
Polydor Virgill no Protestant may teach you out of Gildas a British writer,
ancienter then Bid: Gildas witnesses (says Polydor) that the Brittans
received the Gospel presently upon the first publishing of it abroad in the
world. Yea Beda hist. ge^t. Angl. lib. 2. c. 2.
Bid, your own author avouches, that seven Bishops of the Brittans, and many
very learned men refused to receive Austine for their Archbishop. And Galsr.
Mon. lib. 8. cap. 4.
Geffrey of Monmouth testifies, that Ethelbat king of Kent caused 1200. monks
of Bangor to be slain in one day, because they would not yield to Austins
Archbishopricke: of whom that writer says, that they decked with martyrdom,
entered the kingdom of heaven. Mark you what he says? They were martyrs, that
chose to die rather then to yield to your Popish Archbishop. The like
conversion we may find in the Indies, especially the West, where your
Catholic nation the Spaniards have destroyed in few years, more souls, then
all sent by the Pope, or agreeing in faith with him, ever converted in five
times so many. Although, what tell you us of men communicating with the Pope in
the same faith? How durst they attempt any such matter, without special
commission from him? Is his authority no more amongst you?

The Roman Church has indeed always been visible: but it has not always
been the same Church. For many hundred years it was ours, and not yours,
though the devil labored to sow the tares, you now sell for corn, among the
wheat, and prevailed by little and little. It is therefore ridiculous for you
to challenge us, that we should show when the faith, received by the Church of
Rome from the Apostles, began to fail in it. It was done ( Mat. 13. 25.
as our Savior speaks in the like case) while men slept: and so slily, piece
by piece, that the corn was ouergrowne ere the tares were perceived: most men
took them for wheat: they that saw some difference, thought them too deeply
rooted for them to pluck up: and if any man offered to touch them with his
weeding hook, Satan had taken order by your Pope and his Clergy, that the
hook should be wrung out of his hands; and if he held hard, his head be wrung
off his shoulders. Thus one man being taught by another calamity, as in
hunting with the Lion, the Fox was by the Asses misery, every one thought it
best to sleep in a whole skin, and to bear with that they could not help.
Yet are there many examples of those, who from time to time have withstood the
tyranny of your Pope, and your heresies in Religion: and many more we should
have heard of, if your Popish Clergy had not bin chief commanders through
all Europe.

What is all this painted discourse, but a flourishing repetition of that which
has been often answered, like coleworts twice sod, and strewed over with
sugar? Only to grace the service you send in the dish by one, who in your eyes
is a proper man. But do you not know, that as well his own treason, as the
continual practices of his companions, and above all, the late devilish fire
work of your superior Garnets approbation, have made Campions authority
light, and the name of a Jesuit odious to all true hearted Englishmen? Let us
take the Traitor at the best, and give him some commendation of wit, and of a
quick cornicall style. If once his writings be stripped of their rhetorical
habit, and set naked before the light of true logic, it will appear to all
the world (I will say no more then I am able to manifest) that never any man so
doted upon by them that would seem to be great clearkes, writ more weakly or
unsoundly. You tell us, that the Roman Church was once a true Church. We
acknowledge it with thanks to God, and due commendation thereof: and are loath
to say any thing, whereby the best opinion of it might be diminished; but that
you drive us to it, by building upon that high commendation, which S. Paul (say
you) has left written of it: as if it had once been so extraordinarily rooted,
that no blast could shake it. But how vain a conceit this is, it will easily
be seen, if we consider that other Churches, which have had as great
commendations, are now no Churches at all. What is become of that famous Church
at Corinth, of which the Apostle testifies, that Cor. 1. 5.
In all things it was made rich in Christ, in all kind of speech, and in all
knowledge: so that they were not destitute of any gift? yea the Apostle adds,
that verse. 7.
Jesus Christ shall also confirm them, unto the end, that they may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus. This passes that he says of the
Romans. The like he says of Phil. 1. 3. 5. 6
the Philippians, I thank my God, because of the fellowship which you have in
the Gospel, from the first day until now: and I am persuaded of the same
thing, that he, which has begun this good work in you, will perform it,
until the day of Jesus Christ. How (would you have triumphed) if the Apostle
had said as much of your Church? But what say you to the Church of
Thessalonica? From you (says 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
the Apostle of the Thessalonians) sounded out the word of the Lord, not in
Macedonia and Achaia only: but your faith also, which is toward God, is spread
abroad in all quarters. Are not these commendations as great as those that are
left written of the Romans? Yea, what if that which the Apostle speaks of
them, be not to commend their faith, but to show the reason of his joy, and
thanks to God for their conversion? As if he should have said, that he did
thank God for them, because of their believing: and the report thereof through
the world, was like to prove an occasion of spreading the Gospel, and drawing
many other by their example to the profession of Christian Religion, and
confirming them that did believe. He declares (says Caietan. ad Romans 1. 8.
Caietan) that the cause of his thanksgiving was, that the fame of their
believing was profitable to all the world. For Rome at that time was the head
of the world: and therefore the report of the Christian faith being at Rome,
was spread abroad into all places, and was profitable to all, as being a
means to provoke them to believe. Of the confirming of others Lombard. ibi.
and Ambros.
Lombard says, that they which believed were strengthened in faith, seeing
that their rulers were made their brethren in faith. So do Origin.
Origin, Theodoret.
Theodoret, Gloss. ordin. interl.
your Glosses, Lyra.
Lyra, Thomas.
Thomas, Catharin.
Catharin, and other, understand the Apostle. Ambros. ibi.
Ambrose is not afraid to say plainly, that the Apostle rejoices for their
good beginning, knowing that they might go forward to perfection. For as yet
(says Thomas ibi.
Thomas) they had not perfect faith, because some of them were by false
Apostles seduced, so that they thought the cermonies of the law were to be
joined with the Gospel. He does not (says Gloss. interl.
your interlinear Gloss) commend their faith as perfect, but their readiness
and desire to embrace Christ. All which notwithstanding, we willingly grant,
that the Roman Church was at that time, and long after, a true Church: what
gather you of this grant? I hope you will not say, that therefore it must
needs be a true church still. But we shall better understand your meaning by
that which follows.

There is nothing you Papists are more afraid of, then to be drawn to justify
your doctrine by Scripture. Therefore you always keep aloof, and tell us of
the Church, the Church, as the Jews did Ier. 7. 5.
Jeremy of the Temple. The Roman Church (say you) was once a true Church. Who
denies it? Therefore is it so still? I (say you) that it is, unless you can
show, at what time it departed from the true faith. Did you never know any man,
who in his youth had black hair, and now being old is all white headed? Put
case I would stand very stiffly upon your argument, and say that his head is
black still, and urge you to tell me, when the first hair changed white.
Would you answer me, or laugh at me for my folly? But such changes in faith
(say you) would have been resisted, or at least recorded by some, and you
prove it thus.

If no heresy as contrary to truth, as black is to white, was ever heard of;
to have arisen, without noting, or resisting, nor any such could now possibly
so arise; then no such thing is to be believed of the Roman Church. But no
such heresy was ever heard of to have arisen, nor can so arise, without noting
or resisting. Therefore no such thing is to be believed of the Roman Church.
That I may answer directly to your Syllogism, remember To the syllogism.
(which I also noted before) that you take it, as granted, that there was never
any noting or resisting of errors, but there is yet record remaining of it.
Whereas we gessing reasonably of that which is past, by that we see every day,
persuade our selves, that your Popish inquisitors and censurers have raced and
destroyed many records, wherein the arising of your errors, and the resistance
made against them have been noted. I would speak more of this matter, but that
almost every child knows, how shamefully, and lewdly you deal every day,
with your own men's writings, who forced by the evidence of truth, here and
there give witness to our doctrine in their books. We see not then, why we
may not yield this conclusion, for ought that it can advantage you, or hurt us.
All such errors doubtless have been noted, and resisted; though the records
thereof be perished, defaced, or destroyed by your Antichristian Prelates.
Secondly, though it were granted to be true, that No heresy as contrary to
the truth as black is to white, ever could arise without being noted or
recorded: yet might your Popish errors have stolen in, for the most part,
unperceived. Because they were not apparently contrary to the known truth, as
the absurd examples you bring of sacrificing an Ox, or worshipping a Cow, are.
Popery (as the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
Apostle says of it, under the title of Antichristianisme) is a mystery of
iniquity, which began to work in his days, and by little and little, with
colorable pretenses, wrought it self into the Church, till it came to that
height, in which all the world now sees it. I might exemplify this matter, in
that great point, of your Popes licentious and unlimited authority; how it
began, by reason of the place, Rome being the chief seat of the Empire: how it
grew by the favor of the Emperors, and the worthiness of some Bishops of
that sea, and so crept on, till it had gotten See Doctor Reynolds confer. with
Master Heart page 313. etc.
strength to trample the Emperors themselves under foot. It is said by way of
proverb, that Rome was not built in one day. The speech is as true of your
Popes Romish government, as of Romulus first founding the City. The occasions
and pretenses of your Popes greatness were reasonable fair to show, and
seemed to promise, I know not what security to religion, and peace to
Christendom: but the euenthath showed, that the one by it was, for a time,
quite overthrown, and the other partly destroyed, and altogether brought into
great hazard. But I may not enlarge my answer to far. Hollinshead description
of Britan. fol. 11
Our Historiographer whom you find fault with, no doubt spoke in that just
indignation he conceived against the intolerable pride of the Romish Monk
Austin, and in pity of that bloodshed, which insued upon his finding favor
with the Saxon kings: whom he caused to imbrew their hands in the blood of many
thousand poor Christians: because forsooth they would not submit themselves to
his insolency. If his speech sound unpleasantly in your ears, how would you
have liked Mat. 23. 15.
that of our Savior in the Gospel? VVo be to you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites. For ye compass sea and land to make one of your profession: and
when he is made, you make him two fold the child of hell more then your
selves. For (says Hieron. ad Mat. 23.
Jerome) he that before did but simply err in his ignorance, by your lewd
conversation, is driven from his profession back again to Gentilisme. Surely
they that before were heathen, and might by Gods blessing have been won to
the truth of the Gospel, through the preaching of the Britans, and their
humble conversation, by this Austin lost the opportunity, and became
persecutors of true Christians, for your pride and superstition, with which
afterward the whole nation was miserably overwhelmed, and at last almost
perished under the Normans. But to give you some better satisfaction touching
this point, hear I pray you in a few words, what one of your own writers
says: It is a thing full of horror (says Bucchinger. hist. Eccles. page 217.
Bucchingerus) either to read or remember, that the Popes of Rome practiced
such tyranny, one against another. O how are they degenerated from their
Ancestors? It could not be, that in the time of such cruelty, there should be
any regard had of Christian piety. Let no man then marvel if some abuses,
and perverse opinions crept into the Church. There was great ignorance of the
Scripture, and love of superstition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
The Lord sending men strong delusions, that they should believe lies, because
they had not received the love of the truth.

You press us here, (as you think) with some probability, that if there had
been any alteration of religion, it would certainly have been recorded. But how
should it have been recorded, when it was not seen? You dream of a sudden
change: where as the alteration grew from good to bad, yet with show of some
goodness; and from bad to worse, so nicely, that few or none could discern
it. Your probabilities are two. The former in this manner.

If there could not a little ceremony be added to the Mass, but that it was
set down in history; how could the whole substance of the Mass be newly
invented, and no mention made of it?

This consequence is weak. For those additions to the Mass were matters
enjoined by your Popes, and recorded by your writers of Histories, not as
errors, but as virtues, to the commendation of the Authors thereof, the world
growing every day more and more superstitious, and yet there are some
ceremonies, and other patches of your Mass, about the Author whereof there is
no great agreement to be found in your writers of histories. But the substance
of your Mass was long coming in, and the words themselves in it, having been
devised to no ill purpose, were at at last occasion of error upon error; as
it is worthily declared, by Lord Plessy of the Mass.
the Lord Plessy in his book of the Mass, to which I refer all men, that
desire to be satisfied in this matter, and where (I dare undertake) they may
find good satisfaction. The learned know of themselves, how to have it also
otherwhere, in the writings of our divines, D. Sutliu. de Missa.
Doctor Sutcliffe, and diverse other.

Your latter objection carries some more show of likelihood with it, in this
sort.

If Historiographers were not afraid to note personal and private vices of the
Popes themselves, why should they fear to record any alteration in religion?

Do you not know why? Or can you not discern the difference in this case? Of
whom should they be afraid? Your Popes for the most part, were so notoriously
lewd, that all, your Historiographers write of them, was well known to the
world, before they writ, so that they could not for shame, but say in a manner,
as much as they did. But the chief matter was, that the latter Popes had
quarrels to their predecessors, which was very ordinary: and then it was not
only safe, but as it were meritorious, to display their villainy to the world;
or at the least, they might imagine that the vices of their predecessors would
serve for a foil to their virtues. Sometimes also it fell out, that the Pope
in very civil honesty, had a detestation of such bad courses as other before
him had taken; and that gave men some liberty to write more freely. But your
change of doctrine neither could easily, nor might at all be discovered,
because it was a priuitie of your estate, and a principle of your religion,
with Arcanum reipublicae.
your Pope and Prelates, that Saint Peter's vicar could not err in doctrine. As
for the^ in other countries, who knows not, how few monuments of antiquity
remain? Or who suspecteth not justly, that they have come through hucksters
handling, as in diverse it is more then apparent? Yet are there also diverse
records in the writings of learned men, wherein any man may see direct
opposition to many points, held at this day in your Romish Church.

After many idle repetitions, turnings and windings, at the last you are
lighted upon a part of our answer, that those errors and abuses, crept in by
little and little unperceived. For reply whereto you say, it is an idle
fiction already refuted. How idle then is this new discourse of yours, against
a point, which you have overthrown before? But you knew well enough, for all
your saying, that it asked further help, the^ you could yet afford it. Well,
what say you at the last? just nothing at all to purpose. For what though the
matters be of great moment, and less points noted by some writers? We speak
not of that, but of the small difference from the truth, which at the first
appeared in the bringing in, and beginning of your heresies. A matter of small
importance, being apparently contrary to that, which is generally held to be
true, shall find more to note and resist it, then an error in the very
foundation of religion, so closely carried that it cannot at the first be
perceived. You give us two examples of very important matters, the Mass and
Images. But you offer not to show, that they brake out all at once, to the
height of impiety: No, no, they came in by degrees, under a color of
reverence, and help to further men in devotion. I wittingly for bear to enter
into discourse of these points, because I should be too long, and the matter is
already performed very excellently by that honorable personage the Lord Plessy:
Plessy of the Mass. lib. 1. chap. 6. 7. 8.
for the Mass in his first book, Lib. 2. cap. 2. 3. 4.
and for Images in his second. See our Homilies of the peril of Idolatry.


But I may not forget to answer the imputations you charge us withal. First
concerning the Sacrament, you confidently avouch that we hold it to be (really
and substantially) but a bare piece of bread. Wherein you show that, wherewith
afterward you charge us about Images, either your ignorance, or your malice. By
Sacrament we understand, according to the truth, the whole action of blessing,
giving, receiving the bread and wine. The bread which you call the Sacrament,
is but part of the matter of the Sacrament. But what? Do we make this bread, to
be really and substantially bare bread? Surely, for the nature of it, we say
and are sure, that it never cease to be bread, till it be digested in the
stomach. But for the use, we acknowledge it, so far as it is used, to be
holy bread, and not bare bread, bread appointed, blessed, and made effectual
by God, to seal up in our hearts the assurance of his love, in giving his
son for our redemption, and the forgiveness of our sins, resting upon him
by faith for pardon. Indeed we do not, as you do, blasphemously call the bread
our Creator, or God; upon a conceit, that (forsooth) the substance of the
bread, is either vanished away, or else turned into the body of Jesus Christ,
to be torn in pieces with our teeth, or swallowed down into our bellies, and
from thence bestowed in a worse place. This senseless, and monstrous opinion
has been, and is amongst you, the cause of the most gross and barbarous
idolatry, that ever was committed in the world.

It is neither ignorantly nor maliciously done of us, to charge you, for
adoring stocks and stones, as the Paynims did. Compare the things, and the
worship, and then show me a true difference. Are not your Images of wood, gold,
stone, as the Gentiles were? Have they not the shape and proportion of men and
women, as theirs had? Do not you worship them, as diverse of the Heathen were
wont to do? You Baruc. cap. 6 verse. 3. verse. 12. verse. 18. 20.
cover them with clothing of purpose, and wipe their faces, because of the
dust of the Temple. You light up candles before them: you make their faces
black through the smoke of your incense, you bear them in procession upon
your shoulders, you set gifts before them: your Priests have their heads and
beards shaven: you call upon them for help: you present the blind, the halt,
and sick before them to be healed. verse. 25. 26. verse. 30. verse. 31. 40.
But what mean I to reckon up so many particulars? Who sees not the agreement
betwixt the heathen and the Papists, for the matter, form, and worship of
their Images? Your idle distinctions of Idol, and Image, of service and
worship, of religious and civil worship, I have Defense of the Reformed
Catholic. Page 544. 545.
otherwhere examined and refuted. If you say, that you worship not the Image;
it is too manifestly apparent, as a ruled case amongst you, that Thom. 3. q.
25. art. 3.
the Image must have the same worship, See my defense of the Reformed
Catholic. Page 569.
that belongs to the thing, whose Image it is. But you do not take the Images
to be Gods. If you speak of all your ignorant people, I scarce believe you.
But this makes no difference in worship. The heathen, at least the learned and
wiser sort of them, did not hold their Idols to be Gods, but representations of
their Gods. And you Papists, in making them mediators of intercession, and so
acknowledging but one God, do little better then the Pagans: for they had but
one sovereign God Jupiter, who commanded all the rest. Not only Dij minorum
gentium, their Gods of the third and fourth form, but also those of the second
and first, as Hercules, Apollo, Venus, yea and Virgil Aeneid. lib. 12.
Juno her self too, who was both wife and sister to Jupiter, depended upon
him, and were glad to be mediators of intercession to him for their favorites:
as is every where to be seen in Homer, and Virgil. All the difference of any
moment, that I perceive, is, that some of the heathen Gods, were imagined to be
such by nature; and all your Diui or Saints, pety-gods, have both their places
and offices by favor. But I am weary of these abominations and fooleries of
yours.

The Pastors of the Church being employed in withstanding manifest and
dangerous heresies, neither did nor could, though they slept not, perceive and
reprove every error; yea it is more then likely, that they were content to
bear with many things, as long as the maine points were held soundly: least by
striving for matters of less weight, greater things should be neglected, and
they that erred in small things, upon resistance, quite fall away to join with
the heretics. This in the beginning, for some five hundred years, was the
estate of the Church. And afterward plenty bred pride and idleness: the
chalices were turned into gold, and Priests into wood or lead, that partly
ignorance, and partly slothfulness gave the devil opportunity to sow what
errors he would in the midst of the Church. If any man of more learning or
grace, the^ the ordinary sort perceived and reproved the errors of his time,
he was by one means or other suppressed or disgraced: all me^ and their
writings, especially Anno. 609.
after the revealing of Antichrist, being at the devotion of your persecuting
Clergy. Yet did not Almighty God leave his truth without witness, as it
appears Illyricus in Catal. testium. veritatis.
by record of them who from time to time, misliked and withstood your
Antichristian doctrines. These are no dreams of a proud man in his sleep, but
likely conjectures, or rather apparent truths, as any indifferent man may
discern, and will confess.

To shut up the matter, you be take your self to your general Rendez-vous of
the Church, which forsooth, if those former imputations were true, should have
erred; and so the holy Ghost have neglected his office, which your Pope has
assigned him, to keep the universal Church from erring. It had been well,
your Antichrist would have contented himself, with his sauciness toward his
Leo. Epist. 50.
Lord Saint Peter, in appointing him to the Portership of heaven gates, and not
have presumed to enjoin the holy Ghost also such an office, as our Savior
never committed to him. The charge our Savior left with that his glorious
Lieutenant, specified in that part of his Joan. 14. 17. and 16. 15.
Patent, which you glance at, was not concerning the universal Church, a thing
(in your sense) not once signified in the Scriptures: but touching the Apostles
absolutely, and all true Christians in general and particular, for matters
necessary to salvation. This accordingly has always been performed, no man
that ever truly believed in Jesus Christ, having fallen into any such error,
as might utterly sever him from the body of the true Church, that is, the
company of the elect believers, whereof our Savior Christ is the head: as I
have showed in my special answer to these places before.

But Tertullian says, that the holy Ghost had neglected his duty, if the
Church, had universally erred. in such important matters. Tertul. de
praescript. cap. 28.
Tertullian speaks not of any universal Church, but of several particular
Churches: which you grant may err, and yet the holy Ghost not fail in his
commission. Besides, Tertul. de praenit. cap. 10.
Tertullian himself says otherwhere, that the Church may be preserved in one
or two: and therefore your Catholic Church of Rome might well fall into such
gross heresies, without any disgrace to the Spirit of God.

A. D.. 7.
. IIII. That the Roman Church only is Apostolic.

Fourthly, I find that the Protestants Church is not Apostolic, because they
cannot derive the pedigree of their Preachers lineally, without interruption,
from the Apostles: but are forced to acknowledge some other, as Luther or
Calvin, or some such, for their first founders in this their new faith; from
whom they may perhaps show some succession of the preachers of their faith: but
they can never show, that Luther or Calvin themselves (who lived within these
hundred years) did either lawfully succeed, or was lawfully sent to teach this
new faith, by any Apostolic Bishop or Pastor. Nay Luther himself does not
only confess, but also brag, that he was the first preacher of this new found
faith, Christum a nobis primo vulgatum Epist. ad Arge^tan Dom. 1525.
audemus gloriari, (says he) We dare boast that Christ was first published by
us. For which his glorious boasting, me thinks he deserves well that title
which Optatus gives unto Victor the Lib cont. parm.
first bishop of the Donatists, to wit, to be called filius sine patre,
discipulus sine magistro, a son without a father, a disciple without a
master.

On the contrary side, the Roman Church can show a lineall succession of their
Bishops, without interruption, even from the Apostle Saint Peter, unto Clement
the eight the Bishop of Rome, which lives at this day, The which succession
from the Apostles, which we have, and the Protestants want, the ancient
Fathers did much esteem, and used it as an argument, partly to confound the
heretics, partly to confirm themselves in the unity of the Catholic Church.
So does Irenaeus, who says, Traditionem ab Apostolis, and annunciatam Lib. 3.
cap. 3.
hominibus fidem, per successiones Episcoporum peruenientem vsque ad nos,
indicantes, confundimus omnes illos qui quoquo modo, vel per sui placentiam
malam, vel per vanam gloriam, vel per caecitatem and malam sententiam,
praeterquam oportet colligunt: Showing the tradition from the Apostles, and the
faith coming unto us by succession of Bishops, we confound all them, who any
way through evil complacence of themselves, or vain glory, or through
perverse opinion do collect (and conclude) otherwise then they ought. So also
does S. Austin, who says, Tenet Co^t. epist. Fundam. cap. 4.
me in Ecclesia Catholica, ab ipsa sede Petri Apostoli, cui pascendas oues suas
Dominus commendauit, vsque ad praesentem Episcopum, successio Sacerdotum: The
succession of Priests from the very seat of Peter the Apostle, to whom our
Lord commended his sheep to be fed, until this present Bishop, does hold me in
the Catholic Church. See the same S. Austin, Epist. 150. Optatus li. 2. cont.
Parmen. S. Epiphani. haeres. 275. S. Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 6. S. Athanas.
Orat. 2. cont. Arianos, who pronounces them to be heretics, qui aliunde quam
a tota successione Cathedrae Ecclesiasticae Athanas. orat. 2. cont. Arian.
originem fidei suae deducunt, who derive the beginning of their faith from any
other ground, then from the whole succession of Ecclesiastical chair. And
this (says he) is eximium and admirabile argumentum ad haereticam sectam
explorandam, an excellent and admirable argument, whereby we may epsy out and
discern an heretical sect. The which argument these Fathers would never have
urged and extolled so much, if they had not thought that this succession was an
undoubted good mark of the Church, and that with this lawful, uninterrupted,
Apostolical succession of Doctors and Pastors, the true Apostolic faith and
doctrine was always conjoined. The which to be conjoined, we may easily prove
out of S. Paul himself, who says: Dedit Pastores and Doctores ad
consummationem sanctorum, in opus ministerij, in aedificationem corporis Ephesians.
4.
Christi, donec occurramus omnes in vnitatem fidei, and agnitionis Filij Dei,
in virum perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi: Signifying that
Christ our Savior has appointed these outward functions of Pastors and
Doctors in the Church, to continue until the worlds end, for the edification
and perfection thereof, and especially for this purpose, vt non simus paruuli
fluctuantes, and circumferamur omni vento doctrinae: that we may not Ibidem.
be little ones wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine:
Wherefore that this ordinance and appointment of Pastors and Doctors in the
Church, made by our Savior Christ, may not be frustrate of the effect intended
by him: we must needs say, that he has decreed so to assist and direct these
Pastors in teaching the doctrine of faith, that the people (their flock) may
always by their means be preserved from wavering in the ancient faith, and
from being carried about with every wind of new doctrine. The which cannot be,
unless with succession of Pastors be always conjoined succession in true
doctrine, at least in such sort, that all the Pastors cannot at any time
universally err, or fail to teach the ancient and Apostolic faith. For if
they should thus universally err, then all the people (who do, and ought like
sheep, follow the voice of their Pastor) should also generally err, and so
the whole Church, which (according to S. Gregory Nazianzen) consists of
sheep and pastors, should contrary Orat. de moderatione in disput. habenda.
to diverse promises of our Savior, universally err. So that we may be sure,
that the ordinary Pastors shall never be so forsaken of the promised Spirit of
truth, that all shall generally err, and teach errors in faith: or that there
shall not be at all times some sufficient company of lawful succeding
Pastors, adhering to the succession of S. Peter (who was by our Savior
appointed chief Pastor) of whom we John 21.
may learn the truth, and by whom we may always be confirmed and continued in
the true ancient faith, and preserved from being carried about with the wind of
vpstart error. The which being so, it follows that the true Apostolic
doctrine is inseperably conjoined with the succession of lawful Pastors,
especially of the Apostolic sea of Rome.

Wherefore we may against all heretics of our time (as the ancient fathers
did against heretics of their time) urge this argument of succession,
especially of the Apostolical succession of the Bishops of Rome. We may say to
them as S. Augustine says to the Donatists: Numerate sacerdotes ab ipsa sede
Petri, and in illo ordine Patrum, quis, cui successit, videte: Number the
Priests from August. in Psalm cont. partem Donat.
the seat it self of Peter, and in that order or row of Fathers, see which
succeeded which. We may say with Irenaeus, Hac ordinatione and successione
Episcoporum, traditio Apostolorum ad nos peruenit; Iren. lib. 3. c. 3.
and est plenissima ostensio vnam and eandem fidem esse, quae ab Apostolis
vsque nunc confirmata est: By this orderly succession of Bishops, the tradition
of the Apostles has come unto us; and it is a most full demonstration, that
the faith which from the Apostles is confirmed even until now, is one and the
same. We may tell them with Tertullian, Nos communicamus cum Ecclesijs
Apostolicis, Lib. de praescrip
quod nulla aduersa doctrina facit; and hoc est testimonium veritatis: We do
communicate with the Apostolic Churches, which no contrary doctrine does, and
this is a testimony of the truth.

A. W.
That Apostolicknesse, which is a mark of the true Church, is as I showed
Chap. 15. an agreement and sucession in doctrine, with and to the Apostles; not
as you would have it, a personal descent from them. And therefore your reason
against our Churches, is naught.

Every Apostolic Church (say you) can derive the pedigree of their preachers
lineally, without interruption, from the Apostles. The Protestant Churches
cannot so derive their pedigree. Therefore the Protestant Churches are not
Apostolic.
Your mayor is evidently false, because otherwise some church To the
proposition.
professing the true faith, and not keeping record of the succession of their
teachers, might be held not to be Apostolical. But Tertul. de praescrip. ca.
32.
Tertullian affirms the contrary directly, that those Churches which agree
with the Apostles in faith, though they can allege no Apostle or Apostolic
man for their first founder, yet are never the less to be counted
Apostolical, because of their consent in doctrine. And indeed it is both
impious and absurd, to deny any Church to be Apostolical, that holds that
faith, by the preaching whereof the Apostles planted Churches.

Your minor also is untrue: because it is well known, that if you have any such
succession amongst you, we have it too. For Luther, To the Assumption.
Calvin, and some other of our Divines, were ordered by bishops of your church.
Concerning Luther, what reasonable man can be so absurd, as to think that
Luther would make any man believe, that the Gospel was first preached by
himself: whereas he continually appeals for the proof of his doctrine to the
writings of the Prophets and the Apostles? But Luther might truly say, that he
was the first which had in those times published Christ; especially in the
chief point of the Gospel, which is, justification by faith in Christ. And in
this respect it is an honor to Luther, to have bin a son without a father, and
a disciple without a master: and no more glory to your Popish Bishops and
Priests, to have had so long a succession in error and heresy, then for the
Arians to have been able to reckon up so many Bishops of their faction.
Vincentius acknowledges a succession, continued though secretly, Vincen. Lyrin.
from Simon Magus to Priscilian.

Let us see' now whether you bring any better reason for your selves, then you
have done against us: They are even much about one.

That Church which can show a line all succession of her Bishops, without
interruption, from the Apostle Peter to Cloment now living, is Apostolic. But
the Church of Rome can show such a succession, without interruption. Therefore
the Church of Rome is Apostolic.
Tertul. de praesc. cap. 32.
Tertullian thought it sufficient to prove the heretics not to To the
Proposition.
be Apostolic, that their doctrine agreed not with the Apostles. And Ambros.
de paenit. cap. 6.
Ambrose truly affirmed, that they have not the inheritance of Peter, which
have not the faith of Peter. He (says Greg. Nazia^. de laudib. Athanas.
Nazianzen) that professes the same doctrine of faith, is partaker of the same
throne. But he that embraces contrary doctrine, must be thought an adversary,
even in the throne. He may have the name, but the other has the truth of
succession. Therefore Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43.
Irenaeus says plainly, that those Bishops only are to be obeyed, who
together with succession have the truth. But of this I spoke before, Chap. 15.

Where there is no beginning, what continuance or succession To the Assumption.
can there be? Is not the question, whether Peter were ever at Rome or no, full
of doubt? Are you able in any sort to resolve it by Scripture? unless perhaps
we may say, that he never came there, because it is no where plainly set down,
nor probably to be gathered from thence, that ever Saint Peter was at Rome. But
it is more unlikely, that ever he was Bishop of Rome. I might go forward, to
ask you who was his successor, Linus or Clement: which is a point not agreed
upon by ancient writers. Since that time, you have had 32. schisms in your
Church, sometimes two, sometimes three Popes at once, that your succession
cannot be so clear as you would make it.

To prove your minor, you tell us, that the ancient Fathers did much esteem
succession from the Apostles, and used it as an argument to confound the
heretics, and to confirm themselves in the unity of the Catholic Church.
Who denies that succession is to be esteemed, and that it has some force to
confute and confirm? But what succession is it, that is of such price and
force? Personal succession alone without truth? We heard ere while, what
Tertullian, Irenaeus, Nazianzen and Ambrose say concerning succession, that
without truth it deserves no credit. Yea Bellar. de Eccle. mil. l. 4. c. 8.
Dicosecundo
some of your own writers confess, that an argument from succession does not
hold affirmatively, as if there were a true Church, wheresoever there is
succession.

VVherby does Irenaeus confound heresies? by showing a personal succession of
Bishops from the Apostles? What could that help the matter, unless he be
also able to prove that the doctrine he maintains, has come successively from
the Apostles by them? He speaks plain enough, Iren. li. 3. c. 3
We confound all errors by the doctrine of the Apostles, and the faith preached
to men by the^. Let not the word tradition trouble any man. Lib. 3. cap. 1
Irenaeus for that expounds himself where he says, that the Apostles first
preached the Gospel, and afterward by the will of God Tradiderunt
delivered it to us in the Scriptures, to be the pillar and foundation of our
faith. The continuance of this doctrine, by succession, is used by Irenaeus as
a motive to persuade men to the liking of that truth which had received so good
acceptance, and was warranted by so good authority, as the teaching of the
Apostles themselves. In a word Irenaeus says, that heresies might then be
refuted, by showing that they who had been ordained Bb. by the Apostles and
their successors, continued in the doctrine received, without any approbation
of such heretical fancies.

August. contr. epist. Fundam. cap. 4
Austin (you say) was held in the Church (as himself professes) by the
succession of Priests from the very seat of Peter. And why should he not be
held by that, rather the^ leave the Church for the dreams of the Manichees?
We say, as Austin did, that such a succession is a better proof of the Church,
then their bare promise of truth; especially since (as the same August. breuic.
collat.
Austin shows otherwhere) they would have their word to be taken, as you now
would have yours, for sufficient proof. But Austin in the very same place you
allege, adds withal, that if they could show that the truth was on their
side, he would prefer it before succession; and whatsoever other reason, that
made him continue a member of the Church. In this sense did those other ancient
writers esteem and urge succession, whose names you muster to small purpose,
but only for show of authority.

Concerning that speech of Athan. contra Arian. orat. 2
Athanasius, be not so injurious either to him or your selves, as to press his
testimony to so lewd a purpose. Would you have men think that he which refuted
and confounded Arius and his accomplices by so many and so worthy proofs out of
the holy Scriptures, would condemn not only other men, but himself also for
deriuing his faith in that point from the Scriptures? But though you care not
what become of all the Fathers, so your Popery may flourish: yet like a
reasonable man, consider what a terrible blow you give your own cause. Is
there no other mark of the Church but succession? Then, by Bellar. de eccle.
mil. l. 4. c. 8
Bellarmines judgment, there is none at all; who allows it not, as a certain
light, to show us the Church. But what wants it of blasphemy, to pronounce men
to be heretics for making the Scriptures the foundation of their faith: to
which purpose Iren. li. 3. c. 1
Irenaeus says that they were left? And I pray you, answer me directly, why it
should not be as lawful for me to ground my faith upon the beginning of this
succession in the Apostles, as upon the continuance of it in other men. Yet
might Athanasius well say, concerning that point of our Savior Christ's
Godhead, that he was to be counted an heretic, that should derive the
beginning of his faith from any other ground then the whole succession: wherein
the Apostles were comprehended, and whose doctrine the Churches of Christ till
that time, in that matter had followed. But how will you prove out of this
place of Athanasius, that this should be a mark to discern heretics by
always? It was then an excellent and admirable argument in that point, not of
it own nature, but because the truth had successively been held till those
times.

How will you answer Bellarm. vbi supra.
Bellarmine, who affirms confidently and truly, that truth goes not always
with succession? For if it did, why should not succession be a certain mark of
a true Church? But Bellarmine says, it is not. You tell us, that otherwise the
ordinance of Pastors made by our Savior Christ, shall be frustrate of the
effect intended by him.

What? unless there be truth wheresoever there is succession? Then can it not
come to pass, that any Pastor having lawful ordination, can err. For if one
may, for all the privilege of succession, doubtless succession does not by the
nature of it, free a man from erring. But they cannot all universally err.
What is that to purpose, unless this impossibility of erring proceed from
succession? Let us draw your reason into form, that we may the better see the
force or weakness of it.

If our Savior have appointed a succession of Pastors, that the Church may not
be carried away with every blast of doctrine, then succession and truth go
together. But our Savior has appointed Pastors to that purpose. Therefore
succession and truth go together.
Now the weakness of your reason easily bewrayes it self: To the proposition.
the consequence of your mayor is so feeble. See my answer to 12. art. part. 1.
art. 5.
Shall I show it you evidently in a like matter?

If God appointed David and his successors to rule his people according to his
will and word, that they might truly serve him: then whosoever succeeded David,
did so rule, and the people so served God. But God did appoint David and his
successors to that end. Therefore whosoever succeeded David, did so rule, and
the people so served God.
I shall not need to make any further answer to your mayor, unless perhaps I
may bring the like reason from Gods appointing a succession of Priests and
Levites in the Church of the Jews, to the very same end, that the people might
know and do his will: which intent of his notwithstanding was often made void
both by Priests and people. Yet do not we say, that the world has at any time
been without true Pastors, and their flocks in some one place or other, in a
greater or less number, who have taught and believed the true faith of Jesus
Christ in all points fundamental: without distinct belief whereof, no man can
be saved. But we deny, that either all or any Pastor has this privilege,
because of his succession: yea D. Sutcliffe against D. Kellisons survey: page 5.
we affirm, that a Christian congregation, where the ordinary means cannot
be had, may choose and authorize any man able and fit to teach, for their
Minister; and the truth of God may be in such companies preserved, without any
plea of not erring, by reason of succession established, by virtue of our
Saviors appointment.

To Greg Nazian. de co^pos. dissere^d rat. orat. 7. In Ecclesiis.
that of Nazianzen I answered before: he speaks not of the universal Church,
as you falsely avouch, but of several congregations, as his very words show:
Order (says he) has decreed in Churches (not in the universal Church) that
the flock and the Pastor should be diverse, the flock one thing, the Pastor
another: or that some should be the flock, othersome the shepherds.

You may say what you will, and be never a whit the nearer, if you bring no
better proof then yet you have done. August. in Psalm. contra partem Donat.
Saint Augustine bids the Donatists number the Priests, and see who have
succeeded one another in the Bishopric of Rome. What conclude you from
thence? That the Church of Rome was at that time Apostolic, in regard of
personal succession. Who denies it? But it follows not hereupon, either
that it is still in that sort Apostolic, about which we will not strive; or
(which is the principal matter) that it has therefore such Apostolicknesse as
is required to make a true Church: namely truth of doctrine; which must needs
be meant by Augustine, in the words that immediately follow: That is the rock,
against which the proud gates of hell prevail not. For it is more then absurd,
to make personal succession the rock, on which the Church is builded, and
against which hell gates cannot prevail. It was a likely argument against the
Donatists, that in so long a succession there had been never a Donatist: which
Saint Augustine himself in another place concludes, after he has reckoned up
all the Roman Bishops, from Linus to Anastasius then living. In the rank of
this succession (says August. epist. 165.
Augustine) there is not one Bishop found that was a Donatist.

This testimony of Irenaeus was never of your own reading in him, as the
corrupt alleging of it persuades me. I will set it down as it is Iren. l. 3.
ca. 3.
in the author himself. Ordinatione and successione.
By this ordination and succession (says Irenaeus) the tradition of the
Apostles has come to us: And Haec ostensio.
this is a most full demonstration, that Fidem esse.
it is one and the same quickening faith, Conseruata and tradita in veritate.
which has been preserved and truly taught in the Church, from the Apostles
till now. What one word or letter is there in this sentence, to prove, that
your Church of Rome, at this day, is Apostolic, or that bare personal
succession is enough, to make a Church Apostolic? Rome, in Irenaeus time was
an Apostolical Church, because it had preserved, and truly taught
successively, Bishop after Bishop, the doctrine which was delivered by the
Apostles. Is it therefore Apostolic now, when it has overthrown the very
foundation of the Apostles doctrine?

I marvel what Apostolic Churches they are, with which you communicate,
whereas you say, that there is no Church, that has succession from the
Apostles but yours? Profess. fidei per Monach. Burdegal. art. 60.
Your Monks of Bordeaux draw the universal Church to the communion of the
Romish Church. It was indeed a testimony of the truth, to communicate with the
Apostolic Churches, Tertul. de praescript. c. 21
in Tertullians time, while the truth was, for the substance of it, preserved
amongst them. But let us apply this to our purpose: what would you prove by
it? that the Church of Rome is Apostolic? Here is no mention, nor thought of
your Church in particular. But Tertullian says, it is a testimony of truth,
for a man to communicate with the Apostolic Churches. It was then a
testimony, but now those Churches are decayed: or if some of them remain
amongst the Grecians, will you grant that all they hold is true? How will you
prove, that Tertullians general speech belongs more to your Church, then to
those of the Greeks? Tertul. de praescript. cap. 32.
Tertullian tells you afterward, that contrariety to the Apostles doctrine,
may convince Churches not to be Apostolic, though they allege succession
from the Apostles. But his opinion may sufficiently appear by that, which has
been formerly alleged out of him: and the truth of this whole question, by
your discourse, and my answer to it.

A. D.
CHAP. XVII. The Conclusion of the whole discourse.

A. W.
The conclusion of your whole discourse (as your self expound it in your
preface) is this, that the faith which the authority of the Roman Church
commends to us, ought without doubt to be holden for the true faith. But this
Chapter is such, as that you might rather term it a recapitulation, then a
conclusion of your discourse. For the greatest part of it by far, is spent in
a needless repetition of that, which was before delivered, and that which
should be indeed your conclusion, is scarce signified in it.

A. D.. 1.
Now to make an end, considering all this which I have said and proved, to
wit, that there is but one, infallible, entire faith, the which is necessary
to salvation, to all sorts of men: the which faith every one must learn by
some known, infallible, and universal rule, accommodate to the capacity of
every one: the which rule cannot be any other but the doctrine and teaching of
the true Church: the which Church is always to continue visible until the
worlds end, and is to be known by these four marks, Vna, Sancta, Catholica,
Apostolica, One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic: the which marks agree only to
the Roman Church, (that is to say, to that company, which does communicate,
and agree in profession of faith, with the Church of Rome:) whereupon
follows, that this Church or company is the only true Church, of which
every one must learn that faith which is necessary to salvation. Considering
(I say) all this, I would demand of the Protestants, how they can persuade
themselves, to have that faith, which is necessary to salvation, since they
will not admit the authority and doctrine of the Church, of which only they
ought to learn this faith? Or how they can (as some of them do) challenge to
themselves the title of the true Church, since their company has never one of
the four marks, which by common consent of all, must needs be acknowledged
for the true marks of the Church? How can their congregation be the true
Church, which neither is One, because it has no means to keep unity? nor
Holy, because neither was there ever any man of it, which by miracle or any
other evident testimony, can be proved to have been truly holy: neither is
their doctrine such as those that most purely observe it, do without fail,
thereby become holy: nor Catholic, because it teaches not all truths, that
have been held by the universal Church in former times, but denies many of
them; neither is it spread over all the Christian world, but being divided into
diverse sects, every particular sect is contained in some corner of the world.
Neither has it been in all times ever since Christ, but sprung up of late, the
first founder being Martin Luther an Apostata, a man after his Apostasy from
his professed See Prateolus verbo Lutherani.
religious order, known both by his writings, words, deeds, and manner of
death, to have been a notable ill liver. Nor Apostolic, because the preachers
thereof cannot derive their Pedigree, lineally, without interruption, from any
Apostle, but are forced to begin their line, if they will have any, from
Luther, Calvin, or some latter. How can they then brag that they have the true,
holy, Catholic, and Apostolic faith; since this is not found in any
company, that differs in doctrine, from the only true, holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church? For if it be true (which Saint Austin says) that in
ventre Ecclesiae veritas manet, the truth remains in the belly In Psalm. 53.
of the Church: it is impossible that those who are disioyned by difference of
belief from that company, which is known to be the true Church, should have
the true faith. For true faith (as before has been proved) is but one;
wherefore he that differs in belief from them which have the true faith,
either he must have a false faith, or no faith at all. Again, one cannot have
true faith, unless he first hear it, according to the ordinary rule of Saint
Paul, saying, Fides ex auditu, faith comes of hearing: but how can one Romans
10.
hear true doctrine of faith sine praedicante, without one to preach truly
unto him? And how should one preach truly, at least in all points, nisi
mittatur, unless he be sent, and consequently assisted by the spirit of God?
Now, how should we know that Luther or Calvin, or any other that will leap out
of the Church, and leave that company wherein is undoubted succession, and by
succession lawful mission, or sending from God; how should we (I say) know
that these men teaching a new, and contrary doctrine, were indeed sent of God?
Nay certainly we may be most sure, that they were not sent of God. For since
Almighty God has, by his Son, planted a Church upon earth, which Church he
would have always continue until the worlds end, and has placed in it a
visible succession of lawful ordinary Pastors, whom he will, with the
assistance of himself, and his holy Spirit so guide, that they shall never
universally fail, to teach the true faith, and to preserve the people from
errors; we are not now to expect any to be sent from God, to instruct the
people, but such only as come in this ordinary manner by lawful succession,
order, and calling, according as S. Paul says: Nec quisquam sumit sibi
honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo, tanquam Aaron. Neither does any Heb. cap. 5.
man take to himself the honor, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was:
to wit, visibly, and with peculiar consecration, as we read in Leuiticus. cap.
8. To which accords that which we read 2. Paralip. 26. where Azarias said to
king Ozias: Non est tui officij, Ozia, vt adoleas incensum Domino, sed
Sacerdotum, hoc 2. Paral. ca. 26
est filiorum Aaron, qui consecrati sunt ad huiusmodi ministerium: egredere de
sanctuario, etc. It is not thy office, O Ozias, to offer incense to our Lord,
but it is the office of Priests, to wit, of the sons of Aaron, who are
consecrated to this function or ministry: go out of the Sanctuary. Which
bidding when Ozias contemned and would not obey, he was presently stricken with
a leprosy, and then being terrified, feeling the punishment inflicted by our
Lord, he hastened away, as in the same place is declared. By which places we
may learn that it does not belong to any one to do priestly functions, (as to
offer incense or sacrifice to God, or take upon them the authority to preach
and instruct the people) but only to Priests called visibly, and consecrated
for this peculiar purpose, as Aaron and his children were. For though the
priesthood of the Pastors of the new law be not Aaronicall; yet it agrees with
the Priesthood of Aaron, (according to S. Paul his saying in the foresaid
place) in this, that those that come to it, must not take the honor of
themselves, but must be called unto it of God, as Aaron was, to wit, visibly,
and by peculiar consecration. In which ordinary manner whosoever comes, he may
be truly called Pastor ouium, a Pastor of Christ's flock: because Ioh. 10.
Ibidem.
intrat per ostium, he enters in by the door, to wit, by Christ himself,
who first visibly called, consecrated, and sent immediately the Apostles: and
the Apostles by authority received 2. Tim. 4.
from him, did visiblie by imposition of hands, call, consecrate, and send
others: and those in like manner, others from time to time, without
interruption, until these present men, who now are Priests of the Catholic
Roman Church. These therefore enter in by Christ, who is the door, and
therefore these be true Pastors: and whosoever enters not thus in at the
door, but comes in another way, our Savior tells us, how we should
account Ioh. 10.
of him, when he says. Qui non intrat per ostium in ouile ouium, sed ascendit
aliunde, ille fur est and latro. He that enters not in by the door, into the
sheepfold, but ascends by some other way, he is a thief and a robber; who
comes not to feed the sheep, but to steal, kill, and destroy them. So that
we have not (I say) to expect any to be sent of God to feed us, with the food
of true doctrine of faith, but such only, as come in this ordinary manner;
(as it is certain that Luther and Calvin, when they left their former
profession, and took upon them to preach this new faith, did not come visibly,
called, consecreated and sent, for this purpose, by any lawful authority,
according to the ordinary manner:) or if it should please God to send any one
in extraordinary manner, it appertains to his providence, to furnish him with
the gift of miracles, as he did his Son our Savior Christ; or with a
miraculous conceptio^, and with strange and extraordinary sanctity of life, as
was seen in S. John Baptist: or finally with some evident token, that it may
be plainly known, that he is assuredly sent of God. Otherwise the people
should not be bound to believe him, but might without sin, reject his
doctrine: according as our Savior said of himself, Si non facio opera patris
mei, nolite John. 10.
credere mihi. If I do not the works of my Father, do not believe me. And
again, Si opera non secissem in eis, quae nemo alius fecit, John. 15.
peccatum non haberent. If I had not done works among them, that no other has
done, they should not have sinned, to wit, in not believing. Nay, the people
should now, (an ordinary course being, by our Savior set down, to continue
till the worlds end, as before has been proved) the people (I say) should now
sin, in believing any one, that shall come, and tell them that he is
extraordinarily sent of God, if he teach contrary to that doctrine, which by
ordinary Doctors and Pastors of the Catholic Church is universally taught.
For although it should happen, that the lives of these Pastors should not be so
commendable, or be sometimes evidently bad: yet their doctrine must always be
regarded and observed, according to that saying of our Savior, Super Cathedram
Moysisederunt Scribae and Mat. 23.
Pharisaei: omnia ergo quae cunque dixerint vobis, seruate and facite: secundu^
vero opera eorum nolite facere. Upon the chair of Moses the Scribes and
Pharisees have sitten: all things therefore whatsoever they say to you, observe
ye and do; but according to their works do ye not. By which saying we are
assured that notwithstanding the Pastors of the Catholic Church should at any
time in their lives be like Scribes and Pharisees: yet we may always safely,
yea we must necessarily follow their doctrine, and must not in any wise admit
any that shall offer to teach us a contrary doctrine, according as we are
willed by Saint Paul, who says: Si quis vobis euangeliz auerit Gal. 1.
praeter id quod accepistis, anathema sit. If any shall euangelize or preach
unto you, beside (or contrary to) that which you have already received, be he
anathema. So that since the people did once receive from the ordinary Pastors
that doctrine, which has descended from hand to hand, from Christ and his
Apostles themselves, (according to that of Saint Austin: Quod inuenerunt in
Ecclesia, tenuerunt: quod didicerunt, docuerunt: quod a patribus 2 Contra Iulia.
acceperunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt: That which they found in the Church, they
held: that which they learned, they taught: that which they received from their
fathers, that they delivered to their children) whosoever he be, that shall
euangelize any thing opposite to this received doctrine, whether he seem to be
an Apostle, or an Angel: and much more if he be another, to wit one of these
new masters, who fail very much (to say no more) from Apostolical perfection,
and Angelical purity of life, according to Saint Paul, anathema sit, be he
anathema. Yea such a one that does not only not bring this Catholic or
generally received doctrine, but brings in a new and contrary doctrine, we
should not (according to Saint John) salute him (unless upon some Epist. 1.
need or some good respect) or say Aue unto him: and much less should we give
credit to his words, or use him as a rule of our faith, or prefer his
teaching before the teaching of the Catholic Church.

And surely me thinks, though there were none of these evident proofs, which
I have brought out of Scripture: yet even reason it self would teach, that we
ought to give more credit to the universal company of Catholics, which have
been at all times, and are now spread over all the Christian world, then to any
particular private man, or some few his fellows and followers. It is a
proverb common amongst all men: Vox populi, vox Dei, The voice of the people
or whole multitude, is the voice of God; that which all men say, must needs be.
And on the contrary part, to that particular man or his private company, which
will oppose themselves against this general voice of all, (like Ismael, of
whom it is written, Manus eius contra omnes, and manus omnium contra cum, his
hands are against all men, and the hands of all are against him) it may well be
objected that which Luther (who was the first in this our age which did so)
confesses was objected to himself by his own conscience, or rather
principally by the mercy and grace of the Almighty God, seeking to reclaim
him from his error, while there was any hope. Number tu solum sapis: Art thou
only In Praef. Lib. de abrog. Missae, priuatae ad fratres. Aug. Ordin. in
caenob. Wittenberg.
wise? Luthers words be these. Quoties mihi palpitauit tremulum cor, and
reprehendens obiecit fortissimum illud argumentum, Tu solus sapis? Totne errant
vniuersi? Tanta secula ignorauerunt? Quid si tu erres, and tot tecum in errorem
trahas damnandos aeternaliter? How often did my trembling heart pant, and
reprehending me, did object to me that most strong and forcible argument: Art
thou alone wise? have there so many universally erred? have so many ages been
blind and lived in ignorance? What rather if thou thy self err, and drawest
so many after thee into error, who (therefore) shall be damned eternally? This
did Almighty God object to Luther, the which might doubtless have done him
good, but that he (presuming upon his own understanding of Scripture, and
preferring his own judgment before the judgment of the Church) hardened his
heart against such heavenly inspirations, which he termed Papisticall
arguments. And this same may well be objected to any private man, or any few,
who leaving the Kings broad street, or beaten hye way of the Catholic Church,
will seek out a by-path, as being in their conceit, a better, easier, and more
direct way to heaven. To them (I say) well may be said, Are you only wise? are
all the rest in former ages fools? have you only after so many hundred years
after Christ found out the true faith, and the right way to heaven? have all
the rest lived in blindness, darkness, and error? consequently, are you
only they that please God, and shall be saved? (for, as I have proved before,
without true and entire faith none can be saved) and were then all the rest, so
many millions, your own forefathers and ancestors, (many of which were most
innocent men and virtuous livers, and some of which shed their blood for
Christ's sake) were (I say) all these hated of God? did all these perish? were
they all damned? shall all these endure unspeakable pains in hell for ever? O
impious, cruel, and incredible assertion! Nay surely, I am rather to think,
that you are unwise, who pretending to travel toward the happy kingdom of
heaven, and to go to that glorious city the heavenly Jerusalem, will leave the
beaten street, in which all those have walked that ever heretofore went
thither: who by miracles sometimes, as it were by letters sent from thence,
have given testimony to us that remain behind, that they are safely arrived
there. You (I say) are unwise that will leave this way, and will adventure the
lives not only of your bodies, but of your souls, in a path found out of late
by your selves, never tracked before: in which whosoever have yet gone, God
knows what is become of them, since we never had letter of miracle, or any
other evident token, or ever heard any word from them, to assure us that they
safely passed that way: me thinks, I may account you most unwise men, that will
adventure such a precious jewel as your soul is, to be transported by such an
uncertain and dangerous way. I must needs think, that since there is but one
right way, and that the way of the Catholic Church is a sure and approved
safe way, you are very unadvised, who with the adventure of the irreparable
loss of your dearest and peerlesse treasure your soul, will leave this safe
and secure way, to seek out a new uncertain and perilous way. I must needs
think, since the Catholic Roman Church is (as I have proved) the light of the
world, the rule of faith, the pillar and sure ground of truth: that you leaving
it, leave the light, and therefore walk in darkness; forsaking it, forsake
the direct path of true faith, and therefore are misled in the mist of
incredulity, into the wilderness of misbeleefe: and finally that you having
thus lost the sure ground of truth, do fall into the miry ditch of many
absurdities, and must needs be drowned in the pit of innumerable errors; and
erring thus from the way, the verity and the life, which is Christ Jesus
residing, according to his promise in the Catholic Church, must needs
(unless you will, which I heartily wish, return to the unity of the same
Church) incur your own perdition, death and damnation of body and soul: from
which sweet Jesus deliver you, and us all, to the honor and perpetual praise
of his holy name. Amen.

A. W.
To these idle questions of yours, I answer first in general, that we may with
reason enough persuade our selves that we have the true faith and true
Churches; because we see, that the very quintessence of Bellarmines sophistry
distilled again in your limbeck, is of no force to purge out or alter such
persuasion. This appears in the particulars viewed and examined. To which I
answer severally in a word: The doctrine of the true Church we gladly admit and
receive, yet not upon the authority thereof, but because it is agreeable to
the Scriptures. If you ask us then, why we are persuaded that we have true
faith; we return you answer, that we are therefore so persuaded, because we
find that which we believe auowed in Scripture, and confirmed in our hearts by
the witness of the holy Ghost. Hereupon we conclude (as well we may) that we
are members of the true Church, and our congregations true Christian churches.
For whereas you charge some of us, but craftily forbear to name them, with
chalenging to our selves the title of the true Church; See my answer to 12. art
part. 1. art. 5.
it is a slander of yours, and no challenge of ours; save only thus far, that
we affirm there is no true Church, which agrees not with us in the
fundamental points of the Gospel. But we are far from appropriating the
Church to our congregations, as if all true Churches depended upon us,
according to that you teach of your Romish synagogue. And whereas you condemn
us for no true Churches, because we want the marks of true Churches: we say
that you take those for marks, which are not so, as you understand them; and
farther, that every one of them rightly conceived, is to be found in our
several congregations.

It is one, because it holds that one means of salvation preached by the
Apostles, even faith in Jesus Christ, without mingling of any works therewith
of the ceremonial or moral law, before or after grace, to deserve
justification of congruitie, or everlasting life of condignitie. The contrary
errors held by your synagogue, make and prove it to be no true Church. But how
foolish is the reason you bring against us? The Protestants Church is not one,
because it has no means to keep unity. It has means sufficient, viz. the
truth of the Scriptures, and teaching of the spirit of God. Put case it wanted
means to continue unity; would it follow thereupon, that it is not One?
Surely no more, then that a man is not alive, because he has not means to
keep himself alive.

Our Church has had, and by the blessing of God has many holy men and women,
whose works have given, and daily do give clear testimonies of their inward
graces. Indeed we want unholy legendaries, to devise and publish monstrous lies
for miracles, by which you have gotten the advantage of us, in the conceits of
them, to whom God has sent strong delusions, that they might believe lies. But
wisdom is justified of her children, though you proud Pharisees despise her.

Our doctrine teaches nothing but holiness: that we were Ephesians. 1. 4. Luke 1.
74. 75. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Romans 6. 3. 4.
chosen to be holy: that we are freed from our sins, to the end we might
sin no more: that we are washed, justified and sanctified by the blood of
Christ; buried with him in baptism, that we might die to sin; raised from
sin to righteousness, by the power of his resurrection: that holiness of life
is a part of our glory, without which no man shall ever see God: that he which
says he is justified, and shows himself to be unsanctified, deceiues his
own soul, and is in the state of damnation: Only we neither give the glory
of our salvation to our selves, as if by the power of our freewill, without
special inclination thereof by the holy Ghost, we had received faith, which
other men have refused: though they might have embraced it as well as we, for
ought God did for or to us, more then for or to them; nor look to merit heaven
by the worthiness of our works, as if it were the wages of servants, and not
the inheritance of children.

The universal Church (as you speak of it) is a mere name, without any thing
answerable to it in nature. That which was generally held (while the Churches
of Christ were not subject to Antichrist) concerning the substance of Religion,
by which true and false Churches are to be judged, we gladly and constantly
maintain. The errors which some men defended, and corrupted the Churches
withal, we refute and reject. But it is no mark of the true Church, to hold
all that has been generally maintained in true Churches; but the duty of it
to acknowledge for true, whatsoever was taught by the Apostles, and is recorded
in Scripture.

How far our Church is spread, it passes your skill truly to affirm: and we
may with good reason persuade our selves, that it is in all places, where the
Gospel is preached, and the Scriptures known; because daily experience
shows, that it has some members in those countries where your bloody and
tyrannous butchery of Inquisition does most rule, and under the nose of your
grand Antichrist, in the city of Rome. But it is enough to make it Catholic,
that it acknowledges it self to be common both to Jew and Gentile, not tied
to any country, people or person whatsoever, as yours is to the Pope and Rome.

We are not ashamed of Martin Luther, whom it pleased God to use admirably, if
not miraculously, to rake from under the ashes the light of the Gospel,
covered and choked with your errors and superstitions. Not as if it had bin all that while out of the world, but as 12. art. part. 1. art. 1.
one of your own fellows speaks of it, as being in the eclipse, ouershadowed
and darkened with the thick mist of your Popish decrees, decretals, and
schoolmens tricks, and other such lewd trumpery. Our Church, that is the true
Church of Christ was all that time in the world, but not to be seen of every
man: though from time to time there were still found some who durst maintain
the truth of Christ against your Antichristian heresies. Luthers writings,
words, deeds, and manner of death, were such as might manifest to all men both
his true zeal of the glory of God, and Gods especial favor to him,
whatsoever such lying sycophants as Prateolus feign.

If we would stand upon Apostolicknesse in succession, what have you, that we
want; save only that you continue in succession of error, longer then we do?
But it is an idle plea, to avouch personal succeeding, where there is manifest
contrariety in doctrine: by which, as we heard out of Tertul. de praesc. cap.
32.
Tertullian, howsoever you brag of Apostolicknesse, you may be proved not to be
Apostolical.

We differ not in doctrine, touching the fundamental points of Religion, from
any true, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church: neither does your synagogue
agree with any such. Therefore whereas you demand, how we can brag that we have
true faith, which is not to be found out of the true Church; we answer you, as
often we have done, that we are sure the faith we hold is true, because it is
agreeable to the Scriptures, and being so, we cannot be out of the true Church,
as long as we are in the true faith.

True faith cannot be had by any light or discourse of nature, but only by
revelation from God. For 1. Cor. 2. 9.
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man can imagine,
what the means are, whereby God decreed in himself to save those whom he has
chosen to glory. Now it was not the purpose of God in these latter times, as in
the first before the law, to reveal his will immediately from heaven; but he
sent his Son in the nature of man, and that Son his Apostles, to give
knowledge of those means of salvation; both by preaching for that present age
wherein they lived, and also by writing, for that age, and all that were to
succeed till the end of the world. This is all that the Apostle teaches Romans
10. 16.
in the place alleged by you. Yet we deny not, that the principal ordinary
means to bring men to faith, is the ministry of man, by word of mouth
expounding the word and will of God according to the Scriptures. First then, all
men to whom the Scriptures are vouchsafed, have means of hearing. For in them
they may, if they will, hear men appointed by God, speak to their instruction
and salvation. Secondly, the same God has ordained, that besides the former
teaching, there should be certain men set apart and deputed for the ministry,
whose duty it is to preach in their several charges the word of truth. This
setting apart and deputing, is that sending which is now required; and is to be
performed by such as are, and shall be authorized to that purpose. Thirdly for
our particular case, we are to understand that Luther and these other worthies,
by whose ministry it pleased God to revive the knowledge of the Gospel
decayed, were authorized to preach by your congregation, which was at that time
in appearance the true Church of God. Therefore were they sent, if your church
have any sending: and according to their calling, they labored in opening the
truth of God, as it is revealed in the Scriptures. Thus by the gracious mercy
of God, it came to pass, that they teaching the word of truth, found diverse,
both men and women, whose hearts the Lord by his spirit opened, so that they
embraced the love of the truth delivered by them, and accepted them for their
pastors, and submitted themselves to become their flocks. By this means they
had both a general authority to preach, from that company, which (by
profession) was the Church, and also a particular charge of those who were now
become indeed (in regard of their professed faith) a true Church of God. We
have then in our Churches, for the late reforming of them, first, your calling,
such as it was, and secondly the approbation of true Christians, of which true
Churches consist. Therefore by your own rule, since we have some amongst us
that are sent, we may also have faith and true faith, though we abhor your
Antichristian heresies.

To what purpose is this idle discourse, but to show your own errors? We
neither look for, nor allow any opinion of extraordinary sending from God,
because we have no warrant for any such in the Scriptures. But we say, the
restorers of the Gospel, in this last age, had ordinary allowance of that
Church which bare the show of the true Church, and professed the believing of
the Gospel, which is the foundation of the Church.

But you require peculiar consecration, because it pleased God to appoint such
a course for the Priesthood of the Law. Do you not know, that the consecrating
and anointing of Aaron, was a part of the ceremonial law, signifying the
anointing of the spirit, which our Savior was to receive: to whom, according
to those shows, Joan. 3. 34.
the Lord gave the spirit without measure? The consecration that now remains,
is nothing but the setting a part of some men for the work of the ministry
by prayer and laying on of hands.

2. Chron. 26 18.
Your example of Oziah, is little to the purpose. For it had not been lawful
for him to offer incense, though he had been consecrated with all the
ceremonies that belong to the office of the priesthood, because the office of
offering incense was appropriated by God to the house of Aaron, as Azariah
signifies in his speech to Vzziah. This appointment of God was their calling:
Heb. 5. 4.
the outward ceremonies were but to shadow forth the excellency of our Savior
Christ's priesthood. Neither does the Apostle prove the lawfulness of Christ's
priesthood, by his consecration answerable to Aarons, as your alleging of the
place intends, but only by the Lords authorizing of him to that office. verse.
5.
Christ took not to himself the honor to be made the high Priest (says the
Apostle) but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day begat I thee,
gave it him. verse. 6.
As he also in an other place speaks, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedech: what word is there here of our Saviors consecration?

You proceed to heap error upon error, to the prejudice of Gods truth, and
destruction of his people. If every man be to be held for a true Pastor, and as
such a one to be believed, if he have an orderly admission and allowance to
teach: had not Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Macedonius, and many other
heretics lawful ordination, according to the custom of the Churches in
those times? Yea, were not Luther, Bucer, Martyr, authorized by your Church,
and Calvin too, as you say afterward, when you accuse Luther and him for
leaving their former profession? Come no hirelings in by the door, if lawful
outward admission be the door? How many that enter lawfully become wolves
afterward? I know this (says Act. 20. 29
Saint Paul to the Ephesians) that after my departure, grievous wolves shall
enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, verse. 30.
of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things. Who can doubt,
but some of these might be even of the number of them who were lawfully
admitted by imposition of hands and prayer, the only means of consecration in
those times, before your shauing and greasing was heard of in the Church?

But you ignorantly or wilfully abuse Joan. 10. 1. 21.
that place of the Evangelist, by applying it to the ordinary ministry of the
Gospel: whereas it belongs to the office of the Messiah, and the calling
that he had from God, to be Heb. 13. 20.
the great shepherd of our souls. Joan. 10. 8.
All that came before him, professing themselves to be the Messiah, as Act. 5.
36. 37
Judas and Theudas did, were thieves and robbers: entering not in by the door,
that is Joan. 6. 27. Mat, 3. 17.
by commission from God, but coming in another way, by their counterfetting of
a pattent from God. Neither was the preservation of the people, but their own
advancement the mark they shot at. But the true shepherd Jesus Christ came to
give his life for his sheep, that they might be saved. This is the true sense
of that worthy sermon; which if we will apply to ministers, they must be held
for true Pastors, which being authorized thereunto, do preach Christ Jesus
truly, without mingling any such doctrines as may by any means draw us from
the acknowledging or resting upon him for salvation. He that so teaches and is
authorized thereunto, comes in by Christ the door, especially if he have
withal a true desire to feed the flock committed to him, in the sincerity of
his heart. But if you stand only upon outward calling, the Priests and Leuits
wanted it not, who yet were thieves, because they endeavored to steal away the
hearts of the sheep from Christ the true shepherd.

That which follows of the necessity of miracles or extraordinary
sanctity, concerns not us, who plead not any extraordinary sending. Luther
was appointed by your Church, to preach the Gospel. That duty, according to his
calling, he faithfully performed: never requiring to be credited, because he
was extraordinarily sent by God; but because he taught that which God had left
in the Scriptures, for the instruction and edification of his Church, in all
ages till the end of the world. What need was there now of miracles, or any
other extraordinary course? Joan. 10. 37. and 15. 24.
The places you bring, we answered before.

The universal consent of Pastors and Doctors, in that they teach, has been
found to be but a crooked rule to measure truth by; though we are persuaded,
that the world was never without some that held and taught so much of the
truth, as is absolutely necessary to salvation. But that is universally or
generally taught, which is the common doctrine of ordinary teachers, howsoever
some one or two here and there may be of a contrary opinion. Mat. 23. 2.
How far the Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard, it appeared before,
where this place was alleged and answered. Surely he, Mat 16. 6. and 23. 16.
17. 19.
that charged his Disciples, to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, and
called them fools and blind, would never command them to take their
doctrine, for the rule of truth. Neither could Gal. 1. 8.
Saint Paul mean, that every man should be accursed, who taught at any time
otherwise, then men commonly believed; he speaks not a word of any common
consent in teaching, and he knew that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
there was to be a general Apostasy: but his meaning was, that they should
hold him for accursed that delivered any other doctrine of salvation, how
generally so ever it were taught, then that which he himself had preached to
the^. But of this also before.

I hope you are not so mad, as to imagine that any man will believe, that Saint
Austin so many hundred years ago, prophesied, that your Pastors and Doctors
should from time to time teach nothing else generally, but that which had
August. cont. Iuli. Pelag. lib. 2.
in his days descended from hand to hand, from Christ and his Apostles. Or do
you think it would prove a good reason to say, Austin affirms that Ambrose
and other learned men, who lived in the first 400. years, held that which they
found in the Church, and taught that which they had learned. Therefore it
cannot be that since his time other men have preached or written otherwise? But
be like this place was alleged by you rather for ornament and show, then for
proof or use, and so let it pass.

Though there were no other reason to make us mislike your Church: yet this
were cause enough of doubt, that the foundation whereon you build it, in this
Treatise, and the like, is so weak and uncertain. We must believe you,
because you are the Church. Who says so? Your selves. But you will prove it
by Scripture. How shall I know that you bring, to be Scripture? The Church
tells you so. Shall I laugh at you, or pity you? You are the Church, because
the Scripture says so. The Scripture is Scripture to us, because you say so.
Gal. 3. 1.
Were the Galathians so senseless, as they that believe such absurd fooleries?
Or is it possible that any man should believe them, but he that is given up by
God to strong delusions, that he may believe lies? Bethink your selves, and
return ere it be too late. The Lord will be merciful to your former
ignorance, if at the last you embrace the love of the truth. Leaving those
evident proofs, you speak of (proofs indeed of your manifold errors) you
assay to draw us by reason, because it is more likely, that the universal
company of Catholics deserves credit, then any particular man or his
followers. First, you beg that which is in question. No true Catholic ever
held all the errors that your Antichristian Church maintains: nor any one of
those, whereby you cast down the foundation of religion. Secondly, the
comparison is not betwixt the authority of a multitude, or a few, wherein
number may either help or hinder, but the reasons of each side are to be
weighed, all other respects whatsoever set apart. And yet if we look to
reason: are not the greatest number (for the most part) the worst? Christ's true
flock is a little one, Iuc. 12. 32.
Fear not little flock. 1. Co. 1. 26.
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble. Was not
the voice of the people, even of Gods people, Exodus 32. 1.
Make us Gods to go before us? The voice of God is to be heard in the
Scriptures, Paphnutius in Council. Niccno.
One man that speaks according thereunto, is to be preferred before the whole
world speaking otherwise.

Those objections made to Luther in his private meditations proceeded from the
same spirit, by which the Pharisees spoke to Nicodemus in their Council, Does
Joan. 7. 48.
any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him. Gal 1. 16.
This was that communicating with flesh and blood, which the Apostle would not
once hearken to: Luther in his weakness was drawn into it, and had perished
in it, if the Lord of his infinite mercy, had not drawn him out of it, with a
worthy and admirable resolution. With the like (that it may appear whose
scholars you are) you Jesuits, and Priests set upon simple people, ticing them
on in their ignorance, and your own, though the broad way, that leads to
destruction.

But let us consider this your fleshly eloquence and answer to it. You ask, if
we only be wise, and all the rest in former ages were fools. As if we did
not acknowledge that it is the mercy of God, and not our wisdom that has
given us the ability, and will to understand his truth. We are not wiser then
any other, but have found more mercy, then many have done at the hands of God,
for our salvation. Many in former times have been partakers of the like mercy,
and been made wise to salvation by the same truth we now profess: yea it was
generally held many hundred years, til your master Antichrist drove it into
holes and deserts. After the revealing of his pride and tyranny: the true way
to heaven ceased not to be found, though not so commonly, till it pleased God
to scatter those clowdie mists of ignorance and idolatry, by which you had
hidden it, that it could very hardly be known. Diverse heretofore, and more now
adays find favor with God to discern and walk through it, to the certain,
and everlasting salvation of their souls and bodies. So judge we as it
becomes us in charity of our forefathers: that he which has looked in
compassion upon us their seed, did not fail to show mercy unto them, who never
understood the mystery of your iniquity: but in the singleness of their
hearts embraced the general doctrine of the Gospel, concerning salvation by
faith in Christ. This is the only way, by which all men have gone, that ever
came to heaven, and in this way we travel with danger of the lives of our
bodies (as you speak) because we are continually in hazard by reason of your
conspiracies, treasons, massacres, underminings and fier-works; but with
assurance of the salvation of our souls: if we hold fast the shoot-Anchor of
our hope, and renouncing our own righteousness, repose our selves by faith
upon the gracious mercy of God our Father in Jesus Christ. This doing we have
better certificate, both for the security of our way, and the end of our
journey out of the Scriptures, and by the witness of the Spirit of God in our
hearts, then that lying Carier the devil can bring by any show of your
counterfeit miracles whatsoever.

I must needs persuade my self, since that Apostolical Romish Synagogue is (as
I have showed) the seducer of the world by show of authority, without reason,
the overthrow and destruction of truth, by denying the sufficiency of the
Scripture, and taking the use of it from the people of God; that all you which
cleave to it, plunge your selves in hellish darkness, by refusing to see the
light of Gods word; and by drinking of the cup of abomination presented to you
by that strumpet of Rome, loose the taste of truth, and run forward in
wilful ignorance, to most certain damnation. The Lord is my witness, whom I
serve weakly as I can, in the Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ, that if it were
possible and lawful for me, I could be content to procure your salvation, by
pouring out my heart blood for every one of you, that Jesus Christ my master
might have the glory of your true conversion. To that purpose, and for the
establishing of them, which already believe: I first undertook, and have now
at the last (by the merciful assistance of God) finished my answer to this
subtle Treatise. Let me now earnestly entreat you by the care of your own
salvation, by the zeal you have (in ignorance) to glorify God, by the
infinite love of Jesus Christ, by the undeserved mercy of God the Father, by
the continual gracious motions of the holy Ghost, and by whatsoever is, or
ought to be dear unto you, that you would vouchsafe seriously in the
sincerity of your hearts, without prejudice to consider; whether it be not
more ageeable both to the Scriptures, and the light of reason, to give the
whole glory of our salvation to the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, then to
ascribe the enabling of us to save our souls to God, and the use or employing
of this ability to the choice of our own free will. If your opinion be true,
See my answer to 12. Art. part. 2. art. 4.
every man that is saved, is more beholding to himself, then to God for his
salvation. For though he have power from God, to be saved, if he will: yet
neither has he this power, but upon preparation, depending on his free will;
and when he has it, the using of it well is from himself, and not from God.
You will say, he could not use it well, unless he were assisted continually by
the grace of God. I answer, that for all this assistance by that grace to use
it well, the well or ill using of it, when God has done all, he will do,
arises from the choice of a man's own will. That it was possible for me to be
saved, it was Gods doing: that this possibility took effect in me, I may
thank my self, more then God: so that by this doctrine, the glory of every
particular man's salvation is more due to the party saved, then to God the
Savior. Now on the contrary side; if that we teach be true, the loss falls
on man's part, and not upon Gods. Is any man drawn out of the Jaws of hell and
damnation? The whole glory redounds to God. It was he that provided means of
salvation: it was he that gave me, in particular, knowledge of that means. It
was he, that when I was as untoward, and unwilling to be saved, as the most
damned reprobate, wrought me to believe (can I ever be unmindful or
unthankful!) by inclining my heart to like, and accept of his grace, and faith
in Christ. But in the mean while I loose the commendation, and the glory of
using the grace of God well, by my free will. O Adam, Adam, earth and ashes,
how fast does that pride of nature, whereby thou wast destroyed in thy self,
though in thee it were not natural, cleave to every one of thy posterity!
Genesis 3. 5. 6.
We had rather be thought able to govern our selves, then be governed by God.
It is more pleasing to us, to hazard our salvation upon the nice choice of our
own free will, then to be assured of it, by the mercy of God, working in us
this choice to will. O that, as we are all partakers of Adams pride, so we
might also partake with his repentance and faith! Would Adam (trow ye) if it
might be put to his choice, again venture upon his own free will, though he
were as pure as ever he was, rather then rest secure upon Gods almighty, and
most certain protection? No, no, blessed soul, he knows by woeful
experience (though by Gods unspeakable goodness, to his and our greater
glory) that he, and he only is out of danger, who resignes himself into Gods
hands, to be disposed of at his gracious pleasure. Why refuse we to be like to
Adam in this? Will we follow him in that only, of which only he is ashamed?
Is it not more glory to arise with him, then to have fallen with him? O why do
we every day renew the memory of his fault, by committing the like! Does the
brightness of the truth in these points dazzle your eyes? Me thinks I see many
of you offering to press forward, as it were to take the kingdom of heaven,
the doctrine of the Gospel, by violence: why recoile you? Why quail you on a
sudden? The bare name of the Church, not only stays you, but beats you
backward. The Romish Church cannot err. Who tells you so? Surely they, that
can err, your Priests and Jesuits. Give me leave I pray you, to question with
you a little, and for a minute of an hour, be content to make use of that
reason and knowledge, which God has given you, without forestalling your
judgments, by prejudice of the authority of the Church. Does it not appear
to you by the light of natural reason, that the maine end of all religion is
the glory of God? Do not your own consciences testify in the simplicity of
your hearts, that it makes more for the glory of God, that men should be
beholding to his Majesty for their salvation, then that they should procure it
to themselves? Is it not also apparent to you in the secret of your own
souls, that our doctrine by beating down the pride of man's free will,
aduanceth the glory of Gods mercy: and yours, by hoysing up the conceit of
man's good choice, presses down the estimation of Gods unspeakable goodness?
And shall an idle sound weigh more with you, then sound reason? Consider, I
beseech you, what weak grounds you build this opinion of the Church upon: I
will point at that, which in my answer I have handled. Can you in any sort
compare the opinion of the Churches authority, with the evidence of those
matters, wherewith before I pressed you? Is it as clear that there are
certain men, whom I must believe, whatsoever they teach, as it is, that I must
seek the advancing of Gods glory, more then of mine own pride? Are you as
sure, that these Priests and Jesuits which are your teachers, be sent by the
true Church, and deliver nothing, but the doctrine of the true Chruch; as you
are, that they, who persuade you to rest wholly upon God, and not at all upon
your selves, show you the right way to procure Gods glory, and your own
salvation? Tush (say you) all is nothing unless I believe it, upon the credit
of the Church. Alaste, how did the first Christians, who never thought on the
authority of the Church, when they heard and believed the Apostles doctrine?
Look over all the History of the Acts, peruse the Sermons of Peter and
Paul, and tell me whether you find, that ever they pleaded the authority of
the Church, to procure belief of their doctrine. After men are converted, the
authority of the Church, has her due place, and must bear sway in matters in
different, but for the auowing of truth, her bare word is never of sufficient
importance. It was the doctrine of the Apostles, that wrought upon the hearts
of men, by the clear evidence of it, through the power of the Spirit,
wherewith it was accompanied. What that doctrine was, where should we learn
but in the scriptures, wherein they have written what they preached? These (you
say) give such authority to the Church. This were somewhat, if you made not
their authority in respect of us, to depend upon the Church. The scriptures
(say Stapl. de author. Eccles. li. 1.
your Doctors) have in themselves authority, as being from God: but they are
not of authority to us, but only by the authority of the Church. I perceive
you are ashamed of these absurdities. The Church must be believed upon her
word. Why so? The Scripture says so. How shall I know that these books are
scripture? The Church says so. The Church and the scripture prove each other,
by their mutual testimony, they give each of other: I believe the Church
because the scripture bids me, I believe the scripture, because the Church
bids me. If these things seem to be absurd, as indeed they are most absurd,
blind not your selves any longer with such mists of error, but come out of
them, to the clear light of the scriptures: read them diligently, meditate in
them carefully, call upon God for his grace earnestly, resign your selves, and
your free will to him sincerely: and the Lord that is most ready to bless
them, that use the means of knowledge and faith, in humility, and singleness
of heart, will assuredly enlighten your understanding, and incline your
affections, that you shall discern, like of, and embrace the true doctrine of
Justification by faith in Jesus Christ: and shall renounce your own
righteousness, and free will, to the glory of his grace, and the present
comfort, and everlasting salvation of your bodies and souls, through the same
his son, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all glory, praise,
obedience, and thanksgiving, from this time for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Texts of Scripture expounded or applied.
Genesis 1. 1. page 121. 3. 5. 6. p. 417. 9. 21. p. 212. 12. 13. p. 212. 15. 5. p.
288. 15. 13. p. 206. 20. 5. p. 212. 49. 1. 2. p. 38.
Exodus 3. 10. p. 140. 7. 8. p. 352. 7. 21. 22. p. 352. 19. 20. p. 140. 21. 1.
p. 140. 32. 1. p. 414.
Leuit. 10. 11. p. 140 Number. 24. 17. p. 171 Deuteronomy. 42. p. 86. 31. 9. 19. p. 140.
Iosu. 5. 5. p. 227. 1. Sam. 8. 7. p. 140. 2. Sam. 12. 9. page 212. 275. 1.
Reg. 3. 26. p. 377. 18. 13. p. 288. 19. 18. p. 187
2. Reg. 18. 30. p. 38. 19. 4. 6. p. 38.
2. Chron. 26. 18. page 410 Nehe. 8. 8. 9. p 140 Psalm. 1. 1. 2. pa. 10. 13. 20.
19. 8. p. 74. 22. 27. p. 276. 25. 5. p. 128. 26. 5. p. 210. 42 1, 2. p. 234.
48. 1. 8. p. 168, 169. 48. 5. 6. p. 234. 57. 3. p. 238. 72. 8. p. 276. 72. 17.
p. 39. 73. 13. 16. 22. p. 33. 84. 1. 2. 10. p. 234. 105. 8, 9. p. 170. 106. 40.
41, 42, 43. p. 170 111. 9. p. 169. 119. 103. p 20. 119. 105. p. 74. 119 127.
130. page 20. 74. 133. 3. p. 169. 143. 2. page 363.
Prou. 7. 22. p. 19. 20. 9. p. 334. 354. 26. 5. p. 173.
Eccles. 9. 1. p. 334. 354. Cant. 6. 8. p. 264, Isa. 30 21. p. 232. 35 8. p.
226. 231. 59. 21. p. 276. 282. 60. 11. p. 196. 206. 61. 9 p. 176. 177. 256 63.
9. p. 170.
Ier. 7. 5. pa. 380. 17. 29. 30. p. 39. 31. 31. p. 232,
Dan. 2. 44. pa. 29. 168. 170. 9. 20. p. 363.
Malac. 2. 7. p. 112 140. Math 1. 1. 2. p. 39. 3. 12. p. 208. 3. 17. p. 257.
42. 4. 23. p. 57. 5. 14. p. 179. 181. 5. 15. p. 182. 184. 5. 18. p. 178. 5. 43,
44. p 141. 7. 1. p. 143 7. 6. p. 195. 7. 7. p 117. 7. 15. p. 253. 7. 16. p. 36.
7. 22, 23. p. 272. 7. 25. p. 167. 10. 5. pa. 55. 135. 190. 10. 7, 8. p. 272.
352 10. 23. p. 190. 10. 33. 186. 11. 30. p. 336. 12. 31. p. 57. 13. 25. p. 284.
378. 13. 30. p. 278. 290. 13. 37, 38. 43. p. 291. 13. 48. p. 208. 15. 11. 14.
pa. 141. 249. 15. 24. p. 55. 16. 3, 4. p. 351. 166. 12. p 37. 141. 413. 16. 16.
p 199. 16. 18. p. 129. 158. 159. 164. 16. 19. p. 307. 325. 18. 4. p. 268., 18.
17. p. 145. 147. 193, 194. 20. 16. p. 208. 22. 10. p. 208. 23 2. pa. 138, 139.
143. 413. 23. 3. p. 36. 23. 5, 6. 13, 14. p. 142. 23. 15. p. 382. 23. 16. p.
141. 23. 2. 16. 17. 19. p^. 413. 24. 14. p. 178. 291. 24. 24. pa. 36. 280. 352.
25. 1, 2. p. 209. 26. 70. 72. 74. p. 188 212. 275. 28. 19, 20. p. 35. 41. 55.
113. 135. 150 163. 179. 190. 126 199. 130. 131. 173
Mark. 9. 24. p. 33. 16. 11. p. 311. 16. 15, 16. p. 41. 135 145, 146. 150. 181
Luke 1. 32. 33. pa. 168. 172 1. 74. 75. p. 407. 3. 23. p. 39. 3. 31. p. 39. 4.
18. p. 176. 9. 26. p. 186. 10. 11 p. 137. 10. 11. p. 146. 10. 16. page 36. 44.
126. 136. 137. 145. 268. 308. 10. 21. p. 203. 12. 32. p. 364. 414. 17. 5. p.
33. 22 32. p. 364. 22 48. p. 272. 24. 44. p. 277.
John 2. 29. p. 39. 411. 3. 34. p. 410. 4. 1, 2, 3. p. 189. 5. 30. p. 257. 5
39. p. 10. 20. 74. 6. 27. p. 412. 6. 35. p. 24. 6. 37. p. 166. 6. 38. p. 257. 6
40. p. 166. 6. 44. p. 203. 6. 65. p. 203. 6. 68. p. 39. 6. 70 p. 272. 7. 48. p.
414. 8. 59. p. 189. 9 30. p. 189. 10. 1, 2 p. 411. 10. 4. 5. 8. p. 265. 412.
10. 16. p. 261. 265. 10. 28. p. 167. 10. 37. p. 412. 11. 32. p. 57. 12. 6. p.
272. 14. 27. p. 130. 134. 373, 388. 14. 26. p. 130. 134. 15. 24. p. 412. 16.
15. p. 130. 135. 137 388. 17 9. pa. 257. 264. 266. 17. 20. p. 131. 264. 266.
17. 21. p. 261. 264. 20. 31. p. 81. 351. 21. 16, 17. pa. 308. 391. 21. 22, 23.
pa. 325. 326.
Acts 1. 4. p. 1. 6. p. 39. 310. 1. 8. p. 277. 294. 21, 2. p. 288. 2. 2, 3. p.
39. 133. 2. 5. p. 136. 2. 38. p. 205. 2. 41. p. 185. 2. 47. p. 128. 4. 12. p.
26. 5. 11. p. 128. 5. 36, 37. p. 280. 412 81. p. 189. 8. 4. pa. 288. 373. 204
9. 24. 25. p. 189. 9. 31. p. 129. 10. 3. 5. p. 185. 10. 15. p. 311. 10. 48. p.
190. 13. 46. p 205. 13. 48. p. 204 13. 51. p. 146. 14 23. p. 129. 15. 22. p.
128. 15. 29. p. 321. 17. 11. p. 249. 18. 19. p. 297. 19. 25. 29. 40. 41. p.
128. 20. 19. p. 278. 20. 28. p. 158. 254 20. 29. 30. p. 278. 285. 26. 12. p.
86. 26. 28. p. 183.
Romans 1. 8. p. 369. 3. 2. p. 152. 3. 4. p. 99. 3. 22. p. 24. 4. 25. p 311: 6.
1. 14. p. 339. 6. 3, 4. 407. 6. 23. p. 39. 7. 21. p. 363. 8. 6. p. 61. 8. 9.
16. p. 21. 355. 8. 16. p. 354 355. 8. 30. p. 210. 9. 3 p. 207. 9. 6, 7. p. 107.
172. 9. 11. p. 257. 366. 10. 10. p. 186. 191. 10. 14 p. 32. 33. 113. 10. 14.
15. pa. 185. 233. 10. 17. p. 114. 129. 11. 5. p. 257. 11. 26. p. 282. 11. 2. 7.
p. 207. 12. 5. p. 261. 266. 13. 3. 4. p. 275. 16. 5. p. 129.
1. Cor. 1. 1. 2. page 340. 349. 15. p. 379. 1. 26. p. 414. 2. 9. p. 102 113.
409 2. 14. p. 232. 236. 2. 16. p. 60. 102. 3. 11. p. 298. 3. 17. 159. 267. 167
270. 5. 1. p. 267. 340. 5. 4. 5. 13. p. 209. 5. 11. 12. p. 147. 6. 1. 5. p.
340. 6. 4. 5. p. 148. 6. 11. p. 407. 10. 17. p. 261. 266. 11. 16. pa. 26. 129.
155. 12. 28. p. 128. 13. 3. p. 334. 14. 23. 25. p. 186. 14. 38. p. 25. 26. 15.
9. p. 128. 15. 11. p. 311. 15. 12. p. 340. 15. 14. 17. p. 311.
2. Cor. 1. 1. p. 349. 2. 10. 245. 2. 11. p. 109. 112. 10. 10. p. 348. 11. 14.
p. 108. 13. 5. p. 354.
Gal. 1. 1. p. 185. 1. 8. page 105. 106. 114. 126. 137. 274. 413. 1. 16. p.
414. 2. 16. p. 24. 3. 4. 5. p 311. 4. 4. 5. p. 365. 4. 6. p. 21. 5. 20. 21. p.
49. 6. 16. p. 172.
Ephesians. 1. 1. p 265. 1. 4. p. 407. 1. 21. 22. p 129. 158. 2. 8. p. 24. 2. 12. p
297. 2. 13. p. 294. 4. 5. p. 28 4. 14. p. 254 390. 4. 18. p 61. 390. 5. 22. 25.
p. 254. 5. 23. pa. 129. 158. 160. 5. 25. 27. 29. 32. px. 158. 160. 254 5. 27.
p. 265.
Phil. 1. 3. 5. 6. pa. 379. 1. 18. p. 142. 2. 12. p. 336. 2. 21 p. 340. 3. 6.
p. 128.
Col. 1. 2. p. 349. 1. 6. pa. 278. 290. 292. 1. 24. p. 129. 3. 18. 19. p. 142.
3. 20. p. 144.
1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. page 379. 5. 21. p 253.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. page 292. 2. 3. p. 290. 413. 2. 7. p. 382. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
p. 19. 72. 114. 115. 205 247. 352. 383.
1. Tim. 1. 5. p. 334. 1. 20. p. 300. 2. 2. p. 312. 2. 3. 4. p. 53. 55. 57.
180. 185. 3. 15. pa. 128. 151. 161. 4. 10. p. 53. 58.
2. Tim. 1. 15. p. 300. 2. 19. p. 265. 3. 9. p 278. 279. 3. 16. 17. p. 96.
Tit. 2. 4. pa. 257. Hebr. 2. 14. p. 257. 216. p. 257. 2. 17. p. 3^6. 415. p.
326. 54, 5, 6. p. 411. 10. 38. p. 268. 351. 11. 6 p. 23. 24. 157. 178. 13. 17
p. 143. 13. 20. p. 412.
James 4. 6. p. 268. 1. Pet. 1. 25. p. 114 2. 13. p. 268. 275. 2. 18. p. 254.
3. 1. 7. p. 254.
2. Pet. 1. 10. p. 115. 1. 19. p. 74. 39. p. 53. 58. 59.
1 John 2. 18. 19. p. 300. 4. 1. p. 109. 251. 274. 4. 6. p. 109. 112. 5. 3. p.
334. 363.
Jude verse. 3. p. Revel. 1. 20. p. 216 2. 5. p. 216. 2. 6. p. 300. 126 p. 171.
205. 293. 17. 1. p. 205. 17. 2 p. 114. 247. 21. 14. p. 297.

A Table of the Authors alleged.
A
An. Dom. RObert Abbot An Dom. 1596 Adrian. 6. 1522 Cornelius Agrippa 1550
Albertus Magnus 1220 Alexander Alexand. Episcopus 320 Alphonsus a Castro 1546
Alphons. Tostat. Abulens. episc. 1430 Guliel. Altissiodorensis 1320 Ambrosius
Mediolan. episc. 380 Anselmus Cantuariens. episc. 1080 Antoninus Florentin.
episc. 1450 Athanasius Alexandr. episc. 340 Augustinus Hippon. episc. 400
Azorius 1580
B
John Bule 1560 Sebastianus Baccadius 1597 Bartholomaeus de Pisis 1500 Basilius
magnus 370 Basiliense Consilium 1430 Beda 700 Bellarminus 1575 Bellum papale
1600 Bernardus 1130 Thomas Bilson 1587 William Bishop 1603 Gabriel Biel 1449
Bolsec 1565 Breidenbacchius 1580 Bridget 1518 Bonauentura 1260 Boccacio 1375
Bucchingerus 1542 Burdegalens. monachi 1585
C
Thomas de vio Caietanus 1520 Melchior Canus Canar-episc. 1560 Edmundus
Campianus 1570 Ioannes Capreolus An. Dom. 1415 Carthagin. Council. 3 400
Catechismus Trident. Council. 1565 Catharina Senensis 1370 Catharinus 1550
Cassianus 430 Cassander 1530 Daniel Chamierus 1605 Chalcedon. Council. 455
Girolamo de Catena 1586 Christophor. de Capite fontium 1570 Chrysostom.
Constantinop. episc. 400 Clemens P P. 1342 Clemens Alexandrinus episc. 200
Cochlaeus 1519 Codex Justinian. 529 Constantiens Council. 1417 Ianus Cornarius
1540 Cornelius Bitontinus episc. 1545 Cyprianus Carthag episc. 250 Cyrillus
Alexandr. episc. 430 Cyrillus Hierosolymit. episc. 370 Nicol. Cusan. 1464
D
Joan Damascenus 700 Declaratio motuum VVisbic. 1601 Decretorum liber 1151
Didymus Alexandr. 360 Dionys. Areopag. noth 100 Dionys. Carthusian. 1460 George
Downam 1598 Guliel. Durand. 1236
E
Epiphanius Salam. episc. 390 Erasmus Roterodam. 1528 Eugenius 4. 1430 Eusebius
Caesariens. episc. 320 Extra Joan. 22. 1315
F
John Field An. Dom. 1606 Joan. Fernelius 1547 Joan. Ferus 1554 Francisc.
Feuardent. 1584 Joan. Fisher Roffens. episc. 1530 Joan. Fox 1567 Fulgentius
500 William Fulk. 1576
G
Galfridus Momunet. 1152 Gaudentius 400 Gerson 1429 Genebrardus 1530 Glossa.
interlin. Ansel. Laud. 1100 Gloss. ordin. Strab. Fulden. 840 Goulartius 1590
Gregorius P P. 1. 590 Gregor. de Valentia 1580 Gregor. Nazianzen. episc. 380
H
Haymo Halberstadt. 820 Heruaeus 1560 Hieronymus Stridon 390 Hilarious
Pictauien. episc. 350 Holinshead 1570 Holcot 1350 Book of homilies 1560 Hosius
Cardinal 1530 Hugo Cardinal. 1240 Lady Hungerfords medita. 1605
I
Ignatius 100 Illyricus 1540 Irenaeus 180 Isidorus Clarius 1540 Iansenius
Gandau. episc. 1581 Jesuits Catechism 1590 Iesuiticae Constitut. 1573 Justinius
Martyr. 160
L
Petrus Lombard. episc. 1140 Leo P P. 1. 450 Lucas Brugens. 1530 Martin.
Lutherus 1520 Nicolaus Lyranus 1320
M
Maccdonius 500 Maffaeus An. Dom. 1590 Maldonatus 1572 Marsilinus Patauin. 1324
Martialis Burdeg. 100 Gregory Martin 1582 Philippus Melanchth. 1530 Arias
Montanus 1570 Philippus Mornaeus 1580 Mileuitan. Council. 407
O
Guliel. Occham 1320 Oecumenius 1050 Opus imperf in Math. 450 Optatus Mileu.
episc. 380 Origines. Adamant. 200
P
Pacianus Barcel. episc. 380 Pagninus 1532 Panormitanus 1470 Paphnutius. 320
Paschasius 500 Petrarcha 1330 Petrus de Alliaco 1400 Philo Carpath. episc. 410
Picus Mirandula 1494 Pius P P. 5. 1566 Pighius 1525 Pizamanus. 1497 Platina
1451 Polycarp. Smyrnen. episc. 140 Polydorus Virgil. 1525 Prateolus 1568
Prierias 1530 Proclus Constantinop. episc. 430 Prosper Aquitan. 450 Psellus 400
R
Rhabanus Maurus 850 Revelation of Religion 1605 Rhemish Testam. 1582 John
Reynolds 1580 Ruffinus Aquileiens. 390
S
Alphonsus Salmero 1597 Nicolaus Sanderus 1569 Joan. Scotus 1308 Sixtus
Senensis An. Dom. 1570 Smidelinus 1560 Dominicus Sotus 1554 Sozomenus 430
Speculum exempl. 1605 Staphylus 1560 Didacus Stella 1560 Matthew Sutcliffe 1590
T
Tertullianus 200 Theod. Cyrens. episc. 440 Theophylact. Bulgar. episc. 900
Thomas de Aquino 1260 Trident. Council. An. Dom. 1545 Turrianus 1580 Joan. de
Turrecremata 1460
V
Vatablus 1545 Vega 1568 Whitaker 1586 Anno Mundi. Aristoteles 3640 M. Tullius
Cicero 3980 Homerus 3003 Virgilius 3998
A TABLE OF THE CHIEF MATTERS contained in the Treatise and Answer.
A
THe Academickes denied that there is any truth to be known. page 80. All,
often was put for every kind. p. 57. Allegories are not fit to prove points of
doctrine. p. 264. Boniface 3. the first revealed Antichrist. p. 330. Antichrist
revealed, bare sway over all men and their writings. p. 387. The Apostles were
absolutely to be heard, as well severally as jointly. p. 36. 43. 44. 112. 127.
137. 177. No joint consent in teaching required of the Apostles or any
Ministers. p. 127. Sought to many nations, were not sought to by them. p. 179.
186. Were the light of the world. p. 181. Severally every of them. p. 182. Did
not enlighte^ the world by any joint act of them all together. p. ead. Were not
believed, because they were sent by the Church, but for their doctrine. p. 185.
235. 239. 240. 243. Might and did fly in time of persecution. p. 190. Looked
for an earthly kingdom. p. 39. Yet were in the state of grace by resting upon
Christ for salvation. p. ead. Thought it unlawful to impart the Gospel to the
Gentiles. p. 311. Were over come by the gates of hell, according to the
doctrine of Popery. p. 166. Apostolicknesse, what it is, according to the
Papists. 297. Apostolicknesse of a Church, not easy to be known to all men.
p. 296. Impossible to be known, but by report. p. ead. True Apostolic
succession is in Apostolic doctrine. p. 298. 292. 293. Arianisme was very
universal, and of very long continuance. p. 292. Aristotle's Physics set out,
as if they had not bin set out. p. 81. The maine Assumption of the general
Syllogism. p. 218. Answer to the general Analysis. p. 6, 7. Our answers are
commonly so long, that few find leisure to read them. p. 7. Authority how a
means to beget faith. p. 60. One man of authority and learning draws many
atter him. p. 121.
B
To believe in Christ, what it is. p. 26. To believe the Catholic Church, what
it is. p. 156. We do not believe in ye church, because that were to equal it
with God p 157. They that truly believe in Christ, shall not err out of the
way that leads to everlasting life. p. 232. Belief how wrought p 362. No man
is forced to believe. p. 361, 362. No man withheld from believing by God. p.
58. A man may deliver the truth, and himself not believe. p. 112. Believing
expressly, implicit. p. 44, 45. To believe, that is, to assent, is not in the
power or choice of man's will. p. 40. For what reason we must believe or assent
to the truth p. 30. 31. 42. 43. 47. True believers cannot be separated from
Christ by death. p. 167. Misbeleeuing and obstinately not believing, differ
much. p. 39. Misbeleeuing how far daminable. p. 51. Obstinatly not believing,
how not dam nable. p 39. 40. 49. Refusing to believe against conscience,
always damnable. p. 40. 41.
C
Catharin foresaw the Council of Trent would be misunderstood. p 323.
Catholic what it signifies. p. 280. 281. Few ordinary Papists know. 280.
What the Catholic Church is, and why so called. p. 280. 283. 284. 285. 286.
374. Not all one with Roman. p. 7. As Papists understand it a mere name. p.
187. 199. 373. 407. Said to be Catholic in six respects. p. 281. In respect
of al places and persons. p. 285. Catholicknesse seldom taken for
universality of time. 281. 373. No particular Church Catholic, as Papists
understand Catholic p. 3. The Church before our Saviors coming not
Catholic, as the Papists teach p 281. The Catholic Church continues from
Adam to the end of the world. p. 160 164. 281. The church not called Catholic
by any author within the first 200. years. p. 283. No man called a Catholic in
the Apostles time. p. 282. The word Catholic not used in the Scriptures. p.
ead. The title Catholic not given to any of the Epistles by the Apostles
themselves. p. ead. The teaching of the Catholic Church the rule of faith. p.
61. 151. Teaching contrary to the Catholic Church, how far accursed. p.
106. The Catholic Church is as well in heaven as in earth. p. 6. 8. Not
visible. p. 209. The Protestants church Catholic. p. 408. The Church what it
is. page 6. 10. 26. 71. 150. 169. 170. 175. 199. 225. 393. Not the Clergy
only. p. 71. 123. 131. Papists define it with relation to the Pope of Rome. p.
200. A Council of Bishops ye Popish Church. p. 136. 150. All professors are not
the true Church. 177. The congregation and governors are properly the Church
where they live. p. 148. 227. Diverse significations of ye word Church. 127.
128. see Ecclesia. All believers. p. 120. 210. The elect believers living in
the world. p. 201. 210. Generally a company, assembled or not assembled. p.
210. Where the Church is to be sought p. 61. To be known only by ye
scriptures. p. 56 How it is to be known p. 221. How the pillar and ground of
truth. pa. 151. 152. Built and founded upon the truth. p 154. The faith thereof
how far to be enquired after. p. 14. The authority thereof how far to be
yielded to. p. 45. 50 54. 91. 111. 151. 246. 250. 275. A maine delusion and
needless. p. 67. 72 90. 104. 238. 239. Cannot make that damnable, which is not
so of it self. p. 49. Increases the sin of not believing, when it
determines truly p. 49. Not spoken of in the old testament. p. 97 How far
commended to us by the Scripture. p. 96. 97. How Austin was moved to believe by
the authority of the Church p. 93. The authority of the Church is great in
matters not to be decided by scripture. p. 95. 96. 155. 250. The testimony and
authority thereof is but humane. p. 242. 243. What it is for a man to make
himself judge over the Church. p. 249. Not to hear the Church. p. 147. All
Churches may err. p. 6. 46. 135. What is necessary to the being of a true
Church. p. 239. Many reprobates are members thereof according to the Papists.
p, 164. Outward profession enough to make a man a member thereof according to
ye Papists. pa. 23. 123. 224. 264. 272. 350. Why we ought to seek for, and
join our selves to a true Church. p. 219. 234. Gods true public worship
cannot ordinarily be performed but in a true Church. p. 219. The Church not
holding the foundation of ye Apostles doctrine is to be left. p. 14 Truth of
doctrine in points fundamental, a certain mark of a true church. p 240. 249.
Succession to the Apostles in doctrine makes Churches Apostolic. p. 301. Was
never without some diversity of opinions among the learned. p. 311. The Church
erred in diverse points within the first six hundred years. p. 163. How it is
one. p. 158. 160. 201. 215. 263. 264. 266. 284. 309. 318. The Protestants
Church is one. p. 406. Adam, Abel, Enoch, etc. were of the Protestants Church.
p. 341. 353. No writer within the first thousand years agrees with the Papists
of the Council of Trent in all points. p. 341. The Popish Church has not yet
determined all points. p. 14. 375. The Church yt ignorant Papists believe, is a
Priest or a Jesuit. p. 15. 16. 17. 71. The Papists circle of the Scripture and
the Church. p. 72. 91. 244. 246. 261. 413 How a whole Church may be counted
holy. 271. Many thousands never had knowledge of any Church. p 55, No man can
certainly know that there is any true Church but by the Scriptures. p 244. The
Church has properly to do with none but Christians. p. 90. 193. The Church was
confined to Afric by the Donatists. p. 3. 173. 216. 288. It is not all one to
be in the Church and of the Church. p. 212. What it is to sit in Moses chair.
p. 140. 141. Who are meant by the Church believed in the Creed. p. 157. 158.
168. 175 210. The elect called are properly the church p. 158. 159. 165. 168.
211. 212. 213. 217 265. That Church is not visible. p. 174. 177. To that only
is continuance promised. p. 217. The continuance of the Church depends upon
her being joined to Christ. p. 168. The Church in the Apostles time did not
always hold the same points of faith. p. 310. To believe in the Church, were
to equal it with God. p. 157. The ceremonies before Christ were not continued
without interruption. page 170. 227. Communion with a Church may be refused by
ignorance without pride. p. 275. Confession to a minister neither commanded nor
forbidden by Protestant Churches. p. 342. Popish confession rather prouokes men
to sin, then restraines them from it. 342. 343. Credere Ecclesiam and Credere
Ecclesiae, not all one but diverse. p. 156. Credere Deum, Credere in Deum,
differ very much, p. 156. The perpetual covenant. p. 178. Christians how
called Saints. p. 349. What makes a man cease to be a Christian. p. 273. There
is no constraint used toward the will, either in good or in evil. page 344.
How Constraint and Necessity differ p. 344. 345. Councels may err. p. 260.
Are hard to be understood, and may be misunderstood. p. 11. 12. 323. Are bound
to use all means of disputation to find out the truth. p. 13. Deliver some
things as probable conjectures. p. 12. The course that has been and must
always be held by Popish general Councels. p. 330. Whether the Council be
above the Pope or no, it is not determined. p. 14 15. 375. The Council has
often deposed the Pope. 324. 325. The Council of Constance makes the Pope
subject to the decrees of Councels. p. 325. The Council of the Elders among
the Jews. p. 148.
D
What it is to deny Christ. p. 190. 191. Always damnable. p. 190. Most
devotion in Popery, where there is least understanding. p. 27. Disputation
about points of Divinity necessary. p. 13. Dissension among Papists about
matters of faith. p. 321. 322. 324. Bellarmine dissents in one point or other
from almost all learned Papists before him. p. 319. Every dissent in opinion
makes not churches cease to be churches, or holy. p. 273. Dissension is better
then maintaining of false doctrine or worship. p. 319. Doubting of some points,
how it overthrows not religion. p. 50. How far the doctrine of one that is
lawfully sent, may be examined. pa. 253.
E
(...) what it signifies. p. 128. Any assembly. page ead. Especially about
matters of religion. p. ead. Generally all believers. p. 129. 201. 210.
Particularly several congregations. p. 129. How arguments may be drawn from
those places where the word is used. p. 129. 130. Ecclesiastical governors to
be obeyed when they command that which is right. p. 37. The Elect before the
coming of Christ were chosen ordinarily out of the Jews, since, out of the
Gentiles. p. 207. The Elect only are truly called. p. 210. 211. May fall into
grievous sin, and yet not cease to be elect. p. 211. England not converted but
perverted by Austin the monk. p. 377. Popish errors crept in by little and
little unperceived. p. 382. 383. 387.
F
Diverse significations of faith. p. 6. 22. 28. Faith is absolutely necessary to
salvation. p. 22. 25. 26. Faith for assent to the truth, what it is. p. 35.
319. May be had without the authority of the Church, p. 104. 113. Is in some
greater, in some less. p. 31. Goes before justifying faith. p. 33. Is
accompanied with doubting. p. 32. 33 Perfection thereof is to be labored for.
p. 32. Is tied to the Scripture, not to ye church. p. 46. May come by the
preaching of the schismatics or heretics. p. 34. Not to be built on the
testimony of man. p. 329. How it is one. p. 30. 31. 47. 51. Entire and
infallible faith necessary to salvation. p. 73. How faith may be begotten. p.
25. 26. 33 34. 60. 66. 75. 76. 113. 114. 235. Is to be learned of the
Ministers, not of the Church. p. 234. Matters of faith according to Popery.
311. 320. Are indeed to be proved by scripture. p. 250. 319. 320. Fundamental
points of faith. p. 40. 239. Obstinately not believing them damnable. p. 40. No
matter of faith according to Popery, till within these last 800 years, 320.
321. All popish faith depends upon the authority of the Church. p. 25. The
rule of faith what properties it must have. p. 61. 63. 64. 94. 108. Easiness
to be understood no property of the rule. p. 74 94. How far the rule need be
understood. p. 65 94. All truth must be proved by the rule. p. 84. 87. 115.
What points the rule must resolve, and how far. p. 84. Natural wit and
learning cannot be the rule of faith p. 98, 99, 100. No private spirit can be
the rule of faith 105. The teaching of the Catholic Church the rule of faith.
p. 61. 122. 42. He that has Popish faith may be damned. p. 23. Justifying
faith, what it is. p. 24. It is in the will. p. 33. The just lives by faith; and
where there is faith there is life. p. 273. Lively faith may be in him that is
ignorant, or misinstructed in many points. p 274. The foundation of the
Apostles doctrine is overthrown by Popery. p. 375. Fasting not condemned, but
especially commended by Protestants p. 342. A Popish fast may be kept with
gluttony and drunkenness. p. 342. 366. The interpretations of the Fathers
reverenced by the Protestants. p. 80. Frieries and monasteries. p. 357. Saint
Francis five wounds. p. 358.
G
God calls all men from damnation. p. 56. Decreed all things, that are or
shall come to pass. p. 345. Works not alike in good and evil actions. p.
345. The glory of God is the end of all religion. p. 290. 296. The heathen had
one sovereign God above all the rest. p. 387. To whom the rest were mediators
of intercession for their favorites, as the Popish Saints are. p. 387. How we
may know, that there is a gospel. p. 245. The doctrine of the Gospel is
simply necessary to salvation, not the books of the four Gospels. p. 243. The
Gospel hung about the neck for a preservative. p. 78. Many nations in Austins
time had not heard the Gospel. p. 55. The Fathers thought the world should end
presently after the preaching of the Gospel in all places. p. 55. Many
thousands died in the Apostles time, ere they could by any means hear of the
Gospel. p. 181. 182. 183.
H
Herefie what it is. p. 220. A work of the flesh. p. 52. 118. May be more
general, for a time, then true religion. p. 293. No man can certainly know how
long any heresy shall continue. p. 293. Heresies spring from misunderstanding
the Scripture. p. 119 300. May by it be convinced. p. 119. Great heretics have
had lawful calling to the ministry. p. 36. 411. Heretics plead all for
themselves, that Papists do. p. 119. They that refuse to make trial of their
doctrine by Scripture, are heretics. p. 220. Some heretics have continued a
long time in one and the same doctrine. p. 263. Heretics may be free from all
gross outward sin. p. 275. The first 400. years were most fruitful in
monstrous heresies. p. 305. Some heretical Churches, may be true Churches. p.
219. Some heretics could plead personal succession from the Apostles. p.
299. Any heretical Church may have as good means to end controversies, as the
Church of Rome has. p. 313. Holiness whence it springs. p. 21. 360. Only
true inward holiness can make a man a true Christian. p. 269. Holiness is
resident only in several persons, not in a company. p. 270. 249. Is invested
in the Popes person. p. 356.
I
Comparison betwixt heathenish and Popish Idolatry. p. 386. 387. Distinction
of Idol and Image. p. 386. Papists worship the Image it self. p. 386. No
religious use of any Image to be allowed. p. 360. Ignorance the strength of
Popery. p. 4. 70. All ignorance is not heresy. p. 50. How it shuts men out
from salvation. p. 40. 44 49. 50. 274. Ignorance can excuse no man, the Gospel
being preached every where. p. 113. Ieconiah childlesse. p. 39.
K
(...). p. 283. The keys and power to bind and loose common to all the
Apostles. p. 325. 326. Why kings are called humane creatures. p. 274. He
refuses not to be subject to the king that does not absolutely obey him in all
things. p. 275.
L
The Law cannot be kept perfectly. p. 363. How it is not gricuous. p. 363. One
learned man's judgment oftentimes draws many to it. p. 250. The Leven of the
Pharisees what it is. p. 37. 141. No life but in the body of Christ. p. 273
The light must shine to them that are in the house. p. 182. The love of God
whence it arises. p. 20 Is not alike to all. p. 257.
M
Gregory Martins eauils were answered long since. p. 69. Marks of the Church.
p. 221. 222. 226. 259. Must be proper to it always. p. 222. 280. Easier to be
known then the Church it self. p. 222. 223. True doctrine in the fundame^tal
points is a sure mark of the Church. p. 228. 229. 301. 374. 375. The Mass was
brought in by piece meal. p. 384. Ouergreat zeal of Martyrdom. p. 189
Messiah not Salomons son. p. 39. The ministry, not the authority of men is
used to beget faith. p. 6. 19. 234. 243 244. Needful for the instruction of the
ignorant. p. 98. No charge, practice or warrant for any universal ministry
since the Apostles time. p. 179. Luthers prevailing in his ministry, and his
preservation wanted little of a miracle. p. 355. Ministers to be heard so far
as they speak according to the Scriptures. p. 36. 112. 137. 142. 146. Yet
less danger not to hear them so speaking, then not to hear the Apostles. p.
43 112. Origin preached before he was a Minister. p. 35. Antichrists miracles.
p. 114. 352. Miracles are often counterfetted. p. 352. 358. Preferred before
the authority of the Church. p. 114. The use of miracles is to confirm
doctrine, not to testify of holiness. pa. 172. 351. There never was any true
miracle wrought for confirmation of false doctrine. p. 115. Miracles are not to
be believed for any doctrine against Scripture. p. 115. False miracles cannot
always be discerned by men. p. 115. 352. 353. Luther and Calvin did not
attempt the working of miracles. p. 355.
N
A natural man what he is. p. 61. 236. Absurdly called sensual. pa. 60. 61.
236. 237. May understand the Scripture, though not believe it to salvation. p.
236. Necessity, not constraint taught by Protestants. p. 344, 345.
P
Papists treason. Nouemb. 5. 1605. pa. 8. 346. 347. 379. The wickedness of
Papists testified by their own writers. p. 340. 346. Papists rest upon the
Pope and Councels. p. 51. 312. Are Pharisaicall boasters. p. 338. 363. No
Papist holding the authority of the Church, and the impossibility of the
Popes erring, can be a good Christian or a faithful subject. p. 72. Papists
not sons of God, but servants of the law. p. 343. 364. Papists count
murdering of Princes a meritorious work. p. 361. Outward peace is not so t^^ch
worth, as that for it the Church should be corrupted with errors. p. 312. Must
be provided for by the civil magistrate. p. 312. Saint Peter the Popes Lord.
p. 388. Why our Savior prayed especially for him. p. 326. Why he asked him
thrice, if he loved him. p. 327. Peter's accepting of the sovereignty, a poor
proof of his love to Christ. p. 327. His superiority was in respect of age.
p. 315. It is uncertain whether ever he were at Rome or no. p. 328. 393. The
Pope the Papists Lord God. p. 112. How he came to his height. p. 382. Head of
the Church, though he believe not in heart. p. 23. He that is no Christian may
be Pope of Rome. 23. 111. The Pope cannot err: p. 71. Can show no charter for
his not erring. p. 37. 71. 72. May err, by the judgment of Papists. p. 323.
Even with a general Council. p. 330. 331. It is not determined that the Pope
alone cannot err. p. 320. Pope John 22. doubted of the immortality of the
soul. p. 111. Pope Leo 10. counted the history of Christ a fable. p. 111.
Many Popes have been found to be Apostataes from the faith. p. 323, 324. Many
decrees of Popes are contrary one to another. p. 324. Pius 5. and Clement 8.
^^^olue concerning the words of consecration contrary to the Council of Trent.
page 324. Popish religion cannot hold up the head without the Popes authority.
p. 108. The Pope appoints the holy Ghost an office of his own devising. p.
388. Our Savior and his Apostles hid themselves from persecutors. p. 186. No
necessity to worship God publikly in time of persecution. p. 190. 191. The
Pharisees were blind guides. p. 249. To what purpose our Sauiors perpetual
presence serves. p. 132. Predestination does not take away free will. p. 361.
Without true belief of predestination and justification, there can hardly be
any true religion. p. 290. Prayer for the dead. p. 96. How every one that
prays, receives. p. 116, 117. Preaching the ordinary means of faith. p.
113. 409. No man might have preached the Gospel without warrant from God. page
113. How Luther may be said to have first preached Christ. p. 392. Pride in
opposition against a matter of doctrine, is sometimes in a sanctified man. p.
274. What outward profession of religion is: how far necessary. p, 188, 189,
192. What it is to confess with the mouth. p. 191. False Prophets to be known
by their doctrine. p. 36. How all prophesies in the scripture are always true
p. 206. Purgatory ends with the world. p. 365
Q
Questions of religion how to be decided. page 61
R
Reason how far it may be required in points of divinity. p. 16. 17. 18.
Light of reason cannot find out all things necessary to salvation. p. 25. The
reason of Gods counsel and doings is oftentimes hid from men. p 204. Nothing
against reason is to be believed without warrant from God. p. 244. The religion
of the Popish Church at this day is fetched from the Council of Trent. p. 358.
377. Our Savior did not pray that the reprobate might be one with his father
and him. p. 264. Revelation of the spirit required by the Papists to believe
that the Scriptures are the word of God. p. 245. The Church of Rome sometimes a
true Church. p. 338. Rome was not built in a day. p 382.
S
What is absolutely necessary to salvation. p. 46. 55. 59. 65. 77. 188. 243.
319. Assurance of salvation. p. 150. 354. Sufficient means of salvation
provided for every man. p. 53. 55. 58. Every man has not the means. p. 57.
God will have all men to be saved, not every man. p. 53. 55. 57. 58. 203. 257.
The means of salvation by Christ are such as no man could devise. p. 102. 103.
113. 235. May be known what they are by the Scriptures without faith, but not
acknowledged to be true without faith. p. 235. 236. Contempt or neglect of some
things not absolutely necessary to salvation, may yet deprive a man of it p.
188. The graces of sanctification shall make the enemies of Gods children
acknowledge them. p. 179. That this man is saved rather then that, it
proceeds from the will of God. p. 203. Sacrament what it is. p. 385.
Administration of the sacraments not absolutely necessary to the being of a
Church. p. 226. 227. All things that belong to the right administration of the
sacraments, are set down in Scripture. p. 230. There have bin 32. schisms in
the Romish Church. p. 393. None are properly schismatickes but they that refuse
communion with some true church. p. 275. Schoole-mens writings full of
needless and endless questions. p. 20. All the schoolmen have refuted some of
their fellows, or bin refuted by them. p 313. Interpret and apply the
scripture falsely. p. 118. Scribes why so called. p. 140. What is meant by
Christ's sheepfold. p. 265. Similitudes how they argue. p. 50. Scripture the
epistle of the Creator to the creature. p. 81. Acknowledged by Protestants and
Papists to be the word of God. p. 87. 42. May be known to be so, by the
matter. p. 89. Written for the instruction of all. p. 74. 79. 82. Of greater
authority then any man's writings, or then all men's. p. 241. The bounds of the
Church. p. 61. Ignorance thereof the cause of all evils. p. 119. Condemned by
the Papists of hardness and uncertainty, and insufficiency. p. 11. 73. 79.
22^. Are not hard. p. 74. 75. 76. 77. 82. 94. Papists blasphemies against the
Scripture. p. 42. 5^. 81. Depriving the people of them. p. 52. Hard places of
Scripture must be expounded by the plain. p. 79. Some places of Scripture so
plain, that they cannot be mistaken. p. 79. Why some places of Scripture are
hard, some easy. p. 76. 82. Scripture expounds it self. p. 82. Reading
thereof may breed faith: how? p 25, 26. 34, 35, 36. 75, 76. 114. 235.
Exposition of the scripture not tied to the senses of the fathers. p. 121 No
exposition to be thrust upon the church, that cannot evidently be proved. p.
122. The scriptures left instead of the Apostles, to be advised with in all
points of faith. p 97. May be understood by natural wit and learning. p. 102.
103. Papists glad to fly to the private teaching of the spirit to know the
scriptures. p. 72. 245. Scripture why called Canonical. p 106. Christians
doubting of the scripture, how to be dealt withal. p. 90. Atheists in the same
question how to be dealt withal. p. 90 92. Knowledge of scripture to be
labored for. p. 20. 74. How far the scripture must be known before the
church. p. 244. 247. Many things required to the perfect understanding thereof.
p. 73. 81, 82. This word Expressly foisted in by the Papists into the question
of the scripture. p. 88, 89, 100. The Hebrew and Greek originals rejected by
the Papists. p. 52. Interpretation of scripture. p. 73. 80. 82. 92. 101. 118.
120. 121. Scripture an absolute rule for salvation. p. 7. 17. 96. 97. 322. How
alone sufficient to salvation. p. 65. 66. 73. 78 96. 97. Sufficient for all
matters of faith and manners. p. 56. 67. 68. 83. 86. 87. 89. 94. 250. 260. 314
395. All parts of scripture not true in like sense, nor of like necessity to
be believed p. 38 By what argument the spirit persuades us that the scripture
is from God. p 245. Private spirit when to be rejected p. 120. What spirits are
to be tried p. 252. Who are to try them. p. 254. Sins of infirmity less
heinous then sins of wilfulness. p. 344. Suspicion without just cause against
christianity and civility. p. 72. What succession is to be esteemed. p 2.
393. 394. Succession no good mark of the church. p. 394, 395. Protestants have
succession, if Papists have it. p. 392. 409.
T
The English Translation reproved. p. 66 Defended. p. 69. 70. Not held by us to
be infallible. p. 68. 94. The Rhemish Translation hard to be understood p. 70.
The vulgar Translation corrupt in eight thousand places, by the judgment of a
learned Papist. p. 52, Doubts concerning it. p. 71. The general Analysis of
the Treatise. p. 4. 5. The sum of it. p. 54. What Traditions are to be held
for Apostolical. p. ^5. The spirit is to teach all truth: how? p. 130 God does
not miraculously reveal all truth at once to any man. p. 313. Truth manifested
by one simple man, is to be preferred before the judgment of never so many wise
and learned in a Council. p. 249. 250. Truth must be received, though
delivered by evil men. p. 143. 144. Belief of every truth is required as a
duty of sanctification. p. 274. The truth has had witness of men from time
to time. p. 205. From whom truth is hid. p 82. Evidence of truth, not
visibilitie of the church the means of conversion. p. 204 The speedy
conversion of great multitudes by preaching, a great argument of truth. p. 205.
Truth with contention is better then agreement with Antichristianisme p. 317
Without truth the greatest agreement is but a conspiracy against God. p. 317.
V
The Protestants Churches have means to continue unity. p. 314.
Universality. p. 65. Cannot be seen but only conceived. p. 177. No certain
mark of the Church. p. 293. The state of the question concerning the
visibility of the Church. p. 197. 209. 219 Visibilitie of the Church. p. 174.
176. 198 202. 20^. 214. A Church may for a time be invisible: how? p. 202. And
yet the flock and Pastor know each other. p. ead. Why it was necessary that
the churches at the first should be visible. p. 204. 205 The Catholic Church
invisible. p. 209 To whom the churches are visible. p. 216 Voluntas signi,
beneplaciti. p. 58. 59.
W
The will of God ought to be a sufficient reason of his doings to all men. p.
204 Man's free will preferred before Gods glory by the Papists. p. 361. Men
commonly wonder at that they understand not. p. 27. Good works shall be
rewarded, though not upon desert. 343. Good works are not made meritorious by
being dipped in Christ's blood. p. 365.
Faults escaped.
Page. 61. line. 16. for seen, read said p. 69. l. 9. for which, r. with. p.
ead. l. 11. Isidorus Clarius, put out the comma. p 74. l. 4. in the marg for
13. r. 130. p. 80. l. vlt. for with. r which. p. 92. l. 28. for be, r. he. p.
93 l 26. for yours, r. you p. 96. l. vlt. for expressly. r. properly. p. ^7. l.
19 for rule, r. use. p. 119. l. 24. put out, say. p. 134. l. 17. in the mar.
for vli. r. vbi. p. l. 1. in the marg. for 2, r. 1. p. 163. l. 10. for Church,
r. Churches. p. ead. l. 13. for it, r. they. p. 180. l. 17. for have men, r.
have all men. p. 144. l. 7. in the marg. for lib, r. lit. p. 223. l. 35. for
heretic, r. heretics. p. 292. l. 5 in the marg, for Thophyl, r. Theophyl. p.
316. l 4. in the marg for Goulact, r. Goulart. p. 292. l. 27. for from, r. for.
p. 298. l. 5. for intend, r. intended. p. 302. l. 27. for it self, r. in it
self. p. 307. l. 8. put out, in. p. 309. l. 20. for Christians, r. Christian.
p. 321. l 22. for you, r. your. p. 331. l. vlt for implied, r. applied p. 339.
l. 20. for and settled, r and partly settled. p. 347. l. 22. for his, r. a Popes.
p. 347. l. 23. for his Masters, r. Pius 5. his. p. 352. l. 27. for rrow. r.
trow. p. 354 l. 34 for be, r. he. p 367. l. 31. for is, r. it. p. 371. l. 17.
for led, r. ved. p. 378. l. 1. for Ethelbat, r. Ethelbert. p. 380. l. 8. for
and the, r. and because the. p. 384. l. 4. put out at. 386. l. 22. for purpose,
r. purple. p. 412. l. 30. for we, r. were.


