X^^^phons treatise of householde.

To the reder.
This book of householde, full of high wisdom, written by the noble
philosopher Xenophon, the scholar of Socrates, the which for his sweet
eloquence, and incredible facility, was surnamed Musa Attica, that is to say,
the song of Athenes: is right counnyngly translated out of the greek tongue in
to Englisshe, by Gentian Heruet, (...), which book for the welthe of this
realm, I deem very profitable to be read.

Xenophons treatise of householde.
I Hard upon a time the wise Socrates common of the ordryng of an house,
speaking to one Critobulus, after this manner. Tell me Critobulus, is the
ordrynge of an house the name of a science, like wise as phisike is, and masons
and carpenters craft? So me thinks, said Critobulus. Whether than may we
tell, what is the duty, and the propre office, of the ordrynge of an house /
like wise as we can tell of other crafts and sciences? Me thinks, said
Critobulus, hit longs to a good husband, and a good ordrer of an house to
guide well and order his own house. But yet, said So. If one did put him in
trust; and charge him to order his house, could not he order hi^ as well as his
own, if he would? For he that has a carpenters craft well, he can work
as well for an other, as he can for him self, and may not a good husband, well
expert in the ordrynge of an house, do like wise? Me thinks yes, good
Socrates. Than a man, said Socrates, that is well seen in that science, though
he have no substance / nor no goods him self, may get his living, and have
good wages / if he will order an other man's house / as well as he that builds
an house. In good faith, said Critobulus / he were worthy to have very good
wages, if he could take an other ma^s house in hand / and do every thing /
that belongs to hit; / and make the house better in goods and in substance.
But what do we mean by the house / whether is it nothing else but the bare
house / or whether all manner of things, that a man has out of the house / be
belonging to the house? Me thinks, said Critobulus, that all though that
that a man has / be not within the town / where he dwells / but in the
country / or any where else, that al does belong to the house, what so ever a
man has. And is there not some men / that have enmyes? Yes mary / and a great
meiny to. And shall we say, that their enmyes be their goods or substance? By
my feyth it were a merry ieste, if he that has caused us to have mo enmyes than
we had / would have a reward for it beside, for by cause we have iuged a man's
house / and that that a man has to be all one, Ye but I do not account that
among a man's substance and goods, that is naught and hurtful unto him, but
that that is good and profitable.

Than, as far as I se, ye call that a man's goods and substance, that is
profitable unto him? Ye mary do I, and such things as be hurtful, I call them
domages and not goods. And what if a man bye a horse, that he can not ride /
but fall down from his back, and so do him self a displesure, is not that
horse his goods? No by my faye, saying those things be goods that be good.
Nor the ground than shall not be called goods unto a man / the which
occupies it so, that he has damage by hit. Nor the ground shall not be called
goods, if where that a man should be found and norisshed by it / he dies for
hunger. Than it fares like wise by sheep. If a man has any damage / by the
reason that he can not guide them, nor order them as he should, the sheep shall
not be goods unto him? Me thinks no. Than, as far as hit seems by you /
ye call those things goods, that be profitable / and those things that be
hurtefull be no goods? So me thinks. Than one self thing shall be called
goods unto him that can use it as he should / (...) to him that can not / it
shall be no goods: like wise as recorders be goods unto him / that can play on
them somewhat according: but unto him that can not, they be no other wise good
than stones, that be unprofitable, except a man do selle them. And so like
wise by the recorders / if we sell them, they be good: but if we keep the^, and
can not occupy them, they be no goods. We must needs to agree in this tale,
saying we have said before, that those things, that be profitable be goods.
For the recorders / as long as we keep them unsold / they be no goods / for
they do us no good: but if they be sold, they be goods. Ye mary, said
Socrates, if one have the wit to sell them well. But if one do selle them,
that can not order him self / even when they be al ready sold, they be no
goods / according to your tale. Me thi^keth ye say sir Socrates, that nor yet
money another is goods, except a man can use it. So me thinks / ye have
granted all ready, that those things be called goods / that a man gets any
profit by. But if a man did bestow his money upon an harlotte, and that by
the reason of daily conversation with her, his body were he weker, his soul
the worse disposed, and his house the worse kept and ordered, how should
money be profitable unto him? It can not be in no case / except paraue^ture we
will call our goods a poison, the which when a man does eat of it, hit
brings him out of his wit. But as for money / friend Critobulus / if a man
can not use it as he should, let him cast it away far from him. For hit is
another profitable unto him, nor may be called goods. But as for fre^des, if a
man can use them, so that he get some profit of the^, what shall we say yt they
be? Goods forsooth, said Crito. and much more tha^ sheep or oxen, saying they
be a great deal more profitable. Than, according to your tale, our enmis like
wise be goods unto him / that can get profit of them. So me thinks. And it
is a point tha^ of a good husband and a good ordrer of an house, to have away
to use his enmies so, that he may get some profette by them. In any case. For
ye se well inoughe, good Critob. how many mean men's houses / and how many
lords and kyngis dominions have been increased and amplified by the reason of
war. Forsooth sir Socrates, me thinks ye have very well spoken in this
matter, but what think you by this, when that we se that some men, which have
sciences, good wages / and good propreties, whereby they might make their houses
the better, if they would put the^ self to it: yet we may well se and perceive
they woll not do it. And therefore we se, that the sciences and good propreties,
that they have, avail them nothing: whether than shall those sciences / that
they have / be accounted for their goods and substance / or for somewhat else?
Ye said Socrates, me thinks, ye mean that by bond men / and by some vile
parsons. No by my feythe I: but I speak of some of them, that be honest men's
sons and gentilmennes to / the which I se, that some of them, that be
expert both in those things / that long to war and also to peace / yet
they woll not put them selfs to none of them. and me thi^keth, they should be
in a better case, if they were bound men. For I suppose, that they do not that
that they should, for because they lack masters to put them to hit. How
can that stand, said Socrates, that they have no masters, when that they
desiring to live in welthe and felicite, and minded to do that that would be
for their profette: their lords and superiors do let them, that they shall
not do it? And what be they, said Critobulus, that be invisible, and yet order
them thus? Nay they be not all so invisible, no, Iwis they be clear inoughe to
every man's sight. And ye know well your self / they be most ungracious and
most myscheuous of all, if slouthfulnes, sluggardise / lack of stomach and
quickenes, lack of taking head, and also negligence may be taken for
ungraciousness. And beside these there be other deceitful ladies, the which do
come in under the color and name of pleasures, playenge at dice and cards,
unprofitable trifling and keeping company with unthrifts / the which in
process of time do show plainly unto their adherentes, by them deceived, that
among pleasures there is some woe and some sorrow myngled. These ladies keep
them so in seruage and thraldom, that they can not be suffered to do nothing,
that is for their profit. Ye but there be some other, good Socrates, the
which have no such, to let them from their business / but rather apply them
selfs well fauordly to their business, and seek, and imagine all the ways
possible to get them good with all: yet they do stroye them selfs, minisshe
their liuelode, and destroy their houses: And as concerning to find any
remedy / they be at their wits ends. And they also, said Socrates, be like
wise bound men / as other be, and have over them very sore and cruel fellows
to their masters. Some of them be in the thraldom of glotony, some of
licorousnes, some of dronkennes, some of vain pride / and costly vain glory
/ the which keep their subjects so sore in servitude and bondage, that as
long as they se them young and lusty, and able to work / they make them to
bring them all that ever they can get / to bestow it upon their lustis and
pleasures. But when they perceive they be so old, that they can not work,
than they let them alone with a mischief / to live wretchedly in their old
age, and seek other, that they may bring in to their service like wise. But it
beboueth gentil Critobulus / to strive and fight with them for our own
liberty, none other wise than we would with them, the which / with naked
swords and weapons in their ha^dis, go about to bring us in thraldom and
servitude. Enmyes, if that they be good honest men / when they have brought
some men in to their subjection, they cause many to be much better, teaching
them to be reuly and te^perate, that before were to high minded and to fierce.
But as for these ladies they never cesse, but be evermore punisshyng / beatyng
/ and turme^tyng the bodies / the souls, and the houses of them, that they
have under: and that they do as long as they be their maistresses. Than
Critobulus said unto him after this manner. As for this matter me thynkethe I
have hard you speak sufficiently in it. And when I grope and search well my
conscience, I find, that me thynkyth / I can very well refrain all manner of
such things. Wherefore if ye will give me counseyle, how doing I may encreace
and make my house better, I think / I shall be nothing let of them that ye
call ladies. And therefore tell me with a good will, if ye have any goodness in
this matter. Or else ye think parauenture, that we be rich inoughe, and need
no more goods. By my faith, said Socrates, in deed, if ye speak of me, I
need no more goods, but I am rich inoughe. But as for you Critobulus, me
thinks ye be very pour. And by the feyth I owe to god / I have some times
great pite of you. Than Critobulus laughyng said: And I pray you for goddis
sake, if al your goods were sold, what sh^^^e ^e ye have for them? And what
should I ^^^ue for mine, if I would selle them? I think, said Socrates, that
if I might mete with a good byer / I should have well for my house, and for all
my goods a. v. or vj. mark. But as for yours, I know very well, that ye
should have an hundred times more. And ye that know this, do ye think your
self, that ye lack no more goods, and have pity of me, because of my
pouerte. For that that I have is sufficient enough to find me that that is
necessary. But for to meynteyne your state, and the worship, that ye have
taken upon you, me seems / that if ye had four times as much more as ye
have, it were not inoughe. And how so, said Critobulus? Than said Socrates:
First of al I se, that ye must needs make many feastis and many great
bankettes, or the people will skante abide the sight of you. More over ye must
receive in to your houses many strangers, and entreat them honorably, keeping
good hospitalite. Furthermore ye must bydde many men to diner, and do them some
pleasure, or else at your need ye shall have no man to help you. More over I
perceive / that the cite of Athenes begins to put you to many greatte
charges, as to find horses, to he^^^ to build things longyng to the city,
to, ^^ke musters of me^, to cause goodly pagea^t^ to be made, and goodly plays
to be plaide* But if there come in war ones, I am sure, they will have so
much money from you, what in taxes, what in subsidies, and what in preastis,
that ye shall scante be able ta bear it. And if ye seem to pay somewhat less
than your power is, they woll punysshe you as sore, as though they had found
you robbynge the common treasorie. Beside this, I se yt ye have this opinion /
that ye be rich / and that ye care not to get no more goods / and that ye
give your self to vain and childisshe pleasures, as ye may well do, The which
things do move me to have compassion of you, fearyng lest ye fall in to some
mysfortune, and into great pouerte without any remedy. And as for me, if I had
need / I trow ye know very well / that there be many that would help me: in
so much that if they gave me but every man a littell, I should have more than
the degree of my living does require. But as for your friends, al though they
have more to keep them in their degree, than ye have for yours: yet they look,
that ye should help them.

Than said Critobulus, I have nothing to say against you in this matter: But
it is time for you to instruct me with some good precepts / to thintente that
I be not so miserable in deed, that ye may have compassion on me with a good
cause. Than said Socrates: Do not ye think your self, that ye do a very
strange, and a maruailous thing / that but a pratye while ago, when I said,
that I was rich, ye lough at me / as though I knew not what riches mened, and
never stynted / til ye had put me to a rebuke, and made me to confess, that I
had not the hundredth part of that, that ye have, and now ye bid me to
instruct you / and set my diligence / that ye be not pour in very deed. For I
se well good Socrates, said Critobulus, that ye have in you the cast to make a
man rich in deed, that is to make him have plenty and abundance. And I
trust, he that of a litell thing can make plenty and abundance, shall do hit
much more lightlier of many great things.

Be ye not remembered of our co^munyng a pratye while ago, when I could in no
case contrary your saying: that to him that can not use horses / horses be no
goods unto him / nor land / nor sheep / nor money / nor nothing else, and yet
of such things a man may get great profit and vantage? But as for me, how
do ye think, that I can use or order such things, that had never none? But
me thought, that all though a man had another money, nor no goodis, yet there
was a certain science of gydyng and ordryng of an house. And what lets you,
that ye may not have the same science? Look what does let a man to play upon
recorders, if another he had never none him self / nor borrowed none of no body:
the self same impediment have I in the ordring of an house. For I another never
had instruments / that is goods and money of mine own to learn by hit, nor
there was never no body, that charged me with his goods, to over se the^, or
to order them / except ye parauenture be disposed so to do. But ye know well,
that they that learn first to play upon an harp, they spille the harp: So if
I should now learn on your householde / how to keep an house / I am aferde /
lest I should destroy your house. Ha, ye go about very busily and redily to
avoid, that ye wol not help me to bear, and sustain with me part of my
business. By my fay that do I not: I woll be glad with all mine heart to show
you all that ever I can. But I think this, that if ye came to my house for some
fire, and I had none / if I brought you to an other place, where ye might have
some, ye would not be displeased with me. And if ye came and asked me water,
and I had none, if I brought you in to a place, where ye might draw some,
ye could not blame me. And if ye would, that I should teach you music / if I
did show you other men more expert in it than I am my self, and that would
be glad and feign to teach you, what could ye blame me, if I did so? I could
not do it with a good cause. Therefore I will show you, that these things,
which ye desire so instantly of me, that there be other men more counnyng, and
more expert in them than I am. And this I grant you, that I have had a
greatte mind to know, which were the most counnynge / and the most
expert in all the city. For when I did some time considre / that in one
work, one business, and one thing doing some waxed very pour, and some
very rich, I marueiled, and me thought, it was a thing to be well considered
/ how that should be. And thus considering, I found, that this happened none
other wise / than the thing it self and reason would. For I saw, that they
that behaved them selfs rasshely in their business / had damage and loss by
it: and they, that with discretion, wit, and good aduisement applied their
busynes / brought their matters to pass more quickly, more easily / and with
more auantage. Of the which I think that ye may learn / and so by the grace
of god come to be a very rich man, with much winning and lucre. Now by my
faith I will never let you be in rest, until the time ye show before these
friends of yours / that ye speak of / that that ye have promised me.

But what would ye say, if I did show you some men, the which have builded
for very much money / unprofitable houses / without any good cast, or any
good commodity: and other that for less cost a great deal, have made houses
/ lacking nothing that longs to an house / will ye not say, that I do show
you a point of a good ordrer of an house? Yes verily said Crito. What if I
show you next and according to the same, that some men have much householde
stouffe / and of all sorts, and when they have need of it, they can not use
it, but it is to seche, and they can not tell whether hit be lust or save
leyde up? And for this cause they be wonderslye grieved in their minds, and
vex and trouble their servants, and nothing else. And also other men, the
which have no more / but rather less / have every thing ready at hand / when
they have need of it. What should be the cause of it, gentil Socrates / but
that the tone does cast aside every thing folisshelye, without any order: and
the the other layth up every thing in his place? There ye said well / said
Socrates. And he not only sets every thing in his place / but also in
such a place as is mete and convenient to set hit in. Me seems, said Cri.
that ye say, that this also is a point of a good order of an house. And what if
I show you, that in one place all the bound men and servants be tied fast,
and yet they run away often times: and in an other place they be losed /
wyllyng to abide and labor with all their hearts, will ye not think this a
good point of a house keeper, worthy to be looked upon? Yes mary, said
Critobulus, and very worthy to be looked upon. And what if I show you housbande
men / of the which some complain and say, that they dye for hunger, for all
their husbandry, and some that have plenty / of al manner of things necessary,
by the reason of their husbandry. Ye mary, said Critobulus, parauenture they
bestow their money and their goods / not where they should / but in such
things as be hurtefull both to them and to their houses. In deed there be
some such / said Socrates / but I do not speak of them, but of those, the
which call them self husband men, and yet they can scant get their meat and
their drink. And what should be the cause of this gentyl So? I will bring you
unto them, said So. and wha^ ye se them, than shall ye learn. Mary that will I,
if that I can. Ye but first ye must prove your self, if ye shall be able to
know it, when ye se them. It comes in to my mind now, that ye would rise
very yerly, and go a great way, to se enterludes played, and that ye would
entreat me needs to go with you, but ye never had me to such a sight. Than
ye think, mine own Socrates, that I am worthy to be laughed to scorn of
you. Ye but of your self much more. But what if I do show you some men / the
which by the reason of keeping of horses, have been brought to exstreme
pouerte, and other / the which by the reason of hit, have made them selfs
rich men / and have gotten so great substance, that they live like lords? I
have seen them, and I know them both, but I have never the more vantage for
that. The cause of it is, that ye behold them like wise / as ye look upon the
plaiers of enterludes, not to thinte^t that ye may be a poet, but for a
pastime and a recreation. And paraue^ture ye do well in that, for ye be not
minded to be a poet, but where ye be compelled to keep and find horses, will
ye not judge your self a fool, if ye go not about to study a remedy, that
ye be not ignoraunte in that behalf, saying that the self same things be
good to the use, and profitable to be sold. Your mind is that I should break
horses? No by my faith it, no more than if ye would have a good laborer, I
would give you counsel to bring him up of a child. But there be ages both
of horses and of men, the which be immediately profitable / and do daily so
grow, that they do more good one day than an other. Furthermore I can show
you some men, the which have so used and ordered their wives / that they
comfort them and help them toward the incresing of their house: and some
that have such wives, the which destroy utterly the house, and so the most
part of men have. But who is to be blamed for this / the husband or the wife
/ good Socrates? A sheep / if hit do not well, for the most part we do blame
the sheperde. And a horse most commonly / if he be skyttisshe, and do some
displesure, we blame the breker. And a wife like wise, if her husband teach
her well, if she do not follow it, she is parauenture to blame. But if he do
not teach her, if she be rude / unwomanly / and witles / is not he to be
blamed? Yes by my faith, said Cri. And saying that we be friends, and may
speak plainly between our selfs, Is there ever any other wise man, that ye
trust and charge so much in your busynes, as ye do your wife? No forsooth,
said he. And is there any, that ye commune less with, than ye do with her? No
by my faith, and if there be any, they be very few. Ye married her very young
/ when she had another seen nor hard much of the world. Wherefore hit were
more to be maruailed at it, if she knew and did as she should / than if she did
amiss. Crito. They, the which ye say, have good wives, have they taught them
so in deed? Socra. It is a thing not to stand long upon. For I will bring
you my wife Aspasia / the which shall show you all this better than I my
self. But me thynkethe that a wife, being a good companion / and a good
fellow to her husband in a house, is very necessary / and within a littel as
much worth as the husband. For commonly goods and substance do come in to
the house by the labor and pain of the man, but the woman is she for the
most part, that keeps and bestows it, where need is. And if these two
things stand well to gether / and be well ordained, the houses do increace, if
not / they must needs decay.

More over me thinks, that I can show you in all sciences them, that do
work and labor, according as they should, if ye think that it needs. But
what need you to rehearse them all good Socrates / said Critobulus? For hit is
another possible for a man to have work men of all faculties / such as should
be, nor him self to be expert in all. But as for such sciences / as be
most honorable, and may become me well to occupy them / them I would ye did
show me, and also those men, the which apply them selfs unto them. And ye of
your side help to teach me, and further me in them as much as ye can. Ye
speak very well friend Critobulus, said Socrates. For such crafts, as be
called handye crafts, they be very abiecte and vile / and littell regarded and
esteemed in cities and common welthes: For they do destroy the bodies of those,
that do occupy them / when they make them to sytte evermore at home, and to be
fed up always in the shade, and some make them to stand all the day
staryng on the fire. And when the body is ones tender and feeble / the stomach
and spirit must needs to wax a greatte deal the weaker. And again, they
have but small leisure to set their mind and diligence to do their friends
any good, nor also the common welthe. Wherefore such men seem to be but a
small comfort to their friends at a need, nor no good men to succor their
country in time of ieopardie. And for a suertie in some cities and common
welthes, and specially such as be daily in war / hit is not lawful to
never a cytesyn to occupy no handye craft.

And what faculties will ye counsel me to use gentle Socrates? So. Let not
us think scorn, nor be ashamed to follow the king of the Persis. For they
say, that he / supposing the science of war / and also of husbandrye to be
most honorable / and also necessary among other faculties, does regard
and exercise them wondersly. And when Critobulus hard that / he said: Do ye
think, that the king of Persia carethe any thing for husbandrye? If we
consydre hit after this manner, said Socrates, we shall parauenture come to
knowledge, whether he does or not. For every man grants, that he settethe
sore his study upon such things, as long to war. For it is appointed to
every lieutena^t and lord of the cou^tres underneath him, how many men of
arms, morispikes, bylles, archers, and crosbowes they shall have ready in their
wages, either to keep his subjects from rebellion for fear, or to keep the
country, if enmyes do invade it. Beside these he layth garrisons in all the
towers and castles, and there is a captain appointed to pay them truly their
wages, and to se that there be no fault in hit. And the king causes every
twelve monthe the musters to be made of al them that be in his wages, and be
appointed to be redye in harneis at any time / and so brings them all
together, those reserved that be in garrisons, in to a place, that they call the
place of congregation. And such as be nighe his manor and his dwelling place,
he ouerloketh them him self. But they that dwell in far countrees, he
sendethe thither some, that he trusts best to have the over syghte of them.
And those heedes, rulers, and capitaines, whether they have many or few under
them, if they bring forth their full nombre / that is appointed unto them /
well harneised and well horsed, and well furnisshed of al manner of things, he
gives very great praise and honor to the lieutenantes and to the lords, and
gyuethe them many great gifts and rewards, so that they be rich for ever.
But when he fyndeth / that his lords, his lieutenauntes, and deputies have no
regard to the capitaynes of his soudiours, but catch and polle, and care but
only for their own vantage, he punissheth them sore, he puts the^ out of
their officis, and sets other in their stead. In doing those things, there
is no man that doubts / but that he applies his mind and his study very
sore to war. But beside this / all the country / that is thereby / where he
dwells / he rydeth about him self / taking head and markynge how hit is
tylled and labored. But when a country is so far of, that he can not come
to se it him self / he sends them, that he trustethe best, to over se it.
And when he fyndeth, that his lieutenantes and deputies do keep the country
well inhabited / the ground well plowed and labored, full of such trees as the
country will bear, he promoteth them to the rule of more cou^tres, he gives
them great presents, and does them great honor. But when he finds the
country deserte and uninhabited, the ground untilled and unlabored, by cause of
their negligence / wrongs doing, extorsions, and cruelties, he punissheth
them, he puts them out of their offices / and sets other in their rowmes.
In doing these things, do ye think, that he sets less his mind to have
his country well replenysshed of dwellers, and well tylled and labored / than
that the soudiours should defend hit well? Moreover of the lieutenantes and
deputies / that he has, One man has not the charge of two things at ones.
For some of them be appointed to have the ouersyghte of the husband men and
laborers / and to gether the tithes and tributes of them. And there be other,
that have the ouersighte of the soudiours / and of the garrisons. And if the
lieutenant of the garrison do not his duty in keeping and defending the
country, he that is the lieutenaunt of the housbande men and laborers /
accuses the the other lieutenaunt, that they can not plie their work for lack
of good defense. But if the lieutenaunt of the garyson does his deutye / and
kepethe the country in peace, so that they may work at their pleasure / and
the lieutenant of the husband men does not se to the country / that hit be
well inhabited / and that the housbande men apply their work as they should,
than the lieutenant of the garyson accuses him again. For when the housbande
men do not labor well, the soudiours can scante get vitayles / nor the king
can have his tribute. And in some countres of Persia a great lord, that they
call Satrapa, occupiethe the rowme of both lieutenantes. Than spoke
Critobulus, and said: If the king does, as ye say / he takes as much head
to husbandrye, as he does to war. So. More over in what so ever country he
liethe / and where so ever he makethe his abiding, he settethe his mind to
have goodlye fair gardeynes / that they call in their tongue Paradise, fulle
of all manner of things, that the earth brings forth. And there he bydethe
for the most part / as long as the time of the year does not let him.

Than by my faith, said Critobulus, saying that he bydeth there him self, he
must needs do his diligence, that these gardeynes may be as fair and as
goodly as can be / well replenisshed with trees / and all manner of things /
that the earth can bring forth. And also some say, good Critobulus, said
Socrates, that when the king gives any rewards, that he calls them first,
that have behaved them selfs manly in the wars, because it were to none
effect to tylle and labor the ground, except there were some, that should
defend it. And next to them he callethe those / that have provided / that the
country should not be ydell, but well occupied and labored / saying, that the
valiant men of war could not live, if the good laborers were not. And they
say, that Cyrus, the which has been a very famous, and an excellent king,
said upon a time unto them, that he called unto him to give them rewards,
that he him self was well worthy to have the rewards of them both. For he
said, that he was very good both to se the country well labored, and also
to keep and defend it. Forsothe, said Critobulus, if Cirus did say so, he did
show plainly, that he had as greatte pleasure / that the country should be well
occupied, as to have good me^ of war. So. By my faith, if Cirus had lived,
he would have proved a very noble prince: and of that he showed many great and
evident tokens at diverse times, and among the the other / when he came forth
against his brother to try by battle, who should be king. For they say /
that from Cirus no man fled to the king / but many thousands left the king
to come and serve Cirus. And me thinks this is a great argument of a princis
virtue / when men do obey him with their own good will, and be glad to abide
with him in time of ieopardie. For Cirus friends stood fighting about him
whiles he was yet alive, and when he was slain / they fightyng most valiantly
were slain all beside him, except Arieus, the which was set in the left
wynge.

This gentle Cirus, when Lysander came to him, to bring him presents from
the cities of Greece confederated unto him, they say, as Lysa^der showed him
self to a friend of his in the town of Megara / that he received him with
much humanite, and among other things he showed him a gardeyne, that was
called the Paradis of Sardis. But when Lysander began to maruayle at it, by
cause the trees were so fair and so egally set / and the orders of the trees
lay streyghte one against an other, and made goodly angles and corners well
proporcioned / and many sweet and pleasant savors came to their noses, when
they were walking, he wondering thereupon said thus: Forsothe Cirus the great
beautifulnes of these things is a greatte maruayle to me, but I wonder much
more of him, that has measured and set them thus in order. Than Cirus, when
he herd this did rejoice and say: All these that ye se I have measured them,
and set them in order, and I can show you some trees, that I have set with
mine own hands. And Lysander when he had looked upon him, and beholden his
goodly apparel, and felt the good favor that came from it / and the
estimable fayrenes of his golden chains / his rings, and his precious stones,
said: What say ye Cirus, have ye set any of these with your own hands?
Than Cirus answered. Do ye maruayle of this Lysander? By the faith that I owe
to god, when I am well at ease / I never go to dinner unto the time I have done
somewhat, outher in feats of arms, or in some point of husbandrye till I
sweet. Than, when Lysander herd this, he took him by the hand and said: Me
thynkethe Cirus, ye be fortunate not without a cause. For ye be fortunate
being a good man.

And this I rehearse unto you mine own Critobulus, said Socrates, for this
cause, that ye may se / that they that be rich and fortunate, can not well
keep them from husbandrye. For hit is such an exercise, and such a busynes /
that a man may have pleasure in hit, both to encreace and multiply his
goods, and also to exercise the body so / that hit shall be able to do all
manner of things, that longethe for an honest man to do. For first of all, the
ground brings forth all such manner of things, that a man is fed and
nourysshed with, and hit brings forth also such things, that a man may
have pleasure by hit. Moreover, hit gyuethe us all such things, as we need to
trymme and dress the auters and images withal, and that with most pleasant
syghtes and savors. Furthermore of meats necessary for man's use, some hit
bryngethe by hit self, and some hit nourysshethe. For the craft of keeping of
sheep is annexed to husbandrye, so that we may use them at our own pleasure.
And though hit gyuethe us plentye of all manner of things / yet hit does not
suffer us together them with softenes and tenderness / but uses us to be hard
and strong / in winter by the reason of the cold, and in somer by the reason
of the heat. And as for them, the which do labor with their own hands, hit
makes them bygge and mighty, and they that occupy husbandrye but only with
over lokynge and taking head to other men's warkes, it quickens and makes
them like men / making them to rise yarely in the morning, and causyng them
to walk a great way. For both in the feldes and also in the cities, every
thing that a man does to any purpose, must needs be done in time and in
season. Moreover if he will be a horse man, and defend his country on
horseback, a horse may no where be better fed than in the country. And if he
will be a footeman, housbandry makes a man strong bodied, and causethe him to
exercise him self goinge a huntyng, when it gives lightly meat to the
dogs, and the ground brings up and nourissheth wild beastis. And the
horses / and like wise the dogs / thus helped by the way of husbandry, do
again some service to the ground. For the horse bears him yerly in the
morning, that will se the ground be not let alone untilled and vntrymmed /
and at night bears him home again, if he tarry never so late. And the
dogs keep away wild beastis / that they spille not the fruit, and kylle the
sheep, and make a man to be sure in a wyldernes. More over, it comfort and
styrreth husband men to be bold, and to stand manly to defend their
country, saying it leaves the fruits abroad in the plain to be usurped of him
that is stronger. And what faculty will make a man more apt to run, to
shote / and also to leap, than husbandrye? What science yeldeth more again to
the^ that do labor? What science receives him, that is studious, with
greatter pleasure, saying when he comes / it gives him leave to take what he
will? Where shall a stranger be better welcomed to make him good chere? Where
shall a man have better commodity to keep his winter with fire inoughe and
hot bathes? And where is more pleasant dwelling for goodly waters / gentle
wyndes and shadow, than in the feldes? Where may a man make better feastis /
and more triumphant bankettes? The praise of husbandrye.
What other place do servants love better? What other place does a wife like
more? Where do children desire more to be? Where be friends better received /
and gladder to be? Forsooth me thinks it a maruaylous thing / if any honest
man can find any substance, that he deliteth more in, or if he can find any
occupation outher more pleasant than this is, or more profitable for his
living. And moreover, the ground techeth men Justice, if they have the wit
to learn it. For they that do for it, and have care for it / it rewards them
with far much more.

And if they / that have been brought up in husbandrye, by some sudden
chance of enmyes, they that be lords of the country can not till the ground,
they may go in to their enmies countres / saying they have been well and hardly
brought up, and get there as much, if god be not against them, as will
suffice them to live with. And hit is often times more sure to seek for his
living, in time of war / with weapons of war / than with instruments of
husbandry.

Husbandry also teaches men to help one an other. If we will go to war, we
must have men, nor the ground can not be labored without men. And therefore he
that will be a good husband man / he must get him good lustye work men, and
willing to do after him / and obey him. And the self same thing he must go
about to bring to pass, that leads an army to fight against his enmies,
gyuyng great rewards unto them, that behave the^ selfs like good valiant men,
and punisshe them that be stoburne / and will not be ordered. And he that is a
good husband, must as often times call upon his laborers, and comfort them, as
the captain does his soudiours. And bound men have as great need to be
comforted, and meynteyned with good hope, as other fre men / yea and rather
more, to the^de they run not away, but be glad to bide stylle. And surely
he said very well, that called husbandrye the mother and the nource of all
other sciences. For if husbandrye does stand well, all other sciences and
faculties do the better. But if the ground be barayne / and can bear no
fruit, al other sciences be all most spilled both by see and by land.

When Critobulus had hard this / he spoke after this manner. Me thinks,
good Socrates, ye speak very well in this matter. But ye know very well, that
the most part of such things / as long to husbandrye / a man can not cast
them before hand. For often times hayle stones, drought, or continual rain,
myste, or vermyne, that eat up the sede that is in the ground / do put us
beside our intent and purpose, if it were never so good. And sheep like wise /
if they be in never so good pasture / there comethe a sickness, that destroys
the^ al. Socrates, when he hard that / said again. I thought that ye knew
well, that god is above all / as well in husbandry as he is in war. We se
that they that will make war, that before they begin, they make their vows,
prayers / and sacrifices, desyryng to know, what is best to do / and what is
not best. And think ye, that in those things, that long to husbandry / we
should have less recourse to god? Be ye sure of this, that good and honest men
do worship almighty god with oblations / and prayers, for all their fruits,
their oxen, their sheep, and their horses, and generally for all that they have.
Me thinks good Socrates, said Critobulus, that ye speak very well in this
matter, when ye bid to begin every thing with the trust of the help / and of
the grace of god / saying that god is above al things / as well in war as in
peace. And therefore we will endeavor us to do so. But saying your purpose was
to speak here of the ordryng of an house / the which ye have left, and be
entered in to an other tale, endeavor your self to show us a littell more,
what follows next to that that ye left. For now that I have hard you say
that that ye have spoken, me seems I se much better than before / what a man
must do for to live. Wherefore Socrates said: But will ye, that we rehearse all
that we have spoken before, and agreed in, to the intent that we may, if we can,
go forth in this matter / bringyng such thing as we shall like wise agree upon?
Me thinks that like wise / as hit would be a great pleasure, when two men
have lent money one to an other, to agree upon the rekeninge: So now in our
communication / vttrynge our minds one to an other, if we might gree in one
tale.

Well than, said Socrates, we agreed upon this, that the ordrynge of an house
is the name of a science, and that seems to be the science, to order and
increace the house. And we took the house for all a man's possessions and
goods. And we said, that was truly the possession and goods of a man, the
which was profitable unto him for his living / and we found all that
profitable / that a man could use and order. And therefore we thought
impossible for a man to learn all manner of sciences. And as for all the handye
crafts, we thought best to expelle them from us / like wise as many cities
and common welthes did. For they seem both to distroye a man's body, and to
break a man's heart and stomach. And hereof / we said, that this might be an
evident token. For if the enmyes did invade the countres, and one did set the
husband men and the artificers a side divided in two parts, and asked them,
whether they had lever to come forth and pitche the field to fight with their
enmyes, or else to give up the feldes / and keep and defend the cities: They
that have been used in the feldes and husbandrye would be glad to fight, to
deliver the country. But on the the other side, the artificers would do that that
they have been brought up in, that is to sytte stylle / never labourynge, nor
never putting them selfs in preace, nor in ieopardie. More over we commended
housbandrye for a good exercise and a good occupation for a good and an honest
man / by the which me^ may have all that is necessary for them. For it is an
occupation very sone learned, and very pleasant to be occupied in it: the which
also makes a man's body mighty, strong / well complexioned / and well
favored / his stomach and his spirit to be always lustye and redye to do for
his friends / and for his country.

More over, we iugged that hit gave men heart and courage to be valiant and
hardy / saying the fruits, why husbandry is most honorable.
that the ground brought forth, lay abroad in the plain, without trenches,
boulwarkes, or fortresses. And therefore that kind of living seemed to be most
honorable, and best esteemed in cities and common welthes / because hit makethe
good men / well disposed, and well minded to do good for the common welthe.

Than said Critobulus, I am after my mind sufficiently persuaded / that a man
may have a very good, an honest, and a pleasant living in occupienge
husbandry. But where ye said, that ye knew the cause, that some did so use and
occupy husbandrye / that they had by hit plenty of all manner of things, that
they neded: and some again, that so ordered them selfs in hit, that hit
auayled them nothing, these two things would I gladly here of you, to
thentent we may do that that is good, and eschew that that is contrary.

But what if I do tell you sweet Critobulus, said Socrates, even from the
beginning, what communication I had ones with a man, the which might be called
truly / and in deed a good honest man? That would I here very feign said
Critobulus. For I my self do greatly desire / that I may be worthy of that
goodly name. Than will I tell you / how I came first to the consideration of
this. For as touching good carpenters, good ioyners, good peynters, good
ymagers, me thought, that I might in a littel time se and behold their warkes
most allowed and best accepted / that made them to be so called. But to the^de
I might se and behold, how they that had that goodly and honorable name of
a good and an honest man, did behave them selfs to be worthy of it, my mind
did coueyte greatly to talk with one of them. And first of all for because
Good and Honest, went to gether, when so ever I saw any goodly man, I drew
to him / and went about to know of him, if I might se Good and Honest, in a
goodly man. But it would not be. For me thought that I found / that there were
many with goodlye bodies and fair visages / that had but yuell disposed and
ungracious souls.

Than me thought it best to enquere no further of goodly bodies / but to get me
to one of them / that were called good and honest men. And for because I hard,
that Ischomachus was generally, both of men, women, citezins and strangers,
called and taken for a good honest man, me thought I could do no better, than
to prove how I might common with him. And upon a time, when I saw him
sittyng in a porche of a church, for because me thought he was at leyser, I
came to him, and set me down by him, and said: What is the cause good
Ischomachus, that ye, which be wont to be ever more occupied, sit here now
after this manner, for I have seen you for the most part evermore doing some
what, and lightly never ydell, except hit were very littell? Nor ye should not
now have seen me good Socrates, said he, sytting after this manner, if I had
not appointed with certain strangers to tarry here for them. And if ye were
not here, where would ye have been, or how would ye have been occupied, said I
to him? For I would know of you very feign, what thing ye do, that makes you
to be called a good and an honest man? The good co^plection of your body
shows well enough, that ye bide not always slougginge at home. And than
Ischomachus, laughing at that that I said, what do ye, that makethe you to be
called a good and an honest man, and reioysynge in his heart / as me thought
by him / said? I can not tell if any man callethe me so / when you and he
talk of me, but when I must pay money / or for taxes, preastis / or
subsidies, they call me playnelye by my name Ischomachus. And in deed good
Socrates, I do not always bide at home, for my wife can order well inoughe
such things as I have there. Yea but this would I know of you very feign,
Did ye your self bring your wife to this; or else had her father and her
mother brought her up, sufficiently to order an house before she came to you?
Ischo. How could she have been so, when she was but fyftene year old, when I
married her? and before she had been so neglige^tly brought up / that she had
but very littell seen, very littell hard, and very littell spoken of the
world. And I trow ye would not think it sufficient in her, if she could do
nothing but spynne and card / and set the hand maidens to work. As for
such things as concern the lower parts of the belly, good Socrates, said
he, she had been very well brought up, the which is no small point of good
bringing up, both in a man and in a woman. And did ye teach your wife all
the remenant, said I, so that she is able to take heed to all manner of
things? Yes, said he, but not before I had made my prayers to all mighty god,
desirynge him, that he would give me the grace, to teach her so, and her to
learn that of me, that should be good and profitable to us both. And did your
wife make the self same prayer with you, said I? Yes mary, said Ischomachus,
and it seemed in a manner, that god did promise evidently, and she like wise
showed with clear and manifest tokens, that she would very well regard and
take heed to that that she should be taught. For goddis sake good Ischomachus,
said I, what did ye begin to teach her first: for I had leauer here you
tell me such a thing / than if ye should discriue me a iustynge or a
turnament, though it had been never so triumphant? Mary I will tell you
Socrates, said he. When we were ones so well acqueinted, and so familiar / that
we talked to gether, I examined her after this manner. Tell me good bedfelowe,
did ye ever cast in your mi^de, for what cause I have taken you, and your
father and your mother delivered you unto me? I trow ye know well inoughe,
that I took you not for need, that I had of a bedfelowe to lie with me, for I
might have had inowe at my commandment. But when I had considered in my mind,
and your father and your mother like wise, that hit were well done, to find
out a good one to be part taker both of our house, and of our children^ / I
chose you before all other, and your father and mother like wise chose me.
Wherefore if here after god give us the grace / that we may have children to
gether, we shall take counsel / how to bring them up and instruct them in
virtue. For it shall be for both our profettes to have them, both to defend
us / and to help and nourisshe us in our old age. Now the house that we have
is common to us both. For all that ever I have, I have showed you and
delivered it unto you to keep for both our behoues: and ye like wise have done
the same. And ye may not cast in your mind, which of us both brought more.
^ good les^on for a wife.
But this ye must know for a suertie, that look which of us twain does
behave him self, and does best in this fellowship / that he brings more / and
his part is the better.

Than my wife, good Socrates, answered here unto after this manner. Wherein can I
help you, said she? or wherein may my littell power do you any good? For
truly my mother told me, that all to gether lay in your hands, and that hit
belonged unto me / to be sobre and live in chastity. Mary so it is good wife,
said I, and so my father told me to. But hit is the point of a sobre husband
/ and of a sobre wife / to do so, that that, the which they have, may be well
ordered and guyded / and to encreace and get more to it, by some good and
rightful way. And what do ye se in me, said my wife, that I may encreace our
house, if I do apply it? Mary, said I, if ye endeuoir your self to do those
things to the best of your power / the which both god wylleth, that ye
should do, and the law exhorts you to it. And what things be those, said
she? Verily, said I, no small things, except ye think, that that Be does
but a littell good, the which remains still in the hyue, to over se the
warkes, when the other go abroad to gether flowers. And forsothe me thinks /
that god almighty has set to gether for many good causes and consyderations,
that goodlye couple / that is the husband and the wife, to thentente that they
should be most profitable one to an other in that good felawshyp. why wedlock
was ordained.
First of all to thentent that mankind do not decay and fail, this ioly
couple lies to gether and ingendreth children. Than again by reason hereof,
they bring forth children to help and soccour the^ in their old age. More
over the manner and living of men, does greatly differ from the life of wild
beastis, the which be always abroad in the feldes. For it is mete for men to
have houses. Wherefore it is convenient / that they / which will have somewhat
to bring in to their houses / have me^ with them to do those warkes / that
must be done abroad in the feldes. For tyllynge of the ground, sowynge of the
corn / setting of trees, and keeping of beastis at grass and pasture, be all
done abroad. But again it is nedeful, when those fruits be conveyed in to the
house / to ouerse and save them / and to do all such things as must be done
at home. Babis and young children must needs be brought up within the
house. Breadde must be baked / and the meat sodde and dressed within the
house. Also spynnynge / cardynge / and weauynge / must be done within the
house.

And where that both those things, that must be done abroad, A house wyfes
office.
and those that be done within the house do require care and diligence: me
thynkethe that god has caused nature to show plainly, that a woman is borne
to take heed of all such things, as must be done at home. For he has made
man of body / heart / and stomach strong and mighty to suffer and endure
hete and cold, to iourneye, and go a warfare. Wherefore god has in a manner
commanded and charged him with those things / that be done abroad out of the
house. He also remembrynge, that he has ordained the woman to bring up young
children, he has made her far more tender in love toward her children than
the husband. And where he has ordained, that the woman should keep those
things, that the man gets and brings home to her, and he knowing very
well, that for to keep a thing surely, hit is not the worste point to be
doubtful and fearful, he dealed to her a greatte deal more fear, than he
did to the man.

And he also perceiving, that if any man does him wrong, the which
labors and works without, he must defend him self, he distributed to the
man a great deal more boldness. And for because it behooves, that both they do
give and receive, he has given them indifferently remembrance and diligence,
in so much / that it is hard to discern, whether kind has more of them /
either the man or the woman.

He has also granted them indifferently to refrain them selfs from such
things, as is convenient they do. And has given them power and auctorite,
that look in what thing the either of them does the better / he brings the
more away with him. But because the natures and the dispositions of them both
be not egallye so perfect in all these things, they have so much the more
need the tone of the the other. And this couple is so much the more profitable
the tone to the the other, because that that the tone lacks the the other has.
wherefore good wife, saying we se that, which god has ordained for us both,
we must enforce / and endeavor our selfs to do both our partis in the best
wise. The law seems to comfort us and exhort us to it, the which coupleth
man and wife to gether. And like wise as god makethe them come to gether to
get children, So the law will have them live to gether partakers one of an
others goods in good felawshyp. Like wise the law shows, and god
commands, that it is best for each of them to do their part. For it is more
honesty for a woman to keep her house, than to walk about. And it is more
shame for a man to bide slouggynge at home / than to apply his mind to such
things as must be done abroad. But if any man does contrary to that that he
is naturally borne to / parauenture god will remember, that he breaks his
statutis and decrees / and will punisshe him / outher for because he is
negligent in that that he should do / or else because he takethe upon him that
that belongs to the wife. Me thinks also / that the maistres be / that
keeps the hyue, does like wise that that god has ordained her unto. And what
does the maistres be, said she, A good ensample of bees.
whereby it may be likened to that that I must do? For because, said he, hit
bydeth always in the hyue, and will not suffer no bees to be ydell: and they
that should work without / she sends the^ to their work. And what so ever
any of them bryngethe home / she marketh / receives, and saves it, until the
time come that hit must be occupied. And when the time comes, that it must
be occupied / than she distributeth every thing according as equite requires.
And she causes them that do bide within to weaue and make the fair honey comes
after the best wise, and takes head to the yo^ge bees, that they be well
fed and brought up. But when they be come to that age / and to that point,
that they be able to work, she se^deth them out with one, the which they
follow as their gyde and captain. And must I do so to, said my wife? Ye
forsothe said I: For ye must always bide within the house, and those men / the
which must work abroad, ye must send them to it: and they that must work
within, ye must command them, and be over them, to se them do it. And that
that is brought in / ye must receive it. And that, which must be spente of
it, ye must part and divide it. And that that remains, ye must ley it up
and keep it safe till time of need. And beware / that that / which was appointed
to be spente in a twelve monthe, be not spente in a monthe. And when the wolle
is brought in to you, ye must se that hit be carded and sponne / that clothe
may be made of hit. Also ye must se that the corn, which is brought in to
you, be not so moustye and dousty / that hit may not be eaten. How servants
must be entreted
But one thing specially above all other there is, that ye must be careful
fore, and that shall get you great favor and love, that is, if any of our
servants, hap to fall sick, that ye endeavor your self the best that ye
can / not only to cherysshe them, but also to help that they may have their
health again. By my feythe, said my wife, hit is a very gracious and a kind
deed. For when they be ones helped, and eased / they will cunne us very good
thank, and be the more loving and feythfull unto us.

And me thought, said Ischomachus, that hit was an answer of a good and an
honest wife. And by the reason of this good provision of this maistres be,
said I, all the the other bear so good love and affection unto her, that when so
ever she goth out of the hyue / there will none tarry behind, but all wait
upon her.

Than my wife answered me. I do great lie maruayle / whether such things, as
ye say the maistres be does, do not belong much more to you than to me.
For my keeping and departing within, were but a littell worth, except ye did
your diligence, that somewhat might be brought in. And my bringing in, said I,
should avail but a littell, except there were one / that kept and saved
that, that I brought in.

Do ye not se, said I, how every man has great pite of them, the which, they
say, that their punisshement is to pour water in to tubbes full of hooles,
till they be full. And they pite them for nothing else, but by cause they seem
to labor in vain. By my faith, said my wife, they be very miserable in deed,
the which do so. There be other things, that belong to you to take heed of,
the which must needs be very pleasant unto you / as when ye have taken one in
to your service, that can another spynne nor card / if ye teach her to do it,
hit shall be twyse so much more worth unto you. And if ye have a maid, the
which is outher negligent, or is not true of her hands, or that can not
wait, if ye make her diligent, trustye, and a good servant, all shall be to
your great profette. And again, when ye se your servants good and sobre
fellows, and profitable for our house / ye must do them good / and show them
some gentilnes. But if there be any of the^ knauisshe or froward, ye must
punisshe them. And this again should be most pleasant of all, if ye could
make your self better than I, and make me as it were your servant. And ye need
not fere lest in process of time, when ye come to age, ye be less set by: but
be ye sure of this, if ye be diligent, loving, and tendable to me, our
children, and household, the elder that ye wax / the more honorable and better
esteemed shall ye be. For it is not the beautifulnes, and goodlye shappe, but the
very virtue and goodness that men regard, and favor.

I remember good Socrates, that my first communication with her, was after
this manner. And did ye perceive, good Ischomachus, said I, that by the reason
of this, she was any thing moved to be more diligent? Yes verily, said
Ischomachus, And I saw her upon a time sore an angerd with her self, and
greatly a shamed / that when I asked her a thing, that I had brought home,
she could not fette hit me. And when I saw that hit grieved her very sore / I
said unto her. Take never the more thought for the matter, if ye can not give
me that that I ask you. For it is a token of pouerte in very deed, when a man
lacks a thing / that he can not have. But this need may be suffered a great
deal better / when a man sekethe a thing and can not find it / than if at
the beginning he does not seek for it / knowing that he has it not. But as
for this ye be not to be blamed, said I, but I my self / saying I have not
appointed you a place, where to leye every thing that ye might know, where ye
should set hit, and where to fette hit again.

The praise and profyt of order.
There is nothing, good sweet wife, so profitable and so goodlye among men, as
is an order in every thing.

In plays and enterludes, where a great company of men is assembled to play
their parts, if they should rasshely do and say / what so ever fell in to
their brains, hit would be but a trouble and a busynes / and no pleasure to
behold them. But when they do and speak every thing in order / the audience
has a very greatte pleasure both to behold them, ye and also to here them.

And like wise an army of men sweet wife, said I, that is out of order, and
set out of good arraye / is a very great confusion, in danger to be lightlye
over come of their enmies, and a very pitous and miserable sight to their
friends, as when there is together in a plumpe, asses, fotemen, carts /
baggage / and men of arms. And how should they go forward, when they do let
one an other? He that gothe lets him that runnethe, he that rounneth
distourbeth him, that stands still, the carte lets the man of arms, the
ass the carte / the baggage the foot man. And if they should come to the
point / that they must fight / how could they fight being in that taking?
For wha^ they be feign, by the reason of their il order, to flee their own
company, that lets the^, how could they, thus fleinge, over come them, that
set upon them in good order of battle, and well weaponed? But the army, that
is well ordered and kept in good array / is a very pleasant sight to their
friends / and grievous to their enmies. What friend is there, but that he will
have a very great pleasure to se the foot men march forward in good order and
arraye? What is that man, but he will maruayle when he beholds a greatte
nombre of men of arms riding in good arraye and order? And what enmie will
not be aferde, when he sees morispikes, bylles / men of arms / cross bows,
and also archers, the which follow their capitaynes in good arraye and order
of bataile? And also when they march forward in good array, if they be never
so many thousa^des, yet they walk as pesibly as though there were but one man
alone.

And what makes a galey / well furnisshed with men, fearful to the enmies, and
pleasant to behold unto friends, but that hit goth so swyftly? And what
makes them that be in it / that they do not trouble one an other / but that
they do sytte in order / keke and make signs in order, lie down in order,
rise in order, draw the oores in order? And as for confusion and misorder / me
thinks hit is like / as if a man of the country should put together on a
heap, otes, wheat, barlye, and pease / and when he had need to occupy any of
them, he should be feign to try hit out, and put hit by hit self again.
Wherefore sweet wife / ye shall lyghtlye eschew such confusion, if ye put to
your good will to set in good order that that we have, and take to you that that
ye have need of / and spare not: and give to me that that I call for
graciously. And let us seek out and prepare a hansome place to set every
thing in / according as every thing requires. And when we have set it
there / let us show hit the seruante, that she may fetch hit, and lay hit
up there again. And thus we shall know / what we have saved, and what we
have lost. For the place hit self shall lack that that it should have. And
the sight will search out that that has need of help / and make us to know
anon where liethe every thing, so that we shall not be to seek, when we have
need of hit.

I remember good Socrates, that upon a time I went a bourde a ship of
Phenicia, where I beheld the goodlyest order and the most perfect that ever
I saw. The order of a ship.
I considered how great abundance of implimentes was in that small vessel.
There were many oores, and many other things made of wodde: with the which
they bring the ship in to, and out of the haven. What a sort of shrowdes,
halsers, cables, lines, and other takeling was there? With how many ingins of
war both to defend it self, and to grieve an enmie, was hit armed? What a
sight of armoure and weapons for the men / carry they about with them. More
over, they carye with them much vitayle and other necessaries / that men use
at home in their houses. Beside all this, hit shas laded, with such stouffe and
goods, as the ship master gettethe by the carriage thereof. And all this
gear that I speak of, was stowed in so littell a rowme, that a far greatter
place would not have received it / if hit should have been removed. And I
marked how every thing was so well set in good order / that no one thing
did let an other, nor had no need to be long sought fore: Nor were not so
scatered, and so ill compacte, that a man should tarry long for hit / when he
should occupy hit quickelye. And he that waited upon the Patron of the ship
/ that is to say, he that standethe in the fore part of the ship, I
perceived, that he had every place so well in his mind, that though he
were not there / he would tell you redilye, where every thing lay, none
other wise than he that is learned, can tell how many letters go to this
word, Socrates, and in what place every letter is set. More over, I saw
him, when he was searching and casting in his mind, how many things a
ship has need of: Than I maruaylynge whereon he mused and studied, asked him,
what he meaned. I considre and cast before hand good man, quod he, if any thing
should chance / how and in what redynes every thing lies in the ship /
whether any thing lies out of his place, or if every thing be not trymmed to
the purpose. For hit is no time, when god sends us a storm on the sea / to
be sekyng that that we need of / nor to bring forth that that is not hansome
and well trymmed. For god thretneth and punissheth them that boydel and
negligent. And we may be glad, if he do not destroy us, wha^ we do our deutie.
And if he saves them / that use great labor and diligence, they ought to
thank him greatly. Wherefore when I perceived and saw that goodly and perfect
order, I said unto my wife, that hit should be great slouthe and negligence
unto us, if they, which be but in littell ships and small vessels, find
feet places to stowe every thing in, that they carye with them, And though
they be sore shaken and troubled / and continuallye in great fear, yet they
keep a good order, And we that have so goodly places, and a house standing
stedfastlye on the land, could not find places mete and convenient for to
set every thing in, how much ought we to be blamed of lewdnes and small
wisdom?

We have sufficiently spoken how profitable it is to set all the implimentes
of the house in good order, and to set every thing in such a redines / in
places mete therefore, that hit may be easy to find and come by when need
requires. But how goodly a thing is it to se sewtis of all a man's apparel,
lienge by it self, keuerlettes, and counterpoyntes by them selfs, shetes,
towels, and al naprye ware by them selfs / pottes, pannes, caudrous, and other
garnitures of the ketchyn by them self, all that longs to the table by it
self / and so like wise of all other things, that long to an house, where at
he that is unwise, and knows not good order will laugh. And whether it be so
or not my sweet wife, we may lightly prove without great cost / and with small
labor. And ye must not trouble your self / as though it were an hard thing
to find one, that could learn the places / and remember where to set every
thing. For we know well, that in the city there is a thousand times more
wave than we have: but ye^ what so ever servant ye will command to go and bye
you somewhat / in the market / he will not stand still, as though he could not
tell what to do, but by the reason that he remembers, where he has seen of it
/ he goth thither streighte way, and fetches hit. And surely there is none
other cause of this / said I / but that there is a place determined, where one
shall have hit. But if one seeks a man / the which seeks him to / may
fortune he will often times be sooner werye than he can find him. And of this
like wise there is none other cause, but that there is no place appointed, where
the tone should tarry for the the other. As for setting in order of the householde
stouffe / and of the use of hit, I remember I spoke unto her after this manner.
And how thought ye by your wife good Ischomachus, said I? Whether did she
obey you in that thing / that ye taught her so busily? Isch. What should I say
/ but that she promised to apply her mind unto it. And me thought verily by
her countinaunce / she was very glad / that where before she was in a great
doubt and perplexity / she had found a good way in it, and besoughte me,
that I would make an order of every thing, as I had said unto her as soon as
was possible. And what order did you show her good Ischomachus said I? Ischo.
What order should I show her but this? First me thought best to show her,
what a house properly was ordained fore. For hit is not ordained to be
gorgiouslye peynted with diverse fair pictures, but it is builded for this
purpose and consideration, that it should be a profitable vessel for those
things, that should be in it. Wherefore in a manner it byddeth the dwellers, to
lay up every thing, where it is most mete to put it. The inner priuey chamber,
because it stands strongest of all / looks for to have the jewels, plate,
and all such things as be most precious. The dry places look for the
wheat, The cold for the wine. And bright places do desire such works and
things, as require lightsomnes. More over, I showed her how parlers and
dynyng places, well trymmed and dressed, for men to eat and drink in, in
summer should be cold, and in winter hot. And I showed her how all the
situation of the house was very much southward, whereby it may be clearly
understand, that in winter the son lights welfauourdly upon it, and in
somer there is goodly shadow in it. Further, I showed her the nourcerie and
the women's lodging, divided from the men's lodging, left there came out any
thing amiss, and our servants should get them children without our
consentement. For they that be good / if they have children through our
permission, they woll love us the better. And they that be naught, if they
come ones to couple with a woman, they will find the more ways / and the
better shyfte to fulfill their ungraciousness. And after we had spoken thus,
said he, we went and divided the household stouffe, by sewtes and sorts
after this manner. First we did put to gether all manner of things longing to
sacrifices. Next to that the good wives apparel, both for holy days and
workynge days, and afterward the good man's apparayle both for the holy
days, and also for war, Clothes for men's chambres, and for the nourcerie,
men's shows, and women's shows, Than we appointed out the instruments, that
belong to spinning and cardyng, and such as perteine to the bake house, to
the kechin, to the bathe, and to the boulting house. We did separate a sonder
those things, that should be occupied always, from those, that be occupied but
at diner and souper. And we did separate that that we should spend in a
months space / and that that was appointed to serve us a twelve monthe. For so
it is the better known, in what manner it is brought to an end. And after we
had separated all the householde stouffe in sewtis and sortis / we did set
every thing in a place convenient.

Afterward all the instruments that our servants must occupy daily, as for
the bake house, for the ketchyn / for spynnynge and cardyng, and other like, we
did show them the place, where they should put them again, and than delivered
them / and bade them keep them safe. And as for such things, as should be
occupied but seldom, or upon holy days, or when there came any strangers
unto us, or at certain other times, in certain business, we delivered them
unto a woman, that we made the keeper of our store house / and showed her the
place / where they should be set. And when we had made a reckoning unto her
of all, and also written every thing, we bade her, that she should deliver
them forth as time and need required, and that she should remember well to whom
she delivered any thing, And when she received it again / that she should lay
it up / where she had hit before. And to be keeper of our store house, we
appointed her, that seemed unto us most sobre and temperate in eating,
drinkyng / and slepyng, and that she could very well refrain the company of
men: and that seemed also to have a very good remembrance / and that would beware
to be found in a fault through her negligence / lest she should displease us
with hit / and seek the mean to do that that should please us / that she
might be praised and rewarded for hit. More over we taught her to have a good
will toward us, and to love us, For because that when there was any thing
happened, that made us joyful and glad, we made her partaker of hit / and if
we were sorrowful and heavy for any matter / we called her, and showed her the
same. Furthermore we taught her to set her good will and her good mind to
increase our house, teaching her the way and the manner how. And if any thing
fortuned well to us / we gave her part of it. Also we taught her to be just
and true in her busynes, and to esteem and set more by them, that were good
and rightful, than by them that were false and untrue: And we showed her how
they lived in more welthe and more liberty, than they that were false and
vntrustye. And so thus we did set her in the rowme. And at the last good
Socrates, said he, I said unto my wife / that all this should avail nothing
/ except she took dilligent head / that every thing might remain still in good
order. I taught her also how in common welthes, and in good cites / that were
well ruled and ordered, it was not enough for the citezins and dwellers, to have
good laws made unto the^, except that they beside chose men to have the
ouersighte of the same laws, the whose duty should be to se, that they, the
which do well, and according to the law, may be preysed, and he that does the
contrary, to be punisshed. And so I bad my wife, that she should think her
self to be, as if it were the ouerseer of the laws within our house: and that
she should, when she thought best, A good wives duite.
ouerse the stuff, vessel / and implementes of our house / none other wise
tha^ the captain of a garrison ouerseeth and proves the sondiours, how every
thing stands: or like wise as the Senate and the counsel of Athenes
ouerseeth and makes a proffe both of the men of arms, and also of their
horses. And that she should preise and reward him, that were worthy, to her
power / as if she were a queen, And blame, ye and punisshe him, that does
deserve it. Beside all this I taught her, that she should not be displeased, if
I did put her to more business, and charged her with mo things to be done in
the house, than any servant I had, shewinge her, that prentis and covenant
servants have no more of their masters goods, but as much as they deliver
them, to do their masters service with all, or to bestow it in their behalf,
or to keep it for them: and they may occupy none of hit to their own use,
except their masters do give it them. But he that is the master / he has
all, and may use every thing at his own pleasure, wherefore he that has most
profit by it, if his goods be safe, has most loss, if they be lost or
perished: I showed her, it were reason he should be most diligent, and take
best head about it. Than said I. Good Ischomachus, when your wife hard this,
how did she take it? what will ye have any more of it good Socrates / but that
she said: I knew her not well if I thought it did grieve her, that I should
teach her to take heed to her goods and substance. For it should have been
more grievous unto me a great deal, said she, if ye had bade me to take no head
to my goods / than to bydde me to be dilygent about that that is mine own.
For me thinks, that like wise, as it is naturally given to a good woman,
rather to be dylygent about her own children than not to care for them, Like
wise it is more pleasure for an honest woman to take heed to her own goods,
than to set naught by them.

And when I hard, said Socrates, that his wife gave him such an answer, I
said: By my faith Ischomachus, ye tell me of a iolye and a manlye stomach of
a woman. Ye, said he, ye shall here me tell you other things yet, that will
well show her good lustye heart, that when she had hard but ones speak of
it, streighte way she did after me in it. So. I pray you tell me that, for
surely I have more pleasure a greatte deal, to learn the virtue of a woman
alive, than if Zensis the excellent peynter should show me the picture and
portrature of a fair woman. Than said Ischomachus, when I had seen her upon a
time / that she had peynted her face with a certain ointment, that she
might seem whitter than she was, and with an other ointment, that she might
seem redder than she was in very deed, and that she had a peyre of high shows
on her feet, to make her seem taller woman than she was, I said unto her: Tell
me, good wife, whether would ye judge me worthyer to be beloved, if our goods
and substance now being common one to an other, if I should show you that
that I have in very deed, and make another more of hit, nor no less than it is
in very deed / and kept nothing priuey from you: or if I went about to
deceive you, saying I had more than I have, and showing you false money,
cheines of brass instead of gold, countrefete precious stones, read in the
stead of scarlette / false purpull in the stead of pure and good? Than she
answered streighte way. God forbid ye should be such one: For if ye were such
one, I could not find in mine heart to love you. I will tell you wife, We be come
to gether to the intent to have pleasure of the body one of an other, at the lest
men say so: Whether than, saying I must give you my body to use with you, were
I better to be beloved after your judgment, if I studied and went about to
make my body seem the lustier, the stronger, the better colored / the better
complectioned / and should noynte my face with certain oyntme^tes, and so
show me unto you, and lie with you / and give you these oyntementes to se and
to handle in the stead of my color and of mine own face? Forsooth, said she, I
should never have more pleasure in handlynge any oyntement in the stead of your
face / nor delight more in thing counterfeted, than in your very eyes and your
natural face. Think like wise by me good wife, said Ischomachus, that I have
no more pleasure in oyntme^tes, than I have in your own natural body and face.
And like wise as god has made horses to have pleasure with maares, bulls with
kyne, rams with ewes, so like wise men do think that body most pleasant, that
is pure. And as for such wyles and deceites / they may parauenture begyle
strangers, so that they shall never be spied, but they that be daily co^uersant
to gether, they shall lightly perceive, if the tone go about to deceive the
the other. For they will be spied, either when they rise out of their bed, before
they make them redye, or when they sweat, or when they weep, or when they
wasshe and bathe them. So. And I prey you, said I, what an answer made she to
it. Isch. What, said I? by my faith she went never sens about no such matters,
but showed her self always pure with as good comelines as might be. And she
asked me, whether I could give her any counsel how she should be fayrer in
deed, and not only appear so. And tha^ I gave her counsel, that she should not
sit still like a slave or a bound woman, but go about the house like a
maistres, and se how the works of the house went forward: some times to the
weauing women, both to teache them that she can do better than they, and also to
mark who does better or worse. some times to look upon her that baketh the
bread. some times to look upon her, that keeps the store house, to se her set
up and met that that she weaueth. some times to bestyr her self loking if
eueri thing be set up in his place. For I rekened, that this should be both a
way to take heed to the house, and also should serve for a good walk. Also I
said it were a good exercise to wash, to boulte, to bake, to shake
keuerlettes, ha^gynges, tappessary ware, and to set the^ up again in their
places. For I said, if she did so^what to exercise her self / she should have
the more lust to her meat, she should be the more helthie, and get better
favored color in very deed. And also the sight of the maistres being more
clenlier and far better apparailed, and settinge her hand to work, and in a
manner striui^g with her servants who shall do most, is a great comfort unto
them, that be under her, specially wha^ it lies in them, either to do her
pleaser in doing of their work with a good will, or to be compelled to do it
aginst their wills. But they that always do stand stylle like queen's in their
majesty / they will be only iuged of those women that be triumphantly
arrayde, the which do deceive them.

And now, said he, good Socrates be ye sure, she lives even as I have
taught her, and as I tell you.

So. Than said I. Good Ischomachus, me thinks ye have sufficiently spoken
touching the behauour of your wife, and of you, to the great praise of you
both: but now I pray you, tell me your own deeds, that both ye may rejoice
in telling such things / the which do get you so good a name. And when I
have hard and learned the works and deeds of a good honest man, I may give you
such tha^kis as ye deserve, and according to my power. By my faith, said
Ischomachus, I will be glad to tell you all, what so ever I do, to the intent ye
may correct me, if ye think I do not well in some thing. Socra. Ye but tell
me, how could I correct you, saying that ye be come to this point to be a
good honest man, specially when I am the man, that is taken for a trifler,
that occupies him self in nothing, but in measurynge of the aier: And that
that is a very sore rebuke / and a token of most great folly, I am called a
pour man. And I assure you, The name of pouerte.
that name would have troubled me very sore / if I had not met the the other
day by chance one Nicias horse, and seen much people that came after to
behold him, and hard very much talkyng of him. And in very deed I came to
the horsekeper and asked him, whether the horse had much money or not. And he
looked upon me as though I had been mad to ask him such a pyuisshe question /
and said: How should a horse have any money? And so I turned me even back
again, wha^ I hard / it was laufull for a pour horse to be good, if he had a
good free heart and stomach with him. And therefore I preye you, saying it is
like wise lauful for a pour man to be good, that ye will tell me your manner
of living to the vttermoste point, to thentent that when ye have told me, I
may endeuoir my self to learn hit: and from this day forward to begin to
follow you and do after you. For that may be called a very good day, on the
which a man begins to be good and virtuous. I know well ye ieste with me
good Socrates, said Ischomachus: but yet I will tell you as farforthe as I
can, the holle course of my life, the which I purpose to follow stylle till
the last day of my life.

After that I had well perceived / that except a man knows what is to be done,
and will set and apply his mind and diligence to perform the same, god
grants no man to do well. And unto them, that be both wise and diligent, god
sends welthe and good fortune. Wherefore first of all I began to honor and
worship god / and to call upon him with my prayers / that he would vouchesafe
to send me the grace, that I might have my health, strength of body / honor
in my city, good will of my friends, to return home again safe from warfare /
with the encreace of my riches and goods. Socra. And when I hard that / I
said: And care ye so much to wax rich, saying that when ye be rich, ye
have the more trouble, in studienge how to order and keep your goods? Yes
mary, said Ischomachus, I have no small care of that that ye ask me. For me
thinks it is great pleasure both to worship god honorably, and to help my
friends / if they be in need, and to se that the city be not deprived of the
orname^tes of riches, as much as lies in me. Socra. By my faith that that ye
say good Ischomachus, is good and also very honorable / and longing to a man
of great power and substance. Ischo. It must needs be thus. For there be some
men, the which can not live, but they must be helped of other men. And there
be many again / that reken hit sufficient, if they can get that / that is
necessary for them. But those that will not only order and gyde their houses
/ but also have so great abundance, that they do both honor to the city /
and also help and ease their friends: why should not they be called and taken
for men of profounde wisdom, of great power, and of stout stomach? Socra.
Surely there be many of us, said I, that may well praise such manner of men.
But for goddis sake tell me even from the place, where ye began, how ye go
about to maintain your health, and also the strength of your body / how it
may be laufull to return honorably home again safe fro the war. For as
touching the encreasinge of goods, we shall here of it afterward sufficiently.
But me thinks, said Ischo, that these things be linked to gether, and come
one after an other. For when a man has meat and drink sufficiently, if he do
labor well, he shall have his health the better and the longer. And he that is
well exercised in war, he shall return home safe again / and with more
honor. And he that is diligent, and does not coker him self, nor give him
self to slouthe and idelnes / he is the more likely to encreace his house. So.
Forsothe good Ischomachus, I grant you all this even hitherto, where ye say,
that he that labors, takes pain, uses diligence, and exercises him
self, comes the rather to goods. But what labor ye use to meinteine a good
complexion, and to get you strength, and how also ye exercise your self for
the war / and how ye study to get so much substance and goods / that ye
may both help your friends / and make the city more honorable and stronger
by it, that would I very feign here. Verily good Socrates said Ischomachus, I
rise in the morning out of my bed so yerly, that if I wol speak with any
man, I shall be sure to find him yet within. And if I have any thing ado in
the city, I go about it, and take hit for a walk. And if I have no matter of
great importance to do within the city, my page bryngethe my horse before in to
the feldes, and so I take the way to my ground for a walk, better parauenture
than if I did walk in the galeries and walking places of the cite. And wha^ I
come to my ground, if my tenantes be either setting of trees, or tyllynge or
renewynge the ground / or sowyng, or carienge in the fruit, I behold how
every thing is done, and cast in my mind, how I might do hit better. And
afterward for the most part, I get me a horseback and ride as nere as I
can, as though I were in war constrained to do the same, wherefore I do not
spare another crooked ways, nor no shrowde goinges up, no ditches / waters /
hedges / nor trenches / taking head for all that as nere as can be possible,
that in this doing, I do not maime my horse. And when I have thus done, the
page leads the horse trottynge home again, and carries home with him in to
the city, out of the country that that we have need of. And so than I get me
home again, some times walking, and some times runnynge. Than I wasshe my
hands, and so go to diner good Socrates, the which is ordained between both,
so that I abide all the day another void nor yet to full. So. By my troth good
Ischomachus, ye do these things wonders pleasantly. For in deed to use and
occupy at ones al manner of things, that be ordained for health, for strength,
for exercise of war / for study and conueiance how to get goods / and all
in one time, me thinks a maruailous thing. For ye do show evident tokens,
that ye apply your mind well and truly to all this. For we se you commonly,
thanked be god / for the most part helthful, strong and lusty. More over we
know, that ye be called one of the best horse men, and one of the richest men
of the city. Ischo. And though I thus do, as ye have hard, yet can not I
eschew detraction: ye thought parauenture that I would have said, I am
therefore called a good honest man. So. And forsothe so I was about to say
good Ischomachus, But this I thought first to enquere of you, whether ye do
study and set your mind, how to answer these detractours / and speak in a
cause, whether it be your own or an other man's, or to judge it, if need be.
Ischo. Think yon that I do not sufficiently my part in this matter / if I
think by my good deeds to defend my self, and do no wrong / and as much as
I may help and do pleasure to many men? And more over, think ye that it is
not well done to accuse such men, that do wrong both to private men, and also
to the city / and that will do no man good? So. But yet if ye set your mind
to such things / I pray you show it me? Ischo. Forsooth I never stint, but
am always exercising my self in retoricke and eloquence. For when I here one of
my servants complain on an other / or answer in his own cause, I seek to
know the truth. Again / I either blame some man to my friends, or else
praise him, or else I go about to bring at one some men of min acqueintance,
that be at varia^ce, endeuorynge my self to show them / how hit is more for
their profette to be friends / than ill wyllers and enmies. And before the high
rulers I use both to comme^de and defend him, that is oppressed by wrong and
injury / and before the lords of the cost seile I accuse him, that I se
promoted unworthily, and I preise that that is done by counsel and
deliberation, and the contrary I disco^mende. But I am now brought to this
point, that either it behooves me to suffer or to punish. So. Of whom I prey
the Isch. For that do not I yet know. Stryffe with a wife.
Isch Mary of my wife. So. But in what manner do ye strive in your quarrel? Isch.
When she happeth to say troth, it is very gentylly done, But when she lies /
and erreth in her words, forsooth Socrates, I can not refourme her. So. May
chance that, that is false, ye can not make hit true. But parauenture ye would
begone Ischmachus, and I do let you. Truly I would be loathe to tarry you, if
hit please you to go hence. Ischo. No in good faith, good Socrates, I will not
go hence till the court break up. Socra. By my faith, ye be right
circumspecte and take good head, that ye lose not that honorable name, to be
called a good honest man. For where paraue^ture ye have many great businessis
and things to take heed to, that require great diligence, yet because ye
promised those strangers to tarry for them here, ye will not deceive them.
Ischo. As for those my businesses that ye speak of Socrates, I have provided
for the^ well enough. For I have in the feldes my baillies of husbandrye, and my
deputies. So. But sine we be fall in this communication, I pray you
Ischomachus tell me / when ye have need of a good bayllie, do ye inquere,
whether there be any that can do it well, and so find the mean to have him:
like wise as wha^ ye have need of a carpenter, when ye know where is one /
that can good skylle thereof / ye will desire to have him, or else do ye make your
bayllies and deputies your self, and teach them to do hit? By my faith, How
to pr^paire a ba^lye of husbandrye.
I endeavor me to teach and instruct them my self. For he that should be
sufficient to do those things for me in mine absence, that he is put to / what
nedethe he to know any thing, but that that I do my self. For if I be
sufficient to set men a work, and command them what they shall do, I trow
I am able to teach an other man that that I can do my self. Socra. Than he
that is a baylly of husbandry must owe you good will and favor, and also to al
yours, if he being present, shall be sufficient in your absence. For without
love and good will, what good can a bayllye do, if he be never so expert and
conning? By my faith, said Ischomacus, never a whyt: but as for me / the
first thing that ever I do / I go about to teach him to love me and mine,
and to love my goods. And I pray you for goddis sake tell me / how do ye
teach him to love you and yours, who so ever he be that ye do this benifitte
unto? By my faith, said he, by gentyl and liberal dealing when god sends me
plenty of any manner thing. Socra. This ye mean I trow, that they, the which
be eased and help by your goods or money / do love you and desire that ye may
do well. Surely good Socrates / said he / that is the best instrument that
can be to allure and get a man's good will withal. Socra. And when he hears
you good will good Ischomachus, is he therefore sufficient to be a bayllye? For
we may se that al me^ love them selfs / and yet through slonggisshenes they be
negligent to do those things, the which for the most part they coueyte
right much to have, as goods, Ischo. Ye but when I wol make such men as love
me my baillies and overseers of my businesses, I instruct and monisshe them
before how they should ouerse every thing diligently. Socra. Can ye bring
that to pass? Forsothe me thinks it is unlikely, that any man could be
taught to gyde an other man's business aryght. Ischo. In very deed it is
impossible good Socrates to instruct and teach every man diligently to do it.
Socra. And who be they that ye think mete to be taught and instructed? For
that I desire very greatly to know. Ischo. First of all they that can not
refrain them selfs from dronkennes ar excluded from this care. For dro^ke^nes
brings in with hit forgetfullnes of al manner of things, that a man should
do. Socra. Whether than is it impossible, but only in them, that can not
refrain them from dronkennes, to make them diligent, or be there any other
beside? Yes mary said Ischomachus and they also that can not refrain them
self from sleep. Socra. Be there any mo beside those? Methynketh, said
Ischomachus, that they, the which do set their mind sore to the pleasure of
the flesh / that it is imposible to teach them to have more mind to any
thing than to that. for they can find another hope nor study more pleasant to
them then of their lovers. And when they have any thing to do, it is hard to
imagyne a sorer punisshement than that is to them to be kept from them they be
in love with. Therefore I let such manner of men go nor never go about to teach
them to be more dilligent. So. Ye but they, that do set their mind sore to
lucre, be not they apt to be taught that diligence / the which should be used
and occupied in your ground? Ischomachus. Yes marye they / there can none be
sooner brought to this dylige^ce. For ye need no more but only to show them,
that dylygence is very profitable. wherefore if I chance to have such one, I
commend him much. So. And as for other men, the which do refrain them from
such things as ye do command / and have a metely good mind toward lucre /
how do ye teach them to be as diligent as ye would have them? Ischo. Mary very
well good Socrates. For when I se them diligent, I do both preyse and reward
them. And again when I se them negligent and reche less, I both do and say all that ever I can to anger and vex them with. So. Ye but Ischomachus, sauinge
your tale, that is of the^ that be al ready instructed to be diligent: tell me
this, touching the instruction of them, whether it be possible for a man, that
is naturally negligent / to make other diligent? Isch. No by my faith / no more
than he that has no skyl in music can make other men musicians. For hit is
hard for a scholar to learn that thing well, that his master teaches ill.
And it is hard for a servant to use any dilygence, when his master gives him
example of negligence. Diligente masters make good servants.
And shortly to speak and in general / I do not remember, that ever I hard
that any ill master had any good servants. Mary this have I seen, that a
good dilligent master by chastisynge of dulheded servants / has lightly
instructed them. But he that will go about to make other diligente in their
work, he most specially ought to be a provident and a ware man, and over se
and mark their works. And when there is any thing well and diligently done,
he must cunne him great thank that did it / and he must not stycke to
punisshe him sharpelye, according as he deserves, that is negligent in his
business. And forsooth me thinks to this purpose hit is a right goodlye
answer / that the Persian made, For when the king of Perse asked him / rydyng
upon a right fair horse, what thing did sonest make an horse fat, he said his
masters eyes.

Some think like wise good Socrates, by all other things, that the masters
eye most specially makes them to be in far better plite. So. But when ye
have told and showed him very well and with great insta^ce / that he must take heed to such things as ye will have him, and that he is very diligent / is
he than mete to be your baillye or steward, or else must he learn somewhat
beside to make him fit for that purpose? Ischo. No iwis man. For it behooves
him yet to learn, what he must do, and when, and how he shall order every
thing. For else what avails a baylye or a steward more without this / than a
physician / the which night and day / yarly and lay takes head to a sick
man / and yet he woteth not what is profitable for the same pacient. So And
when he knows what is to be done / shall he need any thing else, or shall he
than be a perfect bailye or steward? Ischo. Me thinks / that he should
learn also to rule the work men. So. And do ye teach your bailie or steward
to be able to rule? I go about it at left, said Ischomachus. So. And I pray
you for gods sake, how do ye teache men to have the science to rule and
co^mande? Isch. Very easily good Socrates / in so much, that I think ye shall
laugh at it / when ye here it. So. Forsooth good Ischomachus, said I, it is no
matter to laugh at / but he deserves and ought rather to be hyghly landed,
that has the wit to teach that. For he that can teach men how to rule, he
can also make them masters, and he that can make them masters, can make them
princelyke and able to be kings. Ischo. Suerly all manner of bestes good
Socrates do learn to obey by the reason of these two things, that is to say,
when they do strive, and will not be obedient, they be punished: and when they
do quickly that that a man byddeth them / they be cherished and well
entreated. Coltis and young horses learn to obey their brekers and tamers: For
when they do obey them, they have so^what done to them for it / that is to
their pleasure and ease: But when they will not obey, they beat and handell
them very sore and roughly for it, until the time they serve the breker at his
will.

And young spaynels like wise, the which be worse than men a great deal / for
lack of reason, and for lack of speech, yet they learn to ren a bout / to
fetch or carry / to go in to the water after the same manner. For when they
obey, they have somewhat given them, that they have need of, and when they will
not nor care not for it, they be punisshed. But as for men they may be well
parswaded and brought to obedience, if a man will show them, how it shall be
for their profitte, if they do obey. Nevertheless unto bond men and vile
persons that way that is used and occupied toward beastis, will very well
induce them for to learn to obey. For if ye do somewhat for their bealye and
make them fare well, ye shall get very much done of them.

But ioly stomachs and noble natures be most moved and styrred with praise.
For there be some natures, that do desire as much laud and preyse, as other
do meat and drink. And when I have taught him, that I will make my baillie or
my steward / such things, the which when I do them my self / me thinks I
shall make men more obedient unto me, I do join this unto hit beside. For as
touching hoosen and shows, and other raiment, the which I must give my
laborers, I make them not a like. For there be some better and some worse: to
thentent that the best workmen may have the preeminence to have the better,
and the worst may be given to the worst. For me thinks it greueth good
servants hearts very sore / when they se that the work that they have done,
and how those have even as much as they, that will another labor nor take
pain, when it behooves to do it. Wherefore another I my self will not suffer,
that they that be worste / and they that be best should be served all a like.
And when I se that my bayllies and deputies does give the most and the best
to them that do best, I do preyse him for it. But and I se him prefer any
man before other because of his flaterynge, or for some other pynishe cause, I
do not suffer it so to pass, but I blame and rebuke him greatly therefore, and
I go about to teach him also, that that, which he does, is not for his
profitte another. So. And when he is sufficient thus to rule and gyde, good
Ischomachus, so that he can make them to obeie him, do ye think that baillye
perfect on every side, or has he need of any other thing else? Yes mary /
said Ischomachus, for it behooves him to keep his hands clean from his
masters goods / and beware that he steal nothing thereof. For if he / that
has the fruits in his hands would be so bold to convey so much out of the
way, that that, which remained were not sufficient to maynteyne the work and
find the laborers, what profytte should we have by his baylishyp, and by his
diligence? So. And do you in deed take upon you to teach them that justice and
rightfulnes? Yes mary, said Ischomachus, but I find that every man does not
obey and follow this teachinge and instrucion of mine. Nevertheless I take here
a piece of Dracons laws, and here a piece af Solons, and so endeavor my self to
bring my servants to follow justice. For me thinks that these men have made
many laws to teache men justice. For they have written, that he must be
punysshed that steleth, and he that robs must be put in prison and put to
death. wherefore it may be clear seen, that they have written those things to
the intent that they, the which do get any goods foul and shamefully,
contrary to reason and equite, should have no vantage nor no profyt by hit. And
when I have this do / I bring in beside some laws of the king of Perse, to
make my servants to deal ryghtfully in that that they be put to. For as
touching Dracons and Solons laws, they do no more but punysshe them that do
amysse: Persiens ^awes.
but the king of Perses laws do not only punyshe them that do wrong and
unjustly / but also they do them good that be ryghtfull and deal justly.
Whereby it appears, that many, the which be very covetous / and care not what
they do / so that they may win, when they se that they, the which be
ryghtfull and good / wax rycher than they / the which do other men wrong,
they continue and prospere well in this that they do no man wrong. And when I
perceive that any of them, unto the which I have been good and showed pleasure
unto them, will not leave, but go about stylle to do wrong and deal unjustly,
than when I perceive that he is past al remedy, I put him out of his room, and
will not let him occupy it no more. But when I perceive, that any of them
sets his mind and courage to be a good / a just and a true servant, and
does it not so much because they think to have some vauntage by hit, but for
the desire that they have to please me, and to be preysed of me, though they be
bound men / I use them as free men / and for their ioly free heart, I do not
only promote them in goods and riches / but also preise and commend them as
good and honest men. For me thinks that and honest man / that is desirous of
honor / does differ in this point from a covetous man, that for preyse and
honor will take pain and put him self in ieoperdie / when it is needful:
and yet keep him self clean from foul lucre. And thus when ye have ones
engendered and fastened this affection in a man / that he owes you good will /
and bears you good love and favor / and that ye have brought him to this
point, that he will apply his mind and diligence to do even as ye would your
self, and beside that, ye have gotten him the science, how every work that
is done shall be most profitable / and made him also sufficient and able to
rule, and that he will beside this bring and show you the fruits of the ground
none otherwise than ye would to your self: whether needs he any thing else or
not, I will speak no more, for me thinks that such a man should be a very
good and a profitable steward and deputy. Socra. But I pray you good
Ischomachus, do not leave behind that part, which we have so lightly run
over. And what is that, said Ischomachus? Socra. Mary ye said, that the
greattest point of all was to learn how every thing should be done, to the
end that profit thereby should rise unto us, for other wise ye said, that
diligence could avail nothing / except a man knew what and how to do.
Ischo. Do ye bid me to teach you the science of husbandry? Forsooth it is it,
said I, that makes them rich / that can well occupy it / and they that can
not, though they take never so much pain / they live wretchedlye.

Ischo. Now than first of al ye shall here how gentle a science it is. For
seeing it is most profitable and pleasant to occupye / most goodlyest, best
beloved of god and of men, and beside that, most easy to learn, how should
it not be a gentle science? For we call all these beast is gentle / the
which be goodly, great, and profitable, and be not fierce but tame among men.
So. But me thinks good Ischomacus / that I have very well perceived, that
where ye said, how a man must teach a steward and a deputy, and that ye
taught him to owe you good love and good will, and like wise / that ye went
about to make him diligent, able to rule, and also ryghtfull: but where ye
said, that he, which will be diligent in deed in husbandry, must learn what
is to be done, how, and in what season, me thinks we have over passed hit
somewhat to quickly and to negligently. Likewise as if ye said / that he, the
which will write that that a man speaks, and read that that is written,
must know his letters. For he that did here this, has hard nothing else, but
that he must learn to know his letters. But when he perceyueth, that he is
never the nerer to know what letters do mean. And now like wise I believe
very well, that he, the which will use diligence in husbandry / must learn to
know well husbandry, but though I believe and know that well, yet am I never the
wyser how to occupye husbandry. And if I were even now determined to fall to
husbandry, I would think I were like a physician / the which gothe about and
looks upon / seek men, yet can he not tell what is good for them. And therefore
to the end I be not such one, teach me the very point and cast of husbandry.
For sothe good Socrates, said he, it is not by this as by other crafts and
sciences / that he which lerneth them must be a long time about them / and
bestow much pain and labor in them / er he can do any thing to get his
living by. Husbandry is nothing so hard to learn: for ye shall learn it even
anon lokyng upon the laborers, and partly by herynge speak of hit / so that
if ye will ye may teach hit unto other. And trewely other artificers and
crafts men do hyde and keep priuey to them self the best points of their
sciences, the good husband men, he that sets trees best / he will have
very great pleasure, if any man behold him, and he that sows after the same
manner. And if ye ask him of any thing that is well wrought, I am sure he will
never keep from you / how he did it. And so good Socrates, husbandry techeth
them that be conversant in it to be of gentyl manners and disposition. Soc.
Forsooth this is a good beginning, and now I have hard you tell this much,
it is impossible to stop me from inquerynge of you further thereof. And
therefore seeing ye say it is a thing so easy to learn, do the rather show
hit me. For it is no shame to you to teach that that is easy: but it is
rather a great shame to me / if I can it not, specially when it is so
profitable.

And therefore I will show unto you first of all said Ischo. that that which
is the diffusest point of all husbandry, as they say which dispute of it
most exactly in words, and in deed occupy it never a whit, is nothing hard
at all. For they say, Knowledge of good ground.
that he that will be a good husband man / must first know the nature of the
ground. So. In deed they seem to say well: For he that does not know, what
the ground will bring forth / I trow he can not know another what sede he
should sow / nor what trees is best to set. Ischo. And therefore a man may
know by an other man's ground, what hit will bring forth and what hit will
not, when he sees both the fruits and also the trees. And when he knows
it ones, hit is not for his profitte to strive against god and nature. For if
a man does either sow or set that that he has need of, he is never the
nerer to have that that is necessary for him, except the ground do in a
manner delight and take pleasure both to bring it forth and to norysshe it. But
if he can not know the goodness and fertilite of the ground by reason of the
idelnes and negligence of them that have it in hand: he shall often times
better know it by some ground that is not far from it, than of the
neighbor that dwells by it. And all though the ground be untilled and
unlabored, yet it shows his own nature. For that ground, that bears good
wild fruits and wyedes, will bring forth, if it be taken head to and well
tylled, other good fruits and herbs as well as them. So that they that be not
all of the best seen in husbandry, can well discern the nature of the ground.
Socra. Forsothe good Ischomachus, I may be bold to bide by this, that a man
nedethe not to absteyne from husbandrye, for fear leest he know not the
nature of the ground. For I do remember / that fisshers, which be alweys
occupied in the sea, the which come not to behold the ground how it is, nor
walk not fair and softly, but ru^ne even through it, when they se the fruits
on the ground, they will not stycke to show their opinion of the ground,
which is good, and which is bad / and praise this, and disprayse that. And I
se they will be communynge often times with men, that can very good skylle in
husbondry, and show them very many things touching a good ground. Ischo.
Where than will ye have me to begin good Socrates to declare husbandry unto
you, lest I rehearse somewhat that ye know already, for I perceive, ye be right
expert therein? So. This me thinks both profitable and a very great pleasure
to learn / and also hit belongs specially to a philosopher to know, how I
might, if I would, by tyllynge and laboring the ground, have very much
plenty of barley, rye, wheat, and other corn Ischo. This I true ye know well
enough, that falowynge and styrrynge of the ground, helps very much to the
sowinge? So. Forsooth so I do. Ischo. And what if we should begin to falowe
and plowe the ground in winter? Soc. That were naught. For than the earth
should be all slymy. Ischo. And what think ye in somer? So. Than it would be
to hard to plowgh it. Ischo. Well than we must needs begin in the spring of
the year. So. Ye mary / for than it is most lykely / that the ground openneth
and spredeth his own strength and virtue about, when it is falowed and
tylled in that time. Ischo. Yea and beside that good Socrates the young wides
turned up so down at that time be as good to the ground as any dougynge: and
they be not yet come to that strength / that the seed of them cast adowne can
grow up again. And I trow ye know this well enough, that if the falowinge,
and the tyllynge of the ground should be good, the ground must be clean kept
and delivered from wides, and well fauourdly heated and warmed of the son. So.
Me thinks in very deed it should be so. Ischo. And do ye thike, that that can
be better brought to pass by any other mean / thanne if the ground be often
times stirred in the somer? So. I know very well, that the wides can never
better wither away and dry up, nor the ground be better heated through the
heat of the son / thanne if the ground be ploughed and styrred in the
mids of summer / and in the mids of the day. And if any man do falowe, or
dygge the ground with his own hands, is it not clear enough, that he also
must separate asonder the wides from the ground, and cast the wides abroad,
that they may dry up, and turn up so down and stir the ground / that the
soorenes and the raw watrisshenes of hit may be warmed and well dried up?
Ischo. Than ye se well good Socrates, how we be both in one opinion touching
falowinge and styrrynge of the ground. So. So me thinks. And touching
sowinge, have ye any other knowledge or opinion, but that is the season to sow,
the which both men of old antiquite / approuyng it by experience / and all
they, that be now, taking hit of them / do judge it best of al? For when the
somer is ones past, and Septembre comes in, al men that be in the world do
look upon almighty god, that when it shall be his pleasure to send some rain
and make the ground wete and moysty, that they may fall to sowinge even as he
commands it. Soc. And forsothe good Ischomachus all the men in the world
have determined by one assente / that they will not sow, when the ground is
dry. And hit is clear to every man, that they take great lossis and damages /
that will go about to sow before god byddeth them. Ischo. Than in these
things al we men do agree. So. For in that that god techeth, it follows / that
every man agrees in it: As for a similitude, Every man thinks best to wear
good furred and well lyned gowns in winter / if he be able, and al so to make
good fire, if he have wodde. Ischo. Yea but there be many, the which do vary
in this touching sowinge, whether it be best to sow in the beginning, in
the mids, or at the later end. Soc. And god does not send every year of
one like temperatnes of wether. For some times it is best to sow in the
beginning, some times in the mids, some times at the later end. Ischo. But
what think ye best gentle Socrates, when so ever a man has chosen his
sowynge time / or ever more in this time, or now in this and now in that,
whether is it best to sow much seed or litel? So. Me thinks best of all
good Ischomachus to distribute the seed, well, full, and truly. For I suppose it
is a great deal better to take corn enough ever more, than some times to
much and sometimes to little. And in this point also good Socrates said he, you
being the lerner do agree with me the techer, and ye have showed your opinion
before me. So. But what of that said I / for in the casting of the seed there
is much counnynge? Ischo. In any case good Socrates, let us look upon that.
For ye know well, that it must be cast with a man's hand. So. Forsothe I have
sen it done so. Ischo. But some can cast it even, and some can not. So. well
than it lacks nothing else but to exercise the hand, as harpers and luters
do / that hit may follow the mind. Isch. It is very well said: But what if
the ground be thynner or grosser? So. what mean you by that? Do ye not take
the thinner for the weaker, and the grosser for the stronger? Ischo. That same
mean I. So. And this would I feign know of you, whether ye will give as much
seed to the tone as to the the other, or else which of them will ye give more
unto? Isch. In the wine that is strong, me thinks hit behooves to put the
more water, and the man that is stronger must bear the greater burden, if
there be any thing to be carried, and some men are fed and nourisshed with
skle^der fare, and the same herin must be observed. So. Thike you not that the
ground wayeth stronger, if a man do put more fruit in it, like wise as moyles
and horses do wax stronger with carriage / that would I desire you to teach
me. When Ischomchus herd that, he said: what Socrates ye ieste with me. But
yet, said he, take this for a very suretye, that whaune a man has sown any
seed in the ground, look when the ground has most comfort of the air with
wete and moystnes, if the corn be grene newly risen out of the earth, if he
stir and turn it in again, it is as if it were a sustinance to the ground,
and gets as much strength by it / as if it had been donged. But if ye suffer
the ground continually to bring forth fruit of the sede, it is hard for a
weak ground to bring forth much fruit still: like wise as hit is hard for a
weak sow to give suck and sustina^ce to many pigges, and keep them fat and
in good plite when they wax great. So. Ye sey good Ischomacus that ye must
sow less seed on a weker ground. Ischo. So I do in deed good Socrates: and
ye also did grant hit unto me a littel before, when ye said, that ye thought
that the weakest should be left charged. So. But for what reason good
Ischomachus, do ye make dyches in the corn feldes? Ischo. Ye wotte well, that
in winter are many showers. So. what thereof? Ischo. Mary thereof chance many
hurtes: for a great part of the field is surrounded with water, and the corn
coueredde in mudde, and the roots of much of the corn are worn and washed
away with the water, and further often times by reason of the great
abundaunce of water, there comes much wides and other harlotry, that
suppresseth and distroyeth the corn. So. It is like enough, that all this
should be. Isc. And think ye than, that the corn being in that taking /
has not need to be help? So. Yes mary. Isch. Than if the corn be covered
with mudde, what shall we do to help it? So. Mary ease the ground and make it
lighter. Ischo. But what if the root is be waxed thynne and almost worn away?
So. Tha^ ye must cast to more earth that it may take root and grow again.
Isch. But what if the wides and other harlotry suck up the moisture from the
corn, like as the drone bees, the which being them selfs unprofitable do
rob away and eat up the bees vitayles, that they had set up for to work
with? So. Mary the wides and harlotry must be pluckte and cut away, like wise
as the drone bees are voyded our of the hyues. Ischo. Think yon than that we
do not make the dyches and sloughes in the feldes for a good cause? So.
Forsothe so it is, but I think now in my mind good Ischomacus, what a thing
it is to bring in similitudes and likenessis. For ye have moved me more a
great deal / and made me more displeased against these wides, when ye spoke
of the drone bees, than when ye spoke of the wides them selfs. But now after
this said I, harvest season will come / wherefore I pray you tell me if ye have
any thing to teache me in this matter. Ischo. So I will, if ye do not show your
self, that ye know it as well as I. This ones ye know that the corn must
always be reaped. Soc. What else? Isch. Whether than must ye stand to reap it
with the wind or against the wind? To reap corn.
So. Not against the wind, for it would be a great pain, as I think both
for the eyes and also for the hands to reap against the ears blown down
with the wind. Ischo. And how will ye cut it, at the very top, or even by
the ground? So. If the stalk be short, I will cut it a low that there may
be straw enough: But if it be very hie, I think better to cut it in the
myddell, to thentent that another the thresshere nor the fanners / shall take
more pain in vain than needs, and that that remains, I think if it be
burned / hit will do the ground very much good, and if it be laid with the
donge it will fyl and encrese it. Ischomacus. Do ye se now friend Socrates,
how ye be taken in the very deed doing, that ye know as well as I, what
longs to reapynge? So. In faith I am aferde lest it be so in deed: And now
will I se like wise whether I can thresshe or not. Ischo. This ye know well
that horses do thresshe corn. Socra. why should I not, To threshe corn
and not only horses but also moyles and oxen like wise? Ischo. But how can
these beastis stamp well and thresshe the corn even as they sh^^de good
Socrates? Soc. It is clear, tha^ (...) is by the reason of them, which have
thecha^ge of the thresshynge. For they do evermore turn and stir and put
under their fee^ that that is vnthresshed / and so they must needs make hit
even, and make an end of hit as quickly as may be. Ischo. Th^h as for this
busynes, ye know it as well as I. Socra. Now after this good Ischomachus,
let us cleanse the corn and wynnowe hit. Ischo. Tell me tha^ good Socrates,
do ye know this, that if ye begin to winnowe it in that part of the
wynowynge place, where the wind is against you, that the chafe will be
scatered abroad through all the winnowynge place? So. It must needs. Ischo.
Than it must needs as well fall upon the corn. So Verily it is no small point
to make the chafe to go beyond the corn in a void rowme of the wynowynge
place. But if a man begin to wynowe under the wind, or a side half of hit,
than it is clear, that all the chafe will void to the place that is ordained
for hit. Ischo. But when ye have cleansed the corn even to the myddyf of the
wynowing place, whether than, the corn being thus scatered abroad, will ye
wynowe the remanant / or will ye put first to gether on a heap as narowly as
can be all that ever is clean? So. Forsooth I will first put to geder on a heap
all that is clean, left parauenture the chafe be carried about the wynowinge
place, where by I should be feign to wynowe twyse one thing. Ischo. Now than
gentyl Socrates, ye may teache an other man, if ye will, how he shall soonest
get his corn cleansed. So. In good faith I had almost forgotte, that I could
all this a great while ago. And now I cast in my mind, whether I have
forgotten my self, that I can play on a harp / play upon recorders / peynte
/ and carue, and other sciences. For there was never man, that taught me these
no more tha^ to be a husband man. And I se as well other men work in their
sciences as husband men labor the ground. Ischo. And did not I tell you but
a littel before, that this science of husbandry is wonders pleasant and very
easy to learn? So. I know very well good Ischomacus / that I understood and
could al manner of things, that do long to sowinge / but I have forgotten my
self that I could them. But the setting of trees said I, is that any point
of husbandry? Setting of trees.
Isch. Yes mary. So. How happens than that I knew well al such things as
long to earynge and sowyng / and am ignorant in that that longs to
plantynge of trees? Ischo Be ye ignorant in deed? So. I must nedis be, saying I
know not in what ground a man should set a tree / nor how deep / nor of what
length / nor what bread it be set in / nor when it is in the ground how it
shall best grow and come up. Ischo. Well than learn that that ye know not. I am
sure ye have seen what pyttes they make for trees that do set them? So. That
I have very many times. Ischo. And did ye ever se any of them deper than three
foot? So. No mary I / nor yet deper than two foot and a half. Ischo. And as
for the bread did you ever se any brother than three foot? So. Forsooth and god /
I never saw none past two foot and a half broad. Isch. Now answer me this
again, Did ye ever se any of less altitude than two foot? So. In very deed I
never saw none of less altitude tha^ two foot and a half. For if the plants
were but shalow set, they would soon be writhed up. Ischo. Than it is apparent
enough to you good Socrates / that they dygge the pyttes to set in trees, no
dyper than two foot and a half, nor no brother than two foot and a half. So.
It must needs be so, saying it is so clear. Isc. But touching the ground / do
ye know which is dry and which is wete, if ye se it? So. Me thinks the
ground, that lies about Licabectus / or any other that is like unto it, is
dry ground: And that is called a wete ground / the which lies about
Phalericus, full of maris al about / and any other like unto it. Ischo. Whether
than will ye dig up a deep pit to set in trees in the dry ground or in
the wete? So. In the dry ground verily. for if ye should make a deep pytte in
the wete ground / ye should find water: and than ye could not set it in
the water. Isch. Me thinks ye say very well. And wha^ the pittes be dygged up,
ye know what trees be mete for both grou^des? So. Very well. Ischo. And if ye
would that the tree, which ye do set / should grow and come up well
fauordly, whether think ye it will better spring and wax mighty and strong /
if ye set underneath earth that has been labored and occupied before, orels
such as has been always unoccupied. So. It is clear enough said I, that it will
grow and come up better by the reason of the earth occupied than of the
ground unoccupied. Isc. Than there must some earth be put underneath? So. Why
should it not? Isc. But whether think ye, that the vine branch, the which
ye set, will gether rootis better if ye set it straight upright, or if ye
set it crooked under the ground, so that it be like this greek lettre, Y,
turned up set down? So. Mary even so. For than there shall be the more rootis
in the earth / whereby the plant shall stand the faster, and so many the mo
branches shall spring up. Ischo. Well than in this matter we have both one
opinion. But whether will ye no more but cast the earth to the plant that ye
set, orels will ye tread and ra^me it hard down? So. Forsooth I will trede and
stamp it hard to, for else it were ieoperdy lest the rain would lightly perce
in, and so rotte and mar the rootis / orels the son dryinge the earth away
from the rootis of the plant, should lewse and vnfasten it, and so kill it.
Ischo. well than good Socrates we be both of one opinion touching setting of
vines. So. And shall I set a fygge tree after the same manner? Ischo. Yes I
trow, and al other trees like wise. For if ye can set vines well, what other
setting is there but that ye may take it upon you like wise? So. But how
should we set olyue trees good Ischomacus? I pray you prove before any thing
/ whether I can any skylle therein. Ischo. Ye se how there is a good deep pytte
dug for an olyue tree, I wot well ye could not choose but se hit, saying
they be dug even by the high ways side. Also ye se how the very stocks of
the olyues be set in the setting place. And farther ye se how there is clay
laid upon the tops of them: And how of all trees that be planted, there are
none covered above / but only the same. So. All this I se well. Isc. And when
ye se it / what should be the let, that ye should not know it: except
parauenture ye can not tell how to clappe a shelle fast to the clay, that is
set on the top thereof? So. By my faith, of all this that ye have spoken,
there is nothing but I know it. And now I cast in my mind again, what is the
cause / that when ye asked me but a littel before in general, whether I could
set trees, I said no. For me thought I could not tell / how a man should set
trees* But after ye began to enquere of me every thing by it self, I answered
you according to your mind, and to your own opinion, the which be called the
most parfecte husband man, that is now at this day alive. Is not my chance
good, Ischomacus said I, askyng a manner of teaching? For I have learned and
can well now every thing by it self / what so ever ye have demanded of me.
For ye lead me by such things / as I am skilled in and understand, unto
such things as I perceived not: and so ye persuade and make me believe that I
know them as well as the the other. Ischo. Well, think ye, that if I asked you
after the same manner touching silver or gold / which is good and which is
badde, that I could persuade you, that ye be a good trier of gold and silver?
And again, I could not parswade you, if I asked you never so much, that ye
can play upon recorders, or that ye can peynte, or do any such things? Soc.
Parauenture yes. For ye have parswaded me, that I have well the science of
husbandry: and yet I know well, that there was never any body that taught me
that science. Ischo. It is not so good Socrates: For I have told you a praty
while ago, that husbandry is so pleasant and so familiar a science, that they,
the which do either se hit, or here tell of hit, be even by and by well learned
in it. And also it shows many things it self for a man to learn, how to
order it best. For even at the first the vine, the which crepeth up upon the
trees, if there be any nere hand it, shows, that it would be helped up and
sustained. And when it spredeth abroad his leaves and branches, the grapis
being yet but very tender, it shewith, that in that season hit would have
shadow made there unto hit, where as the heat of the son lies soore upon
it. And when hit is time for the grapis to wax ripe and sweet the which is
caused only by the heat of the son, it lets the leaves fall, to teach the
husband men, that it would be lightened and eased, that the fruit may the
better wax ripe. And when that by the reason it has brought forth much
fruit, and some ar ripe and some not, it shows, that those closters, that be
ripe, must be gedered, like as on fygge trees they must be taken down / that
be ripe and ready to be gethered. Soc. How can this be, good Ischomacus, if
husbandry be so easy to learn, and every man knows what is to be done, as
well one as an other, that they have not a lyuinge by hit al a like? For some
have great plentye and live welthily, and other some have sca^tly so much as
they need, and be in debt to other men? Isch. Mary I will tell you good
Socrates, hit is another the knowelege nor lack of knowelege of husband men /
that makes some of them rich and some power. For ye shall not lightly here
such a tale go about, that such a man's house is undone, because he has not
sowed even: or because that he has not well set and planted his trees: or
because he knew not what ground was good for vynes, he has set his in a
naughty ground: or because he knew not, that it was good to falowe the
ground before he did sow it: or because he knew not, that it was good to
dounge hit. But this ye may here often times very well, This man gets no
croppe on his ground this year. For he has made no prouisyon to get hit
sowed, or to get it dounged. And again: This man gets no wine. For he
another cares to plant any vynes in his ground / nor sees nothing to those,
that be already planted, to make them bring forth some fruit. This man has no
oil. This man has no fyggis: For he will take no pain nor apply his mind
to have any. These be the causes good Socrates, that make one husband man to
differ from an other, and to be also unlike in substance and in riches / a
great deal more / tha^ if any of them seemed to be experter in his works and
businessis. And of the capitaynes of war like wise, there be many, the which
have egally good wit and very good sight in such things as do long to
war, and yet there be some of them better and some worse / and that is
through the diversity of taking head and of diligence. For such things as
all capitaynes do know, and also the most part of them, that were never in
that dignite, some capitaynes do them and some not. As thus. All they know,
that it is better for them, that shall lead an army through their ennemies
land to march forward in good order and array: that they may be always ready
to fight, if need be. And yet some of them that know this very well do hit, and
some do not. Also all they know / that it is best to keep watches and
scoutwaches both by night and by day: And yet some of them se well to, that it
be surely kept, and some do not. Again / when they lead their army through
narowe places / ye shall all most find none, but that he knows, it is
better to preuente their enemies be times than to late. And yet some of them do
their dilyge^ce, that they may so do, and some do not. And like wise of
doungynge. Every man says / it is very good and necessary for the ground to
dounge hit. And they se / how men may have it both of bestis in his own
kind, and also find other means to have it, and make easily a very great
deal thereof. And yet some take heed, that hit be getered, and some let it
pass, and care not for hit. Yet god sends rain from above, and al manner of
holowe ground receives hit / and keeps it / and waxes a pouddell with it.
The ground brings forth al manner of wydes and naughty harlotry. And he that
will sow, must first rydde and purge the ground, and such wydes and things
as he gethereth out of the land if he cast them into the water / in process of
time it woll be as good and as wholesome to the ground, as any donginge. for
what wydes be there, or what ground is it, that will not become dou^ge in very
deed, if it be cast in to sta^dynge water? More over what remedy is there, if
the ground be to wete to sow in hit? or to soore to set trees in it? Every
man knows, that the water must be voyded out by making of dytches and
sloughes pourposely therefore: and how the soorenes is minished and mitigated,
if all manner of things / the which be not soore / whether they be dry or
were / be myngled there with. And some husbands take good head to this, and
some regard it not. But if a man know never a whitte, what the ground will
bring forth, nor can se another fruit nor tree in it / nor speak with no man /
that shall tell him the truth of hit: is it not far a great deal easier to
have a proof of hit, than either of a horse or a man? For that that it shows,
it is not showed falsely and colorably: but tilled it shows the very truth
/ without any faynynge / what it can bring forth / and what not. And forsothe
me thinks / that the ground does best examyne, which be good / and which be
unthrifty husbands, in that that it sets forth al manner of thing so easy
to be learned, and so soon to be known. For it is not in husbandry as it is in
other crafts / that they, the which do not work, may excuse them selfs, and
sey that they can not skyyl to do it: but every man knows, that if the
ground be well tylled and husbandly handled, it sheweh us pleasure again for
it. And surely husbandry is it / that best proves a man's unlusty courage and
sluggisshe disposition. For there is no man can parswade him self, that a a
man can live without such things as be necessary. But he that has no science
/ whereby he may get his living, nor will not fall to husbandry: it is clear /
he is either a starte fool / orels he purposes to get his living by
robbinge and stelyng / orels by begginge. More over, said he, it made greatly
to the matter, concerning the getting or losing by husbandry, that when they
have many laborers and servants, that the tone takes good head, that his
work men be set to their work in due season and time, and the the other does
not. For that man is better than ten other / that falls to his work in
season. And that man is far worse than an other, the which suffers his
work men to leave their work and go their way over tymely. And as for between
him, that suffers his work men and laborers to trifyll away the day, and him
that will not, there is as great difeference, as between the holle work
finisshed and the half of hit: Like wise as in iorneyinge by the way in fyfty
mile space / two men, which go both one way, and though they be both as
swyfte, as holle / as young, and as lusty the tone as the the other: yet the tone
shall over go the the other. xxv. mile in a day, if the tone goth on his journey
lustily, and the the other for slouthe and cherisshinge of him self, rests by
the way besides springes and fountaynes, and seeks for shadows and soft
wyndes to refresshe him with. Like wise in workynge there is great odds, when
a man does apply lustyly his work, and when he does not, and rather fyndethe
excuses, why he should not work, and suffers his folk every day to trifle
forth the time. And as for to work well and diligently, or to work naught and
negligently, there is as great difference between these two things, as is
between him that works and him that workethe never a whytte. For when they go
about to cleanse the vynes from wydes and harlotry, if they dygge in such
wise, that thereby grow up mo and greatter wides than did before, why may it
not be said, that they were idel and wrought never a whitte. And therefore
these be the things, by the which many men's housholdes be a greatte deal
rather undone, than for lack of science or of great knowledge. For a man that
is at great costis and charges in his house, and can not get as much, another
by his rentes, nor by his husbandry, as will find him and his meyny: it is no
maruayle, if in the stead of great plenty and riches, he fall in to extreme
poverty. But unto such men as will diligently apply them self to
husbandry, and increase their substance and shortly wax rich thereby, my
father showed sometime a good precept, the which also he taught unto me. He
cou^seiled me, that I should never bye that ground the which has been well
labored and tylled, but such a ground, as remained unlabored and untilled,
either through their negligence, that owed it, orels because they were not able
to do it. For the ground that is well tylled and dight, will cost much more
money, and yet hit is than even at the best: And the ground / that can wax
no better, can not make a man to have so much pleasure, and to rejoice so
much / as the the other does, which waxes better and better. For he thought,
that all manner of goods / whether it be land or catell, the which do
encreace and wax better / causethe a man to have more pleasure and joy in it.
And there is nothing, that increases more than does that ground, the which
lay before untilled and vndight, and now is waxed good and fruitful. And be
ye sure of this good Socrates, that we have often times made much land, that
we have bought a great deal more worth than the price that hit was bought
for at the first. And this cast, that is so notable and so profitable, is so
easy to learn, that now ye have ones hard it / ye can it as well as I, and ye
may teache it unto other, if ye list. But as for my father, he never learned hit
of none other man, nor never spente greatte study to find it out: But because
his mind was greatly set upon husbandry, and also he had a pleasure to
labor, he said, he desired to have such a ground, that both he might have
somewhat to do, and also that the profit coming of hit might rejoice him. For
me thinks good Socrates, that of all the Atheniens, my fathers mind was
most set upon husbandry, even of his own nature. Socra. And when I hard
that, I asked him: whether did your father keep still to him self all the
land that he occupied, or did he sell any of hit, if he could get much money
for it? Isch. Yes mary he did selle some of it now and than: immediately after
he would bye an other piece, that lay untilled and vndighte, because his mind
was so much set to labor and to husbandrye. So. For sothe good Ischomacus,
ye show me here a maruailous desire and affection, that your father had to
husbandrye, none other wise as me thynkethe, than some merchants minds be
set upon wheat. For merchant men by the reason that their hearts is sore fixed
upon wheat, where so ever they here that there is most wheat, thither will
they in any wise resort, and will not stycke for danger to pass any see what
so ever it be. And when they have boughte up as much thereof as they can get,
they ship it in the self same ship that they sail in them self, and so
bring it home. And when they have need of money, I trow they do not sell it a
way rasshely, not carynge in what place, as though they desired to be lightly
dispatched thereof: but they bring it thither to sell, where they here, that
wheat is at a great price, and where as men would very feign have it. Ischo.
Well Socrates ye ieste with me: but yet me thinks he loves the masons craft
never the worse, that buyldeth houses and sells them, and makes new again
afterward. Soc. By my faith I swear to you good Ischomacus, I believe you very
well, in that ye think, that every man loves best, and sets his mind most
upon that thing, whereby he thynkethe to get any great profitte. But now I
consider in my mind, how well al your commynicacion has served to the purpose
and ground of this matter. For your ground and beginning was, that the
science of husbandry is soonest and best learned of all other sciences: And now
by the reason of that that ye have said, I am utterly persuaded, that it is so.
Forsooth said Ischomacus, hit is so in very deed. But as for that thing that is
egally common to al men's deeds, whether it be in the exercise of husbandry,
or in the ordering of an house, or in the gouernynge of a City, or in the
knowledge and science of feats of war, I grant you very well that there be
some men, that have a far better wit, a far better cast and policy, and
know better how to rule and command, than some other do. Like as in a galey
wha^ they be on the sea, and must drive as far with oores in a day, as they
should sail, there be some, that be set to comfort and courage them, the
which have so good grace both in their words and i^ their deeds, that they so
quicken and encorage men, that they labor with all their verry hearts. And
there be other some so gross and so rude, that they will be twyse as long in
making of their viage, as the the other were. And as for the the other, they come
down russhynge meryly sweating and preysynge one an other. And as for these
fellows they come down leyserly, and they never sweat for the matter, they
hate the master of the galey, and he again hates them. And after the same
manner there be some Capitaynes, that do differ one from an other. For there be
some, that can not bring it to pass, to make their soudiours glad to take
pain, nor to put them selfs in ieopardie, but even very than when they can
not chose, but they will rather bost them selfs, and take it for a great
preyse, that they may contrary the capitaynes mind, nor the capitaynes can
not instruct them to be asshamed, if any thing misfortune, that is worthy
of rebuke. But there be other, which be good, wise, and politic capitaynes,
the which if they take in hand the self same men, or parauenture other, as
they do often times, they will make them to be asshamed to do any thing, that
should turn to their rebuke, and to think that it is best for them, both to
be obediente every one of them by him self, and when need requires to take
pain, gladly to do hit all to gether with a very good will. And like wise as
there be some private men, the which of their own nature be glad to take
labor and pain, So a good captain engenders this affection in all his
hostis mind, that they be glad to be put to pain, and they coueite nothing
else so much, as to be preysed for some greatte and notable act, done in the
sight of their captain. And what so ever capitaynes they be, that have such
men of war under them, berynge to them ward so good mind and favor, I
say they in very deed be mighty and strong: and not they, the which have a
great mighty body, and can throw a darte, and shote very well: Nor they that
have good horses, and can run with a spear and just before any man: but they
that can bring their soudiours in to such affection and believe, that they
would gladly follow them through fire and water, and through all manner of
danger. Such men may well be called hardy and valyant, that have so many
bold men ready and priest to do what so ever they command. And hit may well
be said, that he goth forward with a mighty strong hand, that has so many
hands following him ready at his pleasure. And he may be called a very great
man in deed, the which does very greatte acts, more by prudence and wisdom,
than through the strength of his body. More over whether he be a debite or a
ruler, that can make men ready and glad to apply their work, and bring them
to continue well in hit, they be those, that shall soonest get goods and grow
to great substance. And as for the master, if he be such a man that can well
punisshe the laborers, that do naught, and reward them that do very well, yet
when he comes to the works, if the laborers do make no show of it, I will
not set greatly by him: but he the which when they do se him, they be all
moved and styrred up, and have a greatte courage and desire one to do better
than another, and a feruente mind to be praised above al, I say that that man
has some thing of the disposition longing to a king. And me thinks it is a
very great point in all manner of things, that be done by the help of men, as
well as it is in husbandry. And to obtain hit, verily I will not say, as I
have done in husbandrye, that a man shall learn it, if he ones sees it, or
hereth it told, but I say, he that will be able to do it, had need to be very
well instructed, and eke to be of a good gentle nature, and that is most of
all to have a very great grace and gift of god. For me thinks this grace
comes not all of man, to rule and govern so, that men very gladly will be
obedient, but it is rather a special gift of almighty god: and he grants it
unto them that be endowed with virtue and temperaunce. But to rule men
tyrnnously against their wylles, he puts the^ unto it (as me seems) yt he
iugeth worthy to live thus in the world, as they say, that Tantalus dryueth
forth the time in hell, being always aferde to dye twyse.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Flete-strete, by Thomas Berthelet printer to the kings
most noble grace. an. M. D. xxxij. Cum priuilegio.


