A consolacyon for christen people to repair again the lords temple, with
certain places of scripture truly applied to satysfye their minds for ye
expellyng of ydolatry, and to instruct the^, of love and obedience.

Compyled By nycholas wise

A preface of the prophets.
The prophet Esaias made an exclamacyon
That heaven and earth should harken to the lord
which for the peoples great abhomynacyon
Prouokyng him to anger dyspleasure and dyscorde
Their fastings / their prayers / and offrynges he abhor^^
yet mercyfully exhortyng them to mende and to live well
He promised them pardon their sins for to expel.
The prophet Jeremy elected was of god
And sanctefyed before that he was borne
Commanded to threten the people with his rod
And fearful plages on cattle, grass, and corn
With other punysshmentes to cause them for to morn
Declaryng their captyuyte their pains and cruel bands
To come for their sin and ydols made with hands
The prophet Oseas likewise did prophecy
Against the priests that people do dysceyue
And also rebuked Israel and Samary
For their ydolatry / but they would not receive
Gods grace and promyses / nor his sweet words conceive
They were unthankful, wherefore he did them blame
Recytyng their sin and punysshment for the same.
The prophet Aggeus, came to zorobabell
The prince of Judah declaryng him the will
Of god the lord, whose goodness does excel
Exortyng the people his pleasure to fulfill
Rebukyng their slacknesse as it was right and skyll
For that they applied not their bodies to some pain
Their temple dystroyed for to build up again.
The prophet Mycheas reproved the wickedness
Of them that inclyned unto ydolatry
Expressyng the pain for their ungodliness
Rehersyng their sin, and if I should not lie
The cause he expounded of their mysery
Aledgyng it to rulers which truth did not regard
And unto priests that preach for profit and reward
The prophet zachary spoke by the spyryte of grace
Comfortyng the people to turn unto the lord
which for their offenses dyspersed were long space
Among the hethen the scripture to record
But god purposyng that they should be restored
Out of thraldom as stories do me tell
Delivered the people of Jude and Israel.
The prophet Malachy spoke of the joyful day
Of Christ's coming the people for to save
And also of him that should prepare his way
Expressyng the pleasure that godly men should have
As for the ungodly he greatly does deprave
Declaryng their dyuersytes through god omnipotent
And their unlike rewards when he shall give judgment.
Christ the true prophet and lord of prophets all
Of whom the prophets before did prohcey
Being the only son of god celestyall
Approved the prophets, their prophecyes he did verefy
For he of whom they prophesied the world to justify
Performed their prophecyes, from heaven he dyscended
His fathers will fulfilled, and up again ascended.
In regnum dei.
The prologue.
COnsidering in my mind the great decay of Christ's church that has
contynewed of a long season (being the faithful congregacyon, ^ Cor vi
which Paul calls his temple.) It has impelled me of a true and unfeigned
heart to take pain (as the common saying is) where at might more truly be
counted a pleasure, to write this litel volume. But for as much as I stood in
stay and doubted the judgments of the unlearned multitude lacking yet
knowledge to deserne the spiritual light from darkness, ye and not that
only, but also doubted the judgments of such as have lernyng, which in time
past feared not to peruerte ye scriptures. Truly it troubled so my mind, ye I
was in.xx. wits whether I might set forth this work acordyng to my first
purpose, either else let fall my labors, keeping it secret to my self and
taking only to my reward my pain for my travel. Thus stageryng as a man
being in an open, large, and wild forest knowing not which way to resort or
ride to his lodgyng, sometime fearyng the uncertainty of ye way, sometime
doubtyng whether ye end of ye way did led unto a wood or covert full of
busshes and briars, sometime fearing robbers, thieves, and cruel beasts to
spoil and devour him. And last of all fearyng lest the night should come upon
him before he came to his iourneys end. So I being in this open forest of ye
world though I know the way of the scripture to be certain, and ye end
thereof to lead to quietness and rest, and that it is ye only rule for all men
to frame their works thereunto. By the which rule I have facyoned and framed
this work (as nere as God has given me grace. yet I doubted the uncertain
Judgments of other men, the one sort that know not the way, and the other
sort knowing it having no pleasure to walk therein, taking upon them to be
guydes unto the simple and unlearned. Where in very deed many of them have
rather played the part of cruyll spoylers and deuourers as it may appear to all
the^ who^ it has pleased god, either to preserve from spoylyng or else of his
infinyte goodness, to call and conducte from false and feigned paths, unto ye
true and perfyte way which Christ has appointed us to walk in. Unto the which
way to conforte, counsel, and courage all men. I have applied this my labor,
first to conforte them in the truth, to courage them to stycke unto the
truth, and to counsel them to follow the same i. cor vi. ii. cor. vi
that the lords temple may be restored and repaired again. But after my
labors ended, ye thing yt has encouraged me to set forth my good will unto
all men (being in this many doubts and troubles of mind) I will show you. I
counsayled with my self and if it were best for me to dedicate it unto some
noble man, as ye may se in diverse prefaces and prologes of books, some are
dedycated unto one man, and some unto an other, which thing truly I would
that al men did no less praise and allow then my self, for it is an occasion
to al the^ which unfeignedly bear loving minds unto the person whom the thing
is dedicated to have yt more favor and love unto it, and to be the more
desirous to read and peruse it for his sake. But as there is in this world no
pleasure without pain, no conforte without care, no joy without sorrow and to
be short nothing without his contrary. So in this I was not so much encouraged
forward one way but I was more dyscouraged backwarde an other way. For when I
called to my remembrance ye froward ymagynacyons and untrue reports of
such as be evil which also have cedused the poor and unlearned to think all
thing to be as true as ye gospel yt they speak my heart was quyte discouraged
to dedycate it unto any noble man. The lack of eloquence to set forth this
work and to make it more mete and conuenyent to be presented unto such an
estate or person (for as much as I have compared and framed it to the
infallible truth of gods blessed word) did little or nothing dyscomforte
me. But because I would not have the truth to be sclaundered by the malycyous
tongues of those that would say. This fellow has taken pain to set forth a
work to please such a man withal. I was at a plain point with my self to
keep it vndefamed that way, and not only to save the truth from false
suspicion, but such persons also from offendyng yt would untruly report it.
For it is undoubted that many which have not feared to speak evil of the
gospel, (saying it would make me^ heretykes) would not pass upon the
sclaundryng of any good purpose or pretense of man. Thus wayeng the matter as
it were in a ballaunce, I perceived yet in all things that the truth
ouercometh at length, and then consyderyng the joyful and acceptable time that
is now, ii. cor. vi.
so that the euangelycal light shyneth over us, To. xiii.
the night being past and the day come to give light unto al men that list to
labor in ye lords work, it entered in to my heart (though I mystrusted not
the coming of ye night again) yet that I ought not to be neglygent in the
lords work according to the gift which is given me. But when I could find
nothing to quiet my mind for the setting forth thereof, without the danger of
some evil report, ye word of god (being the true salve for all manner of
sores, and the perfyt medesyne for all manner spiritual diseases) gave me
comfort prouokyng me to stay no longer therein by the parable of certain men
which received of their lord and master sundry talentes to be put in use for
his advantage until his return out of a strange country, in to the which
he took his journey. And after a long season the lord of those servants came
and rekened with them. Then he that had received.v. talentes said master thou
delyueredest unto me v. mat. xxv
talentes, behold I have gained with them.v. talentes mo. Then his master
said unto him, well good servant and faithful, thou have ben faithful in
little, I will constitute ye over much, enter in to thy masters joy. And he
that had received.ii. talentes had gotten other.ii. unto who^ like answer was
made. But the servant which had received but one talent and applied it to no
profit, but hyd it in ye earth came and said. Master I co^sydered that thou
wast an hard man, which repest where thou sowest not, and gathered where thou
strowest not, wherefore I was afraid behold, you have thine own. But for his
slothful and evil service he was rebuked, his talent taken from him and
given to him yt had many, and the unprofitable servant cast in to utter
darkness. When I remembered this saying of the lord which have received but one
simple talent in comparyson of other which have applied their wits and
lernyng to fulfill the lords pleasure as it appears by their excellent works
and books that they have written, yet feryng lest this small talent should be
taken from me, and so to receive the dyspleasure of my lord, which ought more
to be feared then the displeasures and dysprayses of all men, and his favor
and love more to be extemed desired and sought for, then ye favor of all
creatures. I thought it more conuenyent to follow his will then to regard the
false judgments and the untrue reports of such as know not the truth.
And also of them which know it abusing their knowledge to their great
danger and parell. Wherefore as one intendyng to save al thing as upright as
may be, I have attempted to set forth this my rude work, being as the common
term gothe as plain as a pack staff. And for it shall appear that I seek
not the favor of man, I have not dedycate it unto one man. But because I would
that all men should seek the favor of god I have dedycate it unto all men, ye I
would that the poorest begget which can read or here it red should have it.
But whether they be poor or rich, to whose hands this little book shall
happen to come I her^ely desire the^ not to stycke to any thing which is here
written ferther then they shall think it approved by ye scripture and word of
god, and as I have written in ye book following so I admonysshe you in this
prologue before to take this work for an exortacyo^ to comfort and counsel
all men to read and here the scripture, ephe. v.
that they may understand what the will of god is. And after yt they are ones
called that they may labor also to be chosen, mat. xx. and xxii.
for many are called and few be chosen. But surely who soever be chosen will
put to his helping hands for to repair again the lords temple which is
not made with men's hands. act. xvii
I trust in God to se this temple in his perfeccyon that I may rejoice as the
people of Jerusalem did at the reparyng of the temple and cite again. i. ^^d.
iii.
whereof ye shall perceive more in this work following, unto the which work I
have caused my name to be set, not for any praise that I entende to seek
therein, but for certain consyracyons mouynge me thereunto. The one is that I
have herd by report of other men that diverse be offended with sundry books,
which being without name or aucthor have rather troubled their conscience
then set it in a quietness, and that many have been suspected to be doers
thereof which were never of counsel nor knowledge therein. And I may believe
the thing to be ye more true, for in a small piece of work or twain which I
have set forth my self geuynge it no certain name, diverse persons of diverse
men have had ye fame and report to be doers of it. And though I pass not who
have the praise, so yt ye glory of god and his truth may be roted and take
place in ye hertes of men. yet as there is nothing so perfyt, but yt of some
men it is dispraised and no meruayll seeing the very truth (which is the word
of god) has been evil reported of many. Therefore I think not ye any work of
man can content al men. And for these consyderacyons with other necessari that I
omyt I have put unto this my name as one being content to take disprayse with
praise, pain with pleasure and to be ready if any fault should be to bear ye
burden thereof my self as he yt knows ye secrets of men's hertes be a
wytnes and judge unto me to who^ be honor praise and glory for ever and ever.
Sapi. i.
Amen.

Finis.
These be the fautes escaped in the pryntynge. In the first page of B the.ix.
line these for their. In the first page of E the xiiii. line lyberte for
lyberalyte. In the.iiii. page of F the.xii. line of Christ In the.xiii.
page.xvii. line of G the for their. And in the last page of the same say for
lie,

WHat christian heart way lyth not, which does cogytate and remember how
uncharitably ye people of god have been dysceaued and that of no little time,
through crafty scole masters. And false prechers. Coll. ii.
which more regarding the satysfyenge of these detestable apetytes the^ the
salvation of the precious souls of me^, have kept the^ from the true
knowledge of his holy gospel, that should instruct them the perfyte and redye
way unto him, which said. Mat. xi Eccl. vi
Come unto me all ye that labor and are ladyn and I shall refresshe you. i.
Pe. ii. Esa. liii
So that the people have been as sheep strayeng in wilderness knowing not
whyther to go. John^. x Pro. xxxvii.
And if any hearing the voice of their true shepeherde, began to take ye
straight pathe or way toward him, mat. vii
there were a sort of rauenyng wolves always waiting redye to rent and
devour them, but our merciful Christ being the good shepherde of his
flock. John^. x Ezech. xxxiiii. Miche. v.
Now having compassyon upon the great dystruccyon of his sheep. Sendes abroad
his servants and faithful mynysters to seek and gather them which were
scattered abroad, togythers again / who^ the wolffes and papystycall foxys
dare not abide to try withal. But yet alas for pytye / there is a great
noumbre of Christ's flock, which have been kept so long from heryng the
voice of their shepherde, that scarsly they know him, Ioh. iiii
now calling them unto him. They stand in a stay dowtyng whether it be he and
his mynysters that calls them or not. And some will harke^ nothing at al unto
his voice, so that many run hedlynge still into such snares as were invented
to take the^ in. Whose miserable estate I know not what to say unto. What would
you that Christ should do more for you then he has done, Ioh. iii. Romans v i.
Pe. iii
he has given his life for the redemption of your souls, and has left unto
you his holy Testament that therein ye may behold and understand what his
godly will is. And though it have been long kept from you. yet now of his
merciful goodness ye have fre lybertye to pervse it. Also he has appointed unto
you true and faithful mynystres of his word / with sure and strong defenders
/ against such as were wont to be deuourers of his sheep. What thing else do
you lack / these things are the excellent gifts of the grace of god, and if
ye lack grace and strength to come unto him / why call ye not for it. And ask
it of him i^ who^ ye have a promise by christ that what so ever ye desire of
the father in his name / it shall be given you I meruayll ye consider and
remember not how such as took on them John^. ^ Mat. xxi. Mat. xi
to be your pastors in time paste have pylled you. If ye will still follow
them / ye may well be resembled to a froward or folysshe sheep yt will run
among the breres and rent ye woll from his own back / or in to a dyke and
drown him self / your wits in this does appear to be no better then a
shepes wit / god has given you the use of reason / and to none other creature
but unto man only. And for as much as ye will obstynatly abuse that noble and
excellent gift / whereby only ye excel yt bruyt beasts. I can not se but
your folly is inexcusable. Think you it shall be a suffycyent excuse for you to
say / the bishops / the priests / and such as were our gostly fathers taught
us this to do / and our fathers this many years before us have followed this
way. Truly what way so ever your fathers followed / if it were not the same way
/ that christ appointed them by his gospel to walk in / without the great
mercy of god be reserved unto them, man. ^v
the blind folowers with the blind guydes are fallen both in the pyt. Howbeit
I suppose verily if the gospel of god had been so preachid unto your fathers as
it is unto you, they would have repented there yngnoraunces and iniquites much
more the^ many do now at this time / ye and if the gospel might have had fre
passage adn to be preached unto all creatures as Christ commanded his dyscyples
to do, Man xvi. i Mat^ xxviii. Ioh. xi
I think verily that Idolatrye should never have crepte in to the church of
Christ as it has done. For it is to be supposed that when the bishop of Rome /
with such as pretended to be the successors of Christ and his appostles /
delyted not in pouerte / but took pleasure in pride, and could no longer away
with the rule yt their master Christ had prescrybed unto the^ / supposyng they
should never attain to be lords and masters by that science. Then they laid
their heddes together how they might peruerte and suppress the gospel, and
to oppress all those ye contrary to their minds would stycke there unto, then
made they decreys and laws to serve for their own purpose, and under a holy
pretense set them forth to begyle the people withal. And when they had begyled
kings and princes / and such as had their auctoryte by the word of god. Then
they sone persuaded yt most part of the people thereunto. And such as would
cleue to gods gospel / and not to their constytucyons / were taken as
heretykes and constrained to adjure or to be brent. And when they had brought
their purpose to pass somewhat according to their own minds / that the
princes and their people obeyed them. Then that antichryst the bishop of Rome
was not ashamed to exempt him self from all princes laws / and to put the
law and testament of the lord god under his foot / as though god and man /
heaven and earth had been at his commandment. But as for purgatory it was a
palace of his own / every man knew he might do there what him list. And
after he had (with the help of his loving friends) attained to the glory of
his usurped papystycall power / if any prince began to wtstand his wicked
pleasure out came the thonder bolte of exco^municacion to interdicte both him
and his realm / as the chronicles of England and France can specyfy. It is no
marvel though our fore fathers have been disceyued / and wandered in darkness,
seeing they were taught with blind tradicions, and the light of gods word
were taken from the^. Wherefore their folly is not so great in the sight of god,
as ours, Ephe. v
to whom the light is offered, and do refuse it. And as I said before, I think
that diverse of our fathers would have repented much more, then many of us do
if gods word had been so preached to them as it is unto us. I have herd some
ask this questyon. We marvel say they yt this knowledge has been so long
kept from us, and from our fathers i^ time past this many years, and that it is
now come to pass more then in an other time. This is a very dyffuse questyon,
howbeit ye shall here my mind in it. It is.v. or.vi. thousand years past syns
our first father Adam, Ge^. iii
transgressed the commandment of the Lord for eating of the apple. And it
is now but a. M D. xxxviii. years syns our savior christ the second person
in Trynyte suffered his passion for the redempcyon of the sins of all the
world. i. Pe. iii Rom^ v Math. xxvii.
There were a great many of years from the time that Adam sinned, until christ
paid the ransom thereof with his blood, and many thousands committed sin
in the mean season before Christ came. Now if any man could tell me why that
Christ came no rather to redeem ye world, either why that he suffered more
than, then at another time, me think I could answer the^ dyrectly to their
q^styon. I can say no more but as ye will of God the father was that his son
should then come to save the people, Luc. xix Ioh. iiii
whom Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, nor any of all the holy fathers could save (yet
were they as holy as all the bysshoppes of Rome that ever was) So is it his
godly will that his holy gospel which has been long kept from us, should now
be preached again unto us. But to answer you why rather now then at an other
time, or wherefore it has been so long kept from us. To. xii. Esa. xl.
I will say with saint Paul (Quis enim cognouit sensum domini, Rom xi. Esa. xi.
i. Co. ii.
aut quis consiliatius eius fuit.) Who has known the mind of the lord, or
who was his counselors. Christ answered his disciples that demanded of him,
if he would at that time set up the kingdom of Israel again, saying. Act. i.
Mat. xxii i.
It belongs not unto you to know the times or seasons which the father has
kept in his own power. It is not mete for men to search out the secrets of
god nor to be of his counsel. Peradventure I could guess wherefore this
knowledge has been taken away from the people, by other examples that I have
red in the hystoryes of the bible, of the children of Israel, which often
times forsook the law of the lord and fell to Idolatry, for the which they
were punysshed with diverse plages, and as long as their minds were corrupted
with Idolatry so long were their hertes and their eyes blinded, yt they had no
power to harken nor look on the law of the lord. Idolatry likewise I suppose
has been the pryncypall cause that his gospel and his holy word has been
taken away from us. i. Re. iii.
King Solomon yt was king over Israel and had such wisdom given him as
never none had before him, nor never shall have after him, iii. re. vi
which builded the temple of god in Jerusalem, as long as he walked in ye
ways of the lord al things did prospere with him. In riches he did for his
time excel all men. He had all the pleasures that his heart lyked. But at last
he abused the gifts of god, his wisdom, his riches, iii. re. xi.
and fell to Idolatrye. He builded hye houses unto Idolles, and followed not the
Lord unto the end as his father Dauyd did. And then though the lord spared
him for his fathers sake, yet from his son was there taken.x. trybes. And at
length from his posteryte, which also fell unto Idolatry, was taken the trybe
of Judah by the king of Babylon, ^^ii. Re. xxv.
the Cite of Jerusalem destroyed and the temple of god beaten down to the
ground. And the king with the chefest of his people and all his riches led
captyue in to babylon. But when it pleased god to have co^passyon upon his
people, he delivered them again from they captyuyte, and brought them to the
land which he before had given them to possess, where they builded again
the temple and the Cite of Jerusalem that was dystroyed. i. Esd. iii.
And when they laid the foundacyon of the lords house they reioysed with all
melody, they considered the great mercy that God had done unto them, and gave
him thanks. But alas the people now adays consider not how they are delivered
out of Babylon, out of captyuyte and bondage from the bishop of Romes heavy
tradycyons, and brought again to the perfyte law of lybertye, to the Gospel
of God that heavenly Jerusalem. Where is the Joy and melody that ye should make
for your delyuerau^ce. Where is the thanks and praises that ye should give to
God for his great mercy showed unto you. I think ye have more feared ye
bishop of Romes curses, the^ ye now regard the blessyng of god fallen upon
you. With what blessing would you expecte, to be blessed with all yt a
christian heart ought more to desire, then a ready way unto the kingdom of heaven
to be opened unto you. Ge. xv iii. To. iiii.
The Lord made a covenant with Abraham that his seed should possess a
temporal kingdom and regyment. Remember what a kingdom it is that is
promised unto you, it is not a kingdom that flows with milk and honey as
theyrs did. Exo. ii ^xo. xiii
It is a celestyal kingdom ye flows with ye grate and presence of god. The
confort, joy, and co^modyte, whereof no tongue can express, neither heart can
think. It is not a kingdom yt shall have an end, or where ye i^habitours may
be distroyed as they were by nabuchodonosor, iiii. Re. x^v.
it is a kingdom yt shall contynewe for ever. And ye celestyal cytezens shall
live in such rest, that nothing shall have power to inquiet them. I merualye
that ye are so unthankful for this blessyng. Remember ye not from what bondage
ye are delivered? Why have ye no better to repair again the temple of the
Lord, which our enemies of Babylon sought for to dystroye. And through their
feigned holiness begyled the rulers of ye world, causynge them to commyt
ydolatry, and to build up hye houses for to honor and worship their Idols in.
I do not so much covet and desire the excellent knowledge of lernyng and
eloquence which ye famous doctors, orators, and poets have had) wryti^g not
only in the latin tongue, but also in our own vulgar speech, whereby I might
excyte you to take pleasure i^ redyng of this work, as I ernestly desire to
move you to take conforte and co^solacyon in redyng and heryng of the word of
god, whereby ye might perceive and perfytely understand yt his living temple
(which is even your selves) has been long time in decay, and now of his
mercyful goodness (without our awn deseruyng) brought again to his first
fou^dacio^, whereupon we have fre liberte to bild. Is it not a shame and great
rebuke to us yt we (which have received ye name of christ, to be called
cristiens) should appear to be less thankful, and to take any less joy and
comfort in repayryng of our temple, then ye Jews had (which lived only under
Mosyes law, to bylde again their temple of stone. when ye people were delivered
from their captyuyte, which Nabuchodonosor had led unto Babylon, It was he that
might put to his hands for the buyldyng of the temple again. And when the
buylders were layenge the foundacyon thereof, the people gave thanks and
praises unto the lord, And lauded him with Symballes and trompettes. ^^^d. iii.
And many of the ancient fathers and priests which had seen the house in his
foundacyon before, wept and cried for Joy so that the noyes gave a great
sound.

This temple was but a temple of stone made by men's hands to ye honor of
god. And where the arc of promise and covenant that the Lord made with their
fathers was put in, yet note how they rejoiced to se it set up again. Now ye
that be of Christ, ii. co. vi.
ye are as saint Paul says the temple of god. Why rejoice ye not in the
repayryng of your temple again, ye have a sure and substancyall foundacyon to
build upon, which is laid already unto your hands. i. Cor. ii^
Christ him self is your foundacyon, and though your adversaries have
attempted to pluck down some small stones thereof. yet is there a corner stone,
mat. exi. i. Ephesians. ii
which joins the walls together, against whom they had no power. i. Pe. ii.
It is a sto^blyng stone for all them ye strive against it. They have stryued
so long against this stone that they have hurt them selves. your foundacyon
and corner stone is both one thing. It is christ which would have his temple
restored to his prestyne dignite. And now through his mercyful goodness has
every man fre lybertye to put thereunto his helpyng hand, according to the
gift and knowledge that is given him. But there has been a froward and crafty
sort of people that have hyndered the buyldyng of the lords temple a great
while, as there were some that hyndered ye buyldyng of the Cite and temple of
Jerusalem There were a certain of the hethen people which wrote their letters
unto the king of persia (named artaxerses) which ar that time had the Empire
in his dominion, i. ^^d. iiii.
saying if this City be builded, and the walls made up again. Then shall not
they give trybute, toll, and yearly costome. And it shall apere in Chronicles
that this City is sedycyous and noisome unto kings and regyo^s. And yt they
caused other also to rebel of old, with these and such other things they mouyd
the king to send his commandment that the work should go no further forth,
and then seaced the work of the house of god at Jerusalem, and continued so
unto ye.ii. year of Darius king of persia. And has not likewise the bishops
of Rome and their adherentes (long time fearing the decay of their kyngedome)
perswadyd kings and princes, to believe that such a like matter should happen
unto them, and that it should be a cause of sedycyon, if the temple of god
should be renewed and exalted again which is, if that the people should have
the word of god in their maternall tongue, they said it is to hye a matter for
them to meddle with all, they must receive it at our hands. And as we do
expound it unto them. For well they knew if that matter came to pass, that
then their craft and falsehode would be spyed, they knew that many of their
constitucions and the true word of god could not agree in one mind togythers.
And now when some of our holy prelates perceived, that God would no longer
suffer his Gospel to give place to their wicked purposes, but that it should
come forth in spyte of their beardes. Then began they to cloak the matter
and as though they were innocent of all manner of harms, when they saw no
remedy said, they were contented that it should come forth in English, so
that it might be truly translated. They put great dowtes in the true
translacyon thereof. But how many of them did there put to their helpyng hands
for the translatyng of it. I think verily if other men had not taken more pain
therein then they did, it would not yet have come to that point yt it is now
come unto. And how they wrested and perverted the scryptures when they had them
in their own hands, and that all me^ were forbidden to meddle therewith but
them selves. It is euydent enough to every man that has any zele unto the
truth. He is very symply learned that does not perceive how wrongfully they
have applied this saying of Christ to Peter. Tu es Petrus et dabo tibi claues.
mat. xvi luce. vii.
etc. And of ye lepers that were cleansed whom Christ bad to go and show the^
selves to the priests, leui. ^^^^
which that famous clerk and doctor Erasmus in his paraphrases upon the
gospel does otherwise expound it, than I have herd diverse both priests
and freres which with that text would bolster up their auriculer confession.
And an hundred such places wrested they in scripture, to make for their
purpose. I will not much treat of that matter, for such as be well learned,
who^ god has raised up to set forth ye truth of his glory and to repair
again, his temple have both written and spoken of their false peruertyng of
the scryptures much better then I can do. But truly I think in my conscience
that they shall render a strayte rekenyng for the people of god who^ they have
dysceyued with the scryptures so untruly applied and taught unto them, I pray
god to grant the^ his mercy, for the thing is not so light as every man
thynkes it to be* It does appear in the first book of Esdras, i. Esd. i
after that god had styred up the spyryte of Cyrus king of persia to have the
house of god builded again at Jerusalem in Judah, and that he had given fre
lyberty to all them that were of his people, ii. Para. xxxvi.
and had been captyue long time in babylon to go home into their own land
again to build the house of the lord, there were a certain of the hethen
people as ye have red before that let the going forth of the work after
it was begone, so that it stood in a stay, until king Daryus time which
afterward reigned over the persia^s. This Darius found out in the lybrary
house of king Cyrus his predycessour that he had given in commandment to
build the house of the lord at Jerusalem. ^. ^^^. vi.
Wherefore he mouyd with ye same zele and mind renews the commandment of
Cirus, and ^yueth the^ license to buyld ye temple with all things necessary there
unto belonging. Who will not think but that this was an exydynge consolacyon
and com^orte to all the people, which couetyd the going forth of the lords
work, and a great dysco^fort unto all them, that desired the hynderaunce of
the same. And as it is to be thought of them, so is it likewise to be supposed
of us in this present time. Almighty god the father has moved the heart of our
most gracyous king to look in the library In the holy will and testament of
his son Jesus christ our only savior, being the fou^dacion of his temple upon
ye which Peter Paul, James, i. Cor. iii
John^ and al ye apostles with diverse other holy me^ bylded, and received a
commandment of ye lord to bild upon none other fou^dacio^ the^ ye which he
had laid. Bbut the^ ca^e there such a so^t as I have written of ye enuyed the
going forth of the lords work. And though it were out of their powers to
distroy it, yet have they hyndred the same a long season. But as the will of
god is (with who^ there is no reason to be made, wherefore he does it more now
then at an other time) our godly king being inspired with the spirit of
grace, renueth the commandment of our savior Christ, geuyng fre lybertye to
build up ye lords temples again. He fears not the adversaries thereof, but
expulseth them, and wypeth away Idolatry. iiii. Reg xviii. Number. xxi
Even as the good king Esechias did, which brake down the brazen serpent yt
Moses had made for a remembrance of the power and goodness of god, yet for
co^myttyng Idolatry and worshypynge of it he feared not to break it down,
neither their hye houses in whom they worshypped their ydols. And like unto ye
good king Josias, iiii. Reg xxii.
when the book of the law was found in the house of the lord, after he had
mourned because his Fathers had not herkened unto that book to do all that was
written therein. He caused it to be red unto all his people, and made a
covenant with them, that they should walk after the lord, and keep his
commandments, witnesses and ordynau^ces, with all their heart, and with all
their soul. iiii. Reg xxiii.
And that they should set up the words of the covenant which were written in
that book. And all the people entered in to the covenant. And has not our
most godly king done even in like manner. Has he not sent abroad through all
his realm, that ye covenant of the Lord (which is his holy gospel) should
be truly and and syncerly preached unto all his people. And because they
should the better observe and keep the Lords commandments and walk in his
his wayis has he not given his people fre lybertye to have the law of the
lord in their maternall tongue? who will think this to be a small benefyte?
truly in my opinion it is of such valor that English men had never greater
cause to thank god for and to pray for the gracyous prosperytye of their
king then for this matter, it is a thing hyely to be extemed for a king to
have Justice mynystred wtin his realm, that as the saying is. The Lamb may
dwell by the Wolf, the poor man by the rycher and one quyetly to live by
another. It is a thing of great comfort unto that realm, which has a wise
poletyke and valiant prince to defend his domynyon against foreign nacyons, and
rebellyons if need do require, it is a great benefyte of god unto that
country that has a kind loving and merciful prince unto his people. Now if
these things with many mo then I can recyte be occacyons, unto subjects to
bear faithful hertes and true obedyence unto their sovereign lord and king.
As I said before English men were never more bound to it then they be now.
But yet among all things if I could recyte a thousand more then I can do, yet
could I not reken one thing wherein we ought to receive so great consolacyon.
And hertely to rejoice in / as in ye god has sent us a king which so
gracyouslye settyth forth his glory and causes his people to be fed with yt
ghostly fode which christ spoke of. Mat. iiii Deu viii s^^^. x^i.
Man lives not only by bread, but by every word that procedyth out of the
mouth of god. The holy Gospels are the words that procedith out of his mouth.

And if the people had been so long kept from bodily sustynaunce as they
have been from their ghostlye food.

I think there would have been but a slender company remaynyng at this time to
inhabyte this land. And yet it is a strange rekenyng to here the unwise
sayenges of many of the people, say they not, why should we not live as our
fathers has done before us, they believed this, and they believed that. And we
think there were as good men in those days as there be now. And why should
we not do as they did. This is their opinions, whereunto me think I could make
them a reasonable answer (if reason would suffyse to satysfy them.) This is
true yt the word of god was kept from our fathers, and they were made to
believe that if they should exercise the^ selves therein it would make the^
heretykes. And instead thereof they were fed with the bishop of Romes
constytucyons, so that in contynuaunce the lively faith that was due unto the
word of god was changed and given unto deed Ceremonies. I pray you take me
not now at ye first, that by this saying I entende to disalowe all good
Ceremonies. Do not as the saying is of the nun, when she had red (Omnia
probate) because it served her intent red no ferther, where the next words
following were (quod bonum est tenete.) When ye have seen my work thoroughly ye
shall perceive what my conscience does allow and dysalowe. But to return to
my matter. I said it was given unto Ceremonies that which apperteyned unto the
word of god. And the word of god was kept from our fathers, which is now
declared unto us, they could not here it for it was not taught unto the^, they
could not se it for it was kept from them. Wherefore seeing we here that which
they herd not, se that they saw not, and know that they knew not, merueyll not
though we do the things which they did not, there were much more folly to be
imputed unto us for following of their ways. Then unto one that would take on
him to ride a far journey by night which knew never a foot of his way. And
were also certain that no man would tell him the straight way. The light is
given unto us, what madness were it to walk then in darkness. The redye
way that we ought to walk in is manyfested unto us. Is it not then of a
froward mind that many do refuse it. Perchance there be diverse that stand
in dowte whether the ways that their Fathers walked were perfyte, either else
the wa^es that men are now taught to walk in. To them that be of that mind I
say, if there remain any wrytynges what faith your Fathers were of. And
what ways they walked then compare them to the scripture and will of God, And
if they agree therwithall, dowte ye not but they be good, and if not then think
not the contrary but they be evil. For it is the true twytche stone to try
out the good from the bad. And truly if ye will follow them whose ways and
doctrynes agreed not with the scripture of God / because they had it not / nor
could not be suffered to have it. And ye have it daily preached unto you, and
may read it and here it in your mother tongue if you list, I can not le the
contrary, but where as they offended of ygnorancy, your offense is of
obstynacye. And ye may be counted madder then they which will wyllyngely run
into the fire and burn them selves. For when the book of the law of God, was
found in the Temple, which had not been seen long time before and brought to
Iosyas the king, ^ii. Reg xxii.
he wept and rent his clothes fearing leest the wrath of god should come
upon him and his people, because their fathers had not herkened unto the words
of that book, to do all yt was written unto them therein. He mourned for his
fathers iniquites and said not as men say now adays. Why should we not live
as our Fathers have lived, or why should we not do as our fathers have done
before us, for if our fathers had seen the days that we se, many of them would
have reioysed thereof much more then we do. And I think not the contrary but
they did also couete and desire with all their hertes and were full sorry that
they could not se it. Wherefore I mystrust no more the mercy of God to be upon
them, then it was upon diverse holy men that were in this world before Christ
came to suffer his passyo^, which faithfully believed in his coming to redeem
the world for sin, Luce. x^
and many coueted to se the days of the lord, which saw it not (but in
faith) Symeon desired desired it and opteyned his desire. And when he had seen
Christ, being but a child and he an old man, Luc^. ^^
his saying was (Nunc dimittis seruum tuum domine. etc.) Now lord suffer thou
thy servant to depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy savior wherefore
all ye in whom there is any spark of faith to be redeemed by the merytes of
Christ. By the which the holy fathers that were here before Christ came, and
have been syns that time, and ever shall be unto the worlds end are saved. I
exhort and desire to receive this holy doctrine yt is now offered unto you. And
not obstynatly to refuse it. For there is much more to be required at your
hands then at your fathers, which had not that light opened and lyghted unto
them that you have. And as I hope to be sauyd my self, so do I couyt the
salvation of your souls. Wherefore I instantly desire you to have a perfyte
faith in Jesus christ. so that ye works thereof may testefye your faith to be
good, even as good fruit does testefy the tree to be good. But beware that in no
condycyon ye attrybute onye salvation to be due unto your deeds but unto faith
only. For when ye have done all that ever ye can do, yet say ye be unprofitable
servants. And yet if ye do not good works your faith is but a ded faith,
and no more extemed to be good, Luce. vi ^^t, vii
then a tree is ye brings forth evil fruit, for it is the good tree that
causes the fruit to be good, and not the fruit yt makes the tree good, so
likewise it is faith yt brings forth good works, and not works good faith.
I had not thought to have spoken so much of faith and works, had I not herd
with mine ears notwtstandyng yt the scripture is in English and that it is
preached unto them yt many men yet can not frame their faith in the merytes of
Christ to be only a suffycyent salvation for them, but would patche it up with
their own merytes. Where as concerning yt, they are greatly disceyued, for
good works is but a testymony that ye faith is good, by the which only all
our salvation comes. And yet is there an other thing wherewith ye christen
co^gregacyon have been pyteously disceyued, beside ye confydence in their own
good works in trustyng to ye merits of saints every man as his affection
lay, some unto one saint and some unto an other, and yet ye saints merytes
were insufficient to save the^ selves, for all they were saved by christ as we
are bound to trust for to be. And though some would obiecte against me, yt
they put no confydence in the saints merytes, but only in the saints
merytes, but only prayed the saints to pray for them. I marvel the^ whereof
it came that men had more affection to one saint then to another, in one place
then in an other. This ye can not deny me, ye thing is to apparent. Though ye
deny me the first which is as true as that. What is he that has been one of
these pope holy pilgrims, yt can excuse him self for puttyng dyuersyte not
only betwyxte saint and saint, but also betwyxte image and image. Who thought
that saint James was so good in any place as at Co^postella, or saint Peter at
Rome. And here within this realm did any of the holy pilgrims think our
lady of Ipswytch, Worcestre, Wylsdon, or any of them all to be so bountefull as
our lady of Walsyngham. No our lady of Penryce in Wales was not like unto her.
was not this a goodly honor given to our Lady and to the saints, to think
the^ to be more holy in one place then in an other, or that any holiness,
grace or virtue at all should persyst in a painted stock or stone cloak the
matter who that list. And ye that think to be wise with the best that can make
for your excuse. An ho^dred thousand poor people within this realm yet living
have been and be disceyued with such affeccyonate and peuysshe holiness. And I am
sure that god suffered as well for them as for those that were their furred
hodes, and believe verily that they have been ceduced thereunto by such as now
wynke at the matter, which were not ashamed to belly the saints and to mock
the people with their feigned miracles. I think there can be no greater
dishonor done unto the saints then with such vice and vnthryftynesse, as in
diverse places followed of ye invented worshypyng of them. There is a custom
used specially in ye west part of England to have watches kept at churches and
chapels upon the saints eue^s. And if eating, drinking kissyng, pipyng,
syngyng, and dau^syng be a mete thing to honor ye saint and to be used in ye
temple, then is ye saint as well honored and the church as well used as can be
thought or devised. They have a term theris called boustenyng, which is to
make the blind to se, ye dombe to speak, ye defe to here, ye halt and lame to
go. True it is yt they which never saw nor had hering nor felt any thing at
all have opteyned this grace there (but not i^medyatly) for it was ever.xl.
wekes aft. Before ye benefit of this bousteni^g took his perfeccyon ye know
what I mean. if I should recyte ye abhomynacio^s (which I ashame to put i^
writing or remembrance) it would co^teyne a large volume of it self. mat. xxi
Re. viii Esa. v. Ier. vii
Christ drove out ye buyers and sellers of ye temple sayng my house is a house of
prayer, which ye have made a den of thieves, upon this ye church has be^
converted to a very good use, for under a pretense of prayer aperyng to follow
ye will of christ ye prestes have permytted his house to be changed from a den
of thieves to a den of rybaldes and harlottes. And though they would say yt no
act of syn was committed in the church, yet true it is yt ye occasyo^ of syn
arose oftymes only of their metyng there, and the bargens of vice was often
made and appointed there, and the thing which elswher could not be brought to
pass at their coming to such holy places took effect there as it often apered
before ye year came about. O merciful god yt ye pictures of his saints should
not only be set up to cause his people to commit ydolatry, but for ye
covetousness of their offering pence suffered to be a cloak of vice, syn and
ribaudry, but what meruayl is it that they have so abused the pyctures of his
saints which fear not to abuse the pycture of him self and his precious
blood so belyeng it that it may cause any christen heart to lament and weep to
think thereon, and though ye thing have been written and preached of al ready,
yet can it not be to often put in remembrance to cause both the doers and
permytters thereof to repent and be ashamed of their folly, if there be any grace
in them. I omyt many things to write of because that all me^ can not yet abide
to here ye truth. But I trust the time is come that ye truth shall declare it
self as concerning ye saints, I would men should judge none otherwise of me,
but that I love them as well and better then they which lycke and kiss their
images. For I would that all honor yt is due unto them should be given them.
But in no condycyon that any thing which does apperteyne unto Christ should
be taken from him. For it does appear by the great pains yt ye have taken to
seek these holy places, weryeng of your bodies, spe^dyng of your substance,
and many leuyng their children and household at home in penury, and by
knelynge, kyssyng and praye^g before ye images, yt ye have a certain faith and
co^fydence in the^ wherein ye rob god of his due honor and glory, but there be
a sort of crafty scole masters which have taught you to say, when any such
things is imputed unto you that it is all for gods sake yt ye do it, and yt
ye do it for to please god withal. Alas that ye will still be so dysceyued to
suppose that ye please him, with that thing which hyghly does dysplease him.
Why will ye not look in his testament, or herke^ unto his prechers that ye may
know what his godly will is, romans iii. Ephe. v tess. iiii.
and what ye should do to please him. And if ye think ye are not bound to
know his will, but to follow your own wylles, and fantastycall appetytes, and
the wylles of the^ which sought not the glory of God, but their own fylthy
lucre and aduau^tage. Then does the law of god nothing at all aperteyne unto
you. It is to be thought yt ye have a certain zele unto Christ, but it is not
according to truth. Wherefore beware that zele will disceyue you, for as it
shall be no good ple for a man yt has committed felony, murdre, or otherwise
transgressed the kings laws, to say that he knew them not. No more it shall
be for you yt offend the laws and will of God to make such a like answer,
specially to the^ which may know it if they list. There be certain persons
which say it is better not to know ye laws of God then to know them and
follow them not. In deed to some men I think it is better but not unto all
men. It is better to our Fathers which could not be suffered to know it,
then unto such as at ye time attained the knowledge thereof and followed it not.
Luce. xii
For Christ says to whom much is given, there is much to be required of him.
But now at this time, the gospel and will of god is offered unto all men. It
is preached and taught unto them, who so ever do refuse to receive and here it.
There is as much or more to be laid unto his charge, the^ unto the^ which
knows it and follows it not, there is no excuse to be made in this matter.
why do they refuse it but because they would not follow it. And there be some
yt have an other reason. Behold say they these new gospellers how vnthryftely
many of them live, who are more covetous then they be, where regneth envy,
rancour, and malice more then in their hertes. They speak of love, concord and
charity, yet no men show less charity, nor less love the^ they do, they be
proud, they be lecherus, and al i^ vices as evil or wors the^ they which have
not the gospel. Truly I say every man is bound to know it and follow the same
to ye vtterest of his power, and they yt be such as ye have herd reported of,
reken them to be sclaunderers of the word of god in their deeds as other men
are in words, that speak evil of it. Luce. xii Iac. iiii
And their knoweledge shall be evil unto them. For the servant that knew his
lords will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many strypes. Let not the
noughty conuersacyon of the evil, pluck back your hertes from the knoweledge
of gods word, for it is not the scripture that makes them evil. Psalm. xxxvi.
But it byddethe them to abstain from evil and do good, and such as be evil
knowing gods word, without fail would be wars if they knew it not. But
through their noughty living they cause ye word of god to be evil spoken of,
so that they offend not only them selves, but are an occasyon to other men
to offend also, therefore the more sin is in them. Beware how ye speak
evil of the word of god, for it is a sin greater then al your good works
can satysfye again for it. Think not, nor say not, because such men, and
such men be nothing the better for the Gospel. Therefore I will not meddle
with it. What can thou tell what god would work in thy heart if thou dydest
read it, the thing is so good of it self, that thou art far from grace to
think it would work any evil in the. Doyst thou think because thou see
some lewd persons that know it and abuse their knowledge that thou should do
like wise. O folysshe man that so do mystrust the mercy and goodness of
God toward the, His goodness and mercy is laid forth for all men and though
every man have not grace to attain unto it. yet diverse men which have it not
at one time may have it at an other. And so they whom thou seyst to be evil
and know the scripture yet beware dispyse not nor resuse not ye scripture
therefore for it may work in their hertes at some other time when it shall
please god, to whom you may apoynt no time. There is yet an other opinion of
the^, saying they will here no preaching, because the preachers agree no better.
Truly it is an unwise reason, and in my mind but a feigned excuse, for if all
ye clergy of England agreed in one and preached one true way and doctrine yet
many, I suppose would be no more dylygent in heryng but as slow to come to ye
sermons as they be now, for thanks be to god ye thing is merely well brought to
pass, there are very few sermons made (specially in the Cite and about the
Cite of London) which is in the heart of the realm, that the one is
repugnaunt unto the other. Perchance there be some curres yt would feign bark
were it not that they more feared ye temporal scourge then the sword and
punysshment of God. And what be these that say they will here no preaching,
but even they which also will not read the scripture neither here it read
unto them, wherefore they are to be reproved of froward and obstynat ygnorancy.
Who is so blind as they that will not se. And who are more deffer then they
that will not here. For truly of this effycacy is the word of god that who
soever will come to read it, or to the preaching thereof, with a pure true and
unfeigned mind, willing to learn, and not to be a brabler, and a busy
dysputer thereof. He shall not all only receive great conforte and consolacyon
therein. But also the very fruit and knowledge to deserne the true preacher
of god, from him yt falsely peruerteth the scryptures to maintain there with his
own wicked intent and purpose. Now seeing that the word of god is so excellent
a thing that no condygne praise may be given thereunto. Woe may they be that
are sclaunderers thereof. zacha.
Wherefore return with a contryte mind unto god that he may turn unto you,
trust unto his promys and he will not dysceaue you. And say not with your
selves, I am old, I have lived this many years after this forte, It is to late
for me to change now. Remember the parable of certain men that were hired to
work in the householders vyneyarde, M^^
some came in the morning, some at noone, and some in the evening, and they
that came last had like reward with them that came first, and they which came
first, and at none, grudged at them that came last, because they had like
reward with them. Then said the lord of ye vyneyarde, why grudge ye, have I
not given you your promise, why should I not give to every man as it pleases
me. So men are called to repentance, some in youth some in mydle age, and
some in old age. And the lord may reward him as well that came last as he yt
came first, and no man may say unto him why do you so. So it appears that
heaven is not due unto men's good works and deeds, but it is given of the fre
lyberte and goodness of God unto al them that trusts in his promise, having
a perfyte faith in Jesus Christ. And how that faith may be known, I have
written you before. And if ye meruayll why the priests in time past told you
not this tale, and what ye cause was that they forbade you the scripture.
Truly they knew well that their living did not accord therwithall, and that it
was the thing that would manifest their pride, their covetousness, and all
their sinful living. Wherefore they bare men in hand that it was to hye matters
for the^ to meddle with, but that they must receive it of them. And how truly
they gave it unto the people. He yt has ears to here let him hear, and he
that has eyes to se let him se. Luc. x.
Behold for the kyngedome of god is come nigh unto you, which ye desire daylt
in your Pater noster, when ye say (adueniat regnum tuum) the Gospel is
preached and laid before you, yt ye may therein seek out what his will is, Luce.
xi Mat. vii
he byddes you seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you,
where will ye seek but in his holy testament. Will ye seek it in the bishops
of romes decretals and in Legenda aurea as your fathers did, truly ye may
knock then until your heads ache and seek until your eyes be blind, and yet
not find the way to ye kyngdo^e of god, ye shall as sone find it in Beuys of
Hampto^, and Guy of warwycke as among the holy books that ye and your fathers
in time past have been permytted to look on, but should I say that all our
fathers are loss which were not taught nor could not be suffered to know
the perfyte way god forbyde, for when Christ said to his disciples. Math.
xix. mar. x.
It is as hard for a Camel to go through the eye of a nedle as for a rich
man to enter into the kyngedome of heaven they aunsweryd Lord who then shall be
sauyd? He said that which is impossyble unto men is possible enough unto god
now seeing ye nothing is impossyble unto God. Luce. xiii.
I dout not but many of our fathers which walked not ye straight path unto
christ, because they could not be sufferid to know it (yet having a zele and
loui^g mi^d unto hi^ optained his mercy But unto us which have the open way
declared frowardly to refuse it there is non excuse will serve.

And now to return again to a part of my purpose, I ernestly exhort all
you which are not alonely my natyue country men, but also redeemed with the
same precious blood that I am, Romans v. ^^^. ix. i Pet. i i Ioh. i.
yt ye will put away your co^fydence in pilgrymages unto deed saints and
images. And to think as the truth is, yt it was but a thing invented to rob
from you your temporal substance, which the insacyable belly beasts did so
much covet and desire, that they nothing regarded, what became of ye precious
soul of man, which gold nor silver, man nor woman, saint nor aungel could
redeem, but only Jesus Christ, the immaculate lamb, which was reuelated
unto saint John^, Apo. v.
that was found worthy to open the book with the.vii. seals and none but he
nor to look thereon, in heaven in earth nor under ye earth. Think ye if any
thing could have redeemed man's soul, but only the son of God, that he
should have been sent in to this world to suffer hungre, cold, anguysshe, pain
and cruel death, no surely. Why are ye not the^ ashamed to seek unto any other
but unto him. Why run you ^o this image and that image, and put dyfference
among the^ and their holy places as though one were better then an other, where
there is never a good as ye do use them. And to think that ye please god and
honor him in sekyng of such places. I say plainly yo dysplease him, for ye do
contrary to his commandment, wherein ye dishonor him as much as may be. The
works that ought to be done pleasyng and acceptable in the sight of god are
contained in the holy scryptures, Deu. v
by the which ye are plainly prohibited both to make any image, and to worship
them. And what greater worship can ye do unto them the^ to knele unto them
kiss them, set up candels before them, and offer your money unto the^. I think
I might also say (and lie not) pray unto them. For whereof should this inanne
and vain speech arise with out a sertayne trust in them. When the people would
say, our vlessyd lady of Walsyngha^ help me, the holy rode of North door, and
the cross of Chaldon be my comfort, the true remembrance of the cross of
christ wherein they ought only to seek their consolacyon, joy and tonforte, was
forgotten or at lest abused unto a great nombre of crosses and rodes within
this realm. For the which (as reason is) myny are pulled down, but there
remain some yet, for all things can not be done at one time. I knew a holy
rode standing in England in a house of freres ye which have made the people to
believe and think yt the hear of his heed and berde did grow. What christen
herre can suffer this injury and mockyng of the people with the picture of
christ to be unrebuked written and spoken against. One of ye freres reported to
a friend of mine, that if it were not for that rode, they wist not how to
live, were not they worthy to have a good living yt pyked it out with ye pycture
of christ so execrably used. were not you prayers of these holy men suppose you of
great effect before god. were not these perfyte relygyous me^, and all things
well bestowed yt was given to the^. Judge ye yt have any reason or judgment,
for in my co^ceyte ye can not displease god more then with yt mayntenau^ce of
such idle and abhomynable beggars, and I think there can be no greter dishonor
done unto god the^ ye honoring of his picture so abused, and it is certain yt
ye committed ydolatry with kneli^g, praye^g and offering to it, and sei^g ye
commit ydolatry in the veneracyon of his own pycture. It is undoubted plain
ydolatry to worship or pray to any pyctures or images of saints, which in
their life time refused all honor refarryng it unto God, whom they sought
out in ye scryptures and preached, taught and exhorted all men unto him they
sent them unto no stocks nor stones to offer nor to worship them. Nor they
required no worship to be given to them selves, nor said not we shall save you,
but sent men unto Christ, and said follow us unto Christ. Did not saint Paul
reprove the people because they contended among them selves saying I hold of
Paul, 1. Cor. i.
I hold of Appolo. And at an other time when they would have done sacrifice
unto him and Barnabas. Act. xiiii
Did not they rent their clothes, saying why do ye this, we are mortal men as
ye be and preach unto you the gospel, yt ye should turn from these vain
things unto the living god. They would yt al honor should be given to god, and
not to the^ selves, and yet if saints ought to be honored for their virtuous
and holy life. And for converting of the people unto the true faith of Christ.
I am sure that saint Paul deserved it as well as any of them all. Thomas of
Cauntorbury (which byed for many proper points, if all things were truly
perspected and looked upon) deserved not to have like honor unto him, which I
am sure is to be nombred among the^ yt said. (No^ nobis dn^e no^ nobis, Psalm.
Cxiii.
sed nomini tuo da gloria^) Not unto us lord, not unto us, but unto thy name
give ye glory. Now seeing yt the saints do refuse such honor, which comes of
a supersticious holiness, and that their honor and glory persysteth only in ye
true honourynge of god, me think there is more folly in ye people (which after
such a sort will honor them) the^ there is to be imputed unto those which
seek to serve such masters that will non of their service, but utterly refuse
it. Consider who it is which above al things ought to be honored and served,
it is he yt will refuse none which faithfully will come unto him, it is he yt is
of power to keep all men, and gives fode to al living creatures, it is he yt
helps all them which call upon him, purposyng to observe his co^maundme^tes me
think this master is mete to be served, but let no man think himself mete
to do him service, which when he seyth or heryth what his masters will and
pleasure is to be done, will do a thing contrary to ye same, as though he were
wyser the^ his master. I grant there be few or non of his servants that
have not offendyd him, unless they were preseruyd by his grace. But he is
such a master ye will not cast of his servant for every tryfle and sclendre
fault, no though he have hyghly trespased against him and tra^sgressed his
commandments so he do not utterly refuse him. But when he reme^bres his
folly, and returns with a contryte mind, knowledgyng his offense, and
requy^yng pardon, he is always ready to forgive and to receive him again, Luc.
xv
eue^ as ye father was yt received his son, which had been in a strange
country, and consumed ye porcyo^ of his substance which his father gave him,
when he came home naked he clothed him and feasted him with a fatted calfe, sayng
to his fre^des, let us be merry. Behold my son which was lost and is found
again. So ye yt pretend to be ye people of god, remember i^ your minds how ye
have bestowed ye porcyon of your substance, I mean not only of your temporal
substance, but of the true and profit faith yt you promised at your baptym to
bear unto Jesus christ as concerning your transsytorye goods, you can not
deny but ye have bestowed it on deed Images, where his will is, ye should relyue
there with his own quycke and living Image. Luce. xxv.
The poor people which be sick, lame and blind, and the impotent and agyd
which can not labor and such as be in pryso^. ye have not followed his
pleasure, but done contrary unto it. Wherefore truly ye are not mete servants
for him, oneles ye repent your folly and folysshe ygnoraunce, if ye allege that
your gostly fathers taught you this to do. I say unto you that they be your
gostly dystroyers, that so counseled you to commyt ydolatrye, which for the
mayntenaunce of their naughty sinful life, shut you out of the kyngedome of
god, Mat. xxiii.
and would not suffer you to come thereunto, neither they them selves would
enter into it. The kingdom of god is taken in some places for his lively
word, Luce. x.
his gospel, his glad tidings which he brought to save the world withal,
through faith in his passion. For true it is that ye have been commau^dyd not
to read nor meddle therwithall, and they have been reputed and suffered as
heretykes which have presumed to do contrary to that commandment. But now
I pray you return home again as the prodygall son did unto his father. Luc.
xv
Behold what a feast is prepared for you, covet no longer to be fed with the
dregs of their tradycyons, which may be resymbled unto the coddes that he
would feign have eaten of, among the swyne. Now do as he did return home
again, the table is laid, the gospel of Christ is opened unto you, come and ye
shall here the comfortable words of christ. what joy there is in heaven for a
sinner that commyth to repentance. Luc x^
Consydre within your selves whether ye have not ben lost in sin or not,
when the faith which ye ought to have in Christ only and to be saved by the
merytes of his passion was divided and attributed part unto one saint and
part unto an other as it appears by sekyng unto the Images. Peradventure ye
will say we believed in god, and we sought ye image for gods sake. Whether ye
pleased god therwt or not ye shall here what he said unto Moses, Deu. v. Exo.
xx.
and to ye children of Israel. I am the Lord thy god, which has brought the
out of ye land of Egypt out of the house of bondage. Deu. viii.
Thou shalt have none other gods in my sight, thou shalt make yt no graven
image of any manner of likeness of the things that are above in heaven and
beneth upon the earth, nor in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not honor
them nor serve them, for I yt lord thy god am a jealous god vysytyng the sin
of the fathers upon the children to ye third and fourth generacyon of the^
that hate me, Deu. xxxiiii.
and show mercy upon many thousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments. I steadfastly believe that this commandment did not alone
perteyne unto the children of Israel, but unto all men, and is to be observed
of al those which to the worlds end believes Jesus Christ the son of god
to be ye savior of the world. Now ye that have made these images honored and
worshypped them consydre with your selves whether ye have not committed the
thing which the children of Israel were commanded by ye mouth of god not to
do. For I am sure they are like to some thing yt is i^ heaven above in ye earth
beneth or in ye water under the earth. O lord yt ye have turned you from ye
living god unto deed images which have eyes and se not, ears and here not,
noses and smell not, hands and feel not, feyt and goo not, mouths and speak
not, they are like unto them whom the prophet Jeremy admonysshed the people of
Jerusalem of, Bar. vi
when they were led captyue into babylon, whether it be good or evil that any
man do unto them. They are not able to recompense it, Eccle. v
though a man make a vow unto them and keep it not they will not require it.
They can not deliver a man from death, neither are they able to defend the
weak from the mighty, they can not restore a blind man to his sight, nor
help any man at his need, they can not show no mercy to the wydowe nor do
good to the fatherles, Cap. xiiii
They must be borne upon men's shulders, as those that have no feyt, whereby
they declare unto men that they be nothing worth. Confoundyd be they that
worship them for if they fall to the ground, they they can not rise up again
of them selves, when they be set up in the temple their eyes be full of dust
through the feyt of them that come in, their faces wax black through the smoke
that is in the temple. The owls, the swalowes and birds fle upon the^, and
the cattes run over their heads. They can not defend them selves from the
robbers and thieves, the very wicked are stronger then they, they strepe them
out of their apparel that they be clothyd withal, they take their gold and
silver from them and get them away. yet can they not help them selves, they
can give no sentence of a matter another defend the loud from wrong, to be
short they can not do so much as a crow that fleyth betwyxe heaven and earth.
He concludyth saying blyssed is the godly man that has no image and
worshyppeth none, Bar vi.
for he shalde far from reprove. Many things have I omyttyd to write of,
contained in this Epistle to the intent, that the minds of those which
think I have not written truly. And ye conscience of them which have been and
be yet combred with the execrable zele to venerate and worship them may be
mouyd to read the same. Whom I instauntly desire also to pervse the
xiii..xiiii. and.xv. Chapters of Sapience, called the book of wisdom. And to
resort unto such psalms and places of scripture, as the cotacyons in the
margent thereof shall induse you unto, and I doubt not but your conscience
shall be quyeted and satysfyed in that matter, onles it be such that obstynatly
will repugne against the sryptures and will of god. Which I count unworthy to be
called christians it shall also testefye unto you, how shamefullye ye have been
mocked withal and dysceyued, and what has been done with the offryng money and
other things offeryd unto our Images. Think you it may not be verifyed, as
Jeremy wrote unto the^ that the priests did adorn and trime their harlottes,
and their children with al. I suppose verily there was but a small porcyo^ thereof
given unto the syke and poor people. A lord that thy people should so be
^^^dyd, that their offering unto dee Images should be amayntenau^ce unto quick
and detestable harlottes. This is the goodness that comyth of your pope
holiness. This is the profit that commythe of your pain and pope holy
pilgrimage, whordome and aduoutry is maynteyned through your Idolatrye. I
think there is no faithful chryste^ heart to who^ god has given a mouth to
speak other a hand to write ye can suffer this in jury against his lord god
and his people to be unrebuked. Wherefore say not that I rail. For I suppose
it is my part and all christen men's parts not only to speak and write
against it, but hertelye to pray god to put in the rulers minds to reform
and route up the occacyon of such myscheue. The lord god be praised, the
thing is already gracyouslye begone, which I hope shall have like success and
ending. Wherefore look up ye that have professed to be Christ. Let bales prophets
no longer dysceaue you. I mean these wicked scole masters which through
covetousness made you to believe yt your pilgrimage going and offrynge unto
Images was pleasyng and acceptable unto god. Where in very deed it was plain
Idolatrye and a mere madness, to speak unto it that has no soul, and to make
Sapien xiiii.
petycyo^ unto it for health or life that is deed to pray unto it for help that
is not able to help it self and for a good Iournye to him that can not go.
And when a man is on the ragynge see or purposes to sail over it to call for
help unto a stock yt is far weaker then the tree that beryth him. Sapien xiiii.
gene. vi.
God caused an arc to be made and therefore do men commy. their lives to a
small piece of wood and are sauyd. Deu. iiii Deu. v.
But god commanded as ye have read before and as ye shall read following that
Images should not be made. What marvel is it then that the people often
perysshe, which put more confydence in the thing that the lord has forbyden,
then in the work which the Lord devised and caused to be made. ye I may
say (and lie not (then in the lord him self, as it often aperythe when
through the mercy and only goodness of god diverse have escaped the dangers
perryles, and ragynge tempest of the sea. Go bare fotyd, bare legged, and in
their shyrtes with ca^dels and tapers to sundry Images, which me think is a
pytyfull sight among christen people having one god, the lord and creator of
all things, whom all creatures ought to honor and obey, put their trust and
confydence in, seek their health and comfort at, Deu. vi. Bar. v.
and that only ought to be served and worshypped. It is not much to be
meruayled at, and if there be many yet that murmour at the puttyng down of
ydolatrye, specially in them that are not learned in gods word. For it is
hard suddenly to root out superstycyous holiness from the vnlearnyd peoples
minds, and many of ye prestes are very loathe to lose their offering pence.
For diverse things can not be so well mayntayned now as they were before. It
was no little su^mes of money that came yerelye to the prestes hands for
offri^ges i^ England. To my Judgment if it had been equally divided it would
have suffysed to have found all the poor and nedye beggars within this realm.
But if I were a beggar my self, truly, I would be very loathe to be found and
kept with that money offeryd unto Idols. I had rather beg my bread in froffe
and snow, then to be kept in a warm hospytall with it. Parauenture it will be
objected unto me y^ our images ought not to be called ydols. And that the
scripture means it not of them, but of such as were in the old time among
the gentyls and hethen people what and if I name them not Idols as theirs were
called, but affirm them to be Images and pyctures of saints. Which is the
best name that can be given them. yet if ye knele and pray unto them. I say
plainly that you commit ydolatry, choose whether ye will call them Idols or not
For what soever it be ye robs christ from his due honor and glory I count
it to be an ydol though it be an image of the best saint that is in heaven.
Saint Paul says that no fornycatour, ^. Cor. v. Ephe. vi
or unclean person, or covetous person (which is a worshypper of ydols) has
inherytaunce in ye kingdom of Christ. And in an other place he says how
agrees the temple of god with ydols, ye are the temple of the living god, ii.
cor. vi
as says god. These are the admonicions of saint Paul written in his
epistles, also in diverse other places, co^struct the^ as ye list and choose
whether ye will apply them to old ydols either to new images. And if there
were no images in saint Paul's time, then must ye needs grant me that they
were made syns And the^ I pray you what place have you in scripture, that will
stand with you for the veneracyon and setting up of them. Remember this saying
of Moses unto the children of Israel, deu. iiii.
keep well your souls for ye saw no manner of image in the day when the lord
spoke unto you out of ye fire upon mount Horeb, that ye dystroy not your
selves, and make you any image that is like a man or woman or beast upon the
earth, Deu. v.
or fethered foul under ye heaven, or worm upon the ground, or fysshe in the
water under the earth. etc. Now truly this commandment does nothing aperteyn
unto you, onles ye take the god of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, ye prophets,
and of the children of Israel to be your god if you say and believe that he is
your god, then do his precepts belong unto you, and not to you only but unto
all that believe in him, romans iii.
for he is not a god unto ye Iues only, but to the gentyls also.

O what pity was it, when that poison was first shed in to the church of
Christ, when that papystycall honor was usurped of the bishop of Rome to be
above Emperoures, kings and princes. And when he fell from pouertye unto
pride, falsely peruertynge the scryptures saying that he might bind and lose
at his pleasure. For then the ydolatry which Peter, Paul, and all the
apostles had wyped away with preaching of the word of God, began to renew
again, (...). xvi
Peter's keys were changed, he began to play check mate with his master, and
set up laws and co^stitucyons of his own making. He granted large
indulgences for vysytynge saint Peter's see at Rome, and then other perceiving
the profit thereof opteyned pardons, for vysytyng of syndry and diverse other
places. Then up rose, ydols, what images I should say and Christ was divided.
For where as the people held holy of him, i. Cor. i.
then began they to hold some of one saint and some of an other, and so have
continued many years. But call to your remembrance in whose name ye were
baptized. Were ye baptized in Peter's name, Paul's name or Iohn^s name, if ye
were, hold of them. If ye were chrystened in christ's name, then hold of
Christ and take him for your sauyoure, and his scripture to witness for your
mediatoure. i. timo. ii Heb. ix. Gyl iii^
Wherefore attrybute and give not unto his saints, that which only is due to
him self. For if ye do as I have written so write I again, their images so
abused are but ydolles, and your knelynge and prayenge before them is
ydolatry. But I dowte not though Christ have suffered long this injury unto
him self, and his holy gospel to be trodden under foot, ii cor. vi.
that now the acceptable time is come, so that his word shall florysshe
again in spyte of all the enemies thereof, and that they shall not be able to
abide ye trial of the great wrong that they have done unto the people of god
in keeping away of the sweet fruit that they should have had in his scripture and
to feed them with rotten apples and four crabbes of their own trees. A straw
for your false feigned persuasyons and lies that have taught the people to say,
we honor not the image but the saint whom the image does represent. Why then
do ye exteme the image of our lady not in all places to be like, and diverse
images of one saint to be like good. I might more truly say, to be like
evil. For as ye have abused them, there was never a good, And to be more
plain I can not se how ye can make them good, they that make the^ are like
unto them, and so are all such as put their trust in them. Psalm C.xiiii.
^a^ie^^ xiiii.


Happy or blessed is the tree where through ryghtuousnesse comes, but cursed
is the image that is made with hands. For though it be not called god, yet is it
a stale to rob men's hertes from God, and the honor which alone does
perteyne unto God. O crafty catchpolles that so have invented a name unto them
to be lay men's books, which God has prohybyted to be made, and to keep
from his people the book of his law and his holy testament, the books of the
prophets and appostles, and all the books of the holy fathers agreynge in one.
(as I began this work.) To instruct men the pertyt and true way unto him,
which said come unto me all ye that labor and are laden and I shall refresshe
you, math. ^
which he commanded to be preached and taught to his people, but be it now
that I grant you a ley that they were books to instruct the lay people. mar
xvi Math. xxviii
I am sure their instruccyon extendyd no farther but to put me^ in remembrance
of them whom they do represent. What knowledge have you by their deed and
domme pycturs of their virtuous living. Suppose you they were so appareled in
purple and gold and so set with owchys, bedes, rings, money, and other Jewels
as their Images be, no truly they regarded no such peltrye. Their affeccyons
were moved to other more noble and precyousser things, for the pycture of him
yt ye now garnysshe with gold, by his life time was coueryd with a garment
made of Camels hear, Mat. iii iiii. Re. i
and it is to be supposed (that as Christ reprouyd them which builded and
Lu^^. xi. Mat. xxiii
garnysshed the Sepulcres of deed Prophettes whom their fathers had slain)
that ye likewise which garnisshe, gyld and spare for no cost now upon deed
Images. Would scarslye bestow one penny upon the very saints, if they were
living. For truly their doctrine was the thing which ye can not abide to
hear. Even the Gospel of Christ, that is now preachyd and taught unto you.
I will not faye that ye would kill them which have suffered already for Christ
and his doctrine. Whom ye accounte now to be saints, but if they were living,
without fail ye would repute and call them arrant herytykes. And then I think
it should be a sklendre charity that ye would bystowe upon them. But whereof
happenyth this blyndnesse among you, but that instead of ye true books
contained in scripture both of god and his saints that preached taught and
followed him. ye have set up unto you a blind book, a dome Idol and a deed
Image, which can instruct you to no goodness, nor induce you to no virtue.
Perchance there hanges some old written table by it, contaynyng there in an
abhomynable lie, and a false feigned miracle or twain. But note one thing I
pray you, that where so ever such tables be, ye box to receive offrynge monye
is not or was not far of, and if that the box and offrynges be taken away,
and none permytted to be any more there, they that made and caused to be made
your blind books, and lyenge tables, would be more glad to pull them down the^
your selves, ye they would not pas if there were not one within christendom. But
I marvel that they trusted not the image with the offrynge monye, what need
they to make so strong boxys of iron or war did with plates of iron to keep it.
Me think if the monye had byne laid but even before the image, there could no
man have taken it a way but that his hand should have cleued to the altar or
to the place where the money lay, if they were so holy as they made them, but
men may perceive they had but small confydence in the^ themselves. yet taught
they the people to seek health at their hands which can do no good, nor say
none evil. For every sundry disease there was an image invented and set up.
One for heed atche, an other for tothe atche. One for chokyng, an other for
burning. One for the palsay, an other for the plage. It were to long a work
to reherce the^ all. But yet me think it was great pity that saint Vncombre in
poules was pulled down, for she was a great comfort and helper unto all good
wives which were troubled with shrewde husbands. But I meruell for what
purpose they offered otes unto her me think that offering was more mete to be
given unto saint Loy. For in some parts of England the horse cutters have.v.
pence for cuttyng of every horse a grote to the^ self and a penny for saint
Loye. It is to be thought he was some horse keeper or horse corser, wherefore
otes were more mete to feed his horses withal then to be offered to saint
vncumbre it is no meat convenient for a woman to feed of. I pray you good
women be not dyspleased with me for my plain writing. And if any of you be
troubled with an evil husband, the best counsel that I can give you is to
show your self so kind, loving, and meke unto him, that he may be ashamed
(onelesse he be past all shame) But to be good and gentyl unto you. It does not
belong unto my matter to treat betwyxte men and their wives. And also for
lack of experience because I was never married) It might chance where as I
purpose to please one that I should displease.ii. Wherefore I will resort to my
purpose. desyryng both men and women to think as the truth is, that any
thing which is written in this little volume concerning saints that it is
not written in their dispraise, another yet in the disprayses of such persons
which have been blinded (through false ypocrites) with superstycyous holiness.
Now knowledgynge in their hertes their folly and blindness, receauynge the
truth that is declared unto the^. For there were very few which have not
wa^dered in darkness. But to the^ in who^ gods holy doctrine can take no
place whose stomakes are so full stuffed up with syn and abominable Idolatry
that their ears can not here neither their eyes behold ye word of god. But
obstinatly refuse it, repugne against it, and speak evil of it, calling it
new doctrine) I can not se but they are to be dyspraysed and lamented as
people frowardly refusing the grace of the holy ghost offered unto them, but
ye that are the people of god and have received the light of his gospel,
remember that ye have been deceived. Let it never fall from your minds yt ye
have walked in darkness, John^. ii
and now that the light is come which has been long kept from you. Work
while ye have light some have lost their lives for sotting forth of it. And
many have auentured their lives (scapyng very narowly) before they could bring
it to pass. Be ye busy therefore in ye lords harvest, Luce. x.
the harvest is great and the laborers are few, for there be many idle belly
beasts that couyt to have the night come again, which list not to labor
but sleep in sin as they and other have done before, but because I have yet
made no full and perfyte answer to them which have cedused the people from the
true honourynge of God unto images (for their fylthy lucre) saying and
teaching them to say. We went not in pilgrymage unto the image nor we prayed
not unto the image, but we went for the saints sake whom the image does
represent, and we prayed unto the saint which is in heaven. ye think that this
is so strong a reason that no man can avoyde it. But sure there is nothing
that can be cloked against the word of God which will not be espied, and is
easy enough to be auoydyd. I pray you answer me first for what purpose ye
prayed unto the saint, the saint can not save you. ye are not of god unless
ye believe to be sauyd by the merytes and passion of Christ only. The best of
all the saints could not save him self by his own merytes, no if any of them
were less sinners then you are, it was by grace given them of god and not of
their own powers. And I am sure they are no saints unless they do attrybute
the gift to come of god only, ye will say because they are in such favor
with god, therefore will we pray unto them that they may be mediators unto
god for us. Now here aperyth a lack of knoweledge of you in ye scripture. And
if ye know it a lack of sure faith and trust to believe it. Timo. ii
For saint Paul says there is one god and one mediatoure betwyxte god and
man, which is the man Christ Jesus. What mistruste have you in him, think ye
that he is not a sufficyent mediator for us al. He has made us a promys yt
whatsoever we axe of the father in his name it shall be given us. Ioh xv.
All the saints that be in heaven never made us such a promys for it is out
of their powers to perform it, they they them selves stacke to that promise.
they had never come in heaven else. I never read of any of the saints when they
were here living that made any prayers to the saints which were deed before
them, but always unto god, is god of less power or goodness then he was in
old time. It is even the same god, it is he that brought the children of
Israel out of bondage from the cruel Pharao king of Egypt through the
great see, Ex. iiii. Iosu. ii. Iudi ^. Psalm. lxxvii. Ge. x^ii. i. Cor. x.
which he divided like a wall on every side, so that they walked through as
on the dry land, it is he that gave them water out of the hard stone it is
he that fed them with Manna in wilderness, Exo. xx.
it is he that brought them unto the fruyteful and goodly land that he
promised them, Deu. vi. Iosue. xxiiii.
it is the same God that performed all his promyses to all those that
faythfullyetrusted in him, and observed his commandments. And if ye think
his power be as good now as it was the^ and ever has been, why seek ye not to
him, why seek ye for health at other men's hands. What can ye saints do more
for you now, the^ they could do for the^ which in time paste put the irtrust
holli in God. Perchance ye think your selves unworthy because of your synn
to pray unto god, and therefore ye will desire the saints to pray for you. And
if ye be of that mind it does apere ye have a dystruste in the promys and
mercy of god. If ye turn unto me says Christ I will turn unto you. Zacha.
i. Ier. xxx^ Psalm. xxiiii.
The prophet says what soever he be that fears the Lord he shall show him
the way that he has chosen. Ps. xxvi
Delight thou in the lord and he shall give the thy hertes desire. Pro. xvi
Solomon says commyt thy works unto the Lord and look what thou deuysites
it shall prosper, and if ye turn not unto the Lord, fear him and delight in him
with a repentaunt mind for your naughtye sinful life. In vain is your prayer
and all your deuyses, for ye ought to commyte your works unto the Lord, in
whom only ye have not one promise, but many promyses agreyng in one
(contained in the scriptures) to prosper and to be hard. And to optayn your
requests of god the father for Christ's sake, Ioh. xv.
and not for any of the deed saints sakes, But yet trwe it is that God spared
the punnyshement of sinners, and hylde his hand from plagynge of them often
times for the just men's sakes as ye may read how Moses pacyefyed the
dyspleasure of god against the people with his prayer. Exodus xxxii.
Which was made from such a faithful heart unto god. And for such a true
loving mind unto his people, that he desired (rather then they should be
dystroyed) to be stryken out of the book of life himself. Paul wysshed also
to be cursed from Christ for his brethrens sake. Romans i^.
These prayers were of another manner effect the^ ye prayers of our popeholy
pykepurses, prayng for ye souls in ye bitter pains of purgatory. Again ye
may read ye god would have spared ye dystruccio^ of ye eyties which were
dystroyed for syn, Gene. xviii.
for ye sakes of te^ good persons, if they might have been found in them, at
the request of Abraham. Remember the exortacio^ of saint James, I^^^. v.
for one man to pray for an other declaryng what efficacy is in ye ryghtuous
man's prayer if it be fervent. By example of Helyas that was a man mortal
even as we are, iiiii Reg xvii.
which told king Achab yt it should not rain, and it rayned not on the
earth by the space of iii. years and.vi. months, and he prayed again, iiii.
Reg xviii.
and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth fruit. I would ye people
would be exercysed in redyng and heryng such like stories which might put
them in remembrance of the great mercy and goodness of god always showed unto
them which did fear and love him, and what effect their prayers were of.
Wherein they might also take example what punisshme^t god took upon obstinate
sinners and ydolatres, which though god often spared to punysshe the^ for ye
ryghtuous me^nes sakes, and at their humble and fervent prayers yet is there to
be notyd in the^ all after what sort and manner god spared them. Solomon which
had committed Idolatrye and displeased ye lord, against who^ god raised up
sundry adversaries to trouble him and his kingdom. yet ye lord spared him and
made him a promise yt he should possess still his land duringe his life,
iiii. Reg xi.
for his father david's sake which had walked in ye ways of the lord, but
there was no promise made unto him yt he should inheryte the kyngedome of
heaven for his fathers sake. I am sure he never came there but if it were for
Christ's sake only. Another the best saint that ever dyed, so where ye find
that god showed his mercy upon sinners for the ryghtuous me^nes sakes. Consider
always the diuersyte of the benefit given only for Christ's sake (which is
the kingdom of heaven) and that which was given at the petycyons and for the
love of holy men, being but a temporal reward, it is but a temporal
reward for a man to have his life prolonged. Neither to enjoy lands, riches,
honor, health, or such other things. mar. xvi Act. v.
The apostles by their life time received power of the lord to give health to
them that were sick. And to cast out deuyls and vnclen spyrytes. iiii. Be.
xvii.
ye and ye shall read of holy men that by their prayers have reuyuyd the deed
to life. yet al these were but temporal benefits given also of him by his
saints to confyrme their faith in his name that they did it (which is
Christ) to whom belongs only the remission of sins and the kingdom of
god. Romans v.
Now seeing it belongs only to him to give ye one, and to forgive the other
they ought only to be required and desired of him. And if ye purpose to pray
unto the deed saints for any thing belonging either to your bodies or souls
upon the ground of this argument, saying for as much as they were holy men
and women in their time, and that god spared the punysshment of sinners often
for their sakes, and at the feruente and humble prayers, much rather it is to
be thought that they now having receauid a glorified body, and be in joy with
Christ shall be herd of the lord. And the sinners spared at their request and
prayers. To that I answer if ye were certain that the saints which are deed
(whose bodies remain in the earth to the resurruccyon of all flesh) do
as well hear your voices now, as they did the voices of the people being here
and spekyng unto them by their life time. That then it were conuenyent ye
should pray unto them to pray with you and for you to god. But for as much
as I never yet could be certefied by any man through scripture that they do
hear our prayers, for my part I think it but a vain thing to trust in
the uncertain thing, and to leave the certain, to leave Christ and pray to
his saints. To all those that know the saints here is them I say it is well
done, but to al them that believe it and know it not, I say it is not well
done. For as much as they have not the scripture to certefy the^ of their well
doing. The unlearned multitude exceptyd in whom I think it is another well nor
evil done, which know nothing more the^ is preached and taught by their
curates unto them. So they refuse not the truth (aproued by scripture) when it
is taught them, which I refer unto the bisshoppes and well learned men in the
scriptures wherein is contained al things necessary belonging to faith and
salvation. But admyt that ye were certain yt the saints do hear you (which
I think truly would trouble the most part of the clergy within England
to approve) suppose you that they would pray either with you or for you if ye
think evil in your heart, not being pourged with contricion for syn, and to
pray for good things with your mouth, no truly onles they do only hear the
voice and know not the heart. But God which hearethe the voice and knows
the secrets of the mind, To. viii.
regards neither the honor which ye give him, neither the prayer of your
mouth onles your hertes agree withal and if you pray for grace with your
mouth, and couyt it with all your hertes, it shall be given you if you pray
forgyuenesse of your sins and are penytent for them in your hertes they
shall be forgyue^ you. Axe what soever ye will (in faith) and it shall be granted
unto you. Ioh. xv
But in whose name ye should ask, I have showed you and for his sake there is a
promis made unto you yt ye shall obtayn it. It is not for saint frau^cis sake
that ye shall posses the celestial heritage another yet his holy cowle that can
preserve you from hell (for your sins) let the frers say as they list. It is
a vain reason that I have hard diverse men make, which by a similitude apply
ye favor of worldly princes unto the favor of the celestial god saying if a
man have any thing to do with the king, he must first sue unto the noble men
of the court, and such as be of the kings preuy chamber, if he think to
opteyne his purpose, and not to prease to the king him self. And so likewise
unto God a man should first pray and be a sueter unto his saints and not
presume to go to him self. Is not this an unwise thing that men pondre no
better the dyuersyte betwyxte the creator of all things and his creatures. The
kings grace is the ministre of god, and yet but a man as an other man is, his
knowledge may not be compared to the knowledge of god. To viii Hiere. x^vii.
psalm. vi^
God knows ye secrets of ye heart, the king knows it not before it be
uttered and told him. And he that is the king of a realm has many things
to think on so yt a man has need to make his friends about him if he think
for to speed, and every man may not at al times come to ye kings presence.
But to come unto God is an other manner of thing, so that thou come with an
vmble, a meke, and a contryte heart, for god is never troubled with business,
all things are unto him but as one thing. And though he be king of all
kings, yet is he well pleased that thou shalt come to him at all times, there
is no porter nor door keeper shall keep the out. If y^ love him he will be
always where as you art. Thou can not speak so softly but he shall hear you.
(...). viii.
Thou can think nothing, but he knows thy thought, and if you ask any
thing in faith thou art sure to have it, (...). ^^^
he byddeth the come to him, he sends the to none other. Wherefore should
thou be afraid to do as he byddeth the. And seeing that people have found out
so strong a reason to stand on, I will assaye to stop their mouths with an
other reason.

Who would not think him to be a fool or an hartlesse person to whom the king
would say. If thou have any thing to demand of me speak to me thy self,
and I will give the thy request. And if he would not speak unto the king him
self, but desire an other to speak for him, of the which he were uncertain
whether the king would here him or not, were it not an unwise part. Also if
the king would say, there shall none come in to my preuy chamber, But such
as my son the prince shall suffer to come in. (take it that his grace were
come to his perfyte years of knowledge and perseueraunce. And if I moughte
speak unto the Prince and were right certain to come in* when I desired him.
Were not ^ a fool to desire an other to speak unto the prince for me, which I
were uncertain whether the prince would here him or not. Now seeing we have none
other enteraunce in to ye kingdom of God the father, but by his son Jesus
Christ, and he has said. Come to me, why should we go to any other, Mat. xi
but to him self only. I would have been loathe to bring in these humayne
reasons to establisshe gods word withal, had I not ben compelled (as the
saying is) to drive out one nail with an other, one reason with an other. The
word of God does inform you, who is your mediator pluck no honor away
that is due unto him. Have no less confidence in him the^ ye ought to have.
All that apperteyneth to him by the scryptures give it him, and the^ your
consciencys truly examined if there remain any thing belonging to the
saints, give it them and spare not. But where ye find him to be your only
savior and mediatoure, ^. Thy. ii
patche him not up I pray you with his saints. And if ye list to pray unto
them, learn first to be acerteyned whether they hear you or not, that you
labor no longer in vain. And prove it either a thing inuentyd to rob Christ
from his glory, and you from your money, other else yt it came of a distrust in
the promises and merciful goodness of god. But to say or think that our
lady is not in all places like good, blessed, and holy, or any saint better in
one place then in an other. And so to go to their Images, and pictures,
setting up of candels, knelynge, kissynge, prayenge, and off^ryng unto the^,
ye I say plainly is ydolatry, and for ydolatry god has punisshed ye people
often times with diverse and sundry plages. For ydolatry he spared not kings
and princes, but rooted their posterites from their kyngedomes. iii. Reg.
xiiii. iii Reg. xv. ^. ^vi
As ye may read of Jeroboam, king Achab and diverse other. Now seeing that
the lord spared not kings and rulers of the earth for ydolatry, which were in
the time that the law of god given unto Moses stood only in effect, being in
diverse things but fygures and shadows of the true and very Messiah (which is
Jesus Christ) and we having his most holy testament, a witness unto us that he
has all ready suffered for the redempcyon of our sins. ^. Pet. ii
Shall we suppose yt he will spare us for ydolatry if we repent not and convert
unto him (no truly) but let us wait for a greter punishment the^ they had.
For the lord god said I came not to break the law, Mat. v. Deu. v.
but to fulfill the law. And where as Moses said, thou shalt not kill.
Christ said, Exo. xx.
thou shall not be angry. Moses said, thou shalt not commit aduoutry. Christ
says yt who soever eyeth a wife lustyng after her has committed aduoutry with
her already in his heart. Leui. ix
ye have herd how it is said thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine
enemy. But christ says unto you, love your enemies, Mat. ^
bless the^ yt curse you, do good to the^ that hate you, pray for the^ that do
you wrong. and persecute you, that you may be the children of your heavenly
father, for he makes his son to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends his rain on the just and on the unjust, wherein it apereth what a
merciful God he is. But beware ye that are now past the time of the shadows
and figures of Moses law, and have the very thing offered unto you, which
all those fygures and shadows did represent. For if ye frowardly refuse it,
and still follow your own blind ways, and the inuencyons of those that
sought your dystruccyon, and will not harken unto him that said.

I am the way, the truth, Ioh xiiii
and the life. It is greatly to be feared, that as the children of Israel unto
who^ there was a terrestiall and temporal kyngedome promised (that goodlye
land of Canaan) which was full of all pleasures and comodites for breaking
of the Lorrdes precepts and chefly for Idolatry, Exo. iii
were punisshed with diverse temporal plages and punnisshmentes. So like case
that ye which have the celestial kyngedome promised unto you, where there are
such things prepared for them that love god, which the eye has not seen and
the ear has not herd nor has it entered in to the heart of man. i. Co. ii.
Esa. l^iiii
If ye will not observe the lords commandments, but provoke him still unto
displeasure with your ydolatry as I said, it is to be feared, lest your
punysshment be reserved unto that place, Math. xiiii.
where there shall be waylynge and gnasshyng of tethe. Call your iniquites to
remembrance, expel your sin and ydolatry with repentance. Be not styffe
necked against the lord which stands waiting that he may have mercy upon
you, and lifts him self up ye he may receive you to grace. Esa. xxi
As the prophet Esaye said unto the people of god which were punysshed, for
sekyng help at other then him self, for the lord god is ryghtuous, happy are
al they that wait for him. Mark that saying of the prophet, he said not happy
are some, but happy are all yt wait for him. And though the words were spoken
unto the people of Cyon, and to the Cytesens of Jerusalem, yet does it serve
also unto us. For he is our lord and our God, of whom it was said unto them,
shall ye never be in heaviness, for dowtles he will have mercy upon you. Esa.
xxx
As soon as he hereth the voice of thy cry he will help the. The Lord gives
you the breed of aduersyte, and the water of trouble, but thine instructour
flies not far from yt if thine eyes look unto him, if thine ears herke^ unto
his word, that cries after yt and says. This is the way, go this, and turn
the neither to the right hand nor to ye lift. ye ought to put nothing to the
word of god nor to take no thing from it, Deu. iiii
ye lord would have you keep ye straight path which is appointed unto you by the
scripture. As for the tradycyons of men they be dowtfull and in many things
not co^sonaunt unto ye scripture. Have ye not ben taught to babble up such
prayers, whereof ye understood not one word what ye said. The apostle says if
I pray with tongues (meaning a voice yt he understood not) my spyryte prays
but my mind is without fruit. I had lever in the congregacyon to speak. v.
words with my mind to the informacyon of other, i, Cor. xiiii
rather then.x. thousand words with the tongues (which be not understand.)
The effect of prayer persisteth not in many words. Christ says, Mat. vi
when ye pray babble not much as the Gentyls do, for they think they shall be
herd for their much bablyng sake. Be ye not like them therefore, for your
father knows whereof ye have need before ye ask of him. Man. ^^
The scrybes and pharasyes were reproved of the lord for teaching the people
to observe their tradycyons instead of gods precepts, saying. Ese. xix
Well prophesied Esaye of you, with their lyppes they honor me, but their
heart is far fro me. And where the word of God is truly preached the same
word like wise shall reprove your false teachers which have taught you and
your fathers th^s many years wicked tradycyons. Mat. vi.
The true fasting and perfyte prayer have they abused, and taught the people
to do likewise the works of charity and almous deed (which ought to be done
and given to the poor) has been dymynysshed and given to sturdy and valiant
beggars craftily crepte in to ye church of Christ, which have begyled the
people with their false ypocrysy and feigned holiness. Meruayll not though it
grieve them yt the people have fre lyberty to read and search the scriptures,
for it is the only thing that utters their craft their falshode, and their
wickedness, for betwyxte them and their ydolles which were invented to pyke
me^nes purses (and that under an holy pretense) what meruayl was it that
England was so replenysshed with thenes, vacabundes and beggees, it is an
euydent thing that the most part of them be offended that ye scripture is in
English, whereby their subteltye is espied, for if a man reprove the^ of
ypocrysy, or bid them labor for their living. Awe say they is this ye
charity that the gospel teaches you. Truly it were not to be wondered at if
men were not so much in charity with you as they be which so have dysceyued
the pore simple souls from their charytable aimous, to whom god did apoynt it
to be given. I say not this because men should break their pacyence toward
you, but to reduce you the sooner to repentance and amendment, and to be sorry
and ashamed of your evil doings. Saint John^ says in his second Epistle
who so transgresses and abides not in ye doctrine of Christ has not god, he
that abides in the doctrine of Christ has both the father and the son. If
any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not in to your
house neither salute him. That text I suppose caused the freres to run about
with In principio erat verbum, fearing else they should not be saluted of the
people nor received i^ to their houses. But there is an other place in scripture
more conuenyent to be applied unto them then yt place agreed and served to
their purpose, beware of false prophets which come to you in shepes clothyng,
but inwardly they are rauenyng wolves, ye shall know the^ by their fruytes, God
knows my heart I write this for no malice unto them, but to thentent yt the
truth of gods glory which has long ben hyd might appear again, and his holy
gospel which they and such other have falsely belyed, perverted and kept in
corners may come to his perfyte light, so yt the people might know the true
honoring of God to be in spirit and veryte, and to follow the exhortacyon of
saint Peter to walk after the will of god and not after the will of ye hethen,
i. Pe. iii.
in wantonness, ryotous drynkyng, and abhomynable ydolatry, and the holsom
counsel of saint Paul to be no worshipper of images, Collo. i.
and to mortefy your members of sin upon ye earth. John. v.
Saint John^ warns little children to keep them selves from images. O lord
how has thy blessed word and the doctrine of thy holy saints ben abused ye
old me^ now a days ca^ scarsly be brought to follow ye lesson. Know ye not yt
your body is the temple of the holy ghost. i Cor. vi.
Remember upon what foundacyon ye are builded, Mat. ^^i. (...)
stycke unto your fou^dacyon and cleue fast to your heed corner stone, which
can not be removed. ye are not a temple of stone made with men's hands, ye are
ye living temple of god, ii Cor. vi
which have been long in decay, bruised, broken, and pulled down of those yt
were enemies both to you and your foundacyon Christ, Mat ^^^ i. Cor. iii
but they have pulled so long, yt they have met with a rock, 1 Pet. ii.
ye stomblyng stone which has made them to fall. Now is the time to repair
your temple again be ye not neclyge^t in ye lords work, but labor with heart
and mind, therein every man according to his power and calling. And against
such as will go about to hyndre or let the going forth of your work, provide
watch men (I mean preachers) to defend you with ye word of god as ye people
did at the buyldyng again of Jerusalem with weapons, ii. ^^^. iiii
and some laboring with one hand having their weapons in the other hand. So ye
that are laborers in what science so ever it be (to get your living with
truth, according to the will of god) if ye can handle your weapon, if ye have
any knowledge in the scriptures, then let the law of god, his holy testament
and blessed word (being the sword that Christ commanded his dyscyples to by)
be always ready at your hand, ^^. ^xii
whether ye eat or drink, sleep or wake, go or ride, ye when ye be at your
lawful works, and in all places have it in a redynes, to resyst therewith the
enemies of the lords work (which would not have his holy temple repaired
again.) Behold what an ouerseer and master of your work, ye lord your god
has chosen and appointed unto you our most gracious king a true defender of the
faith of Christ and his church, against the wrongful violatours thereof. And
for because he would not take ye name in vain (craftily given to his grace to
support and maynteyn a church which is against christ) (depriuyng princes from
their just title and true name.) He has taken upon him (as the law of god
permytteth) to be ye supreme heed of ye church under god, which was not only
faisly usurped from his grace and his predycessours, but also from al other
kings and princes. Rejoice and be merry all ye which have been as sheep going a
stray. i. Pet. ii. Luce. xv Esa. liii
But now returned again to your bishop and shepeherde of your flock, and
they that be not come, let the^ come and harken unto his voice, and to their
voices whom he has sent to call them. Let the^ no longer disceyue you which
sent you to deed images no nor yet to the saints to be your advocates. Our
advocate ^s Ihesus Christ. i. Ioh. ii
which optayneth grace for our sins, and not for our sins only but for ye
sins of all ye world. Search the scriptures and ye shall se how wrongfully
and falsely they have belyed it both against god and man. For where they have
borne kings and princes in hand that if the people should be suffered to have
it in their maternall tongue that it would make them heretykes to god, and
disobedient unto their governors. There is nothing more true then this is an
abhomynable lie, a very blasphemy to god, and treason to kings, for it is the
only perfyte thing, that teaches men their true obedyence and duty, both to
god, to the princes and to there governors. (...) iii.
Saint Paul wrote unto Titus saying, warn the people that they submyt them
selves unto prnyces, and to the hyer auctorite, to obey ye officers, and to be
ready unto al good works. To. xiii.
And unto the Romans, let every soul submyt him self unto the hyer powers,
for there is no power but of god. In the same chapter he says, give to every
man therefore his duty trybute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom
custom is due, fear to whom fear belongs, i. Pet. ii.
honor to whom honor perteyneth. Saint Peter says submyt your selves unto
all manner ordenaunces of men, whether it be unto the king as unto the chyef
heed, or unto rulers as unto them that are sent of him, for the punysshment of
evil doers. But for the praise of the^ that do well, honor al men love
brotherly fellowship. Fear god, and honor the king. And Christ him self said
unto the discyples of the pharisees, mat. xxii
which were sent to tangle him in his words, concerning trybute to be paid
unto ye Emperor. Give unto Caesar that which is Cesars, and give unto god that
which is gods. Many mo places are there contained in the scryptures, to
establysshe and confyrme my sayenges to be true, teaching the people the true
love and fear of god, and the just obedience and honor of princes, and such
as be in auctoryte. But I trust that this shall suffyse at this time to be a
memoryall unto you, for to beware of those which durst presume so to belie the
word of god, and that unto kings and rulers of the world. And instead of
gods word to feed al men with fables, lies, and false tradycyons. For it
teaches them not only their duty to god and to the hye powers, but also of
children unto their parents, Ephesians. vi
servants unto their masters, wives unto their husbands, and how ye
husbands again should love their wives, Ephe. ^
educate their children, provide for their household, use them selves toward
their seuauntes, and how every degree should behave him self one toward an
other Now if these which have taken upon them to be preachers in time paste,
both to us and our fathers, be not approved to be untrue mynysters of gods
word, and false liars thereof then believe not my work. And if with their lyeng
and false doctrine they had hurted the body only the thing might more easily
be suffered. But how can they recompense the injury done unto the soul of man
which could never have been redeemed, Ephe. i Col. i. Heb. i.
but with the precious blood of Christ only, which also they have belyed.
Who soever think I write truly let them believe the truth. But for ye
satysfyeng of their minds, I desire them to search the scryptures, which I
doubt not shall be a witness unto me that I have written the truth. And ye
that have received the name of Christ and are called christiens, I testefye
unto you that ye are bound also to receive his doctrine (which is his holy
gospel) or else ye have a name in vain, as for the decrees decretales,
constitucions, and tradicions of men, and the rules of Benedicke Dominicke,
Austyn, Fraunces or any of them all ye ought to give no ferther credence unto
them then they agree with the scripture and perfyte word of god, of the which
word, I require and exhort all men not to be reders and herers only but also
folowers thereof. For if any man here the word and do it not, he is like unto a
man that beholds his bodily face in a glass, Iaco. i,
for as soon as he has looked on him self he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what his facyon was. But who so looks in the perfyte law of
lybertye and contynueth therein, if he be not a forgetful herer but a doer of
ye work, the same shall be happy in his deed. These are not mine own words,
but the godly words and counsel of saint James (ye apostle of Christ.) And
for because ye shall not think ye I have attempted in this my work to entyse
your hertes from devotion and to set you at lyberty to do what evil ye list.
(as ye sclaunderers of gods word have reported of other men.) I pray you to
learn a lesson or.ii. more of saint James and of other holy men yt ye may know
what pure devotion is, and how ye ought to pray and ask in faith, and know
what lyberty ye have by the gospel and word of god. Pure deuocyo^ and
undefiled before god ye father is this to visyte ye fre^dlesse and wydowes in
aduersyte, Iaco. i.
and to keep your selves unspotted of the world. Iaco. i.
If any man lack wisdom let him ask it of god which gives to all men
indyfferently, and casts no man in ye tethe and it shall be given him. But
let him ask in faith and waver not, for he ye wauereth is like the wawes of
the sea tossed of ye wind and carried with vyolence, neither let that man think
he shall receive any thing of the lord. A waueryng minded man is unstable in
all his ways. Dauyd says put you thy trust in ye lord and be doing good, Psalm.
xxxvi.
so shall he give ye thy herts desire. This saying of ye prophet agrees nothing
with the^ which say yt ye scripture and new lernyng (as they call it) setes me^ at
liberty to do what they list but they are enemies to Christ and his doctrine yt
so have taught the people, and their ygnorau^ce is much to be lamented which
believed the^, Dauyd byddeth you to do good, and absteyne from evil, and so do
al ye places of scripture likewise exhort you, for where ye have herd yt it
shall be given you of god the father what soever ye ask in his sons name.
Think ye yt this promise does perteyne to such as be evil doers, and
contynewe still in wickedness, no truly. ii. thy. ii
Saint Paul says let him that calls on the name of Christ depart from
iniquite. Wherefore I counsayll you to follow the exortacyon of Paul, Peter,
James, and John^, and such as were Christ's apostles and dyscyples, leaving
unto us a memoryall of their living, whose doctrine accords with their
masters, and is approved for holy scripture, their learning is no new
learning. It is above a thousand years old, and if that be not old enough,
then I pray you to look upon the doctrine of Dauyd, Esaye Ieromy, and such as
were the holy prophets, and compare their documentes, and living with the
apostles, and se how all they agree together in Christ, and if ye pass so
much upon the nombre of years, because ye say ye will keep the old law and
old facyons, I am sure they may be your fathers great grauntfathers. Wherefore
say not yt ye will do as your fathers have don. For as I have written before
there were crafty scole masters that taught the^ untrue lessons, but many
perceived them which coueted to se the days that we se. Wherefore if ye deny
the doctrine of the apostles and prophets ye deny Christ's gospel, Luce. x.
if ye deny his holy gospel ye deny Christ him self. If ye say ye deny not
Christ it is not true, as long as ye sclaundre his word, calling it new
lernyng, speking evil of the teachers and reders of it. And ye your selves
refusing both to read and here his godly will declared unto you in his
scryptures. Wherefore if ye will be members of his church, help to repair
again the lords temple, inbrace his scripture, harken unto his voice, and
unto them which calls you unto him. And when ye are come follow him in doing
the works of charity which belong unto faith, that ye may here these
confortable and joyful words of Christ. Come hither ye blessed of my father,
mat. xxv
enheryte ye the kingdom which is prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. Amen.

Finis.
God save the king.
Cum priuilegio.
HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE printer's device of John Wayland

Imprynted at London by John^ Waylande with in Temple bar, at the sign of
the blewe garland. Anno. M.D.xxxviii. he. xvi. day of Octobre.


