THE ART OR SKILL, WELL AND FRVITFVLLIE TO HEAR the holy Sermons of the Church.

Written first in Latin, by a godly Minister, named CV^^LMVS ZEPPERVS, and now
truly translated into english by T. W. For the religious edification of such as
unfeignedly fear the Lord amongst us.

Eccles. 4.17. Take heed to thy foot, when thou entrest into the house of God:
and be more near to hear, than to give (...) sacrifice of fools for they
know not that they do evil.

Mark. 4.24. Take heed what ye hear.

Luke. ^.18. Take heed how ye hear.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kingston. 1599.

To the Christian Reader, grace and peace from God the Father, and from his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.
WE that now live (brethren) may truly say, both that our times are good, and
yet that our days are naught. If any will demand how this can be so, seeing
it implies a flat contradiction, the answer is easy, ready, and right also.
For if we consider God, Iam. 1.17.
the only giver of every good and perfect gift: or weigh his blessed bounty
in all sorts of graces, or respect the long continuance of these singular
favors, we cannot but plainly perceive, and openly confess the truth and
certainety of the first part of this sentence. For first touching God, we may
speak it, and that truly also, to the glory of his great name, that he has
opened his hand, Psalm. 14^.
and filled with his blessing all sorts and degrees amongst us. No man's sight
(as I take it) is so bleared, or his heart so brawned, or his mouth so stopped
up, but that he must of necessity evidently see, sensibly feel, and freely
lay out the same. And for his graces generally, we may safely acknowledge as
the Prophet in a certain place does: they are so many, that none can count his
thoughts toward us, yea though we would declare and speak of them, Psalm.
yet are they more than we are able to conceive in our understanding (so much
are our hearts straightened within us, and therefore greater also, than we are
able to express by speech. Now particularly, if we could consider as we ought
outward and bodily blessings, either for the number or variety of them, have
we not just cause to say, that God has bountifully vouchsafed us, that which
the Prophet heartily desired might be given to his people, Psalm. 122.7
namely, that peace is within our walls, and prosperity within our palaces?
And that he has powered that upon us, which Izhac wished unto his son: He
has given us of the dew of heaven, Genesis 27.28.29
and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of wheat and wine, and so forth as
it follows in the Patriarchs words? And touching spiritual graces, we may
doubtless speak no less liberally, than the faithful do in another Psalm:
He shows his word unto Jacob* his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he
has not dealt so with every nation, Psalm. 147.19 20.
neither have they known his judgments or as it is in another Prophet, I will
pour out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy: Joel. 2.28.29
your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. And
also upon the servants, and upon the maids, will I in these days pour cut my
spirit: yea they shall know me from the least of them to the greatest of them
says the Lord. Iere. 31.34.
And concerning the continuance of them, we must acknowledge, unless we will
rob God of his praise, and other men of great good, and our selves of special
comfort, that we have had the Lord, not only forbearing us a year, two, or
three together, but digging round about us, yea digging and dressing us, not
three or four years, as in the parable of the figtree planted in the vineyard
is declared, ^. 13.6.7
but full forty year at the least, be having not only made our wheat and wine
to abound all that while, ^. 6.7.
but daily lifting upon us the light of his countenance: On the other side, if
we weigh either how blind we have been in these blessings, not seeing them at
all: or consider how careless to perform duties for them after light
received: or else regard how hypocritical we have been in the services which
we made show to accomplish, we shall then evidently see in others, and
sensibly feel in our selves the truth of the latter part of that sentence.
For how many be there in the land, who (whether they deliver it of ignorant
malice, or malicious ignorance, we will not stand now to determine it) say as
the people did in the time of the Prophet Jeremy. Iere. 44.16.17.
The word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee. But we will do whatsoever thing comes out of our own
mouth, as to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto her, as we have done, etc. Other some again there are amongst us
(and I fear me there is no small number of them) who, whether they do it of
carelessness and carnalitie of heart in themselves, or presuming before hand,
Deuteronomy. 29.19
that notwithstanding iniquity, God will be gracious unto them, the Lord best
knows) abusing Gods mercy, and turning his grace into wantonness, Romans 2.5.6
do in themselves despise the riches of his bountifulnes, patience and long
suffering, forgetting that the bountifulness of the Lord should lead them to
repentance, and so from God heap up unto themselves, as if it were treasure,
wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of
God. Besides what swarms of hypocrites be there in the lap and bosom of the
Church, of whom we may justly say, either as the Apostle does, they have a show
of piety, 2. Tim. 3.^
but have denied the power thereof, or else serve him for bread and water, wool
and flax, oil and drink, corn, Hos. 2.^
wine, Hose. 2.5. etc.
gold, silver, etc. as the idolaters did their Idols in Hosea his time: or at
the best, as our Savior himselse says out of Isaiah, touching the age in
which he lived: This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, Mat. 15.8.
and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me? By all
which we may not only clearly behold the truth of our first sentence, in both
the parts of it affirmative and negative, but may further see and learn, that
it is very apparent, that we have many ways given the Lord just cause not
only to exclame, or complain of us, as in some of the Prophets he does
touching the nation of the Jews, saying, O my people, what have I done unto
thee? Micah. 6.3. Esaias. 5.4.
or wherein have I grieved thee? And again, what could I have done any more to
my vineyard, that I have not done unto it? but also as it is in another
Prophet, to write a bill of diuorcement, to put it into our hands, and to cast
us off, even for ever and ever, we are then carefully to consider, what is now
to be done this dounge of our iniquities being cast in our faces, our sins
also being thus set in order before us: and the fierce wrath of the Lord being
so justly and sharply also kindled against us. Shall we persist and hold on in
a course of evil? So Satan in his malice against us would suggest, that is
not to be doubted. And so wicked ones would teach us, both by their persuasion
and practice, as the Apostle shows, saying: Romans 6.1
Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Yea it may be the corruption
and naughtiness of nature would easily yield to it, as to a point pleasant to
flesh and blood. But this and all such like wicked conceits and assaults, from
whence, or from whom soever they come, we must cast far from us, and speedily
and unfeignedly return unto the Lord, who graciously calls us, saying:
Ezech. 18.30, 31.
Return and cause others to turn away from all your transgressions: presently
after showing, how and in what sort we should come unto him: Cast away from you
all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart,
and a new spirit, for why will you die, O house of Israel? which also Saint
James expresses notably, saying: Submit your selves to God, resist the
devil, and he will fly from you. Draw near to God, Iam. 4.7.8.
and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your
hearts ye double minded men, etc. But herein always we must take heed of, and
according to our uttermost, seek to avoid two dangerous, yea deadly rocks.
The first is delay and putting off from time to time, which as in other things,
so here is very perilous. Which also the holy Ghost insinuates, by stirring
us up, whilst it is called to day, Hebr. 3.7.
to harken unto his voice, and assaieth to cause us more plainly to understand
it, whilst in another place he provoke us, to redeem the season, because
the days are evil. Ephesians. 5.16. John. 12 35.
And Christ very earnestly presses it, saying: walk whilst ye have the
light, adding thereto for a better encouragement this reason, least the
darkness come upon you, and very perspicuously in another place of that
Gospel mencioning the like, saying: John. 9.4.
the night comes when no man can work. All which plainly bewraieth our
strong inclination to this great evil, and how hard a thing it is to recover us
therefrom; otherwise it had been sufficient, by a word and away to assaied to
reclaim us. The second is a conceit which we have, that Gods great holiness,
and our gross iniquities, will well stand together, men many times supposing
that God either does not regard things, or sin done upon the earth: or hareth
them not, as is pretended he does: or cannot, or will not punish according unto
demerit. But if we knew the truth of God, as it is contained in the scriptures
of God, and how mightily there and else where, it opposes it self against the
same, we would quickly alter our mind. What? Shall not he that has planted the
ear, Psalm. 94.9.10.
hear? or he that has formed the eye, shall he not see? or he that
chastises the nations, shall he not correct? he that teaches man knowledge,
shall he not know? Psalm. 5.4.
Again: God loves not wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him. Nay
which is more: Habba. 1.13.
He is of pure eyes, and cannot see evil, or behold wickedness. And in another
place: In the hand of the Lord is a cup, Psalm. 75.8.
and the wine is red: it is full mixed, and he powers out of the same: Surely
all the wicked of the earth shall wring it out, and drink the dregs thereof:
All which we must acknowledge, unless we will with the Atheists blasphemously
deny God to be, or with the Epicures grossly suppose him to fit idly in
heaven: or with the profane, carnal, and careless, presume of his mercy
before hand. But this we must assure our selves of, that if we foster these and
such like conceits within us, as the wicked continually carry about with them,
it cannot be avoided, but living their life, we must die their death, and that
as we have been fellows with them, and followers of them in their
transgressions, so also we must become partakers with them in their punishment.
Which if we would be sure indeed to avoid, we must carefully do that that Saint
James earnestly provoke us unto, namely: To be doers of the word, Iam. 1.22
and not hearers only, deceiving our own selves and others also: and to
labor to have our hearing mixed with faith, which because the people in former
time had not regard of, Hebr. 4.2.
that which they heard profited them not, as the Apostle shows in the Epistle
to the Hebrews. For your help therefore (dear Christians) that way, and
furtherance in other good works also, there comes out now, and is published
in print, this worthy work and godly treatise following. Concerning which, I
will say no more but this, that if you will read it reverently as you should,
labor rightly to understand it as ye ought, and endeavor religiously to
practice it in all the parts of it, as in duty and conscience you are bound,
you shall find, not only a gracious redress of those things that either in
times past have been, or presently are amiss in you, but also feel, a
preventing power, of and against future evils: yea I dare assure you in the
word, not of man, but of God, that you shall be carried along by the hand in the
spirit, Romans 7.22.
to delight in the law of God, as in regard of your inward man, and to be
enabled by the mighty working of the same blessed spirit, Romans 7.15.
no more to do that evil which you hate, but to accomplish those good things
which you unfeignedly love: that so being filled with the fruits of righteousness
and religion, Philip. 1.11
which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God, you may even here
in your hearts continually feel, and else where, in the life that is to come,
particularly and comfortably also hear, that sweet sentence from our Savior
Christ's own mouth: Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundation of the world. What shall I say more? What am I
able to do else? Phil. 2.13.
It is God that must work in you both the will and the deed according to his
good pleasure. For my part, I can but exhort you to well doing: I can but pray
for you, that you may begin, continue and increase in the same. In these
duties I have not been wanting according to such measure of mercy, Hebr. 13.22
as I have received from God. It lies in you, that have been blessed from him,
with the first fruits of the spirit, and the beginnings of regeneration, not
only to suffer with patience the words of exhortation, but to profit by them.
And God it is that of his free favor only toward us in Christ, must grant
the requests and desires of his servants. Wherein surely he will not fail us,
Hebr. 13.20 21.
if we be not wanting to him and to our selves. Now I beseech even him that is
the God of peace, and that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
to make you perfect in all good works to do his will, be working in you that
which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever and ever. London the xij. of December. 1599.

The Book or Treaty it self, and the sum thereof: Touching- hearing of
Sermons.
CHAP. 1. And the sum of it.
THat it is a point of great skill, not only to make Sermons, but also rightly
and religiously to hear them. Page 1 How great art or skill is required to
make Sermons. ibid. Again, to hear them well, and with profit, is a point of
no small skill and labor. 2 The hearers duty Before the Sermon. In the Sermon
while. And after the Sermon.
3
CHAP. 2. And the sum of it.
TOuching the hearers duty before the Sermon. 4 That men's minds must with great
religion and devotion be disposed and prepared to the hearing of Gods word.
ibid. That this preparation to that exercise, is in the Prophets called
sanctification or sanctifying. 7 That this sanctification or sanctifying, does
require that all impediments of it or to it, should above all things (even as
they were corrupting causes) be removed and taken away. 8 Of this sort and kind
are. 1 Surfeting and gulling in of wine and strong drink, the day before the
Sermon. ibid. A remedy set against that impediment. 11 2 Too much care for
present or worldly things. 12 The remedy thereof. 13 3 An imagination of some
singular knowledge in Gods werd: and that men may at home read the Bible, or
some certain Postals. 14 The remedy against it. ibid. 4 Schismatic and
partial choice of Preachers or ministers of the word. 18 The remedy against
it, where also there is mention made, 20 Of the inequality of gifts in the
Church, and in the ministry. 23 5 Hatred against the ministers and
ministry. 27 The remedy, where also is declared with how great hazard of
eternal salvation this hatred is joined. 28 6 The largenes of parish Churches
34 The remedy. 35 7 The security of the old and carnal man. 40 1 The remedy,
or, remedies rather aginst it 42 2 The master or father of the family must not
go alone to the holy assemblies of the Church, but must be attended upon, or
accompanied, with his familiy, and those of his household. 42 The duty of
those that must call upon others to go to Sermons. Neighbors. 43 Elders. 44
Magistates. ibid.
3 That every hearer whiles the bells ring, and by the way as they go to
Church, must be occupied with religious and holy meditations. 45 Causes
compelling as it were men to the dilligent hearing and study of Gods holy word.
46. 47 4 Men must at home read before hand, and diligently think upon the text
that is to be expounded in the Church. 50 A Christian man's duty in reading the
Bible. 51 5 The bearer must pour out prayers for the Preacher. 55 himself. 56

CHAP. 3. And the sum thereof.
TOuching the hearers duty in the Sermon time, and that in the holy assemblies
also. 57 This duty stands principally in these points, 1 That such as are
learned and can read, have the holy Bible always in a readiness. 58 What
commodities this custom will bring with it. 2 That all of them be present, not
at half the Sermon only, but at the whole. 65 3 That sleep, talking
together, and curiosity be far removed and driven away. 63 Remedies against
sleep in the holy sermon time 65 Also against talking together. 66 Also against
curiosity. 68 Also against reading other things in the Sermon time. 70 4 That
the whole drift and body of the whole Sermon be diligently observed and
marked. 71 5 That men's minds be free from prejudice and preconceiued opinions.
74 What great hurt, pertinacy in preiudicate opinions may bring to the truth.
76 6 That men be present with a mind to learn, and not to dispute and reason
against things delivered. 77 After what sort, and how far forth the Church
may judge touching sermons made or heard. 79 7 That hard things propounded in
Sermons should not breed lothsomenes or tediousnes, but a desire rather more
and more to search out the points themselves. 81 Why God in some places of his
word, here and there does intermingle hard points. 82 The searching out of holy
things, does freely and indifferently belong to all men. 85 8 That hearers must
know and observe the method of the sermons. 86 sorts or kinds of the^. 87
How the ministers may and should be holpers forward of their hearers, as in
this behalf. 89 9 That the things heard, must be converted to the exercises of
faith, prayer, repentance, etc. 90 That this may be done? both the ministers
must be truly touched, whilst they are preaching, and the hearers must be
transformed into the affections of the ministers. 91 10 That if happily the
Sermon be somewhat long, yet they think it not tedious or troublesome to them.
93 11 That parents, scholemasters, and elders do every one of the^ in the
sermon while, diligently observe the^ that are under their charge. 96 12 That
scholars be accustomed by writing to take Sermons. ibid. What great profit,
and sundry commodities, this writing of Sermons carries with it. ibid.
CHAP. 4. And the sum of it.
Touching the hearers duty after the sermon. 100 1 Men must not go out of the
Church before all the parts of gods worship and service be ended. 101 Wherefore
the whole Church indeed should be present at the Public prayers. 102
Administration of Baptis. 105 Celebratio^ of the holy sup. 107 Catechizing of
children. 110 Blessing of the congregation. 113
2 Things heard in Sermons, must at home be deeply thought of. 114 3 Household
governors and schoolemasters must demand of them that belong unto them,
repetition of the Sermons. 116 4 Every one must godlily confer by the way as
they go homeward, in their talks, and at their tables touching the Sermons
heard. 121 The profits that come by such conferences. 122 Chrysostom will have
the Sermons heard to be communicated to them that were not present at holy
assemblies and exercises. 123 5 No worldly businesses are upon the Lords day to
be taken in hand after we have heard sermons, but they must be wholly spent in
heavenly things, and in private exercises also. 125 What worldly businesses,
and at what time also worldly businesses may without sin be dealt withal on
the Lords day. 130 6 That either the ministry, or other that are skillful in
holy matters must be councelled withal touching points that are dark, or not
sufficiently understood. 132 7 That according to the sermons heard me^ must
make a ce^suring and an anatomy of the^seues. 135 8 That parents,
schoolemasters, and elders, must correct the offenses and scapes of such as are
committed to their charge, according to sermons made, touching such offenses.
137 The conclusion of this treatise. 138
CHAP. 1 It is a matter of much skill, not only to make, but to hear Sermons
well.
NO man that will well consider of, and uprightly weigh, What great skill is
requited to make Sermons.
the things that hitherto have been delivered, will, or can doubt, but that it
is a point of excellent skill, to preach with fruit in the public assemblies
of the Church:

But yet withal we must know, that it is a point of no mean or common skill
and pain also, It is no small cunning to hear them well.
to hear holy Sermons well. Of which howsoever some men may doubt, and the
thing it self may to many seem very strange, specially at the first blush,
and the rather because it is not usually propounded or heard, yet will I assay
to say somewhat, and to prove it also, because the order and course of this
present work and treaty craves and calls for the performance of it.

Now because to make Sermons, and to hear them, are (as we say in schools)
relatiues, that is, the one importing and implying the other: and because as
all men know it is no easy matter to perform that high duty well, here
being required to the doing of it before they come to it, preparation, reading,
meditation, prayer and sundry such like: and beside faithful performance of
it, with many other things when they have accomplished that duty, any man that
has but a crum of sound judgment, may hereby plainly perceive, that many
excellent duties are required also in hearing of Sermons, wherein me thinks
these three following, are principally to be respected, showing indeed what he
is to do.

1 Before the Sermon. 2 Secondly in the very Sermon time. The sum of this
book.
3 And lastly after he has heard the Sermon.
CHAP. 2. Touching the duty of the hearers before the Sermon.
Men's minds are with great religion to be framed and set to hearing of Sermons.
THE very heathen themselves, did in former time so reverently and
vncorruptedly esteem of, come unto, and perform their idolatrous services and
worships, that they ever took it to be a very wicked thing, to touch them, as
it were, or to handle them with unwashed hands. Whereupon grew that proverb
amongst them, with unwashed hands, so often as they would signify, that men
repaired to, or dealt in some holy thing, or matter otherwise of great moment,
irreligiously, negligently, or vnprouidedly, as we say. How much more then,
both in hearing Sermons, and also in handling of the holy word of God, as
likewise both in administering, and in using holy things, and Gods service
especially; shall we have just cause to think that we have need of, as much
religion, reverence, and devotion of mind, as we can attain to, that so we
may the better prepare and dispose our selves, to so holy and heavenly things,
in which consists the only top, as I may say of our felicity and chief
good; and the better take heed to, and keep our foot, when we shall go to the
house of our God: as Solomon admonishes us in the book of the Preacher, chap.
4. verse. 17. for in this case whether we consider Psalm. 18.7 Ioh. 15.15.
at the presence whereof even the mountains tremble, and in whose sight not
the heavens themselves verily, no nor the Angels indeed are clean: or regard
the height Corinthians: 1. Corin. 2.9.
or respect that exceeding great misery 2. Cor. 3.5.
Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God: or weigh the most high Isay. 54.10.
and vouchsafes to make with us a covenant of grace and salvation, not
disdaining that our exceeding misery and unworthiness: or in a pair of just
scales uprightly us, and hereafter shall be beneficial for us, rightly to
handle such great matters, and well to perform them for Gods glory, and the
salvation of our souls, I say, all or any of these things well considered, it
cannot otherwise be, (sure I am it should not otherwise be) but that we should
go to the holy assemblies and meetinges, not with snailes paces, that is,
creepingly and slowly, but with wide and large steps, as those that go upon
stilts, and to come to them, and to be present and co^uersant in them: not
having our hands and our garments washed only, but our minds and our hearts
also, Iam. 4.8.
as Saint James says: Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye
double minded men, and so draw near to God, and he will draw near to you*
Considering and remembering, that in this case especially, that common saying
must be true: Touch not holy things with unwashed hands. From whence also it
comes to pass (as we see) that so often as either prophets or godly kings
among the people of God, did call together either their household servants and
families, or the priests, or the whole people, either to hear Gods word, or to
offer up sacrifices, or to entreat God, when common calamities were at hand,
they exact, demand and call for nothing more than sanctification, clensing and
preparation thereto: Places proving that preparation or sanctification should
go before the word.
as in many places of the scriptures, examples touching this point present
themselves unto us. Amongst others see, Genesis 35. verse. 2. Exodus 19.10. 1. Sam.
16.5. 2. Chro. 15.12. 2. Chro. 29.5. Joel. 2.15.16.

Here we are to mark, that this one word of sanctifying, or sanctification
comprehends under it all that duty, which a godly hearer (that should
prepare and fit himself, to the saving hearing of Gods word) ought to bring
with him: yet because that is very large, I will for more perspicuitie and
plainnes sake, more straightly aim at those things, and more particularly put
them down, which are comprehended under this term of sanctification, as also
what things are contrary thereto, and indeed should be removed and amended,
For so by one and the self same labor, it shall manifestly appear, that not
only the very hearing of holy Sermons, but that preparation also, to that
saving and healthful healing is not some light labor, as sundry suppose, but a
matter of very great skill, industry and travel.

For even as in the brittle and frail things of this world, there is almost
nothing that is not stopped as it were, with certain his own lets and
hindrances, for the removing whereof men must especially labor and toil,
least both the thing it self, and all the fruit and profit of it, even whilst
it is green (as we say) perish and come to nothing: so to the hearing of Gods
word, and to the performance of Gods worship, the most great, grievous and
hurtful difficulties of all others are objected and set against the same, yea
shackles, and more than iron setters, which either altogether banish and
withhold men from holy assemblies, or else verily so snare and keep their
hearts in thrall, that they make them that are present, absent, and rather
shadows of men than men, and in the holy places of praierleaue them (we may
more truly say it) living images, in stead of those deaf, dumb and dead
pictures that were wont to be there before. But these lets and obstacles must
first of all be removed. And though by the things which have already bin
spoken, a man may easily conjecture and conceive that they are of two sorts:
yet because for the most part they come together, as if it were in troops, I
will one after one rehearse them, and withal declare the remedies of them.

Surfeiting must be avoided.
yea continually, men must abstain from drunken feasts and gulling in
Sermons, they must abstain from burnt wine, which in some places a man may see
ready to be sold either at the gates and entrances into the Church, or very
nigh to Churches. On the A reason.
drink or otherwise, as also the fullness of the former days wine, either
tieth men wholly Hosea pronounces: That wine and new wine or strong drink
take away the heart. Hose. 4.11.
Wherefore that utterly takes away the serious meditation and thought of Gods
word, his works and judgments, (whether they be mercies or miseries and
afflictions) yea it remoueth the meditation of everlasting life: which thing
also Isaiah observed, when unto them that were given over, to continual
quaffing and drinking, and were mighty to drink wine, and strong to mingle
things which would make men drunk, he ascribes this, that they regard not the
Lords work, nor consider or behold the work of his hands, Esaias. 11.24
but despise the law of the Lord of hosts, and contemn the word of the holy
one of Israel. With which agrees that which our Savior Christ tells us,
Luke. 21.34.
when he affirms: That by surfeiting and drunkenness, men's hearts are become
heavy and oppressed: so that they are not able to rise up to the contemplation
and beholding of heavenly things, that so Paul also dehorting Christians from
drunkenness, does by a certain opposition set, as directly contrary one of
them to another: the spirit of wine, and the spirit of the Lord, as also the
effects of drunkenness, and of Gods spirit: and on the other side exhorting men
to the effects, fruits, or works of the holy ghost, and even unto those
exercises also, which should be performed in the holy assemblies of the Church,
disswadeth them from drunkenness, Ephesians. 5.17 18.
as a most present infection and destruction of them all, saying: Be not
unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with
wine wherein is excess, but be fulfilled with the spirit, speaking mutually
among your selves, in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs, singing and
making melody to the Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for all things
unto God the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It shall not therefore be besides the purpose, Remedies against the hinderance
or let of surfeiting.
if, as at all times generally, so particularly the day before the Sermon, and
chiefly before the Lords day, men do utterly and altogether abstain from more
long, and intemperate An exception.
notwithstanding it be to women in childbirth, and to sick persons, for by
this same very law, strangers and travelers also should be bound and
restrained: and so every man might come soberly, and well prepared to the sober
meditation of Gods word, and the performance of the whole worship and service
of God: even as Saint Peter also will have us to be sober and watching unto
prayer. 1. Peter. 4.7.

Too much care of present things.
and from the uncertain things of this world, that so they may be made able
to receive holy and heavenly things: and before they go out of their houses,
they must as it were bind them together in a bundle, and if not altogether cast
them away, yet for a time lay them aside, and leave them at home. For in
worldly affairs and endeavors, it continually almost fares with us, as one well
said: be that be^deth himself to many things shall have his senses less busied
about some one. And again Our hearts are such, as they cannot at one time admit
two diverse cares. A double reason.
Muchlesse can we handle well, and as we should, worldly and heavenly cares,
heuinesses, and the riches of this life, Luke. 8.14.
are those thorns which cheake up the seed of Gods word, that it cannot bring
forth his fruit. (...). 8.7.
And the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be.

How much better therefore were it in this behalf for Christians, Remedy
against excessive care.
to imitate that same Crates of Thebes? who cast his goods into the sea,
because he supposed that by them he should be pulled back from the study of
philosophye, saying: I had rather lose them, than that they should destroy me,
or cast me away: A reason.
for how great folly and blindness is it, so to embrace and coll the mutable,
uncertain, and brittle things of this life, (yea such as have adjoined unto
them infinite vexations and troubles) as that a man will prefer them before
the hearing and study of Gods word, yea and before such things, as are sure
and stable, and do bring with them, to them that have them, perfect both
pleasure and blessedness? which what is it else, but after the example of our
first parents, Genesis 2. and 3. Chap.
for an apple, to leave Paradise, and the same not earthly but heavenly? and as
Esau, to sell our birthright, and the privilege of the first borne for bread
and pottage of lentils? Genesis 25.34. Number. 11.5.
and more highly with the Israelites to esteem the garlike and onions of
Egypt, than that holy land of Canaan? And with the prodigal son, to choose
rather to feed with the shales and buskes for hogs, than in his fathers house,
Luke. 15.16
plentifully and daintily to eat the meat of Angels? And more eagerly to
desire the filthy and infamous pleasures of the Sodomits, than leaving them to
follow Gods holy calling, even to everlasting life?

Singular conceit of knowledge.
withholdeth from the bounds and borders of the Church, and from hearing of
Gods word. And herein they do the more foster and feed themselves, because they
have the holy Bible at home in their houses, and some one or other postill, as
also other profitable books, by the reading of which they can profit more (as
they suppose) than by frequenting the Church: yea they fear not to boast, that
they themselves better know and understand the holy things of God, tha^ the
public preacher or minister of Gods holy word.

But for the removing of this obstacle or let, and for the right settling of a
man's self, Remedies against conceit of knowledge.
to the hearing of holy Sermons, men must again and again, think upon that
speech of Christ, wherein he says: That you ought to have done, For both of
them are enjoined and commanded us from Math. 23.23
And how often are the holy assemblies of the Church commended unto us, both by
Gods commandment, and also by holy men's examples, which examples have as it
were the force of precepts? As that in the Temple of the Lord, all his people
speaks of his glory: That they declare the Lords name in Sion, Sentences.
Psalm. 29.9. Psalm. 102.21* 22. Psalm. 149.1. Math. 13.43 Revel. 2.11. Luke.
16.29. Hebr. 10.25
and his praise in Jerusalem, when the people shall be gathered together, and
the kingdoms to serve the Lord: That the Lords praise is in the congregation
of saints: That he that has ears to hear, ought to hear: That men should
hear Moses and the Prophets: And that we should not forsake, our assemblies
and Churches, as the manner of some is. Examples.
And with what great knowledge of heavenly matters and mysteries was that
kingly Prophet David furnished? Yet he affirms, Psalm. 122.1.
that he rejoiced when it was said unto him, we will go into the house of the
Lord. And being driven into banishment, he earnestly and heartily bewailed this,
that he could not safely be present at the holy meetings and assemblies of the
people. Priscilla indeed and Aquila being man and wife, Psalm. 42.4 Psalm.
84.4.5. Acts. 18.36
made such good proceedings in the way of God, that they did more exactly
instruct in the way of God, a man well instructed before in the way of the Lord,
and a very eloque^t man, to whom also the Apostle bears witness, that he
watered in the Church, Apollos by name: 1. Cor. 3.6.
and yet notwithstanding they heard him publicly speaking in the Synagogue.
And how often both in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the first epistle to the
Corinthians, is there mention made of the public assemblies of the Church. A
reason.
For the public preaching of Gods word has many peculiar privileges and
prehemine^ces, that the private reading thereof has not, in regard of which,
that in many respects, and by many degrees is worthily to be preferred before
this. For in the ecclesiastical assemblies lively voice of the teacher, is
more effectual Papias in Eusebius says, Eusebius. histo. eccle. lib. 3. cap. 36.
and witnesses of himself: I persuaded my self I could not get so much
profit by books, as from the lively voice: Lastly the public assemblies of
the Church, and the things that by calling upon Christ's For whosoever shall
call upon the name of the Lord, Joel. 2.32. Romans 10.13.14.15.
shall be saved. But how shall they call upon him, in whom they have not
believed: and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a preacher? therefore faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God, as the Apostle Paul testifies, Romans 10. verse. 17.
And Christ himself says: Mat. 18, 19.20.
If two of you shall on earth agree upon any thing, whatsoever they shall
desire, it shall be given them of my father which is in heaven: for where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And
what means Christ else, when he marketh his sheep or his elect, with this
note, that they hear his voice. John. 10.27.

Other some there are, who are bewitched, Partial, or rather schismatic
respect of ministers.
which they make of ministers, and are not only nice and coy, or wanton, as we
would say, but fall to open contempt, or carelessness: which then falls out,
when sundry are established in the ministry of some one certain Church or
City, and arises either What manner of preachers men do for the most part
like of.
whom either they themselves do not affect or favor, or who will not flatter
them, nor yield unto their affections, nor cannot, he will not tickle their
ears, with a certain smoth kind of speech, either by pleasant histories and
tales, compiled and fetched from profane authors, as if they were like
tingling brass and no better, then do they, even as it were for the nonce, and
of set purpose withdraw themselves from the holy assemblies, and withhold
themselves from Sermons. But that shall befall such hearers, as fell upon that
wicked king of Israel, Ahab: of whom, when Iehoshaphat the godly king of Judah
demanded, whether there were not besides those four hundred prophets of Baall,
yet any other prophet of the Lord, of whom they might inquire and take counsel,
touching their war against Ramoth-Gilead, answered, 1. King. 22.7.8.
there is yet one man (to wit Micaiah the prophet) but I hate him, because he
does not prophecy good unto me but evil: or else it shall betide the^, as it
did to Felix and his wife Drusilla, who desired to hear Paul a prisoner at
Cesarea, to preach unto them: Act. 24.25.
But when Paul disputed of righteousness, and temperance, and of the judgment
to come, Felix being afraid and trembling, answered: now go thy way for this
time, and when I have convenient time, I will call for thee again. For whereas
Felix in the government of that province, did many things tyra^nously, and had
greater regard to gain, than to justice: and whereas Drusilla, who was a
Iewesse, was contrary to Gods law, married to an uncircumcised man, and so
became a filthy adulteress: Paul in a certain kind of grave wisdom, which
yet had joined with it great liberty of speech, reasons and disputes
principally of such things, which he knew to be wanting in his hearers. But
when this song pleased them not, they enjoin Paul to be silent, and send him
packing from them, faining that some other time, if it shall be sit and
seasonable for them, they will call him again, and hear him more at large
concerning those points. But as for them that in hearing of Sermons, and in
choice of the ministers of the word, do by a certain profane and carnal
leuitie seek nothing else, but either a certain pleasing of their ears, or a
spending of them, they shall have the same, that that Herod Antipas had, to whom
when Pilate commanded Christ to be led captive, Luke. 23.8.
he greatly rejoiced, seeing that having a long season desired to see Christ,
he thought now good occasion was given him, that he might both feed his eyes,
and delight his mind with certain new miracles, and such as before were never
seen; no otherwise, than if he had gotten some Iugler or Inchanter, that would
show him some pleasant sight. Which thing, when such Herodian, profane,
curious, careless and idle hearers, cannot obtain of Christ and his faithful
ministers, they nothing at all regard them, and do not only with most wicked
scoffs and scorns deride the^, but clothing them with a certain scornful
kind of attire or apparel, and loading them with all manner of scoffs, they
openly produce and traduce them to be derided of all.

But Saint Paul (which also is of great force, to break and cut in sunder this
Gordian knot, not with Alexanders sword, The remedy.
but with the two edged sword of Gods word) did in the Church of Corinth
sharply reprove this, Heb. 4.12.
that being led theru^to by a certain lightness of mind and carnal affection,
some did hang upon one doctor, some upon another, and so enuiously preferring
one before another, they brought in dissensions, 1. Cor. 3.3.4.
and schisms into that Church: not that they, who^ he named, fostered and
maintained dissensions among themselves, or taught contrary things one to
another, but because the Corinthians themselves did consider of and esteem,
either A reason.
who is our only master, as he himself says, Mat. 23.8 and the only head of
the church, and that by professing, Ephesians. 1.22.
following and esteeming other masters and teachers besides Christ.
Furthermore, it is convenient, who has purchased us with his blood, and also
has Lordship, Act. 20.28.
power and authority over us, into whose name likewise we have bin baptized,
and have again given him our names also. And because the false Apostles, as
ambitious teachers did in the Church of Corinth, affect the commendation and
praise of eloquence and wisdom: and on the other side traduced Paul, for
using in his Sermons, a certain base and contemptible kind of speech: he
therefore shows that both the kind, and the style of the doctrine of the
gospel, 2. Cor. 2.1.
did much differ from philosophical sort of speaking, and from the wisdom of
the world. And this he does least the power and worthiness of the gospel, might
by this means wax vile, and the glory of it be ascribed rather to the art,
excellency and eloquence of speech, tha^ to the virtue and power of Christ,
and whilst me^ rather give ear to pleasant words, and attend the colors and
paintings of speech more than the matters themselves, and seek the tickling
and delight of the ears the very kernel and marrow (as I may say) of true
doctrine should be neglected. The place it self lies thus in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, It has been declared unto me (my brethren)
touching you, 1. Cor. 1.11.12. etc.
by them that are of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you.
Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am Paul's, and I am Apollies,
and I am Cephas, and I am Christ's, Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for
you? either were ye baptized into the name of Paul? And a little after, Christ
sent me not to baptize, 1. Cor. 1.17.
but to preach the gospel, and yet not with skill or wisdom of speech and
words, least Christ's cross (that is to say, the doctrine of the Gospel
touching Christ's cross) should be made of none effect: And so on forward, as
follows in the same place. And because he would have them the more often and
the better to think of this admonition, he repeateth it again in the third
Chapter. verse. 3.4. etc.

As for the difference and inequality of the gifts which appear to be in the
ministers of the Church, Touching the inequality of gifts in the Church, and
in the ministry.
as they should not rent the ministry in pieces, or disgrace it, so should it
not bring forth the one or the other, in the Church and hearers, but rather
should join them together, with the more strong give of Christian charity, and
be a greater ornament unto them. A reason.
For even as the very ministers of the Church themselves, should not be proud,
because they have more excellent and greater gifts then other (for what have
they that they have not received? And if they have received it, why do they
beast of it, as if they had not received it? 2. Cor. 4.7
) neither contemn those that are inferior unto them, neither on the other
side, those that are inferiors, and have received meaner or fewer graces,
should envy them: even so should the hearers or the Church, not so indeed
admire, love, reverence, and extol some to the skies, that they should
contemn other some, A similitude
and so despise their very ministry, that they will withdraw themselves even
from their Sermons: for as there are in the one and the self same ground and
garden, many and diverse kinds of herbs, which differ one from another in
color, savor, sent, form, greatness and excellency, and yet they are so
far off from bringing forth any confusion and deformity, that with this trim
and fine variety, as if it were with a garment of diverse colors, they either
adorn, or else make more pleasant and sweet the said ground or garden. Again
that diverse difference that is betwixt musical voices; Another similitude.
that manifold variety of strings, which is in instruments of music; the
great diversity that is in the sounds of pipes, flutes and trumpets: these
very things I say, are they, which at the last beautify and adorn music,
whether it be by the voice, or upon instrument, and by their wonderful harmony
singing together, concord and concent, do both please men's ears and affect
their hearts. There is therefore altogether the very same consideration of the
diversity of gifts in the A reason.
ministers of the Church, and of the very Church it self: for it stands us
not in hand so much to consider what is given either unto him only, whom we so
much admire and esteem, (...). 1.17.
or to our selves, as to observe also other men's gifts and graces: knowing
this, that no man has any thing of himself, but that God alone, 1. Cor. 14.26
is the author and giver of all good things: and that the end of all his gifts,
is the edification of the Church: for in this case God passes by no man,
Notable sentences.
but though he disposes of his own graces in an unlike measure, some having
more, some having less, yet he gives to every one so much as may suffice both
to obtain salvation, and exercise and execute his office and function.
Wherefore, though one man have many graces that another wants: yet that other
has some graces which he lacks, and for which graces Illustration by
particulars.
or cannot be contemned. One it may be has pleasant speech, and tickleth the
ears with a certain sweet falling or composition of words, yet perhaps he
sticks or else wandreth up and down, but in the bark or chippings as I may
say; not piersing to the kernel and marrow of those matters, which that other
(who pleases not men's ears) well performs. This man by gravity weight and
abundance of matter, supplieth want of smoth words: In which the other
exceeds and excels, by a certain flood as it were of eloquence. This man's
speech or sayings only swim as it were in the upper A conclusion. Luke.
10.16.
For the contempt of any minister, is the contempt of God Neither should men
stand upon, or stay themselves in those outward pleasant inticements, The
subject of teaching and hearing.
paintings, and colorable deceits of words, speech and gesture, but look to
the pith and substance of the matter it self, and in public Sermons, to seek
or search after Hatred of the ministers and ministry.


Furthermore many there be which boil and burn with so great hatred against
the ministers of the Church, that they cannot endure Act. 7* 55.58.
they hear and receive al things with provoked and unjust minds no otherwise
certainly affected than were the Jews at Steuens speech: they fret in their
hearts, they gnash upon them with their teeth, and stop their ears, and out of
the holy assemblies, they bark at, and bite as it were with the very teeth of
dogs, all that their ministers have spoken in their Sermons, yea and many
times, slander, and that with no less than devilish malice; all that the
ministers say: yea and spread abroad such things touching their Sermons, as
never came into the ministers minds, much less into their mournes.

But these men sin, and indeed are injurious The remedies.
which perhaps may be esteemed to be of and in whose name they exercise and
execute their embassage, yea, which is more, 2. Cor. 5.20.
they sin against their own this fiery dart of Satan, and so the better
prepare themselves, Ephe. 6.16.
to the diligent and healthful hearing of Gods holy word. For when the
Israelites had forsaken Samuel, and desired to have a king, as other nations,
and Samuel was somewhat grieved and a little displeased, as in that behalf,
God assaying to comfort him against so great contempt and injury, says unto
him: They have not despised thee, 1 Samuel 8.7.
but they have despised me, that I should not reign over them: And Christ
says unto his Apostles: He that hears you, hears me: and he that rejects
you, rejects me, Luke. 10.16 John. 13.22.
and he that rejects me, rejects him that sent me: with which things also
consent Saint Paul's words, who affirms, that the Apostles and all the
lawful ministers of Gods word, 2. Cor. 5.20.
do exercise an embassage in Christ's name, even as if God did entreat men by
them, and that whosoever rejects their doctrine, does not reject man, 1.
These. 4.8.
but God himself. In our tongue we have a common proverb, by which we are
willed to bow our knees and to bend to that tree, that yields us shadow,
what then should we as in this respect do to the Church ministry, by which
God dispenses unto us, those most excellent mysteries of eternal salvation,
and yields us shadow and refreshing, yea a true and an assured haven,
against the heat and tempest of everlasting damnation, and the fire of hell,
and shows and sets out unto us, all our distemperature of body and soul:
so that if we would rightly esteem and weigh well together, the graces which
by the ministry, are bestowed upon us from God, and compare them with all the
carnal duties of this world, See. 1. Cor. 9.11. Romans 15.27. Gal. 6.6.
and with the kindnesses and benefits which at any time can proceed from godly
hearers, to their ministers, we shall find that they are of little or no
account at all. In which respect also indeed it is, that the holy Ghost does so
often exhort the Church, to the love, reverence, honor, and all duties of
kindness toward the ministry, as we may see. 1. Tim. 5.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
Heb. 13.17, Gal. 6.6. And as concerning the Galatians, Gal. 4.14.
he does indeed to their singular and immortal praise and glory, say of them,
That they received him as an Angel of God, yea as Jesus Christ himself, and
if it had been possible, that having pulled out their eyes, they would have
given him them.

With how great hazard of eternal salvation, the contempt of the ministry is
joined.
Wherefore certainly we must conclude thus, that that same cruel contempt and
hatred of the ministry and ministers of the word (which in very many places,
is even by children, sucked in, and instilled together with their mothers
milk) is not at any hand to be esteemed so small a matter, as it is at this
day commonly accounted for play and sport: but rather that it is a notorious
and cruel wily shift of Satan, by which he sets upon, and annoyeth not so
much the ministers, as the hearers. For because he sees, like a false forgerer
and accuser as he is, that this would be too gross and palpable: and therefore
frustrate and in vain also, Satan's subteltie.
if he should go roundly and openly to work and council men to hate and
contemn Gods word, and to neglect their own salvation, he assayeth by
vndermin ngs, sleights and subtelties, as sly as Sinons were, to perform this
matter, and therefore suggesteth unto men the contempt and hatred of the Church
and of the ministry of the word, Fit similitudes.
and of salvation, and labors to breath this as a certain hellish poison
indeed into men's hearts, and here, as if he had already gotten the victory,
triumphs, as he that knows this well, that the very ministry of
reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.19.
and eternal life, shall altogether be accounted of, according as the
ministers themselves are esteemed: which stratageme or subtle practice of the
devil, if men's minds were well and thoroughly acquainted therewith, it is not
Godly wisdom.
and at the least should pursue that with due good will 1. Ioh. 5.1. Gal. 6.8.
that wholly lies in wickedness, and so of the flesh reap corruption, yea
destruction: yea they should remember, that open rebuke is better than secret
love: and again, that the words of a lover are faithful, and the kisses of an
enemy are deceitful, as the Lord says by Solomon, Prou, 27. verse. 4.5.

The greatness or largenes of parish assemblies.
both because such Churches are divided and dispersed in many places, into many
towns and villages, many on the Lords days are hindered from hearing of the
word of God: and also by reason of the badnes of the weather, the ways
likewise unto their parish Churches being sometimes troublesome and tedious
(the wearisomenesse whereof either they will not endure and swallow up, or else
sometimes cannot) they are let therefrom, either by old age, or by sickness,
or by care of small children, and household business etc. Very aged people, and
sick persons respected.
All which though I deny not, but that they are certain impediments, yet are
they not sufficient to excuse men's daily negligence, in hearing of Gods word,
unless it be for the most part in very old people, and in such as lie sick,
in and upon their beds.

In this case, how much more hard law, The remedies.
did the Lord in times past lay upon the people of the Jews, Exodus 23.17.
Exodus 34.23 24.
whom he would have to appear before the Lord, three times every year, by far
longer iourneyes, by much more unseasonableness of weather, greater dangers
and causes, and far greater hazard of their worldly wealth, yea, Deuteronomy. 12.11
18.
and every one to bring their whole family with them, and that in Ierusaelem,
as if it were, in the chief or only parish Church: and that not with empty
hands (as perhaps covetous hearts would persuade them) but with the offerings of
their hands, as God had blessed all or any of them? And least to hinder them in
this work, they might pretend loss of their goods (which to very many of them
indeed, if men would speak according to flesh and blood, could not be little
or small) or specially the invasions, and spoils that their enemies might
make, all the men meeting as it were in one place, and the land, left as it
were naked of all help and defense, God meets with this color or fear, or
certain danger if you will, promising that he will so work, that not any of
their enemies shall so much as covet their land, Exo. 34.34.
much less assault their empty houses and countries, whilst they go up, that
they may appear those three times in the year before the Lord. Yea so far
forth certainly, did God mean to teach and testify unto us, that we should
not need to fear any disprofit or loss to come to our selves, families or
substance, whilst for Gods service sake we are constrained to be absent from
our houses, or rather willingly leave them for a time. As for the Jews, they
are such careful obseruers of this law, that even Joseph and Marie with Jesus
their Examples.
of twelve years old, came up to Jerusalem, Luke. 2.42.
according to the custom and manner of the feast. And the Jews also, within
their captiuities and sundry exiles, remained dispersed far and wide here
and there in the lands of the heathen; and they likewise which of the Gentiles,
by their labor and travail, had embraced the Jewish religion, did at
Jerusalem frequent those feasts of the those religious persons, Act. 2.5.
that came every one of them out of the places where they dwelt, out of every
nation under heaven to Jerusalem, and abode there on the feast of Pentecost.
And the Eunuch also, a chief governor under Candaces the Queen. Act. 8.27.
So certainly the Queen of Sheba came to 1. King. 10.1.2. etc.
exceeding much, and precious stones, to talk with that most wife king
Solomon, and to hear his wisdom. Which example Christ himself alleges
against the contemners of Gods holy word saying: Mat. 12.42. Luke. 11.31
The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with the men of this
generation, and shall condemn them, because she came from the uttermost
parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater
than Solomon is here. great troop, Mat. 8.1. John. 6.1.2 etc.
out of diverse and sundry places of Galilie, leaving all their businesses at
home, flock unto Christ, and remain with him full three days together, Mat.
15.32.
enduring also great hunger, either because all the things which they had
brought with them from home, were consumed, or else because they brought no
victual with them, which falls often forth in such sudden and tumultuarie
meetings. But Christ willingly, and of his own accord regarded them, and
miraculously, fed them, least feeling want, and lack of things necessary,
for the sustentation of the body, they might have cause, or pretend color of
fearing, even from the very hearing of Gods word. Wherefore the better we would
have, either our household matters or private affairs provided for, A conclusion
we must so much the more diligently attend the study and exercises of Gods
word, and so much the more cheerfully prepare ourselves, to every journey of
our short life, that so we may have the more liberty and freedom to hear
Gods word. Al we confess, that our life is our pilgrimage, and that the days
of it are few and evil, Genesis 47.9.
and we have not, we cannot attain unto the years of the life of nor fathers:
And yet we lay up for this brittle course, as if we had many years to run.
Whereas we know, that man lives not by bread only, Deu. 8.3 Mat. 4.4. Pro.
10.22.
but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God: And again, the
blessing of the Lord makes rich: Wherefore we should first seek the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, and then all these things (which we stand in need
of for meat, drink cloth, etc. Mat. 6.33. Psalm. 127.2.
) should be given unto us: otherwise it is in vain for us, to rise up early,
to sit, and to eat the bread of sorrows.

But if mothers, wives, or other of the household, What wives mothers, and
others of the family that cannot come, must do.
cannot safely sometimes by reason of their household businesses, and attendance
of infants upon the Lords days, come unto their parish Churches, yet they must
endeavor, that turn by turn, as it were, upon the next Lords day, in greater
companies, they be present at the Sermons, and must at home demand repetitions
of such Sermons, as they themselves were absent from, and yet some of the
family heard the same. Besides, such as are of great What old persons must do.
must very diligently repair unto such Sermons as in the week time are made,
in the several villages or hamlets of their parishes. And as for those, that
What sick persons must do.
they must provide to call home unto them, so often as need shall require, the
ministers of the Church, to instruct, and comfort them. They must also send out
their children to be instructed in learning, at the least wise, to schools of
our mother tongue (which are almost at every man's door) that they may also use
their help, in reading over the blessed Bible, and other profitable books, if
either grievous diseases be upon them, or extreme old age approach unto them.
And whilst their years last, so to apply themselves to the hearing, learning,
and speaking of Gods word, that from thence they may fetch aid, against old age
shall come, and pleasant comfort to themselves, against all days of danger or
distress.

Carnal security.
and by which men are either utterly withheld from hearing Gods word, or
certainly very many of them hear it with no fruit at all, is that same
natural or carnal man, 1. Cor. 2.14.
even that same old Adam, which lies dead, and as it were buried in
security, impenitencie, and the perverse desires of this world, as if it were
in a certain most deep and dead sleep: for because that God (who speaks
with us by the preaching of his word) is exceeding justice, holiness and
purity, and will at no hand communicate himself, and those his most excellent,
and heavenly mysteries of salvation, with the secure, impenitent, and hogs of
Epicures heard, neither will manifest unto them, or set before them to be
tasted of, that hidden wisdom of his word, Romans 1.28.
but gives them up rather into a reprobate mind, void of all judgment
blinds their eyes, and hardens their hearts, John. 12.40 Esaias. 6.9.
least they should see with their eyes, or understand with their hearts, and so
might be converted and healed, as God in his word threatens them. Again, God
himfelfe together with that healthful wisdom of his word, Wisd. ^.2.3. etc.
is found of them that tempt him not, and discovers himself unto the^ that
distrust him not, for perverse thoughts separate from God, and his power, when
it is tried, reproves the unwise, for wisdom shall not enter into a wicked
soul, nor dwell in a body that is subject unto sin. For the holy spirit of
discipline flies from that that is forged, and withdraws it self from
foolish thoughts, and then is known, when iniquity comes. Repentance what.
Therefore in this true repentance (which is busied in and manifested by
hatred, and forsaking of sin on the one side, and in earnest desire of
godliness and righteousness on the other side, principally stands that
sanctification, unto which God (as in the beginning of this Chapter, we have
already declared) by the prophets exhorts his people, so often as he calls
them, to public assemblies to hear his word and to worship him. To which also
pertains that worthy precept of Solomon: Eccle. 4.17.
Take heed to thy foot, when thou shall go into the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools, etc.

And thus far touching the impediments and lets, in removing of which (as if
it were in causes corrupting other) it behooves a

The father or master must come to the holy asse^blies, accompanied with his
household.
Wherefore these impediments and hindrances being first removed, a godly father
of a family, or master of a household, must not himself, and the godly laws
of Christian magistrates? Nay rather good household governors, as fathers,
masters etc. Haba. 2.4
should have great care of the salvation of all and of every one of their
household: knowing that the just must live, not by another man's, but, Romans 14.12.
by his own faith: and that every one of us must yield an account to God him
self, and the things that he has done in the flesh. And therefore he must
bring with him his family, to the Sermons or preachings of Gods holy word. And
if any by reason of their domestical affairs, or other urgent businesses,
cannot be present at a Sermon, they must endeavor, in greater troops and
companies, to be present at the next Sermons. But what mean I, to speak of
the family The neighbor must inuit his neighbor to the public assemblies
of the Church.
Every faithful man should both by his example and voice, inuit his
neighbors and other men, to those spiritual tables, and heavenly bankets of
Gods holy word. Even as Isaiah, describing the desires of the people of God,
which should be manifested under the kingdom of Christ, ascribes this unto
them, both that they should in great troops gather themselves to Christ's
kingdom, and also should mutually exhort and provoke one another thereto,
saying: Come ye and let us go up unto the mountain of the Lord, Esaias. 2.3.
unto the house of the God of Jacob, and he shall teach us his ways, and we
will walk in his paths. The like study, and the very self same zeal, both
in flocking together, and also in inuiting one another unto holy asse^blies,
did Zachariah foretell should be likewise in the new Testament: and he adds
withal, Zach. 8.21. John. 1.43.47.
that those that were invited should answer, I will go also. And so did Philip
and Andrew inuit Nathaniel, and Simon to come unto Christ, whom they had found
before. So Joseph and Mary brought with them to Jerusalem, to the feast of the
Passover there, Jesus their son, Luke. ^.42.
when he was twelve years old. Church elders or officers.
Specially this is the duty of the elders of the Church, to provoke their
neighbors (since the ouerlooking and care of them is committed unto them) to
diligent frequenting of holy assemblies. Which also the magistrate himself
should do, Magistrates.
and that not only by publishing laws and decrees, but chiefly above the
rest, by his own example. As Eusebius lib. 4. de vita Constans. Cap. 17. and
33. reports touching Constantine the Emperor, that in the Church when it was
assembled, he even taking the books into his hands, began the contemplation
of the holy scriptures, made prayers with the whole assembly of the Church,
and being in the midst of the Sermons, admonished, exhorted, etc. he would
not sit.

But if any Christian man be ready to go Every Christian man, as he goes to
the Temple, ought to be occupied with religious thoughts.
he must in the third place, even again and again think upon this, to what
end now he would go thither, and what things he is there to do. For even
as the Kings and Princes of this world, are by trumpets and drums wont to
give signs, when and how often, they would have their courtiers come together,
to eat meat: So when we hear the belles ring, we should think, that a sign
is given us, 1. Tim. 6.15
by which the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, calls his family and
household, to his spiritual bankets and heavenly table, being ready to
satisfy and refresh their hungry fainting and sick souls, with that most
sweet food, and immortal drink of his holy word. And therefore being
quick, 1. Pet. 3.4.
frequent, and cheerful, and adorned with that inward man, and being washed
and trimmed, we should with as much delight at the least, if not more, come to
these spiritual things, even as courtiers carry with them, when they are to
sit down and eat at their princes tables. We should therefore think, that we
are about to go to the house of the God of Jacob, that we might pray before
the Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts, even as the faithful do provoke one
another, Zach. 8.21.
in the prophet Zachariah: the meaning is, that Augustine says: Thy prayer is
a familiar speech and talk with God, August. in Psalm. 8 5.
when thou read (or hear) Gods word, God speaks unto thee, when thou
praiest, thou Yea we should think upon the ends why God has created and
redeemed man, which is his own glory, and that we should set forth his praise,
Esa. 43.7.21 1. Pet. 2.9.
who has called us out of darkness into his wonderful light. And we should
also think upon and remember, the means, by which we may attain and come we
should first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, that is to say,
the righteousness of faith, and of good works, Mat. 6.33.
which double righteousness is set out unto us in the Law and the Gospel:
from whence also it is manifest, that for the seeking or searching after this,
we had need also to search the scriptures, and to hear Moses and the prophets,
John. 5.39. Luke. 16.29 2. Pet. 1.19,
and to attend that most sure word of the prophets: yea we must way and
consider thoroughly the causes, This is my well beloved son, Mat. 17.5. Luke.
16.29 Coloss. 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.19.
in whom I am well pleased, hear him: and will have us to hear Moses and the
prophets, and to have the word of Christ dwell in us plenteously, with all
wisdom, and to take heed to the most sure word of prophecy, as unto a light
or candle that shines in a dark place, Iam. 1.21.
and with meeknes to receive the word that is grafted in us, which is able to
save Next, that this is the last end both of our creation and of our redemption
to acknowledge God our creator and redeemer, according to his word manifested
by the Prophets and Apostles, yea by his own son, and that we should glorify
him both in this, and the life to come, as has been already said.

1. Pet. 1.23.
and to be borne again, not by mortal or corruptible seed, but by immortal,
even the word of God which endures for ever. For in his word has almighty
God set out unto us remedies against our sins, and everlasting condemnation,
and that through his son manifested in the flesh. By the same word he works
faith in us, 1. Tim. 3.16 Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.17.
without which it is impossible to please God.

David says, Except thy law had been my delights, I should now have perished
in mine affliction: And again: Psa. 119.^^
This is my comfort in mine affliction, that thy word has quickened me. Psalm
119.53
And Jeremiah the prophet speaking unto God says, know that for thy sake I
suffer rebuke. Iere. 15.15 16.
O Lord, thy words have been found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto
me for joy, even for the joy of my heart. Esaias. 50.1^.
Whereupon also it is that Isaiah says: Who is he among you that fears the
Lod? Let him hear the voice of his servant. He that has walked in darkness,
and had not light, let him hope in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.
Fifthly, that Gods word is the only Number. 15.3^
to look after our own heart and after our own eyes, that we should go a
whoring after the^: neither to do that which seems right in our own eyes,
neither to depart from all the words which the lord has commanded us either to
the right hand or to the left, neither to add any thing to that word, Deuteronomy.
12.8. Deuteronomy. 28.14 Deuteronomy. 4.2.
nor to take any thing from it. Lastly, that we cannot in the whole course of
our life and calling, be at any hand assured and certified of the presence,
favor, and blessing of God with us and upon us, unless his word be a la^terne
unto our feet, Psalm. 119.105.
and a light unto our paths, for it is not an idle or empty word, which God
witnesses unto us, but it is our life, and by this word we shall prolong our
days. These meditations (I say) and thoughts, while we hear the bells ring,
while we prepare our selves to go on to holy assemblies, or else even in those
ways as we go, are that excellent preparation, and quickening or rousing up of
our selves, and sanctification, that so we should not come to the hearing of
Gods shord with unwashed hands, but our hearts should be disposed and fitted
indeed to true reverence and devotion.

Deuteronomy. 32.47 The Text that must be expounded in the Church, must first be read
at home, and thought upon there.
namely, that he who takes true delight and pleasure in Gods word, must (if he
be any whit learned) before he come to the holy assembly, sundry times read,
yea and read over again and again, either the Chapter or the Text of the
Bible, which are to be expounded in the holy meeting (which will easily appear
to every one upon the Sabbath days, by the ordinary Texts which then are
commonly expounded, and in the Sermons, which are had and handled on the week
days, out of some whole book of scripture, that is expounded in order, as it
lies) yea and he must by himself assay what he can do, in searching out the
argument of that text, the parts, doctrines, use, No man should be discouraged
in his wants.
and other things that are contained therein. Now these private meditations,
though performed rudely and grossly; if yet a diligent hearer will compare
them with the public preaching or Sermon, he shall with small ado at the
least find out, either in what things he did not sufficiently attain unto the
purpose of the holy Ghost, or aimed not rightly at the drift thereof. And if in
any thing he did stick in his private meditation, he shall perceive light
communicated unto him, and a hand raught out to lead him. And if by endeavor
and earnestnes, he do once overcome the first difficulty of this holy, godly,
and wholesome exercise, he shall make such good proceedings in the skill, both
of reading the holy Bible, and of hearing holy Sermons, that the matter it
self will make plain proof of this, A notable encouragement.
that the fruit shall notably answer the labor bestowed, and that he shall
inwardly rejoice for so great good gotten thereby.

This very same counsel we read, that Chrysostom also in former time, did
give unto his Church at Constantinople: for thus he writes upon John. One
thing for the present, Chrysostom. in euan. Johan. hom. 10.
before we come to the words of the Gospel, I would entreat you, yea I pray you
despise it not, specially since we desire nothing that is grievous or hard to be
done, neither profitable, but to him only that receives it, and yet far more
profitable to you that show it forth. What is it then, that we require of you?
That upon some one of the days in the week, or upon the Sabbath at the least,
you would have regard to read such portions of the Gospel, The hearers duties.
as are to be expounded, which you The fruit that shall come thereby.
By this means no small fruit and profit A Christian man's duty in reading of
the Bible
Thus far he.

And indeed the duty of a Christian man, does not consist in hearing public
Sermons only; but requires also private reading of Gods word at home: and
that not only, when we are presently to go unto the Temple or Church, Psalm.
1.2.
but we must meditate day and night in the law of the Lord, from which kind of
study and exercise a blessed man is described. Yea we must afford our selves
some time and leisure from our affairs and cares of this life, that we may
give our selves to this heavenly and wholesome exercise, knowing that this one
thing is very necessary. Luke. 10.42
Neither must we stay only in the reading of those Chapters or Textes, which
are expounded in the assembly and meeting of the Church: For the whole
scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to teach, to
convince. 2. Tim. 3.16
etc. And therefore our Savior Christ commands us to search the scripture,
John. 5 39.
or rather gives this testimony to the Jews, that they did search them. And
the Apostle Paul commands, Col. 3.16.
that the word of Christ should plenteously in all wisdom dwell on us, or in
our houses, to wit, by daily reading and exercise thereof, we teaching and
admonishing one of us another out of it, or according thereto. Which study and
care indeed Luke does highly set out and commend in the men of Berrhea. Act.
17.11.
And truly upon the very same place to the Colossians lately alleged,
Chrysostom commenteth and writes after this manner. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Coloss. hom. 9
Hear (says he) all you that are temporal men, and have charge of wives and
children, how even to you particulerly and principally he commands this,
that ye should read the scriptures, and that not simply, or by the way as we
say, but with great diligence. And a little after. O all ye secular men,
Commendation of the scriptures.
hear I beseech you: Get you Bibles: they are the medicines of your souls. If
you will have nothing else, yet get the new Testament, the Acts of the
Apostles, the Gospels, continual and diligent teachers. If heaviness betide
you, come and sit down here, and take and taste these things, as a storehouse
of sovereign medicines. From hence take unto thy self comfort against thine
evil and afflicton* whether damage come unto thee, or death, or the loss of
thy household things. Yea sit not down here only, A notable sentence.
but turn again and again* yea try all things, and contain them in thy mind.
This certainly is the cause of all evil, that men are ignorant of the
scriptures: we enter into the battle: without armor and weapons, and how can
we then be kept safe? Those that are armed, are commonly preserved and become
conquerors, the unarmed or naked are not so. And Saint Jerome in his epistle to
Celantia (which entreats of the institution or instruction of the mother of a
family) concerning this very kind of exercise writes thus: Hierom ad Celant.
So think upon the keeping of thy self at home within doors, that yet thou
may give some refreshing and liberty to thy soul. Choose to thy self a fit
place, and such a one as may be somewhat removed from the noise of the family,
into which, thou shall do well to withdraw thy self, as into a haven, from
the manifold tempests of worldly cares, and may by the quietness and
closeness of the secret place, still and pacify such waves of thy thoughts,
as from without are raised up. Have thou there such great study and care to
read Gods word, so many turns and courses of prayers, and so firm and
straight thought concerning things to come, that thou ma^st by this vacation
and relaxation easily recompense all the businesses of the rest of the time.
And touching this notable and incomparable profit, which men may get by private
reading of the holy scriptures, very excelle^tly does Augustine dispute in a
certain Sermon of his, where among other things he writes thus. August. serde
stud. sapien. and medit. legis Dei.
He that will be always with God, must pray, often and read often: for when
we pray we our selves talk with God* but when we read, God talks or
speaks with us. The reading of holy scripture, yields us a double grace,
both because it instructs the understanding of the mind, and also because man
by that means, being drawn from the vanities of the world, it leads him to
the love of God. The labor of reading is honest, and profits much to the
purging or cleansing of the heart. For even as by fleshly food, the flesh is
nourished: so by Gods word the inward man is nourished and fed, to all good
in this life which causes the Psalmist to say. Psalm. 119.103,
How sweet are thy word: unto my mouth? yea more sweet than the honey or honey
comb.

The hearer must power forth prayers.
and is very fit to cause men profitably to hear sermons, which though it be
kept to the last place, must yet notwithstanding principally here be stood
upon, and that is touching pouring forth or making of prayers to almighty God:
1. Cor. 2.16.
The natural man indeed perceives not the things which belong to the spirit of
God, for they are foolish unto him, neither can be know them. Mat. 16.17.
Again, flesh and blood reuealeth not this unto us, that Christ is the son of
the living God, Pro. 2.6.
but our heavenly father. He gives wisdom, and out of his mouth comes
knowledge and understanding. Wherefore, here men had need to make prayers,
both for the preacher himself, and also every one of the hearers for
themselves.

The Church is bound to pray unto God, Prayer for the ministers of the word.
as the sound sincere, and uncorrupted food of the word, 1. Pet. 2.2.
and that he may deliver the same, with such readiness, cheerfulness,
fitness, gravity and grace, that all this his whole embassage may be indeed
the ministry of reconciliation and life, by which God may gain them, 2. Cor.
5.18.
and many other to himself, even to eternal life. So does the Apostle Paul
desire the prayers of the Ephesians for him: That utterance might be given him,
Ephesians. 6.19.
to the opening of his month with liberty, that so he might make known the
secret of the Gospel, whereof he was an ambassador in bonds, that thereof he
might speak boldly as he ought to speak. And the same thing does he request
of the Church of the Colossians, namely, that they would pray for him, Coloss.
4.3
that God would open unto him the door of utterance, that he might speak the
mystery of Christ.

Prayer for the hearer.
and to soften his will and heart, that so he may grow in the knowledge of his
heavenly doctrine, may lay hold of it by a true faith, and may turn the same
into the daily and wholesome exercises of prayer and repentance. So does David
pray: Psalm. 25.4.5
Make me to know thy ways O Lord, teach me thy paths. Cause me to walk by thy
truth, and teach thou me, for thou art the God of my salvation. And again in
another Psalm: Psalm. 119.10
I have sought thee with my whole heart, let me not straie from thy
commandments. Luke. 17.5.
So the Apostles prayed, O Lord increase our faith. And Chrysostom puts
down such a form of prayer, concerning this matter, when thou preparest thy
self to sit (says he) or to read, Chrysostom. hom. de patien. and consum.
huius saeculi.
or to hear another man speak, first pray unto God and say: Lord Jesus Christ
open mine eyes, and the ears of my heart, that they may hear thy word, and
understand the same, and perform thy will. O Lord, because I am a stranger
upon this earth, Psalm. 119.18.19.
hide not thy commandments from me: but open thou mine eyes, and I shall
consider the wonderful things of thy law: for in thee have I trusted O my God,
that thou would inlighten my heart.

CHAP. 3. Concerning the hearers duty in the Sermon while, and in the holy
assemblies of the Church.
THe things, that in the former chapter have been spoken, The sum. and scope
of the former chapter.
touching the hearers duty before the Sermon, do all and every one of them
respect this point, that men's minds may be sanctified and prepared to the
right and wholesome hearing of Gods holy word, as likewise, that both snares and
scruples, which hinder men in that behalf might be taken away, and also that
men's hearts being furnished with necessary meditations and exercises before hand
(sorting in nature the rest that they are to be acquainted withal) they might
be brought into this wrestling place, and come to this exercise more prepared,
and depart from it more profitably. But of all these things belonging to
preparation, we may not without cause say, as we are wont to speak: He that
begins well has attained half the work.

Now we will bring out hearer, as it were upon the Theater, or into the open
view and sight of the Church, and will furnish him with such laws and
instructions, as which if he bring with him and practice there, he shall never
come thither, but he shall depart better learned, and more blessed, before God,
and in himself also.

Such as can read must always have their Bibles ready.
enter into the holy place of prayer and preaching, but besides the book of
Psalms, which are sung in the Church, let them have always in a readiness
the holy Bible, that so they may with the whole Church, in their voices and
singing, both praise God, Psalm. 47.5.7. Psalm. 119.54.171. Ephesians. 5.19. Col.
3.16.
and call upon him (which part of Gods worship indeed, the holy Ghost requires
of all the faithful, as appears by the places quoted in the margin) and also
the better turn over and harke^ unto that chapter or those chapters of the
Bible, which upon the Lords days especially in the ordinary reading of the
Bible are wont and ought to be read, as those textes likewise, which are
expounded in the Sermons. Furthermore, they must at the least note with some
mark, such testimonies and texts of scripture and were either not known
before, or not understood, Augustine, who writing unto Jerome, August. ad
Hieron. epist. 19
tells him of a certain Bishop, who was almost cast or pulled out of the
pulpit, because that in expounding a place of the prophet Jonas, he swarued
somewhat from the words of the common translation. For from whence could the
Church or people so quickly smell out this, unless some of them at the least,
if not very many had in their hands, and in a readiness (as we may say) the
blessed Bible book, and had looked upon the text, which was read and expounded
unto them? And this custom of bringing their holy Bibles with them, Diverse
uses of bringing Bibles to Church.
will manifest in them no mean or common argument, both of excellent zeal
toward the word of God, and also of a mind, that is very desirous to profit in
that truth of God, which most noble senses, that is, by the help of hearing
and seeing, is conveyed to the mind. Luke. 22.1.
Now the feast of unleavened bread (which is called the Passover) drew near,
adds such things of his own, as were neither ever any where written, or
heard at any time, namely this: Cursed is every one that keeps the Passover
without unleavened bread: Socrat. lib. 7 hist. eccle. cap. 5.
and that by this falsification, those more simple Nouatian heretics, that
were of the common people, were carried away from the faith. Socrates witnesses
it in his ecclesiastical history. Such a like thing also does Sozomenus
rehearse in his ecclesiastical history touching one Tryphillus Bishop of
Lodre, who in a solemn assembly of Bishops being to allege that saying of our
Savior Christ, Take up thy bed and walk, he changed the word, John. 5.8.
and used another that signified, a very low and base bed; for which things
sake, Sozom. lib. 1. hist. eccle. cap. 11.
Spiridion did openly reprove him, as Sozomenus writes. Wherefore the
ministers of the Church, shall be made much more diligent and heedie also, in
making of their Sermons, and in alleging textes and testimonies of scripture,
if they know, that there are some that will toss up and down, and bring to
the skales such things as they shall utter and deliver to the people.

Secondly, men must strive, yea every one Eeuery man must be present at the
whole Sermon.
to be present at the whole Sermon, and all the parts and pieces of it. For we
see a very wicked custom to have prevailed very far in many Churches, that
in the Sermon while, the people do continually gad in and out, and run up
and down, some packing away in the midst of the Sermons, or after the Gospel
is read, as they use to speak. But I would gladly know, what zeal there can
be in such giantlike and barbarous confusion? or what desire to learn and
profit? or what fruit can ensue thereupon? for how can it ever come A reason.
which is not harkened unto, or known from the beginning to the end, and that
with as great attention of mind, and intention, as may be? How shall any man
attain the A caution or exception.
(that is to be publicly expounded) attentively read, and has not sundry
times called read it decreed and provided for by the 24 Canon of the fourth
Council of Carthage, which also is cited in the Canon law de consecrat. did.
8. Council. Cart. 4. Can. ^4. de consec. Did. 8. Council. Age. Can. 32.
Let him that goes out of the auditorie, when the minister is speaking in the
congregation, be excommunicated: and in the council of Agathen it was decreed,
that people should not presume to goout of the temples before priests or
ministers had blessed the congregation. But what great zeal, yea what feruency
Gods people had in former time, the examples following, will plainly declare
and prove.

Thirdly, sleep, talking and speech with other Sleep, talk or speech, and
curiosity must auant.
curiosity or the reading of other books, must utterly depart in the holy
Sermon time, and the eyes and ears of every one must be attent to the mouth of
the minister, who in the name of God exercises an embassage, and all things
there must be received with hungry appetites, and as it were greedy minds. For
so were the ears of all the people, attent and bent to the book of the law,
Examples.
when Ezra from the very morning even until noone, did in the presence of men
and women, Nahem. 8.3.
and such as understood, from a pulpit of wood read the same. So great
companies approached unto Christ, with a desire to hear Gods word, Luke. 5.1.
Luke. 1 2.1.
in so much that they pressed one upon an other, yea and trade one upon
another. So the multitude did with one accord give heed unto those things
which Philip spoke, Act. 8.6.
when he preached Christ in the City of Samaria. Cornelius the Centurion (when
being warned by Oracle from God, he called Peter unto him, that from him he
might hear such things, as by which he and all his household might be saved)
showed forth a very earnest and ready mind both to hear and learn, saying
unto Peter: Act. 10.33.
Now therefore all we are here in the presence of God, that we may hear all
things which are commanded thee from God. 1. Pet. 2.2.
This indeed is that sincere milk of the word, which as newborn babes we
should desire, that we might grow up thereby. Where by a fit and fine
similitude, the desire to hear Gods word, and to profit by it, is aptly
compared with the desire of infants, by which they desire their mothers milk
and breast, which in them we know certainly is very great. The exhortation also
of Jesus the son of Syrach, serves to this purpose, and is delivered in these
terms: Willingly harken to all godly speech, Eccle. 6.36.37 38
and let not the hidden speeches of wisdom escape thee. If thou see a man
of understanding in the morning, make have unto him, and let thy feet wear the
steps of his doors. Do thou perfectly weigh the Lords precepts, and
meditate his commandments continually. He shall establish thy heart, and the
desire of wisdom shall be given to thee. As for those drousie and dull
hearers of Gods holy word, Against sleepie and drowsy hearers of the word.
with which we see the holy places of prayer and preaching for the most part to
abound (sorrow it is to say it) the example of that young man Eutychus, should
justly strike terror into such, who while the Apostle Paul was preaching,
falling into a dead sleep, and yielding so much thereto, Act. 20.9.10.
that he was more and more overwhelmed therwithall, fell down from the window
of the third loft in which he sat, and was taken up dead. Now if this befell
him, A heap of respects aggravating the sin of sleeping in the Sermon while.
whose sleep notwithstanding did in many respects deserve excuse, if we
thoroughly weigh the circumstances of the text, what shall we think may befall
them, which in the day time, in a Sermon while, but of one hour long at the
most, and that as if it were of set purpose, and without any shame at all,
before the holy Angels, and the whole congregation, and so many reverend and
godly persons, men and women settle themselves to sleeping and snorting? Surely
these belong to the catalogue and number of these lukewarm persons, Reave. 3.16.
who^ the Lord threatens, that he will spue out of his mouth.

Remedies against sleep in the holy Sermon time.
I deny not indeed, but that upon sundry causes it may sometimes fall out,
that in the Sermon while sleep may come upon a man, yea and the same both good
and Godly? 1 Thessalonians. 5.7
and thrusting them, should awake them: They that sleep (says Paul) sleep in
the night, and they that are drunken, are dru^ken And what else is it I pray
you, if in the temple you see such as are accustomed to give themselves to
sleep and to talk, what is it I say; but even openly to mock Gods majesty
to his face, and to scorn and contemn his most holy word?

Against talking in the Sermon time.
Origin writing upon Exodus, and inueighing against sundry disorders and
faults that were practiced in the Church assemblies, amongst others, he does
bitterly speak against talking there, in such terms as these are. Some there
are (says he) that know not whether readings are recited in the Church,
Origin. in Exodus hom. 12
but getting themselves into the farthest places of the Lords house, busy
themselves there with worldly tales. Of whom I dare boldly say, 2. Cor. 3.15.
that when Moses is read, there is not now a veil put upon their hearts, but a
thick and high wall. For if he that is present, and hears, A very strong
reason.
and is attentive, and handles again and fifteth the things that he hears,
and asks after, and learneth also such things, as at the first he could not
understand, can yet for all this hardly attain to the liberty of knowledge,
how may he (that stops his ears, that he should not hear, and turns his
back to the face of him that reads) be justly said to have a veil put upon
his heart, unto whom, not so much as the veil of the letter, (with which the
sense is covered, and is no more but the sound of the voice) has approached or
come? And against such talkings in the holy places of prayer and preaching,
Saint Basil expounding these words of the Psalm: In his temple every man
shall speak of his glory, Psalm. 20.9.
writes thus: Let them that in the temple speak long and large speeches,
Basil. in Psalm. 29
hear (says he) the words of the Psalm. He that is in the temple of God;
should not speak vain, filthy or slanderous words, but all should speak
glory. There are present the Angels, marking the words, And a little while
after he says: Miserable men leaving their own howses, Things hindering men
from profiting by holy exercises in the temple.
make have to the temple, that they may obtain aid and help for themselves:
but tell me I pray you, with what reverence? with what humility? They do not
indeed hear the word of God: they do not well perceive the meaning and nature
thereof, Psalm. 29.9.
In his temple every man shall speak of his glory. But thou do not only
not speak of it, but hinderest others from it, by thy vain speech thou many
times turnest away such as would worship God, and thou speak evil of the
holy scripture, and of the grace of the holy Ghost: Chrysostom complains,
Against curiosity.
that in the Church of his age, curiosity had grown so far, and gotten such
a head, that he affirms that many came to the Church, to look upon women's
beauty; and somewhat curiously to behold the comeliness and fairness of the
younger sort, whom in a certain place he pursues with this inuectiue speech.
Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 74.
What do thou (O man curiously in the Church prying into women's beauty, and
tremblest not, slaundering Gods temple with so great contumely and reproach?
what? do thou take the Church to be a brothell house? and more base than the
market place? For in such open assemblies and places, thou blushest, yea thou
art afraid, least any man should further pursue a woman: but in the Church of
God, when God himself speaks unto thee, and deterreth thee from such sins,
even at the very same time, especially thou do commit fornication and
adultery, in which God with a great and glorious voice, thundereth against
thee, and enioyneth thee to fly from such things, and yet thou tremblest not,
neither art amazed. And after a few words he says again: Certainly it is
much better to be either blind, or otherwise very sick, than so filthily to
abuse our eyes, we should rather by an inward and partition wall be separated
from women. But because ye will not, our ancestors have thought it
necessary to disioyne you by these wooden walls. And I have heard of our
elders, that these partitions or walls were not from the beginning. For in
Christ Jesus, there is neither male nor female: Gal. 3.28.
And in the Apostles times, men and women prayed together: Act. 1.14.
and the women were then women indeed, and the men likewise were such manner
of men as they should be. But now contrariwise, Iere. 5.8.
women verily have taken unto them harlots manners, and men imitate the fury
and rage of horses. Thus far Chrysostom, whose place I have the more
willingly put down, because of the partition wall which he mentions to have
been at that time in his Church.

Nay I will say more than this, namely, that in the Sermon while it is not
meet for men to give themselves over, or to spend the time in reading books
of divinity, or the very Bible it self. For this is not to give atte^dance to
the things that are spoken, as we have heard already the Samaritanes did. Act.
8.6.
For in the holy assemblies of the Church, and in the Sermon time, that ought
to bear sway, do this, or attend this, by which our ancestors, did as it
were by a prouerbiall sentence command them, to be attentive only to the
present matter that was in hand, and not to busy themselves about other
things: for what do these in a man's self, Two very badde fruits of private
reading in public exercise time.
that he has greater learning and knowledge than the teacher? And it is one
thing, according to the present occasion, and as it were by the way, to seek
out and to mark, by turning the holy Bible only some one testimony or other,
which was alleged in the Sermon, that we may the more diligently meditate of
it at home (of which also we have spoken heretofore) and another thing for a
man wholly to give himself, and that of set purpose, in public place to his
own private reading.

Fourthly, all the frame of the whole Sermon, The whole body of the Sermon, and
the knitting of it together must be observed.
and the body, must very attentively be harkened unto and observed, if a man
will obtain any sound understanding of the points, or sound edification. A
man may find many, who as if they were certain pilgrims and strangers, do by
the way, and of a certain kind of flying devotion, The faults of them that
hear Sermons.
or came in the midst of the sermon: or went away when it was half done. In
comparatiue speeches, similitudes, and such like, one snatcheth the first
proposition thereof, but the reddition (in which principally is the force of
the point it self) he carelessly neglects and passes by it. Two bad fruits
of bad hearing.
But what else can be gotten by this, but this, that the Sermons shall remain
Three good causes why men should be atte^tiue.
or in a certain respect, which if they be taken simply, or understood
generally, will engender wicked opinions and corrupted judgments. Now such
things may be restrained, either in the premises, or in the words following,
and so be more rightly expounded and applied. Again, What a profitable hearer
should look to.
and as it were with one breath. Wherefore it is meet that a profitable hearer
should always be of a ready, laborious, and very attentive mind, that his
attention and heed taking may not wax cold, but according to the present
occasion, may (as if it were by certain interupted spaces and times) return
again. For unto this techlesnesse of ours, we should ascribe this, that we do
with great impiety hear such things, as were well produced and alleged in
the holy Sermons, not only to be diversely tossed too and fro, but to be torn
and rent in pieces, with scoffs, scorns, and slanders. And yet since it
sundry times What a wise and careful minister should perform, in doubtful
speeches.
and as it were by a parenthesis, yield and minister them hope, either of a
more large explication of those points, or of the answer of those doubts and
objections, and will promise them abundantly and sufficiently to satisfy
them, and will entreat them to remain attentive, and a little to support him,
by patient hearing of him.

Men's minds must be free from prejudice, or foreconceiued opinion.
Fifthly, men's minds, whilst they are hearing Gods word especially, must be free
and set at liberty from the enchantment of all prejudice and foreconceiued
opinions whatsoever, which either others have proposed and broached unto us, or
we have drunk in and forged to our selves. For as they that have bleare eyes,
The proposition of a fit similitude.
or else see something by the mean of a colored or dyed glass, are not able
to behold any thing well, nor to judge rightly of diverse colors, but all seem
to be of that color which the glass is of, which they use in steed of
spectacles: The reddition of it.
so the same thing falls out unto them, that are before hand possessed with
the enchanting of prejudice, that they are not able rightly to understand any
thing in Gods word, or in the holy sermons, though otherwise it be never so
easy, plain, and familiar, but do as it were violently snatch and draw all
things unto the maintenance of those opinions which they have sucked in. How
familiar, plain, and altogether without any ambiguitie or darkness, is that
which Christ foretells his disciples, Luke. 18.31 32.
saying: Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be fulfilled to the
son of man, which are written by the Prophets. For he shall be delivered to
the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and shall be spitefully entreated, and shall
be spitted on. And after they have scourged him, they shall kill him, but the
third day he shall rise again? But what cause was there, that they understood
none of these things, that these sayings were hidden from them, neither
perceived they the things that were spoken? Verily because they were bewitched
and besotted with preiudicate and foreconceiued opinions, touching the carnal
and worldly kingdom of Christ: This veil was laid over their hearts: And
therefore they were not able to make these things agree betwixt themselves,
namely, how Christ should suffer that infamous death of the cross, and
withal, how according to their preconceiued opinion, he should reign as a
most mighty worldly king. Wherefore in this case, men must according to Gods
commandment: 1. John. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Try the spirits whether they be of God or no: and trying all things, yet
retain and hold that only which is good. Surely it is a very wicked thing,
even in the outward matters of this life, to give place to preiudgement, and to
give a sentence on either side, the cause not being on both sides sufficiently
known and searched out. But the hearers of Gods holy word are here occupied,
about a much more great and excellent subject. Wherefore The more excellent the
matter is, the more heedily it must be regarded.
that they do not so stiffely cleave to the opinion which they have once
embraced, that they will altogether stop their ears against them that think
otherwise, or are not of the same mind with them, and so hinder themselves from
hearing better, more The inconveniences of preiudicate and forestalled opinions.
being sound and good, as we were ready to catch them, and to snatch them when
they were offered, least through a false show of truth, we may be deceived, and
least we strive and fight rather for our own Eccle. 4.17.
Wherefore when we go unto the house of God, we must well look to, and keep
our feet: that is to say, our wicked affections, yea and such preiudicate
opinions and conceits of our own: and with Mary to sit rather at Jesus feet,
Luke. 10.39
that so in a certain true kind of humility and lowliness of heart, we may
show our selves to be his obedient scholars and disciples. For if when we
hear things contrary to our opinions, or such as are not pleasant to our
palate and taste, we will presently either harden our ears and The evils that
ensue going from Sermons.
we do not so much ill indeed to the minister and preacher of the Church
(though such departing imagine that they hurt them) as we do unto our selves,
and depart and fly, not so much from the minister Men must be present at
public assemblies and exercises, not with a mind of sifting too much, but of
learning well.
but to the world, and to our selves, and very much differing from that denial
of our selves, which Christ requires to be in his very natural and true
disciples.

Sixthly, it behooves those that come to places of prayer and preaching to be
present there, not with a mind peremptorily to determine of matters according
to our fantasies, or to toss and sift points, too and fro as we list, but with
a mind to hear and to learn. As we shall Phocion they think it a goodly thing
always to dissent from other men, will take upon them to be judges rather than
hearers, masters rather than scholars to learn at holy Sermons, and censors
of others, rather than such as will be censured. What cannot malice, contempt,
and other vices perform?
Here nothing can be spoken so sound or so true, but that in it, they will give
trial touching the strength and force of their wit, by improuing of it, by
bespotting of it, yea, by traducing and slandring of it. That therefore betideth
them, which in former time fell upon the Pharisees, Luke. 14.1.
who watched Christ, that so from his doctrine and actions, they might take
some occasion, to accuse and destroy him, if it might be.

Saint Paul wills indeed, yea and commands also, 1. Cor. 14.19
that the Church should judge of those things which the Prophets speak. And
Saint John will have us, John. 4.1.
to try the spirits, of the teachers, yea and their doctrines also. How and
how far the Church should judge touching Sermons.
And yet neither the one or the other of them, will have this judgment to be
undertaken, with a wicked and evil mind, but with a good and godly heart, yea
and will have the same to be restrained and subsist within these bounds,
namely, to consider whether the things which the prophets and interpreters
deliver, do consent with the rule of Gods Truth being once discovered, all
things must give place.
and Anacharsis the Sythian did in former time condemn, in the assemblies and
Orations of the Athenians. For so soon as it shall appear, that the things
which are spoken are agreeable to Gods word, then presently all censure must
cease, neither is there any thing else remaining, but that through the
obedience of faith, we submit our selves to such matters, though all the senses
both of our reason, and of our affections do A reason.
For here we may assure our selves of this, that look how many forms Who they
are, that must judge of, or censure Sermons.
But if so it be (as it sometimes falls out) that sundry matters would have
some censure, yet we must know that this is not the part of fools and
unlearned folk (as was used in the assemblies and Orations of the Athenians)
but of wise men, and The place where.
or greater skill than others: The manner how.
but privately and secretly: neither with the affections of choler and anger,
but must be undertaken, with the And the end of censuring must be regarded.
may be humbly acknowledged and reverently esteemed, if he have endued us with
a more excellent measure of discerning, and spiritual

Seventhly, if now and then difficile and Hard things should not breed
continual lothsomenesse, but a desire more and more to find the^ out.
which the hearer cannot presently, and upon the first propounding of them
understand, he must not be overtaken with tediousness and lothsomenesse to
hear them, and more diligently to think upon them, but with Augustine he must
more and more admire them, and labor by searching to find them out. For those
difficile, hard and high points, which here and there we meet with, both in the
holy scriptures, and also in the Sermons of the Church, as they are a great
argument, that no of a reasonable and natural man, who cannot conceive
heavenly things, 1. Cor. 2.14.
does as yet cling and cleave unto us: so they inform and casting off other
cares and affairs of this life and world, we might the better attend, and
dwell upon the reading, heating, meditation, and searching out of heavenly
things, and besides might the more diligently by prayer stir up the Lord more
and more to open and inlighten the eyes of our minds: and might seek after
many Philips, Ananiasses, and Peter's, Act. 8.34. Act. 10.5. Act. 9.17.
that is, might ask council of such as are better exercised in Gods matters
than we. For the more free and noble mind or disposition any man is of, so much
the more hardly can he endure to bear uncertainty and doubting. An example
whereof we may see in the Eunuch, who touched, yea and moved much with the
difficulty of a place of the Prophet Isaiah, Esaias. 53.7.
was not yet notwithstanding all that through any bashfulnesse (which yet in
this case is wont to hinder many) any whit at all afraid, but humbly
demands of Philip, Act. 8.31.34.
how or of whom the Prophets words should be understood. Likewise the
Thessalonians also, heard Paul teaching in the synagogue, and when any doubt
did arise, they did daily at home search the scriptures, Act. 17.11.
whether those things were so, which they had heard, taught and preached.
Besides all this God minds by such difficulty and hight of some points, to
get majesty, authority, and credit to his word, yea and to the holy Sermons
also. A similitude.
For as those things easily grow into contempt, which presently, and at the
first show or setting forth are familiar to every one of the mean people: so
every man almost marueileth at, reuerenceth and highly esteems such things,
as cannot be attained unto, but by great study, labor, and pains taking. So
much the more also by the like reason, does God mind to commend unto us,
Public and private use of the mystery.
the ecclesiastical ministry, that so we might not only publicly, with
greater diligence hear it, but might privately repair unto, and take council
of them that be in it, and so might testify that we have not by the way and
superficially, but soundly and thoroughly care concerning the knowledge of holy
and heavenly things. For if all men did know all things, Chrysostom. hom ^4. in
Math.
a teacher should not be needful, and so the order of things should be
confounded. For unto the^ indeed whom he would have to be teachers, thus
speaks God himself by Isaiah the Prophet, Esaias. 40.1.2
speak (O ye priests) unto the hearts of the people. But unto those whom by
learning he would have to know the mysteries of truth, thus he says in the
song of Moses: Deuteronomy. 32.7.
Ask thy father, and he will tell thee, thine elders, and they will declare unto
thee, says Chrysostom. And touching the courses and considerations of the
darkness of some things in the holy scriptures thus writes Augustine:
August. lib. 2. de doct. christ. cap. 6.
That some things which are darkely delivered in the scriptures, have in them,
or bring with them a most thick darkness or dimnesse: that all this was
foreseen and performed by God himself And after a few other words They that
do not altogether find that they seek for, are still an hungered: Excellent
sentences, and counsel thereupon.
they wax feeble and unlusty through lothsomenesse. But in both or either of
them, men must beware of languishing. Nobly therefore, and very healthfully
also, has the holy Ghost so tempered the holy scriptures, that in and by the
more plain places, he might meet with, and provide for hunger, and in the
more obscure and dark places, he might take away lothsomenesse. For nothing
almost is, or can be fet out of the more dark places, which is not elsewhere
found to be spoken very plainly and as openly as can be.

Othersome there are, which fly from and avoid, yea turn away their ears and
their heart from searching out of holy things, and from inquiry after truth,
specially in the points of doctrine which are now in controversy, and have
some difficulty and doubt in them, specially if they hear any of them touched
in the Sermons: A gross error.
wherein they do under this false persuasion deceive themselves, that the
knowledge and judgment of these matters, does nothing at all belong unto them,
The same confuted.
but concerns learned men only and preachers. As though it were not said to
all, how many soever they be that profess Christ's name, Mat. 7.15. 1 Thessalonians.
5.21 1. John. 4.1. 2. Pet. 3.17.18.
and have been baptized into him: Beware of false Prophets: try all things,
retain that which is good: try the spirits whether they be of God or no.
Beware least ye be plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from
your own steadfastness, but grow in grace, and in the knowledge and
acknowledging of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, every one must know how they only flow in at the ears, but may
also be understood with the heart, yea and not understood only, but may be
treasured up in mindful minds and memories. For as in the beginning we said,
great art and skill was required not only to the making, but also to the
hearing of Sermons: Hearers must know and well observe, the method ministers
use, and their kind of preaching.
so not only the minister or preacher of the Church had need of an assured
method, by the benefit whereof he may readily minister and lay out all things,
but the diligent hearer also had need thereof, that by the benefit and help of
method, such things as are well propounded and laid open by the preacher, may
as if it were, by the benefit and aid of a faithful keeper be retained still
by the hearer. For unless the hearer be able to discern and judge What things
the hearers of Sermons must respect.
when from the narration there is raised up a general proposition or division,
that is too say, in what heads or points it is showed that the whole speech is
to be occupied he is in hand with confutation, or objections Men's memories many
times hurt, by the want of method in the preachers.
and the several parts thereof are to be referred: but that all things
confusedly, and as it were on heaps, shall be thrust into men's ears, then I
say, there never was, or ever can be so happy, holy, or heavenly a memory,
that is able to remember and keep fast all such things, as in an houers space,
and a continual course of speech were delivered. So the hearer should be able
to All that is delivered respects faith, or good manners.
he must know whether any true doctrine be delivered and confirmed, and any
false doctrine or some error be confuted. And if it concern life, whether it
bear upon and command piety toward God, or some other certain virtues
belonging and sort of life, all the things spoken are directed, as for example,
whether they concern the state of household government, The parts of an
household.
and in that again, whether they respect either married folks, as the husband
and the wife, or the parents and their children, or the menseruants or the
maidseruants, or the hired servants and workmen. And so likewise touching the
other kinds of life: also they must consider which condition of men or states
of men, as their prosperity or adversity the things propounded do concern. A
similitude.
For as unless the mariner well behold, the Bear or Charles waine, as we call
it, in the firmament, he will take or make but an uncertain course in the sea:
so except the hearer in hearing of Sermons, use such a method, digesting of
matters, and order, all the things that he hears shall indeed be and remain
indigested, raw, vanishing, and not at all understood, even as if it were a
co^fused Chaos or heap. No profitable hearing without observation of a good
course.
Wherefore a profitable hearer must use this course, even as if it were
Ariadnes line or thread, if he will deliver himself out of the Labyrinth, or
maze as I may say, of Sermons, and find a sure way out of them. It is no
marvel then, that since in this case so few are instructed, and do come unto
the holy assemblies, and do hear Sermons, without judgment and spiritual
wisdom, there are so few found that profit by hearing of Gods word, yea
though they have very excellent and worthy teachers.

But first the preachers of the Church, Helps for the hearers whereby they may
attain the method of Sermons
and

Ninthly, every one of them must apply unto The things that are heard, must be
turned to wholesome uses.
and turn them to the wholesome exercise of faith, prayer, and repentance. And
this they must do, whether they perceive themselves strong in faith, or weak
therein, or behold themselves subject, either to certain temptations of
conscience, or to some sins, vices, and infirmities, and be either in
adversity, or in prosperity, and be in this or in that state of life, and
settled in some certain duty belonging thereto. A strong reason.
For the doctrine of Gods word consists not so much in understanding and
knowing, as in doing, and in the true exercises of faith and godliness: Romans
2.13.
Because not they who hear the law are just before God, but they that perform
the law, they shall be justified: as he also that shall look into that perfect
law of liberty and shall abide therein, Iam. 2.25.
even he, if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the word, shall be
blessed in his deed. A worthy inference.
Wherefore the doctrine of Gods holy word, must not only be put into our
ears, but into our head, and not into our brain or head only, but into our
hearts also, yea, and not into our heart only, but into our hands also, that the
more sound fruit of it, may appear in us. Whereupon it is yt our savior
Christ also says: John 13.7.
If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. And on the other side
affirms, Luke 12.47.
That that servant which knew the will of his master, or Lord, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes:
yea has long ago foretold us; Matthew. 7.21.
that every one that shall say unto him Lord Lord shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that shall do the will of my father which is in
heaven.

To this healthful practice and obedience of Gods word heard, Council
profitable for practice of such things, as are delivered in preaching.
and that the same may indeed affect us and thrust us forward, this shall bring
no small aid and assistance, if the ministers in preaching of Gods word, do
not use speech only, but practice also a certain demonstration of spiritual
might and power; yea and be indeed, truly, Good things which the hearers must
use.
and from the heart affected therewithal: and that the hearers again, can
thorough Gods grace put on the preachers mind and affections, and by a certain
kind of spiritual alteration and change, be transformed into them, and follow
both in the learning, and in the practicing of Gods word, the very self same
order and course, that they perceive their faithful preachers to use and
practice in teaching of it: Which thing (that I may shortly unfold my self,
August. lib. 4, de doct. christ. cap. 12
and use Augustines words) shall easily be brought to pass, if the learner
love that that the Preacher promises: if he fear that which he threatens: if
he hate that which he rebukes: If he embrace that which he commends, if he
lament that which he aggrauateth, and shows is worthy to be lamented: and if
he set any thing out that is worthy to be rejoiced at, rejoices therein: and
takes pity of them, whom by speaking he places before their eyes, as meet to
be pitied: and flies from them, whom by terrifying he sets before them to
be avoided, etc. So we read of the Elders of Ephesus, that when they heard
Paul, with a very patheticall, and yet lamentable speech, to commend that
Church unto them, Act. 20.31.37.
and to rehearse his tears, by which he had admonished every one of them day
and night, three years together, there was also a great weeping and mourning
among them all. John. 7.45.46.
And when Christ spoke so as never any man, those officers that the Pharisees
sent out to take or to trippe Christ, were so transformed, and had put upon
them such other affections and minds, that they did not only not bring Christ
bound (a matter that was given them in charge to do) but they did commend and
embrace both him and his doctrine. An excellent sentence.
To be short, it can hardly be uttered, how much good it does, when the hearers
affections and endeavors, do answer the affections and endeavors of their
teachers. For where there shall be found the like will and mind both in the
hearers, and in the teachers, it cannot be but that there shall follow
thereupon very excellent fruits of Sermons.

Tenthly, godly hearers must not think the Men must not wax weary with long
Sermons.
or fret in themselves, much less trudge and pack out of the Church, if the
Sermon be sometimes more long, or grow greater than at other. The ministers and
preachers of Gods holy word, must carefully endeavor to avoid that. But perhaps
the doctrine that is presently to be treated of, is more plentiful and
fruitful than that it can be comprehended and In what cases the minister may
now and then be somewhat more long and large.
that there was not in former time any fit opportunity offered to propound it,
or may in short space after to be offered. Perhaps also the present state of
things requires men again and again, to lay upon the same anuile. The
hearers sometimes are present, which perhaps at another weary, A very strong
reason, and fit comparison.
but wait as it were, the delivery of many good things: we do easily and
without any loathsomenes pass away the time, if that idle speeches and
talkings together, or disorderly and drunken, or riotous feasts be deferred and
put of many hours, yea even to midnight, Job. 17.12.
And the day be turned into night, as it is in Job. Wherefore if in the holy
assemblies and exercises of the Church, we be so quickly weary, or fret and
fume, it is sure a sign of such a mind as is ill affected, and does not
hunger and thirst after (as it should) the righteousness of Gods word, Matthew.
5.6. Psalm. 1.2. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Genes.
and has not his delight in the law or testimonies of the Lord. On the other
side, as to be an hungry is a token of bodily health: so with a great and
earnest desire to hear Gods holy word, is a most assured argument of the good
health and welfare of the soul, so says Chrysostom. Surely that must needs
be a long Sermon, when Iehoshua read in the presence and hearing of all Israel
all the words of the law: Iehosh. 8.34, 35.
in so much as there was not a word of all things which Moses had commanded,
which Iehoshua read not before all the congregation of Israel. The like
consideration was there also of ye ecclesiastical assembly, when Josias the
King, 2. Chron. 34.30.
in the hearing of all the people, and that from the greatest to the smallest,
read all the words of the book of the covenant, which was found in the house
of the Lord. The same book of Moses law Ezra did read from the morning until
the mid day, before men and women, Ezra. 8.3.
and them that understood it, and yet notwithstanding the ears of all the
people were in so long a Sermon directed, and hearkened unto the book of the
law. Afterward the children of Israel read in the book of the law of their
God four times a day. Ezra. 9 3.
How long was that Sermon of Christ's, which is set out in the fifth, sixth, and
seventh chapters of the Gospel according to S. Matthew, specially if we regard
this, that the Evangelists do propound unto us only the bare heads, points,
or sums, as I may say, of Christ's Sermons? S. Paul being to depart from Troas
the day following his speech, Act. 20.7.11
continued his words and preaching even until midnight, and speaking long unto
them, even until the dawning of the day, at the last he so departed. Therefore
it is not any new, or unaccustomed thing, though sometimes for sundry causes it
so fall out, that Sermons be somewhat prolonged, and yet the hearers be held,
and remain with continuance (and that also without loathing or stomach, and
chasing) in good and continual attention.

Every one should look to his own in the Sermon time.
scholars, and flock, least either by sleeping, or talking together, or
committing some light and unseemly things, or else gadding out of the Church
in the Sermon time, they commit something that is unseemly or unworthy of the
holy assemblies of the Church. And if perhaps any such thing should be
performed, they must either by and by, or at home, or in the schools, or upon
every first occasion so falling out, admonish and correct them as in this
behalf. For in the holy assemblies of the Church, one must have special
regard of reverence, comelines, and modesty, and if as in this behalf there
be any offense committed, 1. Cor. 11.4.5. 1. Cor. 14.34.40.
it must be corrected and censured, and that according both to the doctrine,
and the example of Saint Paul the Apostle in his epistle to the Corinthians.

Scholars must write Sermons. Commodities ensuing that exercise.
Particularly scholars must be accustomed, to take Sermons in writing: which
kind of holy exercise has many commodities, and the same of great moment also.
For whilst they must attend diligent hearing, and ordinary writing of Sermons
continually, they cannot without measure exercise and practice, if this or some
other good matter be not laid upon them. By this means also men shall meet One
foul fault in schoolemasters,
manfesting it felf in the neglect of school discipline. For many judge very
hardly, if not unjustly; concerning schools and scholars, whilst amongst
children brought up at school, and others (who were never so much as at the
school doors threshold) they do as in regard of honesty, and piety see no
difference at all. Thirdly, they years get unto themselves so great knowledge
in the blessed Bible book, specially if they accustom themselves to the
reading of the Bible, both in the schools (which thing certainly should be
practiced in all Christian schools) and also at home, at certain spare
hours, that at the last they shall both rejoice for so great riches and
spiritual treasure obtained and shall leave behind them many of full and ripe
years, who perhaps in this respect took themselves not to be the last or
behind others. The memory helped.
The memory certainly, while it suffers not those things to flote and
vanish away, which the pen must spedilie receive and take: and the judgment,
The judgment also.
whilst Augustine in some place of his books touching Christian doctrine,
August. de doct. Psa. 10
sometimes persuades the minister and preacher of the Church to do, namely, so
long to pursue and stand upon the beating and repeating of one and the same
point, until by the gesture and countenance of the hearers, he perceive that
they understand it) that yet they should know, that to note it once only will
be sufficient, yet so as they do prefer that before the rest, Many things
required in a diligent hearer or writer of Sermons.
which both in words and sentences does excel the rest. Also they must know,
when the several parts of the speech or method of the Sermon begins or
ends: that is to say, which is the beginning or ending; which is the
narration or discourse, which is the proposition or division, which is the
confirmation, which is the confutation, which is the conclusion, and when some
of the parts of the speech are omitted; which thing is sometimes performed,
either about the beginning, or else in the confutation, or toward the
conclusion (or perhapps in some other part of the speech) as we have declared
in his proper place.

CHAP. 4. Touching the duties that the hearers are to perform, when the Sermon
is done.
A corrupt opinion.
THere is scarce the hundredth man, that does not fully persuade himself that he
has well and exactly done his duty in and about the matter of hearing
Sermons, if with a sertaine kind of attention and diligent meditation of the
things propounded, he has heard the Sermon from the beginning to the ending:
and have also felt some certain motions of the mind, and devotion of the
heart, as it were by the way, and upon the present occasion in the Sermon while
stirred up in him. Mo things required than diligent attention at Sermons etc.
And to say the truth, these exercises and offices of a Christian man are not
to be contemned or neglected. But yet the last labor, ending and finishing as
they say, are not yet so added unto this holy work, but sundry things yet
remain, which directly concern the lively and healthful practice of the
doctrine heard, yea do so turn the doctrine we have heard, into moisture and
blood, that the fruit thereof does by many means and ways also redound to our
selves and others: Romans 2.13.
which yet are of so much the greater moment and weight, because not the
hearers, but the doers of the law shall be justified, as the scripture affirms.
And Christ himself says: If ye know these things, John. 13.17.
blessed shall ye be if ye do them. Wherefore touching some things concerning
this point, and such as shall be thought necessary, we will now put men in mind.

For first, an ungodly, lewd and shameful Men ought not to go out of the
Church, so soon as the Sermon is ended.
that such as hardly endured and held out to the end of the Sermons, so soon
as they are done, shall in such a number and heap, and with such violence
also, get them out of the temples, that few are found that tarry the public
prayers of the Church: fewer that are partakers holy assemblies and exercises
should be shut up and finished. Inconveniences that follow going out of the
Church before all be finished.
But in the mean season, remaining in the Church yards as they call them
commonly, or in the Church porches, they treat of (and that with no small
profanation of the Lords day, and the taint or spot of Christian

Why the whole Church should be present at public prayers.
For concerning public prayers, this is it we must hold: seeing there are two
principal actions and parts of the holy assemblies, one, by which God speaks
with us, both in his word and sacrame^tall signs, as if it were by visible
words: the other, by which we again do by our prayers as it were talk with
God, we may see Many evils ensue our departing out of the Church before public
prayers be finished.
security, and slothfulness of their minds: by which they declare that they
are not touched with any care either of themselves, or of the Church, which is
the communion and fellowship of saints, or have any consideration of all or any
of Gods judgments, whether The proposition of a similitude.
if thou should hear some worldly king or prince (whose favor and bounty
thou and all thine do enjoy, and live thereby) speaking with thee, and offering
unto thee not only the continuance of his former favor, but more bountiful
and plentiful benefits, thou after this his most gracious speech were ended,
should either stand before him without all motion of body or mind, like unto
a dumb and dead image, or presently turn thy back upon him, The re^^^tion.
that I may not speak more hardly? But how much more grievously and filthily
do they sin, who not staying for the Churches public prayers unto God, and not
joining their own prayers with the same, gadde and trudge out of the holy
assemblies? do and thankesgiuig? Interrogations full of force and might.
Are we ignorant of this, that God for those his diverse and innumerable, yea
truly infinite benefits toward us, does Herodo. lib. 1
which that rich king Cresus said to Cyrus, sometimes the Persian monarch (as
Herodotus witnesses) that there was a round place for men and matters, which
turning about communicate with their necessities, Romans 12.13. Amos. 6.6. Romans
12.15.
that we will nothing morn for the affliction and sorrow of Joseph, that no
pity shall touch us, and cause us to weep with them that weep, which thing
also the holy Ghost does so often urge, and press upon us, even in so many
words? Are of the public prayers of the Church, See for this purpose. Act.
12.5. etc.
in which so many faithful souls, do in a certain holy agreement, consent,
and as it were conspire together: Tertul. Apolo. cap. 39.
and that they are (as Tertullian speaks) a certain violence acceptable to
God, if some certain assembly and congregation, as if it were made with one
hand, come unto God, and humbly sue unto him by prayer.

And as concerning the administration of Baptism, many persuade themselves,
Why they should be present at the administration of Baptism.
that it is in vain for them to be present thereat, and that they have no
profit by it. But besides that, God himself will at no hand have the
Sacraments of his Church to be taken as certain ceremonies, appointed for that
heathen Ceres, which were done in corners closely, and as it were by stealth,
but has appointed for them, the public and solemn assemblies of his people,
as we may perceive by many places in the new Testament, Matthew. 3.5. John 3.23.
Act. 20.7.
and particularly those that are quoted in the margin: we must know that God
requires even the prayers of the Church for those infants, 1. Cor. 11.20
which by baptism are presented and offered to Christ: which prayers indeed,
neither the zeal of Christ's house or of the Church, nor Christian charity
will suffer us to detain or withhold from them. And because spread abroad over
the whole life of a Christian man, Romans 6.3.4. etc.
and that even to his grave, so often as it is ministered in the Church, we have
therein a manifest occasion offered us to call to our remembrance that heavenly
covenant, by which God has promised, and that as it were by an oath interposed,
that he will be our God for ever: yea even of that covenant that is to be
renewed with us, the heavenly both sign and seal whereof is our baptism: and
that both for Two ends of our baptism.
The use of the former speech.
in that mutual covenant on our part with the same our God, which is made with
us by the solemn testimony of our baptism. Which thing will notably stir
us up to the acknowledging, faith, and obedience of God, and strengthen us
through his grace, more and more to renounce Satan, the world, and our own
flesh, and altogether bid them farewell. 2. Sam. 17.26.
No doubt David when he was yet but a weak youth, might promise unto himself
victory against that huge and terrible gia^t Goliath, and that God would stand
on his side against him, because he himself was circumcised, and the other
not. How much more assured hope (and that eue^ from the baptism which we have
received) may we conceive, that we shall triumph against this infernal Goliath,
the devil I mean, and be assured of Gods grace toward us? So far of is it
that we are present at the public administration of baptism, either
unprofitably, or with the loss and mispending of our time.

And as touching the Lords supper, if it were rightly, and as it should be used
in the Church, no man, so often as it is administered, should withdraw himself
from the participation thereof: Why they should be present at the celebration
of the holy supper.
much less should any that were come to the years of discretion depart out of
the temple whilst it is administered. For since Christ himself in the
institution of his supper so often repeateth this: Matthew. 26.26.27. Luke 22.19.
1. Cor. 11.26.
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye all of this, do ye this in remembrance of me:
show out the Lords death, etc. And the minister according to the duty of his
message, does in Christ's name inuit and call the whole Anacletus.
since Anacletus the second Roman Bishop is affirmed to have decreed, That
after the consecration was ended, all should communicate that would not want
entrance into the Church and assemblies thereof: Conc. Antio. can. 2.
Since also the Council of Antioch decreed, That such as come into the Church,
and hear the holy Scriptures, and do not communicate, but do of a certain
intemperancy, turn themselves away from the receiving of the holy Communion,
should be removed out of the Church, till they had amended this fault. Which
though in the first Council of Toledo it were mitigated, or at the least
propounded with some more mild words: yet there also it was decreed, Council.
Tolita. 1. can. 13
That they that come into the Church, and are found seldom or never to
communicate, should be admonished. And if they do abstain after admonition
given, let them be separated from the fellowship of the Church. And what
means this, that even yet to this day in the reformed Churches, such as
yield not to the ministers and elders a just cause of their absence, and do
rashly withdraw themselves from the use of the holy Supper are therefore
admonished, and for the same, ecclesiastically reproved? Metaphrastes writing
ye life of one John Eleemosynar, Metaphra. in vit. John. Eleemosy.
or alms giver, as we would say, reports, that seeing all his hearers,
whilst the Supper was in celebrating, to depart out of the Church, he also
leaving the action, went his way, speaking thus, That he had no need of that
labor, but that he administered the Supper for the benefit and profit of the
people. And that therefore seeing they would not voutchsafe to be present, he
went about a needeles work.

Why they should be present at the catechizing of children.
Furthermore, if men dealt well, and christians had that zeal they should, none
of them that were of the years of discretion, or parents, should depart out of
the Church, no not when the nouices were to be examined and instructed. For the
holy Scripture is wont to call such children, not only as are so in years, but
such rather as are so in understanding, and in the knowledge of Gods word, and
of the way of truth. But how many are there (the greater is our grief) that
even amongst them that are of the years of discretion, yea, that are of great
years, and have hoare hairs, are not at this day found infants and children
as in this behalf? These interrogations can hardly be answered.
Why therefore should not such suffer themselves to be catechized? and though
they would refuse to be examined, and to yield confession of their faith (as
commonly they do) why do they not yet by their hearing and presence, endure at
the least wise that instruction which is bestowed upon children? For those
catechisings of children, because they are performed by continual course of
questions and answers, and in the same al things be childishly and rudely
handled, and in a shorter manner dispatched, may more easily be comprehended in
memory, than Sermons that are made in a continual tenor and course of speech,
and are with greater labor beautified and adorned. Parents duty.
And to provoke the greater and better attention to all the things that in this
behalf shall be performed, there must be no small care and regard in parents
for their children which are to be instructed, that they may satisfy to bring
them up in the instruction and information of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.
a double care and respect should in this behalf stay and hold the^ fast, not
to depart from ye catechisings or instructions of youth. The one is, Two
excellent respects.
yt they might publicly fear me certainly, A lamentable thing.
very many parents, the more is the pity, and with grief we may speak it,
are as yet very rude and ignorant of heavenly things concerning their own
salvation) they notwithstanding might yet learn such things as are needful
for them, A very strong reason, and forcible to persuade. An argument from
profit to the people, to the Ministers.
which also by the benefit of these catechisings, almost without any labor,
(sure I am, without any shame or confusion of them themselves) they may attain
unto. And unless my judgment utterly fail me, youths, such as are of the years
of discretion, and parents also, may in some manner profit more by these
catechisings, than by Sermons; in so much that the Ministers of the Church,
should at no hand loose their labor, if in the summer season, and in the
assemblies that are made upon the Lords days in the afternoon (in which many
men, as we well perceive, The good use of catechizing.
are so far from fitting themselves to good exercises, that they do of
purpose give themselves over to sleeping and snorting) they would sometimes
omit Sermons of instruction, and give themselves only to the catechizing of
children, and use withal, some more plentiful exposition of the Book of the
Catechism, which might evidently stand in steed of the Sermons omitted, and
satisfy such as were of the years of discretion, and had made further
proceedings than other.

And so the Church might at the last, Why men should stay the blessing of the
Church.
upon good ground receive and be partaker of the blessing of the Church, before
the congregation were dissolved. In the old Testament God himself ordained
that all holy exercises Thus shall ye bless the children of Israel, and say
unto them; Number. 6.23.24.
The Lord bless thee and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and give thee peace. To which ordinance and commandment of God, the
Psalmist doubtless alludeth in one of his Psalms, where the priests say unto
the people: Psalm. 118.26.
We bless you of the house of the Lord: that is to say, either we that are of
the Lords house, and have the care of the Lords house committed unto us,
understanding so these words of the priests: or else you that are of the Lords
house, and indeed of the true Church of God, referring the words unto the
people, to whom Council. Agath. can. 31
In so much that in the council of Agathon it was decreed, that the people
should not presume to go out of the temples before that blessing was
pronounced. Neither is the ceremony of this blessing toyish as some suppose,
or superficial, but grave and good indeed. For even as it is Gods pleasure by
the ministry of his Church to be effectual, and has established in his
Church the ministry of reconciliation and life, so even in this very blessing
also, 2. Cor. 5.19.
the ministers are witnesses and preachers of Gods grace toward his own
people, in so much that this very rite and order, is an effectual testimony
of Gods grace, blessing, inlightning, and mercy toward them.

Secondly, such things as have been diligently heard in the Sermons of the
Church, 2 The Sermons must be diligently called to remembrance, and well
considered of.
must, and that with no less diligence, and that also out of the holy Bible be
looked into, turned over again, and as it were chawed at home, that by this
comparing of them, and as it were weighing of them in an equal balance, both
our judgment concerning Gods matters may Four good effects of that duty.
and the things we have heard may sink more deeply into our memory, sticking
fast there, and our consent more and more strengthened, and our faith and piety
Luke sets before us a notable Berrhea. Act. 17.10.11.
For when as Paul and Silus preached there in the Synagogue, they received
their word with all readiness. And least they might be overtaken with too much
readiness to believe, receiving every thing for Gods word, when they came home
out of the Synagogue, they searched the scriptures daily whether those things
were so which Paul and Silus delivered, A good example is of great force.
and so by reading of the holy scriptures, did as it were by an exact
touchstone to try and examine those things. Whereby it came to pass, that not
only a great multitude of them bleeued, but by their example also, not a few
of the Grecians and heathen, both men and women, were brought to the faith of
Christ. Origin upon Leuiticus affirms, that they offer to God an acceptable
sacrifice and remembrance, Orig. hom. 4. in Leuit.
that day and night meditate in the law of the Lord, and keep fast in memory
all the scriptures: or if they cannot do that, do at the least commit to
memory such things as are taught or rehearsed in the Church, and who after
they depart out of the Church, do as if they were clean creatures, chawing
the same things again, call them to memory, and to be short, endeavor to
accomplish Gods commandments.

Thirdly, fathers of families and household governors, 3 Fathers and teachers
must demand of their people an account of the Sermons.
must as they sit at table, or else where, repeat at home the Sermons which
they have heard with their family and household: and the like must the
schoolemasters do with their scholars in the schools, and likewise every one
with those that belong unto them, yet so as the schoolemasters carefully look
upon the books, in which their scholars have taken and written the Sermons,
and correct the scapes of their writings, or the faults and errors therein,
whether it be as in regard of the manner of writing, or the matter written. And
this duty does God himself prescribe unto, and press upon fathers of
families, yea and schoolemasters also, who are or should be parents of souls
to their scholars, for thus he says: These words which I command thee, Deuteronomy.
6.6.7. etc.
this day shall thou repeat and rehearse unto thy sons, and thou shall
speak or talk of them, when thou sit in thy house, and when thou shall
walk by the way, and when thou shall lie in thy bed, and when thou shall rise
up. And a little after in the same Chapter: Deuteronomy. 6.20.21.
When thy son in time to come shall ask thee, saying, what mean these
testimonies, and ordinances, and iudgemets, which the Lord our God has
commanded you: then shall thou say unto thy son, we were Pharaohs bond men,
etc. And the like you may see in other places quoted in the margin, Exodus
12.26 Josh. 4.6. Psalm. 7^.3.4
which for shortness sake I do not put down. And Chrysostom does diligently
and carefully exhort fathers and household governors to this duty, and
endeavor, of remembering Sermons at home, and of repeating them together with
those of their households, saying: Those that depart from the assembly of the
Church must not be entangled with businesses, Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Math.
contrary to that study and endeavor which they had whilst they were there,
but returning presently home, they must lay open the holy books, and call
their wife with them, and their children also, to confer upon those things
which were spoken: and these things being more deeply and thoroughly settled in
their hearts, then afterward to go unto, and to provide for such things as
are necessary for this present life. And in another part of his works, namely
upon John, he says thus: This I judge very necessary to admonish you of,
Chrysostom. in Ioh. hom. 2.
and to exhort you to, that look what mind ye are of now, ye would persevere
and continue therein, and that not only whilst you are in this assembly, but
at home also let the husband speak often of these things together with his
wife, the father with the son, and let them on both sides deliver their
opinion, and inquire other men's, and let them strive to bring in this most
approved and godly custom. An objection.
Neither let any man say unto me, Children must not be busied or occupied about
this. For I say that it is not only needful they should give over themselves
to these admonitions, The anwere.
but that they should follow them only. Yet having some respect to our weakness
I say not so: neither do we mind hereby to lead them from worldly and earthly
affairs, no more than we do our selves from civil businesses. But of these
seven days which God has allowed us, we rightly judge that one should be
employed to the worship and service of him, that is the common Lord of us all.
Is not this a foolish thing, A familiar, but yet a pithie speech. Psalm. 16.2.
that we would have our servants always occupied in our businesses, and yet we
will perform no service to God? specially since all our service and labor does
nothing at all profit him? For God wants nothing, Psalm. 50.12.
but that which we do to him redoundeth wholly to our own profit. As for you,
when ye bring your children to shows and plays, ye will provoke them, but
never exhort them to doctrine, learning, or any profitable thing. Nay rather,
if any holy thing be to be achieved, The speech of our time.
or any spiritual matter to be obtained, ye call that needless and
superfluous care. Do ye not justly provoke Gods wrath against you, when for
the attaining of other things, ye set a certain time, and use all diligent
care, but yet think it tedious and unseasonable to have your children
exercised in the doctrine of holy things? It should not be so, yea dearly
beloved brethren, I tell you it should not be so. Young age, and the
disposition of it.
Certainly this age needs these admonitions especially. It is tender, and
quickelie comprehends and learneth the things that are propounded or
instilled into it, and receives the things it hears, as it were by a seal
set upon the wax of hearing, that is, it easily enters into the minds and
hearts of children. Besides both the life of youth is in hearing, If men will
be won to godliness, we must begin with them betime.
and in them otherwise almost it is without use, so that they may easily be
bowed either to virtue or to vice. If therefore any man will even from their
cradels, and as it were from their first entrance into vice, draw them to the
way of virtue, he must settle them in a certain habit as it were, and nature,
to live well and rightly, neither suffer them of their own accord to run
quickly into worse matters, since such accustoming of them unto virtue from
their tender years, cannot but allure Two good ends of bringing up youth
religiously.
and shall be found more profitably to be employed in civil matters, because
they shall, and that even from their very The same Chrysostom in an other
place reproves husbands and married folk, for that they did cast the whole
burden and weight of bringing up others upon the ministers back and shoulders
only: you only (says he) should be instructed of us: Chrysostom. hom. 9. ad
Coloss.
and your wives and children by you your selves: But ye leave all things to us
to perform. And therefore we are constrained to endure great labor and grief.

Fourthly, 4 Men must Godlilie confer of the Sermons by the way, and in their
talks, and at their tables or feasts.
even in the way also as men come from the Church homeward (as we see those
that dwell in villages, and abroad in the country, have for the most part very
long ways from the Church home) and in their feasts, and in all other their
commings or meetings together, the hearers must talk of the Sermons they have
heard, and confer one of them with another: that so they may cause them to
stick faster in their mind, and may more and more build up one another. But a
most wicked custom has in this behalf mightily prevailed amongst Christians,
namely, that so soon as their foot is out of the Temples or Churches, many of
them are as it were with a certain kind of violence carried and fall into, and
that even in the very Churchyardes and porches thereof, worldly and profane
businesses and speeches, A wicked custom amongst Christians.
and consume and spend the best part of the Lords day, not only in worldly
affairs, but in wicked, dishonest, and filthy speeches, and the accusing of
their neighbors, or else, in unjust, ungodly, and scoffing speeches (more vile
than that of Lucian) both against the Sermons made, and also against the
preachers themselves. Which indeed is rather to keep a feast to Satan, than
to Christ. Those disciples certainly that went toward Emmaus, Luke. 24.13
14.27.
did on the day of the Passover talk touching Christ, and concerning all
other things which in those days fell out unto him at Jerusalem: and Christ
walking with the^ in a shape not know unto them, began at Moses and all the
Prophets, Act. 8.27.28. etc.
and interpreted unto them all the scriptures that were written touching him.
That Eunuch of Ethiopia, returning from the temple of Jerusalem homeward,
fitting in his chariot, read the Prophet Isaiah, and conferred with Philip
touching that place which he had then in hand, desiring him to expound it unto
him. So Tatianus says, Tatianus.
that every age and order also among the Christians, were Christian
Philosophers: yea, that the very virgins and maids as they sat at their work
in wool, were wont to speak of Gods word. Niceph. lib. 3. hist. eccles. cap.
37.
And Nicephorus writes, that the Christians even as they travailed and
iournied, were wont to sing Psalms, and that by this singing of Psalms, there
was at a certain time a Jew converted.

The profits of such speeches.
By such speeches and communication, Christ is invited, and comes unto us, he
promising that he will be in the midst, Mat. 18.20.
where two or three are gathered together in his name, which also he did indeed
perform, when drawing nigh to those disciples that were going toward Emmaus,
and did talk of him, he travailed together with them, Luke. 24.15 32. Philip.
4.9 Ephe. 4.29.30. 1. Cor. 15.33
opened the scriptures unto them, and caused their hearts to burn within the^.
God, even the God of peace is present with them that speak such things.
Whereas on the other side, by corrupt communication the holy Ghost is grieved,
and good manners are marred and corrupted. And indeed it cannot be, but that
notable fruits and proceedings shall be made, Esaias. 55.11. 1. Cor. 15.57
and come of these godly speeches and conferences, according to Gods own
promises in his word.

Chrysostom in a certain homily of his, Chrysostom. hom. habenda cura salutis
praeximi.
to which also he gave this title, touching the care that is to be had for our
neighbors salvation, exhorts men to communicate the Sermons heard, to such
as were not present at them. I (says he) use not such long and large Sermons
for my self, but for your sakes. Therefore ye also should hear, not for your
selves, but for others that must be instructed by you, because the body of the
church is nourished and preserved by the agreement of the members, and by such
mutual aides as they perform one to another. And as that member that keeps
all the food to it self, An apt similitude. The proposition, with the reason of
it.
and imparteth it not unto the neighbor member, both hurts it self, and
corrupts the rest of the body, as we may easily see in the stomach (for if
it alone keep the food to it self, it both kills the rest of the body with
famine, and destroieth it self with it own never satisfied corruption:
whereas on the other side, if it receive that which is sufficient for the
satisfying thereof, and sends the rest to the other members, it preserves
both it self, and the rest of the body in good state and health) even so thou
also, if thou keep to thy self the things which thou hear from us, The
reddition with the reason of it.
and do not communicate the same unto others, thou both hurtest them, and
also corruptest thy self, because thou do foster within thee these two sore
diseases of slothfulness and envy: for it will suffice for thy destruction,
either through wickedness or envy, or if ye will, through sloth, not to
communicate them to others. Thus far Chrysostom.

Fifthly, men after the Sermons which they have heard upon the Lords day, 5
Upon the Lords days after the Sermons are done, men must not meddle with any
profane businesses.
must not undertake or treat of worldly and profane affairs belonging to this
life, as upon markets, marriage feasts, dancings, pressing or swearing of
soldiers (unless the enemies power and presence, and as we may say, assault,
urge, and press the same) bargains of buying and selling, dividing of
inheritances, casting of accounts about money matters or other things, and such
as be like to these, by which the Lords Sabbath is profaned, and the Lords day
is not dedicated to God as it should be, but to our selves and to the world. No
these things must be left, and the Sermons Private exercises on the Sabbath.
and we must read the holy Bible and other profitable books touching Christian
religion, we must The prevention of an objection.
But if in some houses there be not any that be learned, or can read, some of
the neighbor families which can do that duty, shall meet there, and lend
them their labor and aid, as in this behalf. For as we take unto our selves,
and employ about our own businesses, A just and a very weighty reason.
all the rest of the six days of the week, and that many times from day
peep as we say, till it be very late in the night: so surely it behooves us,
no less to dedicate and consecrate the Lords day wholly to God himself, to
holy actions, and such exercises as are good for the health of our souls. For
what if God had claimed to himself, and to his holy service six days, and
had left us only one for our use, and the affairs of this life? what would we
have done then? A worthy inference upon the premises.
As therefore this is a great argument of his singular goodness and mercy,
that here yielding much of his own right and authority, he has appointed but
one day only for himself: so of what great ingratitude, ungodliness, and of
never satisfied covetousness, is this a testimony, that we will not or can not
leave, no not the seventh part of our whole life to God and our own souls,
untouched and undefiled? For (good Lord) with what deceits, crafts, vsuries,
lyings, A vement exclamation.
thefts, bankettings, drunkennesses, wanton songs, blaspemies, cursings by the
holy name of God, braulings, blows, fightings, whordomes, adulteries,
wantonnesses, vanities, murders, and ten thousands besides of most grievous
wickednesses, do faires, marriages, markets, dancings, and the other things
above rehearsed, pollute and defile the Lords days, in so much as we may say,
that they are rather consecrated to Venus and Bacchus, yea to the devil
himself than to God.

God verily will have his people on the Sabbath day to cease and rest from
earing and from harvest work. Exodus 34.21 August. in Psalm. 91. August. lib.
10. de chordis.
And yet Augustine upon the Psalms, and in an other piece of his works,
affirms that it is better to go to plow on the Sabbath day, than to dance,
and that it is more meet for women to spinne then, than that whole day to
dance unchastly: Yea God would have the Sabbath under the old Testament to be
sanctified with so great religion, that he would not have the Jews so much as
to kindle fire thoroughout all their habitations. Exodus 35.3.
And upon pain of their souls, or as they love them, he commands them to
take heed of this, Iere. 17.21.27.
that upon the Sabbath day they neither bring in, nor bring out any burden by
the gates of Jerusalem. But notwithstanding this, if they will do otherwise, he
threatens that he will kindle a fire in their gates, that shall devour the
houses of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. Nehem. 13.15.16.17.
Wherefore Nehemiah seeing certain men of Tyrus, that in Jerusalem did buy and
sell upon the Sabbath day, he reproved the rulers of Judah, and calling to
their memory this threatening of God, denounced by Jeremiah, he provided that
the gates of Jerusalem should be shut upon the Sabbath day, and set some of his
servants at the gates to watch that there should no burden be brought in on
the Sabbath day. Nahum. 13.21.
Yea, he was so zealous in this behalf, that he would not suffer chapmen and
merchants, no not without the walls of the City, but protested amongst them,
that if they did so once again, he would lay hands upon them. There is a
notable law of Leo and Antonius the Emperors, touching the Lords day, In Cod.
lib. 3 tit. de Feriis.
and it is this, We will not have holy days dedicated to the most high
majesty of almighty God, to be spent in any pleasures, or to be profaned with
any troubles of exactions: wherefore we decree that the Lords day shall be
always so honored and regarded, that it shall be exempted from all
executions, A worthy and very religious law.
no summons shall urge any man then, no demand shall be made of suretiship, all
appearance shall be silent, all pleading shall be hushed, that day shall be
far from taking knowledge of causes: the rough voice of the crier shall be
silent: the parties contending shall cease from their controversies, and have a
space of agreement: the adversaries may come together not fearing one another,
etc: An excellent caution.
And yet giving liberty to the ease and rest of this religious day, we do
not or will not, for all that, suffer any man to be detained with filthy
pleasures. Stage plays, and Theater sighs shall challenge nothing that day:
feats of wrestling; running, etc. as also the pitiful spectacle of wild
beasts, yea though the solemnity thereof should fall to be kept for our birth
or birth day, it shall be deferred. He shall be degraded, and never have to
deal with war, The punishment.
yea he shall endure the open sale of his patrimony, whosoever he be, that
shall upon any time of the festival day be present at shows and spectacles.
And the same punishment shall the apparitour or summoner of every judge endure,
if under the pretext of public or private business, he think that the things
which are established by this law may be violated. By such a like constitution
did Constantinus the great decree, Constable. magn.
that all judges and assemblies of Cities and towns, and the service of all
arts should cease or rest upon the reverend Sunday, as we call it, or upon
the Lords day.

Wherefore such in this behalf offend, Profaners of the Sabbath.
or think that they have well discharged and done their duty, if happily they
do superficially hear the forenoones Sermon, or perhaps the half of it, but
spend the rest of the time of that day, in or about profane things only. An
old and true saying.
but that whilst men do nothing, they learn to do ill. But betwixt these
two blameworthie extremities, this is the mean, namely, to consecrate and to
spend that day in those exercises which we have spoken of already; and that
not only in the public assemblies of the Church, but at home in every
several family, privately and aparte.

What worldly (...).
Nay we say further, let no worldly businesses or labors be taken in hand, but
such as necessity it self does force us unto: that is, such things as
pertain to our own health, welfare, and defense, or to the health, welfare,
and defense of our neighbors: and yet so to, and in such things as could not
either be taken in hand, or dispatched the day before, or will not endure a
delaie till the day after. For in or under the commandment touching the
Sabbath, such good works from God are not forbidden, as the intermission
thereof has both joined with them the assured death and destruction of man,
and also is contrary to charity. For in that case the son of man also is
Lord even of the Sabbath: and the Sabbath was made for man, Mat. 12.8. Mark.
2.27
and not man for the Sabbath. Wherefore the Macchabees did in this behalf
through superstition offend, 1. Macch. 2.34.35. etc.
that upon the Sabbath day would not fight against Antiochus, nor cast a stone
at their adversaries: by means whereof they endured the slaughter of a
thousand men or there about. Whereupon after they had well weighed this error,
and that by this means they might be rooted out of the land, 1. Maccha.
2.40.41.
they decreed to fight against all that even on the Sabbath day should set upon
them by battle. So does our-Sauiour Christ defend, and that against the
calumnies and slanders of the Pharisees, his own disciples, who for the
beating back of the necessity of famine, did pull the ears of corn and
gather them on the Sabbath day. Mat. 12.1.5.
And further adds: have ye not read in the law, that on the Sabbath days
the priests in the temple profane and break (but this he speaks upon
supposition of the opinion of his adversaries) the Sabbath, and yet are
blameless: where no doubt he alludeth to those holy works and labors of the
priests, who were constrained on the Sabbath day to slay sacrifices, Number. 28.9.
to bake the show bread, to set them in rows before the Lord, also to prepare
incense, Leuit. 24.5.8
to kindle the fire for the sacrifices, to sees the flesh of the sacrifice at
the door of the tabernacle, Leuit. 8.31.
and to dispose and set in order those several instruments and vessels of the
service and worship, Exodus 26.33.
which was prescribed under Moses: all which surely required no small labor
and business. So if all the harvest time together, the sky were rainie, and
only the Lords day fair, no man that is of sound judgment could doubt, but
that the grain might without sin both be cut down, and carried into the
barnes.

Sixthly, if we have heard in the Sermons some certain points which are dark, 6
We must ask council of the ministry touching such things as are dark, and
we do not well understand.
or which we our selves could not sufficiently attain unto, we must not at any
hand loath or neglect them under the pretext of this profane speech, things
that are above us do not belong unto us: but either we must ask council
concerning them of the ministers of the Church, or if in this case reverence of
them, or shamefastness in our selves (which yet should not be) do hinder us;
we ought to go to them that are more familiar to us, and are endued with
greater knowledge of Gods word and holy things. For if we do this in other
things of this world, and concerning our own life: how much more must we
perform it in these divine and heavenly things, the right knowledge whereof is
necessary for us unto salvation, and in the knowledge and judgment whereof we
should more and more abound, that we may knew the things that differ, Phil.
1.9.10
and that we may be sincere or pure. And in this behalf, it is the duty of the
ministers of the word, not only to teach every one in the public assemblies
of the Church, but pruately also to instruct and teach. As on the other side,
it is the duty of faithful hearers, not to be content only with the public
hearing of Sermons, but privately to lay open, and pour out as it were into
their ministers bosoms, their ignoraunces, doubts, and scruples of
consciences. For the priests lips preserve knowledge, Malach. 2.7
and the people must require the law at his mouth, because he is the messenger
of the Lord of hosts. And Christ being exalted to the right hand of his
Father, does not for any other respect uphold and preserve the ministry of
the Church than this, Ephesians. 4.13.
that we might all meet together into the unity of faith, and the
acknowledging of the son of God, that we henceforth be no more children, or so
should remain always in Gods matters, wavering and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, but following the truth, should grow up, etc. So that Eunuch
which was chamberlain to the Queen of Ethiopia, was not ashamed, neither
thought he it any whit hurtful to his credit, to lay open his ignorance to
Philip, Act. 8.34.
and to entreat him to open unto him that place of Isaiah which he was reading.
So the Apostles do beseech Christ to open unto them the parable of the tares
of the field. Mat. 13.36.
So when they were ignorant what this meant, that Christ said it should come to
pass, that after a while they should not see him, etc. Christ knew that both
they inquired concerning this amongst themselves, John. 16.19. etc.
and also were desirous to ask him thereof. And how often do we read that
Moses, Aaron, Saul, David, and all the people of Israel, did in hard and
doubfull things ask council at the mouth of the Lord?

Seventhly, godly hearers must very diligently search and sound their own
hearts, 7 We must use a certain censuring, and sentencing of our selves,
according to the Sermons we have heard.
whether, yea and how far forth they do in their life and actions express
the doctrine they have heard. And in this behalf they must make a certain
sperituall anatomy of themselves, to wit, how their hearts, affections,
thoughts, eyes, ears, countenances, hands, feet, and the actions of all and
every one of these members do agree with the Sermons heard, and the doctrine
of Gods word, yea they must search and sift all the nookes and corners of their
hearts. And if in this case we find a certain sweet harmony and consent
between Gods word, and the will that is in us, What the sifting of our
hearts must bring forth in us.
there will flow and follow from the joy of our consciences, thanksgiving unto
God, whose free favor and gift this wholly is. But if we find in our selves
contrary affections, or have other desires or opinions in our selves, we must
at no hand smooth, or flatter our selves, 2. Cor. 7.10.11.
but through a certain sorrow, which is according to God and godliness, we
must accuse our selves, that so God may absolve us, and we call upon God for
the forgiveness of our sins, and by prayer entreat his savor, that so the old
leaven, 1. Cor. 5.7.
and the superfluous filthiness of sin, being more and more purged and cast
out, we may be sweet bread to the Lord, and be renewed in our inward man. For
indeed so great is, partly our blindness, partly our security and
carelessness, and partly selfeloue also, through the corruption of nature,
Three nenecessarie things.
that without such censuring and anatomizing of our selves, we cannot easily be
Virgils verse touching a good man, is very well known, which because it is
famous, and worthy to be remembered, I have thought good here to put down. For
thus he admonishes and painteth out a man even ciuilly good, and hardly giving
place to any impiety. He does not give his eyes over to sweet sleep, Virgil.
before he has deeply thought upon all the acts of the day past. As also
what is past, what was done in time, what not? why comelines was wanting in
such a deed? or reason in another? what escaped my self? why that opinion
stood, which it had been better for him to change? pitying one, why I felt
some grief in a broken heart? why I willed somewhat which was not good to
will? why my self being evil, I preferred profit before honesty. Whether any
man were hurt by word or by countenance? why nature more draws me, than
correction or education? Thus walking as it were through all his words and
works, and beginning at the evening, and reuoluing all things, is offended
with the evil, and ascribes praise, and promises and gives rewards to
things well done.

Eighthly, parents, schoolemasters, Inferior persons offenses, must be
corrected by the Sermons.
and elders, yea all Christians indifferently, if they see or certainly know,
that either their children, or scholars, or people, or neighbors and fellow
brethren, have offended, this they must assaie to correct and redress, by
alleging and calling to remembrance the Sermons that were made touching these
sins, yea by more special and strict applying of A double profit.
while they exercise discipline, and use brotherly admonitions and corrections,
to which all the faithful are mutually bound one to another, and

These things have I observed partly out of The conclusion of this whole
treaty.
and such other skillful men in the matters of the Church ministry, as I
could indeed see and hear: and partly from the proper and take to mine own
private use, and also publicly to communicate and impart to and with other of
my brethren, that run with me in the self same race. By which things if they
shall be as much furthered and helped in their ministry, What fruits his
labors shall bring forth, if others profit by it.
and in this their heavy and hard charge of preaching, as I perceive I have
received profit thereby, then I shall have cause therein to thank God, and in
respect of my self to rejoice and to be glad also for their sakes. And surely
he must be themselves, What faithful ministers should do.
and to strive unto this, namely, very holily to handle this duty of
preaching, very diligently meditating upon their Sermons What good people
should do.
And how much more does it concern the people or hearers with great religion,
to dispose and prepare through the obedience of faith. Prouocations to well
doing.
To which worthy works these things following shall add no small edge, and
not a little sharpen and provoke the^ 2. Tim. 4.7.8
namely, that if they shall well perform and finish their course in this holy
race, there is laid up for them the crown of righteousness: Daniel. 12.3
and that the wise or teachers of others, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that justify or instruct many unto righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever. And in the hearers, this should
provoke, yea prevail very far, that the word which is grafted in them, Iam.
1.21.
being received with meekness, is able to save their souls. And that our
Savior Christ himself pronounces them blessed, Luke. 11.28
that hear Gods word and keep the same. Which that we might be the better and
more assuredly persuaded of, the Lord has repeated it again and again in his
holy word.

(...).
Errata.
Page ^4. lin. 5. read, whom. p. 20. li. 5. r. time. pa. 35. li. 19. r. cost^.
pa. 43. li. 8. r. for. p. 89. l. 1. for without, r. with. p. 91. li. 3. r. he.


