THE SAINTS SVFFERINGS, and Sinners Sorrows.

Or, The evident tokens of the salvation of the one, and the perdition of the
other, Phil. 1.28, 2 These. 1.6, 7.

Sanctorum Victima, victoria Romans 8.36, 37. 2 Cor. 4.8. Impiorum Laetitia
luctus. Iam. 4.9. and 5.1. (...). Ambr. Melius and falieius est pugna^tem non
vinci, quam desidem non tentari.

Impij per multa pericula perveniunt ad plura, per plura ad pessima.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for N. Bourne, dwelling at the Royal Exchange.
1631.

To the truly Honorable, and Religious Sir Roger Townsend, and Sir Robert
Crane, Knights and Baronets, and their Noble and virtuous Ladies, increase of
joy and peace in believing.
Honorable, and worthy Witnesses.
I Crave your testimonies, as well for the preaching, as the printing of these
Sermons. You were at sundry times, and in several places, the best and
chiefest of my hearers, and it concerns your honors to be as innocent in the
hearing as it was my duty to be innocent in the speaking. You cannot be
ignorant of the Accusation, and if that were sufficient to make a man guilty,
Si accusasse sufficiat, qui^ erit Innocens?
who should be innocent? as once Julian said of the Christians, the worst man
of the best living.

It is the saying of Syracides. Eccles. 11.7.
Blame not before thou have examined the truth: understand first, and then
rebuke. It was the sharp censure of King James in his Daemonology, Lib. 3.
Cap. 1.
that uncertain report, is the author of all lies: yet they are worse who lie
in wait to find fault and to turn good into evil, Ecclus 11 31.
of whom the wise man has complained long since, and we may see how every age
of the world renders it, day by day more malicious.

Alas, when there is wanting that virtue which in all men we call Honesty: and
that special gift of God which in Christians we call Charity, how are men
condemned without hearing, and wounded without offense given? We see in
experience, that dogs always bark at those they know not, and that it is
their nature to accompany one another in those clamors: so is it with the
inconsiderate multitude, being once set on, they trust to their tongs, their
teeth are gone, and bark and bleat when they cannot bite.

It is a penance to a Preacher to be troubled with triflers, who have neither
eyes to see, nor heads to apprehend what is said; yet dare they thunder and
threaten, as if they meant to bear down all before them: Every understanding
has a peculiar judgment, by which it answers other me^, and valueth it
self; and therefore it cannot seem strange to me to be abused by reports. Let
vain men prick on in their pride, hoyse up the top-sayle of untruth, and
flant it out against us, yet God forbid, that these should always have wind at
will, and find as free passage to superiors as they imagine. But seeing it is
so easy to feign, and face out reports, I must be content to leave such
professors, to their easy ways of reprehension, than the which, there is
nothing of more frailty.

When Moses saw the Jsraelite, and the Egyptian fight, he did not say, Why
strive you? but drew his sword, and slew the Egyptian: but when he saw two
Israelites quarrel, he said, Ye are brethren, why strive you? If any thing
delivered be an Egyptian, let it be slain by the sword of the Spirit, and
never reconciled: but if an Jsraelite, and yet questioned, why strive you? What
wrong I have done, let all judge that read this Sermon: what wrong is done to
me by the accusation, Heave to him, that either mistook me, or meant me a
mischief. He has put an Egyptian in the place of an Jsraelite, and an
error in the place of a truth. I said, God is often a mothe in our counsels,
meaning in the success, and event of man's consultations, which to be an
Israelite, these Scriptures do acknowledge, Deuteronomy. 28.28. Hos. 5.12. Zach.
12.4. How these words may be strained to Counsels of State (as they are by my
accuser) I confess it passes my understanding.

It may be the fails and follies of some in preaching, to seek vulgar
applause; A vanity much avoided by wise men. Saint Augustine affirmed, Laudari
a bon^^ timeo, and amari a ma io detestor.
that he feared the praise of good men, and detested that of evil. And to them
that will read and remember, our ancients have given better rules. Saint Ierom
desired in preaching, Hier ad Nep^t. Lachryma auditorum sunt lauds tua. Non
pla^sum, sed planctum.
rather to have the praise of the tears than of the tongues o^ his hearers.
Saint Augustine being applauded for his preaching, answers: F^lia haec sunt,
nos fructu^ quaerimus. These a^^ but leaves, we look for fruit. Chrysostom
tol^ his hearers, he ow^^ them thanks, when th^^ paid him tears. Si haec
audientes, doletis, maximas me debere vobis gratias confiteor, quis est enim
qui melaetificat, nisi qui contristatur ex me? These rules shall I desire to
follow both in preaching; and in printing, and for this end I have desired, to
make my thoughts more legible, and my self and my Sermons, the subject of
every opinion, wise, or weak.

I have presumed upon the Dedication, and having thought upon some Witnesses
and Patrons, have addressed my self to such friends, as love the truth, and
deserve to be loved of it. I will not trouble you o^ any other with further
reasons of my writing, or with excuses. He that does ill, no plea can warrant
him: and he that does well, cannot easily be discouraged with any censures. I
crave no man's pardon in giving good counsel, but his acceptance; And presents
of love may be well taken both of friends and strangers. The things I dare say,
are both commoda, and accommodata, seasonable and profitable for our times,
where in God smites, and his household smar^teth; and such beginnings will have
fearful endings upon their enemies.

An heathen wis^ man could say, Adversities are Tributa vivendi, tributes of
living. And wise Christians above all ought to know them, and to pay them most
willingly. Their Lord and master has gone before them, and it is their duty to
follow him, not as those whining soldiers, qui gementes sequuntur Imperatorem;
but as those worthy Martyrs, which like a cloud of witnesses, have gone before
them. And here I remember some passages that may be patterns for others, which
I have heard from some of you, well agreeing with the subject of my Text, Dicta
docta and pia ^ir^ vere diligentis deum, and Ecclesiam,
as namely: He will never dye for Christ, that will not first learn to live
for him. Another of the like nature was concerning comfort in death. videl.
Death takes away the pleasure of all worldly things, and Religion the pain of
death.

This may well make us prize the rule of the Apostle, that Godliness is great
gain, and surely a godly life is to be preferred before all good things about
us. What can it advantage a man to be well for the world, and ill, and vile
for himself? He gains nothing that wins the world, with the loss of
himself. Very Ethnicks in their Ethickes have laid it down for a rule, that
nothing is so good for a man as to live well. Honor, riches, pleasures, have
their valuations in the world, and they are the greatest marks men shoot at,
and strain their consciences to the highest. But howsoever men give these
their good word, yet they will be wanting in the day of death, when nothing but
the gain of godliness will profit us.

To purchase honor, we make riches our servants; and yet even this consists
for the most part in the applause of the multitude, which it may be will follow
us in fair weather; but will be sure to forsake us in the first tempest of
misfortune, and steer away before the Sea, and wind, leaving us to the rualice
of our destinies. Who would trust such an heard of Animals, that please
themselves with the noise they make, without any true knowledge of the cause,
or the distinction of virtue and fortune? Let the impious prosper, and they
shall be applauded; and let the virtuous be unhappy, and they shall be
despised. Fortune raises up men to the horse, and rides them: who when they
are descended, and on foot like other men, and they and their fortune parted,
we shall see a bitter contempt spurn at the one with as great liberty, as a
base Groom dare presume to beat the other. Who sees not then the profit of
Godliness to be preferred, before all worldly advantages?

That skill must needs be the best, which can teach a man to know himself,
and that gain the greatest, which is accompanied with the favor of God, grace
of Christ, and comfort of the Spirit, and which can made us blessed in this
life, and the life to come. The Saints sufferings, and Sinners sorrows, have
contrary beginnings, and contrary endings. Their beginnings are known by their
shortness, their endings cannot be known for their Eternity. A good man
knows the worst at the first, and his very sorrow is turned into joy, and his
joy is unspeakeable and glorious: but a wicked man knows his best at the
first, and his joy is turned into sorrow, and his sorrow is not to be defined.
All that our Text can say of it, is, What shall his end be? Nay, there is yet
more both in their joy and sorrow. It is not an alteration, but a conversion. A
good man's sorrow is not only changed, and removed; but converted into joy, as
the matter of it: but the joy of the wicked is not only taken away, but made
the matter of his future sorrow, and oftentimes as an unknown sorrow springs
from an unknown sin, as we shall discover in a second Sermon.

The joy and woe of this world, how great soever, will sail out of sight; and
then death which pursues us, and keeps us in chase, will lay hold, and fasten
on our bodies, as prises for worms, and leave our souls to a worse reckoning.
O what an extreme madness were it, in the shipwreck of all worldly things,
where all sinkes but the sorrow, to save that for another world? What then
remains to him that all his life has enjoyed fortune for a servant, and time
for a friend, but the heavy, secret, sad, and severe thoughts of another life,
where neither Time nor Fortune shall favor him? Happy are all those that have
grace to value worldly vanities, at no more than their own price, and by
retaining the comfortable memory of a well-acted life, can behold death without
dread, and the grave without fear, and embrace both as necessary guides to
endless glory.

The sorrows of this life, are but of two sorts; The one has respect to God,
when we complain to him against our selves, and for our offenses, count him
just in all that we suffer; and to such sorrow Saint Paul has promised
blessedness. The other has respect to the world, when we mutter to our
selves against God, an^ complain of him as if he had done us wrong, either it
not giving, or taking away what we desire to have an^ to hold: forgettin^ that
humble and ju^^ acknowledgment o^ holy Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. And such sorrow the Apostle ^ath
threatened with ^eath.

Questionless he ^s either a fool, or a ^ebell that will quar^ell with God in
his ^avours, or frowns. A fool, if he be ignorant whence blessings and
crosses come: a rebel, if he know it, and be ^mpatient. How mean soever our
estate be, yet is the same far greate^ than that which Go^ owes us; and ho^
sharp soever o^^ afflictions be, yet the same are far les^ than those which
are due unto us. (...) know impatience full of excuses, an^ we say we rath^^
murmr at the hand, than the power that beats us: b^ take heed, lest like some
foolish Curres whilst we bite the stone, we bark against the hand that threw
it. See God in all his chastisements, and bear with patience, for whatsoever
the beginning is, the end shall be happy.

To conclude, My desire is to all, and you in special, for the acceptance,
perusal, and Patronage of these Sermons. It is but a small testimony o^ my
unfeigned observance of you, and al^ that love the truth* And thus I take my
leave, and commend both you, and yours to the God o^ mercy, and truth, who
guide, comfort, deliver, sanctify, and preserve you all, and fill you with the
comforts of the blessed hope of the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Yours in the service of Jesus Christ, to be ever commanded, JOHN YATES.

The Authors advertisement.
WHEN the Philosopher spoke soberly to the people, Laert. in vita Diog. lib. 6.
they gave him no audience: but playing the Minstrell, multitudes flocked after
him. Poets and Poetizing prophets have presumed to preach and prophecy of our
calamities; and we, like graceless men, are well content to read them, and
make merry with our own miseries, and to laugh at our own misfortunes. We
are in just, and God is in good earnest, and in the end we shall know to our
cost, what it is to trifle with God. God will bend us or break us, before
either he cease smiting, or we smarting. Be afflicted, Iam. 4.9, 10.
and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned into lamentation, and your
joy into heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of God, and he shall lift
you up.

J have labored in this Treatise, to tread out a way before you, and even
from the Saints sufferings, and Sinners sorrows, to give you good counsel.
Now is the time to glorify God in suffering, and by the beginnings of
judgments, to show our selves to be of Gods family. My Text is a Brief of
judgments, both upon Gods house, and upon the haters of it; and gives the true
distinction of the beginning and end thereof. That judgment that begins with
Gods people, falls heavily in the end upon their enemies.

J may seem in the middle of this Treatise to forsake my Text to seek out the
Commentary: but J shall entreat my Reader for a favorable exposition of my
mind and meaning. The Text touches the sin that ought to be taught with
all exactness, and therefore J to help my Reader the better, have bent my
strength the more to deal thoroughly with it in all the branches. J shall easily
render my account, and by that other Text, clear my self of all unnecessary
digressions, and unprofitable searches of such secrets as that place J now
mention, will allow me.

Ioh. 16.7, 8. It is a truth that Christ insists upon, that his departure is as
expedient and necessary as his coming into the world. He came into the world
to redeem it, and he leaves the world, that his Redemption may be preached
and applied. This application is the work of the Spirit, and by conviction is
to be wrought upon the world. The things of which the world is convinced, are
all Evangelicall, and essentially differ from things legal. First, in
commands, the Law commands us to do and live, the Gospel, to believe and live.
The Law bids us look to our own righteousness; The Gospel to the
righteousness of Christ. The Law does charge us with holiness, according to
our own righteousness. The Gospel, with holiness according to the Spirit: Which
being more exact, is the cause that it is so much spurned at, and contemned by
the world. Legal purity is not persecuted like Evangelicall purity. A man may
be a Pharisee, and favored by the world: but a strict Christian is out of
hope to farewell, even by the best worldlings. Persecution has waited more
upon the Gospel, than the Law. The light of the one is far too clear for
worldly eyes to behold it. It is strange with the world to deny it self, and
believe in another. It is hard to forsake a moral righteousness, and seek to
be justified by another. Who can endure to have Satan so judged in him, as
quite to forsake all Laws, as to live by the new Commandment? This is a large
difference of legal and Evangelicall commands: yet let them be accursed, that
so far set at odds Law and Gospel, as either like Jews do reject the
Gospel to defend the Law, or like Familists renounce the Law to maintain the
Gospel. Love and no Law is the lewd learning of our new Gospellers. Duty, say
they, is not worth the name of a Christian, that must do all of mere love.
Loose love that likes of nothing but free will offerings. Such licenses are not
granted by Law or Gospel. They both agree in the command of our lives, and
yield us liberty to obey, no license to live as we list: The Law will send us
to Christ, and the Christian being justied, will be sent back again by the
Gospel, to walk unblameably by the Law.

Legal comminations follow our works, and curse us for our deeds: but legal
comminations follow our says, and where that is wanting, tell us we are
condemned, and as sure to go to hell, as if we were there already. Legal
promises of life depend upon our merits, and tell us we shall be rewarded for
our welldoing. But Evangelicall promises depend upon our faith and Christ's
merit, and tells us it shall be only well with us in him. Sins we have
against the Law, and every book entreats of them. Sins we have against the
Gospel, and it were well every Writer would in these days insist upon them. J
have ventured far into their discourse, and wish all Christians by the
example of the Jews in my Text, to take heed of them. There is one thing will
be admired at, both for the Method and matter; how J come to speak so much;
and in such a manner, of the glorious kingdom of the blessed Trinity. My
answer will be speedy, having granted me the Commentary for my Text. The holy
Ghost comes in the absence of Christ, and by applying his redemption,
administers first in the kingdom of God, taking possession of those subjects
that God the Father has chosen, and whom JESUS Christ has redeemed by his
precious blood. The Spirit works for the Son, and therefore returns the
Kingdom to him again at his second coming. The Son works for the Father, and
therefore so takes the Kingdom from the Spirit, that in the end he gives it up
to the Father for the full perfection of glory. This mutual working sends me
in my discourse from one person to another, and to all the world, to let them
see what may be gained or lost, by obeying or disobeying the Gospel. I have
wondered in reading the most ancient Fathers, what they meant by urging so
frequently men to Martyrdom, that they might not lose the honor of rising and
reigning with Christ at his second appearing. Surely they saw and believed that
the Spirit of grace did not in vain persuade them. They shall have honor
according to their hope, and as above others they gave their lives for Christ:
so before others they seem to live again, Rev 20.4. Let the meaning in that
place be what it will, for J will not determine thereof: yet the age of the ten
persecutions so conceived of it, as by plentiful testimonies might appear. It
is agreeable with Christ's proceedings, to honor them that honor him, and as
they are before others in their zeal and service; so to be above others in
their dignity and desert, though not of merit, and for their works; yet
according to his mercy and their works. J could not well leave untouched, with
the coming of the holy Ghost, upon Christ's departure, the return of him
again, and delivery up of all to the Father, that the Family and Household in
my Text, might see their patience perfected in power, and their power
consummated in glory. The Kingdom of God in the diverse administrations of it,
will be worthy the contemplation, and Gods House shall be most happy in their
thoughts of it: All their enemies most miserable in the loss and deprivation
thereof. Their ends shall be augmented, in misery as many degrees as that
Kingdom shall be advanced in glory. But J will stay my Reader no longer in
the Preface, but wish him good success in the substance of that which
follows.

THE SAINTS Sufferings.
1 PET. 4.17. For the time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of
God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them, that obey
not the Gospel of God?
WHen Samuel had finished his speech to Israel, God himself secondeth the
Prophet with a voice from heaven; and then the people tremble: 1 Samuel 12.18.
we never have our hearers at an advantage till God make their ears to tingle
with some judgment: then they stoup with Samuel, and say, Speak Lord, for thy
Servants hear. The text I have now chosen, touches upon the things, which are
both commoda and accommodata, profitable and seasonable for these times;
wherein the house of God groaneth under affliction.

Two purgatories attend and wait upon Gods family in this world; one of water
another of fire: and no sooner are Gods servants washed with the water of
baptism, but presently they are cast into the fire of affliction, and proved
and tried as gold. Both are expressed in this Chapter; the first to the 12.
ver. and the second from thence to the end. That we may have the mind of
Christ, cease from sin, and live to the will of God, the washing of the new
birth is necessary: only the second purgatory seems unquoth and strange, that
fyrie trialls should befall innocence, and the purity of Saints be persecuted
by sinners: but the reasons of the Apostle will quiet this conceit, and comfort
them: First, with greater inward joy than any outward sorrow can command, Verse.
13. Secondly, with a greater fullness of glory than any malice can obscure, the
very spirit of glory rests upon them, that the worst of tongues can never
wipe off, Verse. 14. Thirdly, with a better cause than contumely can conquer,
Verse 15.16. Fourthly, with a sweeter season than sorrows can sour, Ver. 17.
And this reason the text alleges, out of which I will raise these five
propositions.

1. God has a house.

2. God judges his house.

3. God in judgeing makes Choice of a fit time.

4. God having a fit time, does but begin with his house.

5. Where God begins to judge, he makes there an end.

God has a house.
The sense of this proposition is plainly and fully expressed in 1 Timothy 3.15.
That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of
God, which is the Church of the living God. This house then is the Church; a
holy, spiritual, living and growing house 1. Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21. No house in
the world, that is honored with these properties besides: and therefore
fittest for the holy, spiritual, and living God to dwell in. Other houses are
all material and corporal; wherein God is neither included, nor out of which
he can be excluded, in regard of his infinite essence: though in the
manifestation of his essence he resideth ever in his Church after a
transcendent manner. Where shall a master most delight to be, but at home? and
what home has God: but his Church? The earth is the Lords and the fullness of
it: but the Church is his special possession, and the mansion of his glory.

The Church is Gods house, because he is both owner and maker of it. The Lord
(if you mark it) is master of his house, not after the custom of men; who
first own and then build; for God should have nothing to own, did he not
first make. Psalm. 100.3. He has made us, and not we our selves, we are his
people and the sheep of his Pasture. Beside this grand title, God makes
challenge to his Church by other rightful claims; as election, Amos 3.2. by
redemption, Tit. 2.14. Provision, Psalm. 31.19.84.11. protection, Isa. 31.5.

Uses in respect of the householder.
Use 1. To cast our care upon God; who being master of his family will take
care for it. 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting presupposes confidence; for he that doubts,
will scarce rest securely on God: Like as a man that treads on the Ice and
quaketh at the least cracking, will be loath to cast down his body, where he
fears to venture his foot. But we need not be timorous, when we are to cast
our care upon God; but may trust him with our bodies and souls, and then try
him; as the master of that household, whereof we are members.

Secondly, It must also teach us holiness, for holiness becomes Gods house
for ever. Psalm. 93.5. Hence is it, that the Lord lets the wicked lie
uncleansed, as habitations unfit for the majesty of heaven, and therefore
suffered to drop down in their own rottenness and corruption: but rather than
his own house should not be cleansed, he himself will take his fan and
purge his sloore; and handle the besome to sweep out every dirty and noisome
corner: yea he will punish it, that he may refine and repair it, Isa. 27.9.
Our pollutions in this kingdom must have a sweeping; for the Lord having begun
with us, if we be his house, he will not give over until he has searched
every corner and hallowed us to his own use.

Uses in respect of the family.
1. It must persuade us to unity, the very sight of two things in the house of
God made Paul exceeding joyful, Col. 2.5. faith and order: Faith makes fast
God and his house so firm in society, that nothing can devide them.
Steadfastnesse of faith makes Gods house stand and rest immovable, yet would it
be as a confused heap, if order should not beautify it: Order sets God in the
family as Master, all other as servants, and teaches us he must command, and
we obey, and happy is the family when it is so ordered. True faith and right
order are the two grounded pillars for this house to rest upon, which reeleth
and is ready to fall upon their first and least removal. We must therefore
take heed to the first and least disjoyning of these two; admit error or evil
in either, and it will endanger the whole. A house divided in it self cannot
stand, our devisions either in doctrine or discipline make a rent in the house
of God. By the one we weaken faith, and by the other the beauty of order.
Peace which all men call for, must be grounded on these two pillars; no truth,
no true peace; no order, no sure peace; neither is it enough to have them in
the Laws of the family, but they must be within, even in the heart and souls
of all those that will accord in one house.

Alas, when we plead for peace, we observe not the rule. Mar. 9.50. Have salt
in your selves, and peace one with another. Unseasoned and unsanctified men
want the true ciment, that should knit them into one building with the Saints
of God. As long as we are rotten within we will rage without, and cry out of
the most innocent for the breach of peace. Peace is lovely; but where there
wants the true love of God and his truth: (that sanctifies the heart) there is
no room for true concord. The house of a wicked man saluted with peace repels
it back to him that offered it. Math. 10.13. He must be a son of peace that
will admit the salutations of Gods messengers, Luke 10.6. Filius Ecclesiae,
must be filius Dei. He that is a stranger to the Lords tabernacle is most
forward to disjoynt the frame of it; and will prove in his masters family that
unruly servant, that smites his fellow servants, and first complains of breach
of peace. Oh let truth and peace kiss each other, and happy shall be the house
of God. Let every man say with David Psalm. 120.7. I am for peace in Gods
family, and cursed be they that are for war.

Secondly, we must learn from hence compassion and mutual pity, as being all
of the same household. In a body if one member suffer, all suffer with it; and
the tongue will complain of the little fingers ache. Let us commiserate our
brethren overseas, and not suffer the seas more to devide us, than the walls of
a house can devide a family. Those cold winds that blow between us must no
whit cool the fervor of our love; which we must labor to keep in heart, by
our affections to them and prayers for them; every one laboring to express
the forwardness of his heart according as God offers ability and means; for
in this house Kings may do that, which subjects cannot: the rich may do that
poor men are not able: men may do what women are too weak to effect; But all
may send prayers to heaven, like fire to fall upon the earth, and consume their
enemies.

Apoc. 8.5. The Lord Jesus takes fire from the Altar, whereon our prayers are
offered, and casts it upon the earth: which presently causes voices,
thundrings, lightenings and an earthquake: that is, works our revenge, and
our adversaries ruin.

Revelat. 11. verse 5. Out of their mouths proceeds fire; the prayers and
prophecies of the witnesses devoureth their enemies. Act. 12. verse 5. upon the
Churches prayers Peter is delivered and bailed from prison. Herod's soldiers
and chains, the first and second ward of keepers, doors and iron gates, are
unable to deteine, when the forcible and fervent prayers of the Church pull to
heave him out. Oh pray, pray, pray for the peace of Zion; they shall prosper
that thus love her. Never did the Church of God enjoy any great deliverance,
but prayer procured it. If we cannot pray, we may not hope for any good to
Gods people. Let us with Peter and John at the hour of prayer, go up to the
temple, Act. 3.1. and likewise to the tops of our houses, Act. 10.9. and both
publicly and privately importune our Father, who sees in secret as well as in
the synagogue, to have mercy upon Zion. Hypocrites that pray only in public,
have their rewards (that they are not heard of God, but seen of men) and do
rather hinder than help in prayer; being an abomination unto the Lord. Ye
that fear the Lord, both privately and publicly, make your requests known to
him, that is ready to hear you: Take unto you words, and say, Spare thy people
O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule
over them etc.

Last-use in respect of ill neighbors.
The last use is to show us that the house of God has always been pestered
with peevish, perverse and persecuting neighbors: little love has been lent
to this house by sinners, which are liberal enough in the hurt and hatred of
it. Saints in a manner live by themselves, and are seldom kindly visited by
this unkind world. If heaven were not more propitious and bountiful, they of
the household of God were most miserable. Wars on all sides are waged against
this house, and all cry down with it, down with it even to the ground. Rome
seeks the ruin of it and runs hastily to such a prey; but we are to know
that all the wars of our adversaries are sacrilegious wars; as assaulting
the very house of God. If any man destroy the temple of God, him will God
destroy. What is more abominable to God and man than to pull down Churches?
The holy war of Rome is to ruinate Gods houses, and rear up the houses of
Baal. Such holiness is hellish; and though it prosper for a time; yet it
returns at last upon the hairy scalpe of such as go on to supplant his house,
and crusheth them under the ruins of their own mine. Zech. 12.2.3, 6. the
Church proves at last a cup of poison, to eat out the enterals of these that
devovre it: a burdensome stone, to quash in pieces such as lift at it: a hearth
of fire to consume the dross and stubble that would choke and oppress it.

God judges his house.
The people of God drink of the cup, Ie. 49.12. but not in judgment, that is,
the judgment of perdition, 2. Pet. 3.7. Judgment (says the text) does but
begin with them: but where it ends, it is a judgment indeed: God may bathe
his sword in the heaven of his Church, but it will come down upon the People
of his curse to judgment, Isa. 34.5.

How the Lord judges his house.
Judgments fall upon this house either secretly or openly, Hos. 12.14. Secret
judgments are compared to the moth and rottenness: I will be unto Ephraim as
a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness, Tinea damum facit, non
sonitum. Thus God is sooner found in the issue, than felt in the blow. A moth
frets a garment secretly; and rottenness eats into a tree unsensibly. As a
moth to a garment, and rottenness to a tree: so is God to the proceedings of
Ephraim and designs of Judah: that is, he frustrateth their endeavors and
makes their enterprises fruitless. The purest garment is subject to the moth,
and the strongest tree to rottenness: so the best and most worthy attempts may
in their event and success, for the sins of a nation, prove abortive and
unprofitable: As may appear in these five particulars: First in wealth.
Secondly, in strength: Thirdly, in Counsels. Fourthly, in courage. Fifthly, in
religion: for in these especially may we observe the secret and most hidden
judgments of God.

1. God is often a moth in our wealth and outward estate.
Wealth is the blessing of God: yet Deuteronomy. 28, 16, 17, 18. a curse is threatened
against it, and for disobedience often executed: our obteyning, possessing,
expending of wealth, are often blasted of God with secret judgments. When we
have secret ways to gather, God has as secret ways to scatter. Pro. 11.24.
We learn of an ill master, Matthew. 4.3, rather to desire to make stones
bread, or raise a living out of lying and other hard and unwarrantable courses,
than to make bread of Gods Word: we think it necessary, that we live, but
how we care not: following the heathens rule, that wealth must be gotten to
supply necessity, no matter for right. Hor.
Vnde habeat nemo quaerit, sed oportet habere. Thieves, Usurers, oppressors,
deceitful Merchants and tradesmen are resolved they must live, but how, in
what manner, and by what means, they weigh not. O that we would never force
any stone to relieve us: that every word of God might be our warrant, to take
up whatsoever we own or use; and we no more willing to sin against God than
not to live.

2. God is often a moth in our strength.
Strength of body is another blessing of God, and ^^fitts a man to be
serviceable to God and his country. The Church has now need of able and hardy
men, tha^ may endure to stand in the open field, and fight for his truth. It is
not our goods and lives that our enemies seek for: it is our God and Religion
that they thrust at so to make room for their own. Oh how should me^ fit
themselves for this service, and give over their drunken quarrels, veneries,
and other effeminate courses, which have almost enfeebled our English nation,
and disabled our bodies to fight or brook the open air. Just it is with God
to make us dye before our enemies that will not dye to these sins, nor seek to
live according to the ancient discipline and example of our worthy progenitors,
who have been ranked with the best and ablest soldiers in the world, when now
being soaked in ease, and disused to labor, we are thrust down to the lowest
form, and reputed of small esteem amongst our Neighbors.

3. God is often a moth in our Counsels.
Counsel and wisdom direct men to the fairest and most hopeful means of
their security. Therefore to be smitten in the brain ( Deuteronomy. 28.28. Zach.
12.4.) viz. either not to see the way, or in the event and issue of good
Counsel not to prosper, is one of Gods sorest judgments, and the truest
forerunner of ruin. Our sins (says the Prophet) withold good things. Ier.
5.25. Even our best consultations are blasted with the noisome and pestilent
breath of our sins. Oh that we were sensible of this judgment, and could
mourn for it. Who sees not in this, this, Gods hand against us: and yet
(alas) how few lament it. We laugh at our Sorrows, and lay nothing to heart.
This is the way to make him that was a moth unto Ephraim, a moth unto us, to
smite us even in our Counsels, and make them fruitless in their hopefullest
and best proceedings: and thus may God make the best of our Counsels and
consultations rotten and moatheaten.

4. God is often a moth in our courage.
It was the high dignity of Ephraim to speak with majesty in the midst of all
the tribes, and to cause trembling round about him. Hos. 13.1. But when he
offered in Baal, he died. Sin is the dampe of courage, and the death of the
heart, and decay of all excellency. And here we find God again smiting, Deu.
28.28. Zach. 12.4. who as he takes away Counsel by blindness and madness, so
does he take away courage by astonishment and amazement of heart.

5. God is often a moth in our Religion.
Religion of all blessings is the greatest, and yet in this we are often
secretly smitten of God. This whole land has great cause to praise God that
the truth of the Gospel is so publikly maintained. This blessing we would
learn to esteem, if we were in the skins of our forefathers, or neighbor
brethren abroad. The time was when we would gladly have served God in Woods
and Caves, and secret Cells: and how glad would our brethren abroad be, to see
but one of our days: yet we enjoying full liberty of profession and practice
under good and wholesome laws, we nothing answer Gods goodness unto us, but
live as if we wanted these inestimable privileges, and show plainly the
secret curse of God upon us. Errors and evils, such as Popery and Idolatry,
may steal and creep in at a posterne gate: but (blessed be God) at an open
and wide gate they find no entrance. The sword of authority like the
Cherubims, stands at the gates of our Eden to keep out the rebellious. Would
God to our laws, there were the like execution, and happy success in the
means. The neglect in these, may cause God to be a moth in the rest, and
secretly to withhold from us the blessed influence of a Blessed Religion, and
of our blissful laws. Thus much of Gods secret judgments upon his house.

The more open and apparent judgments.
Gods secret judgments consist rather in the privation of good things, than in
the sensible smart of positive plagues. But when we are not apprehensive of the
moth, then he roares as a Lion, tears and rends in pieces, takes away his
prey, and suffers none to rescue. When the good gifts of God want their
blessing, when in our estates we become poor, in our bodies weak, and in our
souls blind, fearful and unholy; these wants should stir us up to seek
God: but if we like senseless people move not, God to make us more sensible,
inflicts upon us sorer judgments, and makes us feel our losses in our lives,
and our blows in our blood, and smites us as he once smote the Philistims,
first a far of, in laying some Dagon which we adore, flat on the ground: then
striking off hands and head, (wherein we trust for help) he leaves it an
useles stumpe. When blockish men regard not this, The Lord draws nearer, and
smites their bodies with sharp pains, and yet proceeding farther, he take
away their lives with the sword. Easy warnings neglected, end in greater woes,
and God that at first would feign be heard, at last will work his pleasure,
and will not hear. Ezoc. 14.21. tells us of four sore judgments, the Sword,
Famine, Pestilence, and noisome Beasts. Some of these have raged in this Land,
and we may fear the rest will follow, unless we prevent them by our
repentance. The Lion has rored: who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken,
who can but prophecy?

God in judging his house makes choice of a fit time.
The original word (...) imployeth rather the convenience of season, than the
continuance of time. As God knows when to deliver his, so he has his season
wherein to punish and chastize them: and that first, to revenge the quarrel of
his covenant, Lev. 26.25. It is ill contesting with God, especially for them
that are linked in covenant with him. You have I known of all the families of
the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities, Amo. 3.2.
Secondly in respect of the Gospel, which cannot be preached without
opposition of outward violence, Matthew. 11.12. Luke 16.16, violent men will prey
upon Gods kingdom, and every wicked man will have ablow at it. Like Kites upon
a Carkeise so are Gods enemies upon his Church, Luke 17.37. Thirdly, this
season here poynted at, fulfills the prophecy of Christ, Matthew. 24.9. For here
Peter writing to the dispersed Jews, five years before the destruction of
Jerusalem, tells them that now is the time to deliver them up to be afflicted,
killed, and hated as his master Christ foretold before his death. Fourthly,
Christians are too great strangers in their afflictions, as in an estate
unwonted: therefore Peter brings this reason to bring Christians to
themselves, for the time is come, etc. that is, God has sent you the fittest
season of your trial: and therefore (...) be not strangers in things familiar
and seasonable, and wherein you ought to be the best studied. Fifthly, the
season bids you expect the harvest: you sow in tears, and shall reap in joy:
When others that sow in joy, shall reap in sorrow. Philip. 1.28. 2 Thessalonians.
1.6.7. Little do the Jews know their approaching miseries; their perdition
hastneth, and you shall be comforted when you see Christ as good as his word.
Upon this ground I verily believe is that to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.36, 37. Yet
a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. You have
a promise that Christ will come upon the unbeleeving Jews and destroy them:
be you patient and wait: live by faith: and the Lord will come and save you,
when that disobedient nation perishes. James 5.1. Go to now ye rich Jews,
weep and houle, etc. The Apostle fetches his reason from their last days and
miseries near at hand, that is, the very periode of your kingdom and policye
is now approaching, etc. It shall be a comfort to us to see the downfall of
Rome according to holy prophecy, as it was to the believing Jews to see
Christ's promise fulfilled upon Jerusalem; he had threatened and in time
executed his decree in punishing the ungodly.

Use 1. To teach us that afflictions should not be strange to the godly, that
live at home in their Fathers family, and make his word their stay. For what
can be strange that falls out seasonably? Ye and Snow in winter, thunder and
lightening in Summer, are no wonders: no more can afflictions seem strange,
seeing they are always fitted to their own proper time.

Use 2. Afflictions are not dangerous nor hurtful; (howsoever sharp and
bitter) because seasonable. Many a thing is undone, by missing its own season.
If sown corn be not buried with winter snow, and nipped with frosts (whereby
worms and weeds are destroyed) it will not flourish afterward, no not in the
strength of Summer. The want of seasonable correction hazardeth many a soul,
and thousands perish, because they know not even this their acceptable time.
But those happy crosses that fall seasonably upon us, never depart without a
blessing. This makes a Christians chains to be chains of gold, and the
marks of the Lord Jesus to be glorious.

Use 3. Afflictions are glorious and beautiful in the eyes of the Lord. Every
thing (says the wise man) is comely in his season: then it flourishes and
floureth, and expresses beauty to every beholder. The scars of a soldier
received in the field are ensigns of valor: and the wounds which a Christian
suffers in fighting the good fight, are impressions of honor.

Use 4. Afflictions are profitable; time and season make for the good of all
things. The poor woman of Edessa fearing to come too late to suffer with
Christians, forgets her self, and with her child in her arines, and her
clothes half on, meets the Deputy in the face, and feared not to tell him the
cause of he haste, to wit, least he should have made an end before her coming;
who desired as well to dye, as to live with Christians.

Use 5. Afflictions are changeable. No season will last always, there will be
an end of the Saints sufferings, the rod shall not always rest upon them,
Psalm. 125.3. God knows how to take off, and lay on his own blows, how to
bring in and bring out his own seasons. Summer it self would be teadious if
Winter should not follow it out, and bring it in. Afflictions should never have
an after fruit; were they ever grevious for the present, and had no change.
They are but an exercise, which without change cannot be endured.

God having a fit time, does but begin with his house.
In these words is expressed the measure and method of afflictions; the
believing Jews have the first hansell. Their share is the first and least, but
not the last of the cup, Psalm. 75.6. The best of good, and the worst of ill,
does always settle to the bottom. Hence it is that wicked men sip of the cup
of pleasure before the godly: but the godly taste of the cup of sorrow before
the wicked: Isa. 49.12.34.5. Romans 2.9. Heaven first endures the sword, then the
earth, Ier. 25.17, 18, 19. All Nations, Egypt, and the mingled people, must
pledge in that cup, wherein Jerusalem begins. Every soul must smart for sin,
but the Jew first, and then the Gentile, Romans 2.9.

Use 1. Learn Gods severity that will not spare sin in his own, no not when
he spares it in a wicked man. A master of a family will often wink at the
misbehaviour of stangers, but will not suffer his children to look awry.

Use 2. See Gods mercy; that having tempered the bitter cup of his wrath,
appoynts his own to taste the top, reserving all the dregs for the wicked; who
must wring them out; whiles his own servants do but wash their lips, and let
down some drops, to know how bitter sin is in the bad fruits of it.

Use 3. This helps to plead the cause of Gods house against the enemies
thereof; Papists vpbraide Protestants with their calamities, as a curse upon
their cause; affirming that our Churches (if true) would flourish, and appear
by those visible signs which accompany the glorious monarchy of the Catholic
Church. But stay there; Romanists reckon without their host, and take an
intruder for the master of the house. Their holy father has played the false
Prophet, and healed the wound of the Roman Monarchy with a plaster of new
Idolatry, so that all the world wondereth after him, Rev. 13.3. No marvel
then, if their Church flourish, having such a wicked throng to defend it; whose
portion is the botome of the cup in Gods hand: and therefore in order of time
the last Bohemia, the Palatinate, Churches of Germany and France, have drunk
and begun to others; yet never the less precious in Gods eye, because the
first in trouble. Let others expect that time when the Lord Jesus shall arm
himself with that power, which as yet stirs not, and reign not only in his
own, but over his enemies, by making them angry; when the time of his wrath
comes, to recompense his servants for their sufferings, and sinners for their
wickedness; That the one may glory in the perfection of their blessedness,
and the other pine under the pressure of their miseries. They that now destroy
the earth, must themselves be destroyed, Rev. 11.17.18. The times for
persecution, ratified by an oath, Dan. 12.7. are by the oath of the same Angel
proclaimed to continue no longer, Rev. 10.6. The continuance of Antichrists
succesfull tyranny is the less to be admired, seeing Christ has sworn, that
the Roman monarchy in the ten horns, shall enjoy so long a term to do
mischeife both to the natural few, and to the surrogate Israel of God, Luke
22.24. Rev. 11.2. But when the time, times and half a time shall be no longer,
and the oath of the 42. months shall expire: then the latter end of Antichrist
shall be worse than his beginning. Plead therefore the cause of Gods people,
and let the world take notice, that these judgments begun in the Church, will
end in her enemies.

Use 4. Let every Christian learn hence to plead his own cause, and not to
cast away his confidence in the evil hour of tentation; for the Devil will
put hard to persuade him, that he is in worse case than other men, and more
hated of God because his hand is heavier upon him. But know, that in
chastisements, God begins with his best servants; who therefore must take it as
an argument of his love.

Sinners Sorrow.
Where God begins to judge, he makes not there an end.

The end of Judgment is woeful; and the last lash of Gods scourge works the
bitterest smart. In the disobedient or rebellious here mentioned, we have a
terrible pattern for ungodly men. The Jews wished the blood of Christ to be
upon them and their children. Read but their end in story, and it will suffice
to move a heart of flint, and make us compassionate to desperate sinners.
Besides, this their end was eternal perdition: for that is the end of ungodly
men disobeying the Gospel. It is noted in story, that when the Romans had
slain a great number of them upon the banks of Jordan, and tumbled their
carkeises into the river, they never left swimming till they fell into the lake
of Sodom, where they were buried as in a grave: a tipe of the sinking of their
souls, into the gulf of hell; for St. John living to see their miserable end,
turns the style of hell, and terms it the lake of fire and brimstone, Rev.
19.20. where I believe that he alludes to this fearful presage of the Jews
eternal perdition. The better to conceive of the end mentioned in the text,
let us consult with our Savior, who by the end understands the destruction of
Jerusalem. Matthew. 24.6.13.14. The end is not yet: that is, with the first
signs foregoing Ierusalems destruction. He that endures to the end shall be
saved, i.e. he that houlds out in other signs of persecution, scandal,
apostasy, shall be saved even temporally when the end of Jerusalem is come; as
all the Christians were; being warned by a voice from heaven to remoove to
Pella. Then shall the end come: that is, no sooner shall the Gospel be
preached to the Gentiles, and the Jews rejected, but the Roman Army shall
come and destroy Jerusalem, Dan. 9.26. Messiah being once cut off from the
Jews, they shall no longer be his people, but another that he will choose
shall come, and spread over them the wing of abomination: Notwithstanding with
many shall he confirm his covenant, and by seven years labor gather a
Church amongst the Jews, which he will save, when he suffers the rest to
perish. This is likewise the end which Peter mentions, verse. 7. before the
text; by consideration whereof, he exhorts the Christian Jews to sobriety,
watchfulness, and prayer. John out living this Apostle, points it out by an
hour, 1 John 2.18.

This example of the end of the Jewish Nation, must become a rule to all
Nations, to take heed of rebellion against the Gospel: God that spared not the
Jews, will spare none, that long provoke his patience. And here let us observe
four things.

1. All the wicked must have an end; and that first, of Gods patience: 2. of
their pleasures: 3. of their lives. God will not always bear the reproaches
of sinners, neither shall they always enjoy their pleasures, which at the best
are but pleasures of sin for a season; and with their natural lives all
their jollities in this world come to their period.

2. The end of the wicked is miserable; for when it comes it lasts and
continues; one misery overtaketh an other, they must drink, and be drunk,
and spue, and fall, and rise no more; Ier. 25.27. Neither can they refuse to
drink, because Gods people have drunk before them; And if they drink whose
sins are pardoned, then such as have no pardon, must needs have judgment
endless, easelesse, and remediless. Now the misery of this end of the wicked
consists, 1. In the extremity of it; hence compared to unquenchable fire,
utter darkness, the never dying worm, and everlasting perdition.

2. In the place, called hell, a prison, tartarus, gehenna, and bottomless
pit. Hell is beneath all comfort: a prison is a straight custody of the soul;
tartarus (...), a place of horror and fearful spectacles: Gehenna, a valley,
where Idolaters burnt their children with fire, and to prevent all pity, drum^
were beaten up, to drown the horrible hideous cries of Infants. No pity in
hell, for all the yelling of damned spirits: a bottomless pit, out of which
the damned shall never be able to creep or craule.

3. In their lamentation, they shall weep their bellies full, and be never
the better. To weeping they shall add wailing and wringing of hands: and the
height of their lamentation shall be gnashing of teeth. Their teeth shall
chatter, as if extremity of cold chilled them: much weeping cools the heart,
daunts the spirits, and sets the whole body in a shaking. Such cooling shall the
wicked find in the hottest fire.

3. Though the damned feel exquisite torments, yet they shall never know their
full extremity. Peter stands amazed in expressing their end, and smothers the
terror under a question, as unutterable: What shall the end be? Good men can
fathom the depth of their sorest calamities, and Peter here determines their
crosses with a beginning; but when he comes to decipher the end of the
wicked, as being at a non plus he stops the current of his discourse and
conceales the rest under a cloud of admiration. A wicked man's end is unknown,
from the capacity of the subject: he shall never know, what his strength is
able to bear. He might count himself happy, if he were as a stone in a rock
of flint, which as it tastes no joy, so feels no pain. 2. It is not to be
expressed for the extremity of the torment; So that a wicked man shall never
know his worst. 3. It cannot be known for the perpetuity of it, whence we may
say of their torments, as of the joys of heaven: The eye of man never saw
them, yea, such as the ear has not heard; nor (which surpasses the highest
strain) they never entered into the heart of man; which of all things created,
approaches nearest to an infinite nature.

4. That which shall be known, shall be enough to crush and confound every
wicked sinner. He shall not know where to appear or hide his head. Happy man,
if the mountains would overlay, and the rocks crush him in pieces: no burden
would then be too heavy, no weight or pressure too painful, no punishment too
great, that would shelter him from the piercing eye and revenging stroke of his
angry judge. Alas, how can men living contest with the Almighty, outface his
word, outbrave his justice? who when they are dead, cannot brook the frown of
his countenance, nor put to silence the voice of despair. I should now
conclude this point with the counsel of Christ, Math. 5.25. Agree with thy
adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way, least at any time, (for thou
know not when thy appearance shall be) he deliver thee to the Judge, the
Judge to the laylor, the laylor to the prison, where thou must lie for ever.

But in the close of this verse and that which follows, mention is made of
the true cause of all this misery, and that is especially the disobedience of
the Gospel. The Law is added as a light of former sins, consisting of impiety
against God, and cruelty against man. The Jews crucified Christ, a legal
sin, but they crucified themselves in rejecting his blood, and the Gospel
that offered them pardon for that sin and all others. The fault was foul
enough to murder Christ, but to murder their souls in denying salvation by
his blood, was of all sins the greatest. They are branded for ungodly persons
by the testimony of the Law, and their own wicked actions, of Idolatry and
obstinacy. They are sinners deep seyzed in singular bloodshed and butchery of
Christ and his Saints: but the transcendent sin is here fairly characterized
by a special act, and by a special object. The act is Evangelicall
disobedience; and the object, the Gospel it self.

The Gospel.
In giving the Gospel to a Nation, it is more than he does to all Nations:
where the Gospel is given, faith and obedience are but given to some in that
Nation. The Gospel distinguishes Nations; faith and the gift thereof, the men
that profess it. Grace is given where it is not received. Given to a Nation,
of which it may more easily be rejected than embraced. Psalm. 147.19, 20. here
the Word is not revealed alike to all. Psalm. 81.11. here rejected by them to
whom it was given. Psalm. 119.70. David's heart being pined with want, takes
pleasure in the Word; others having their hearts fat and greasy, despise it.
Isai. 6.9, 10. Men have hearts too fat to believe, ears too heavy to hear,
and eyes closed up from seeing. The Gospel is as strange to some that hear
it, as those that never heard it, Hos. 8.12. Christ came to his own, and yet
was not owned by them, John 1.11. Some received him, verse. 12. when the nation
rejected him. These 1. had power to believe. 2. to receive. 3. to be sons. In
the mysteries of the Gospel, prudent men come short of Infants, Luke 10.12.
and receive in parrables, what others receive in power, Luke 8.10. yea, find
that savor death unto death, which to others is life unto life, 2 Cor. 2.15,
16.

Gods free Grace.
Shall we say this is the work of our own wills, and the good use of our own
freedom? This were to render more than we receive, and to glory in our own
power and praise. Thus to differ were to disgrace the Gospel, that grants unto
us deliverance from enemies, and obedience unto friends, Luke 1.74. Our good
friends in heaven mutually conspired our victory and obedience. God the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, bound not up the hands of our enemies, but gave us also
hearts to obey for this gift.

1 Cor. 4.7. presses upon the pride of us all, Physically, Politically,
Theologically. Who made man, or man to differ from a beast? He were a beast,
that would not acknowledge God for the Author of both: Who raises man to
honor or distinction of civil order? Surely the same God that made him
preferres him. But above all, grace is least in our command, and most in the
power of God; nay, wholly from him, as appears by the gift of faith, a new
principle, nature never acknowledged; by righteousness, a purchase, that never
came out of our virtues; by holiness, a work, not of our wills, but the
sanctifying Spirit.

Faith is a firm principle of the Gospel, and keeps us by the power of God,
and not our own, unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. I know what advantage is taken,
Ier. 32.40. by turning the text from They shall not depart, into They may not
depart. Loath the words should be more peremptory than possible. Possible they
would have it run, and then raise their answer against Gods grace, that faith
or fear is not so certainly placed in the heart; but as it may stay, so
depart, if we will forward either. God puts in our hearts a new principle, and
that for this end, that we might be assured of the new Covenant, and of our
cleaving to God; and therefore fuller assurance than of a possibility and
power in our selves. The Legal and Evangelicall principles of well living, (as
we shall afterward declare) differ much in nature, office, and end. God by
original righteousness left man to the trial of his own power. But by Faith
or the new principle, has cast man upon himself, and a holy and happy
dependencie upon his power for salvation: The Gospel is his best law for life,
and surest power of God, Romans 1.16, to save him; yet with this caution, that
we believe. Promises are general, and must be received as they are
propounded; Faith makes them particular to us, and in our deeds and
determinations we may presume no further than the general evidence applied;
we must silence all search of further secrets, and Gods will revealed must be
our rule, and to reach higher by his decrees, is to outreach our selves and
rove about the truth.

If any say, why have some the Gospel and not Faith? I silence his presumption
with Gods freedom, and say, why has he either? His Gospel is a pledge of
his love, and thy faith of his favor, thou have no wrong when he counts thee
worthy of neither. If he have a list to leave thee an Infidel, thou art but thy
self. His Law contains wonders, and works them daily in preaching. All hear
the same word, yet have not the same affection. He speaks too boldly of Gods
counsels, that will reason by our dispositions. O the depth of the riches, both
of the wisdom and ways of God! His judgments must be past our finding, and
fadoming: We must fear to search too much, and take heed of an evil eye,
because his is good. He calls and commands by his word, and of them he chooses
as few or many as he pleases. He makes some last in Vocation, first in
Election, and some he calls first that he never chooses. The Jews by Peter in
my text are divided, and the nation differenced in receiving and rejecting the
Gospel.

70. Famous years.
Four things would further be unfolded: 1. the time of this end. 2. the
persons. 3. the judgment. 4. the cause. The time is the last year, or at
least the last week of the 70. weeks of Daniel, Dan. 9.24, The Gentiles, Luke
21.24, have times to fulfill, and from former times they come to latter times,
1 Timothy 4.1. which divide themselves, Dan. 7.25. and 12.7. Rev. 12.14. into a
time, times, and half a time. So the Jews have the like account and
computation, and falling upon their last times, have them by Daniel determined
in the number of 70. weeks. These make seven points or periods of their time,
every period containing 70. years, and six of them are to be held for the
expectation of the Messiah: The seventh is the most famous and illustrious of
all the rest. First, for the incarnation of our Savior. 2. For his doctrine
and death. 3. For Ierusalems desolation and destruction, which is the end we
have now in hand. 70. years take up this time; the first year begins with
Christ's birth and blessed coming into the world, and for 30. years, Luke
3.23. he lives in obscurity, save his disputation with the Doctors at his age
of 12. years: 18. years more he spends in labor and subjection to his
parents. This time puts well on the 70. years, and for one week, counting
from 30. to 38. is Christ most famous in publishing himself Messiah, Dan.
9.27. and for 7. years confirms the covenant with many. He preaches by
himself for half of this week, he dies in the middst of it, and charge his
Apostles to continue the rest and remainder of it to the Jews only.

A wonderful mercy to this nation, if there had been any good nature in it:
never man spoke like him, did like him, or suffered like him. He will neither
off the Cross, nor out of the Pulpit, till he have accomplished a week of
extraordinary mercy to an ill deserving nation: but this week ended, in the
38. year of his incarnation, he comes to Peter in a voice and vision, to
persuade him he may freely preach and converse with the Gentiles, Act. 10.
Paul takes this for another argument of mercy in the beginning of judgment.
Romans 11.14. He provokes to emulation and salvation by the Gentiles; and thus
continued the Gospel between Jew and Gentile a long time: But this obstinate
people would be moved by nothing, and therefore in the last week, if not the
last year, are destroyed.

The desolator Christ, or the Romans, (it mattereth not,) now executes the
words of him that in the days of his flesh uttered them, Math. 22.7. Christ
the King sends forth his armies, and destroies the murderers, and burns
their City. I have received it from the Oracle of God, and learned Expositor,
M. Joseph Meade, the best Delian diver that ever I found in these mysteries;
that S. James Chap. 5.7, 8. means by the coming of Christ, his coming in the
Roman army: So Zachary has it, Zach. 14.4. his feet in the Romans stand
upon the same mount he prophesied; and this wary Expositor takes further
warrant from an Ancient Writer, and alleges Oecumenius so clearing the text
before him.

Brethren, the Bible is the best History in the world; it triumphs over all
humane knowledge, and carries our minds and memories over the vast and
devouring space of time, not only past, but yet to come. It makes us live now,
as if we had lived with our dead Ancestors, or were to live with our surviving
posterity. It gives us piercing eyes, and makes us see into the very deepth of
darkness, and to foretell deeds that are yet to be done.

Only much wisdom, and much watchfulness are required of him that will
apply for good such secrets. The pure oil, Exodus 27.20. for the lights to
cause the lamps to burn, must be beaten; for with much labor and affliction
the light of Gods word must be prepared, and with patience preached, and made
to shine in the Church. Would God this national example of the Jews, might
be the instruction of our nation: we have had better than a 70, years
continuance of the glorious Gospel; if we provoke God like these stubborn
Jews, it is our duty from the like danger to look for the like punishment. I
will say no more, I see the patience and punishment of the same God: take him
whilst he offers mercy, least he leave thee, when thou would be glad to
find his favor.

The persons.
The persons here punished, are the Jews, and must be an example unto us, of
obstinacy and wilfulness against God. They are bold to sin, and must bear
with baseness the mark of God above all people.

Their end and misery.
Their end is the very tragedy of all miseries, and compendium of the last
woe. They are punished as if doomesday were come upon them. God it is that will
be the Author of all tragedies, and write out all men the parts they are to
play in this world. He is not partial to the greatest, when they grow
insolent against him. Darius of a great Emperor is put to play the poor
beggar, and in the drought of death to call for drink from an enemy. Bajazet
the grand Signior of the Turks, turns the stage of his honor, into a
footstool for Tamberlane to mount on horseback. Valerian, by Sapores is
commanded the same service, and thousands more of examples might be brought.
The greatest Worthy, and the least worm are subjects to God, and without
wrong, must be made to serve his providence. Fortune (we say) on the great
Theater of the world deals with us, as we do with our selves in the change
of our garments in our lesser Chambers: when we have unclad our selves, every
man wears but his own skin: and so the proudest, and most presumptuous are
of the same nature with the meanest, when they are stripped of some few rags
they wear: we are to meet with an hard master, that will not pardon us
farthings, Math. 5.26.

In the way we might have done well, but now being come to the end of our
journey, we must abide both our pay and pain. Hell fire will be the hotter, by
how much God in patience has been the cooler: Tarditas supplicij gravitate
pensatur, the calm of Gods mercy, ends in the tempest of his justice. Men
shall see now how to sorrow, but not to solace themselves. Isid. l. 1. de sum.
bon. Ad aggrevatum ut videant unde doleant, non ad consolationem, ut videant
unde gandeant, they have played with those things that now will not please
them. When they come to number with God as well for magnitude as multitude of
sins, they shall perceive themselves burdened as well for conscience as
memory. There is sin (says a Father) both in weight and number, etsi non
timeas quando expendis, time quando numeras. The many seventies enjoyed by the
Jews, became severe in the count, and for short weeks they have now sharp
miseries. Cum illis ludunt quae illis laedunt, They sport with that which will
not spare them. They become careless of their evils, and then carelessenesse,
sadness and suddenness will overtake them. The time was when God called for
that, which they would not give, and now may call for that which God will not
grant; like Dives they deny morsels, and want dropps when they need them.
Would they give their souls to God, when they have given them to the devils,
he will none of them but commands (as the text has it) the devils to fetch
them without their wills. It is small happiness that concludes with so heavy
news. Some say he is a happy son whose father goes to the devil: but an
heir of such happiness may have as heavy an end. Abraham remembered Dives of
pains in hell for pleasures upon earth.

Men that have despised the Gospel were blessed, if they might die like
beasts, and be buried like worms. A Toad is touched with less misery in the
hatred of man, than men that for sin are hated of God. A bitter cup that is
in Gods keeping, and though vengeance be not powered out of it, yet it neither
sleeps, nor rests there for ever. Judgments do not follow crimes as
thunder does lightning, neither is a wicked man's pang always superscribed in
his forehead. Wickedness has Sugar in the mouth and sorrow in the heart;
wantonness like oil shines in the face, and is festered in the soul:
worldly things upon the best terms are vain, but vile with sin: men may up
and be rich with injury, grow great by secret evils, and not know their woeful
end. If these things had better conditions they were no great friends to us,
but as they are by us to corrupted, they are no less then tormenters. A gay
coat will not always bear out a corrupt heart, nor high title a hell in the
conscience.

Sophar in the book of Job powers out curses upon the head of an impious man,
te les him he shall suck the gall of Aspes and be slain by a Vipers tongue.
The sun that shines fair six days upon a wicked man's tabernacle, may be
clouded the seventh, and then for delay he comes to pay the interest. Surely
when the heavens shall shrivell as a scrole, and the Mountains move like
frighted men, then no Cave shall be found to receive, or mighty Mountains to
fall upon them. Count them miserable who for a while are made fortunate by
impiety, fools are at no time happy: if wicked men were wise they would cease
to be evil. Iniquity is an undoubted proof, both of folly and misery. Grieve
not at the sinners impunitie and prosperity, because rightly discerned they
even then neither prosper or go unpunished.

Vulgar people for their names lie buried with their bodies: but great persons
and kingdoms stand upon record. We are marveilous blind in their use, men
think such and such persons miscarried not by sin, but simplicity. They are
dare hazard the same way, and look for better success. Let me never be
credited if they fare better then their neighbors. Their Chronicles will come
out with the same edition and addition of better wits. It is no working against
Gods works that has always cursed ill courses: man's end in this world, ends
not his misery in hell. He stands for a time upon the slippcrie ye, and being
in darkness knows not when Gods Angel shall push him into hell, Psalm. 35.6.
Three aggravations of his misery, first, the place of his standing, this is
slipperie. Secondly, it is possessed with darkness, and therefore being in
the way to fall, he cannot have the wit to place one foot for safety. He
that walks upon the ye in darkness must needs have a downfall as deadly,
as a break-neck.

God is angry every day with sinners, and could find in his heart to cast them
into hell, that he spares them is his patience not his pardon, for he will
punish in the end. He will one day breath fire upon those coals that in mercy
he breathed into us. His fire shall fall as rain, catch them like snares. To
sire he will add brimstone, and to both an horrible tempest, Psalm. 11.6. The
stream and current of Gods wrath shall run like a River of brimstone, the
very pile of the pit is fire, and that fire has also much wood to work on,
Isa. 30.33. This afterclap of hell is the worst, and should have our greatest
care of prevention before it be too late, and we have lost both our lives and
him that is unto us both life and length of days.

One hand by the pulse asks the other how we do, and our eye is on our Urine
to divine in what danger we are: why is there not a pulse panting and beating
within to admonish us of our inward estate? With what presumption do we daily
provoke God to blow these Souls into hell that once he breathed into our
bodies? The Lord teach us Wisdom to think of our end, that when we are
taken of our feet to fall on our beds, and from them to the cold earth, we may
not be raised off our foundation, but rest on him that will sustain us, if we
obey his Gospel. Let the good departure of my Soul to salvation, be always
evident to my faith, and I shall be the less curious to care how dark and
deadly it entered into my body. It is the going out more then the coming that
concerns every hearer of Gods Gospel. This was St. Augustines meditation, and
shall be mine for ever; that my end may conclude my sorrows, and begin my
joys.

The true cause.
For the cause of this end we are taught by our Text to be sin, and in
special the sin of the Gospel. Irreligious honest men, and civil insidels
know not this sin, they have no light and leading unto it: Conscience applies
no such fact to the Law, as to disobey the Gospel, neither does the Law
trouble any man with accusation of this sin. It is solely and solitarily the
Gospels office to convince of this fault. To want faith in God is reproved by
the Law; but in a Mediator, by the Gospel: To want personal righteousness,
is the crime the Law will charge us with; but to want the righteousness of
another, must come to be evinced by the Gospel. Holiness of nature is what
the Law requires, and condemns the contrary; but holiness of Grace infused
by the Spirit, is the light of the Gospel, and to be destitute thereof is the
greatest condemnation, John 3.19.

This must teach us first to distinguish the sins of the Law and the Gospel,
and how to aggravate them. Secondly, seeing faith and the Gospel are free
gifts, we must neither be closse friends unto nature, nor open friends unto
grace. We have no power to reach so high as the Gospel, or call for faith at
our pleasure: we are more ready to reject both, and reason against them with
the stubborn Jews, than convinced and yield them our obedience. Thirdly, we
must look to our danger. Turks and Tartars that never heard of the Gospel,
shall escape better than Christians: They shall be beaten with few stripes for
that little they have received, we with many for our great and graceless
neglects: In stead of rods God will lash us with Scorpions, who have neither
answered the utmost of our power, or greatness of our means, Math. 11.15. and
13.12.

Civil and moral men under the Gospel are in greatest danger, because they
oppose their own righteousness to Christ's righteousness, and will not be
moved to master themselves, in a mean conceit of their best proficiencies:
These are in danger to want faith, because it is needless for those that have
thoughts of fullness in themselves. Their virtues and good actions are all they
boast of, and therefore these men prove barren under the Gospel. With these
full Pharisees we have another sort of people in as great danger upon a
contrary ground; faith is their glory, and they sear not to ^ee found with the
best in Gods favor: Ask th^se (...) in good earnest, (...) they were
convinced of sin, and they will be brief with you, that they scorn but to
be less holy than the best, and to reprove them is audacious slander: Why,
but are you not sinners? yes, for fashion sake they will not deny that, Are we
not all sinners?

But what say you to want of faith in Christ; to this they have a vulgar and
gross answer; marry, God forbid I should be so bad as not to believe in
Christ; I thank God I love him with my very heart, and so have done ever since
I was borne. But were you never soundly convinced by the Gospel and Gods
Spirit, of this great want? What? would you make us infidels? we abhor to
think of such questions: go and ask them the Turks, for we by the grace of
God will never turn Turks, and take part against Christ. But when came this
persuasion into your hearts, and by what means was it wrought? I find, John
16.8, 9. a Spirit of conviction; what say you? Have you heard of this Spirit
since you were baptized? how and in what manner has this Spirit wrought in
you? Truly we believe there is such a person in the Trinity, for so we were
baptized; but for such a gift, it is all one to us, as if there were no Spirit
at all. Now (poor souls) you have put them besides all their divinity, and
convinced them of that for which they give God thanks, blessing God they never
wanted faith, which assures them they never had it; for to want it, is the way
to have it, and to believe the contrary, an undoubted testimony of their
dangerous presumption. God open their eyes, and bring them to a better trial
by the truth of his word.

I will therefore descend into a more strickt examination of the sin and the
judgment in my text, and deal right down in the whole work of the
conviction, John 16.8. and then again repeat the judgments, and summon up as
many particulars as my memory and Gods mercy shall suggest unto me. I will
read this text alleged, and deal by fair and capital titles, for the more
firm and faithful remembrance of my Reader, in all that follows.

A glorious Kingdom.
John 16.8, And when he is come, etc.

There be two great Doctors come from the Father into the world, by whom he
will convince the world before he judge it, and these two succeed the one the
other; the first absents himself, and the other comes in his room. To find
Christ a successor in man, is the crime of the Church of Rome, of which they
are now ashamed, and by correction mend their Authors and bid them say, the
Pope is the Vicar of Christ, and Successor of S. Peter. But by their leave,
they yet want an Index expurgatorius, to expunge and wipe out the Pope, and put
in a more equal for Christ, left by himself, when he left this earth, fitter
to be both Christ's Vicar and Successous. These two excellent Teachers
undertake the conviction of the world before the condemnation of it. So dealt
Jesus Christ with the Jews. We will enlarge our selves in the work of the
Trinity, and be ample in the view of their Kingdom.

The excellent and admirable administration of Gods Kingdom.
There be three persons in the Divine nature that works all things, yet are
all things wrought in a wonderful and most distinct and unconfused manner. The
Father of himself and to himself works all things, and so is the beginning
and end of every action, 1 Cor. 8.6. The progression from this beginning, and
regression to this end, is the rarest and sweetest mysteries in the Bible. In
the progression the Father goes on by the Son, and both Father and Son by
the blessed Spirit; and here begins the immediate administration of the
Kingdom within, the Spirit always taking the possession of it. I will open
clearly this Divine and ravishing secret, and set men on work with no new
notion, but an old truth; for I abhor to deflect from the ways of Antiquity.

Of the progression and regression of the Kingdom from and to the Father.
St. Paul settling true religion upon the surest pillars, pluckes down the
rotten and ragged pillars of Pagans and Papists, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but
one God, the Father of whom are all things, and we to him. etc. Many gods
confound themselves in their beginning and end, and therefore if creatures were
from them, they should be confounded in their original, and this confusion
would breed a greater, they should not know whom to serve: But we (says the
Apostle) have this error corrected in one God, neither need we be confounded
with many persons, for they are our best help in religion. Take the first
person, make him the beginning of all creatures, and our end in special, and
we shall know both to whom we are beholding, and to whom we owe our thanks.
The Heathen have no such knowledge, they neither know Author nor end of their
actions and praise.

In this we agree with them, that to go to God without a mediator is
presumption in both, and therefore they have their many lords to go by to
their many gods, and are here again confounded in their prayers, not knowing
to what Saint to turn. Friar Teitis, made a sermon that Saints might be
served with the Lords prayer; for that it was a common question with the Roman
Chanters to demand, to whom do you say your Pater noster. This is a strain of
the old religion, and many lords of the Heathen, and therefore Christ being put
out, or shuffled in with the multitude, it was no marvel such a question
should be raised; for to God must we go by a mediator: but Paul in the
progression of our religion has given us better direction, that as the Father
by one Lord Jesus Christ has made all things; so we, if we will proceed
aright, must by the same Lord Jesus Christ, and no other, go to the same
Father, and so in conclusion, after a long and glorious perigrination upon
earth, we shall be brought to the Father, that he in us (as Paul witnesses, 1
Cor. 15.28.) may be all in all.

Of the Sons mediation in this Kingdom.

It was expedient for us that the Father should send his Son; for we which
are the best of his creatures, being lapsed, cannot without Christ serve our
end. He is (...), 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephs. 4.5. 1 Timothy: 2.5. and 6^15. etc. the alone
mediator, and powerful potentate with God for us. For this end he is
incarnate, and to this purpose he lives and dies, rises from the dead,
conferreth forty days of this Kingdom, Act. 1.3. and so departs into
heaven, and makes further way for progress in this kingdom, and to perfect
this, sends his Spirit, telling us of a truth how expedient this is for them
that are now to be left to preach his kingdom, to have him depart that the
second Doctor may come. Expedient and necessary for all that are to be saved;
for Christ being risen again, had all power and judgment from his Father,
Mat. 28. etc. The present execution of this power, had been a woeful thing
with the world, being both unrighteous and unholy. Christ redeemed it, and
therefore will not presently destroy it, but commands in the same place, that
proclamation of his power be made; and being with his Heralds unto the end,
will in the end call the world to an account, and show both his power, and
their judgment. This great Embassage into all the world had need of some noble
Agent to lead the way, and be present with the holy Apostles and their
successors: and this honorable person is the third person in the blessed
Trinity, in whose hands and administration Gods Kingdom is for this present
age, and of which we are now to speak.

The Kingdom of Grace.
In the Lords prayer we petition, Thy kingdom come, our understandings at
this day abbreviate this petition, and are defective in the expression of it,
and so consequently our prayers come short of their duty, and deal with God
for no more than they know. We will (God assisting) enlarge our thoughts in the
regression of the Kingdom, from the Spirit to the Father again, and show,
First, the administration of the Spirit. Secondly, of the Son. Thirdly, of
the Father; and so teach you plainly to pray for the Kingdom of grace,
Kingdom of power, and Kingdom of glory when all is returned to the Father.

The Kingdom within and seated in men's hearts.
Luke 17.20, 21. The Pharisees would have a Kingdom by observation: but Christ
knowing the Kingdoms administration, first to rest in the Spirit and grace
thereof, takes away that error, and according to the nature of the Kingdom
sets and seats it within; for such as is the government; such must be the
Kingdom. The government spiritual, therefore the kingdom spiritual. Grace
and the Spirit of grace, carry no outward pomp and external state; but are
all glorious within: And this is that kingdom that suffers violence without,
and is oppressed by rebels and traitors to the Lord Jesus, and their own
souls.

The Kingdom of violence.
The Kingdom of Gods Spirit is the most pious and peaceable Kingdom in the
world; yet suffers more than all kingdoms, as shall now appear, Math.
11.12. Luke 16.16. Gods kingdom under the Law and the Prophets suffered
violence, and so shall it under John, Christ, his holy Apostles, and Ministers,
do for the time of the Gospel. I know these texts are strained to another
sense, and so my self have been a follower of this violence, till that man of
God M. Joseph Meade, cleared my sight by his industrious and judicious
observation of the text. It may be we are both deceived, and it becomes humble
men not to be peremptory in crossing and controlling others. We all agree of
the violence offered to the Kingdom of grace, and disagree in the proof of it
by these texts. Hear then mine arguments and reasons which I subject to the
spirit of the Prophets.

1. Christ's answer by the Law and the Prophets, shows the conformity between
the old and the new Testament; the ancient and surrogate Israel of God.
Violence waited upon the Church before Christ, and so will it now, and after
him. It is your error (O foolish Jews) to look now for a kingdom by
observation, and to see your selves more redeemed from the Romines and men,
than from devils, and your sleves, more deadly enemies: You have more need to
have Satan displaced, than your selves placed in a temporal Monarchy: I am
come to save your souls from sins and not your bodies from bondage.
Secondly, John that now preaches the new Kingdom is in prison, Math. 11.2.
and must lose his head: I look for no greater favor, my Apostles will
succeed me, and by succession it will last till I come and take the Eagles
off the carkeise, Luke 17.37, 3. The Kingdom is preached, a thing that the
world hates, and therefore will every man have a blow at it, and violent men
will prey upon it: this reading the texts will render, without all renting and
tearing the phrases. 4. The word signifying violence, or violent men, was never
taken by any Author for inward violence, or motions free and voluntary, but for
outward force and external power, putting others to be patients of their
persecutions and punishments.

The Spirits conquest.
God is not wanting to his poor servants, but gives courage and consolation in
all their oppressions. The Spirit sets up such a Kingdom in the heart and
souls of Gods people, that no pain or peril can prevail to conquer their
faith and confidence. They are resolved to carry their lives in their hands,
and rather dye than deny that truth that the holy Ghost has taught them. This
spiritual I Kingdom subdues all Kingdoms, yea, more than all Kingdoms, for
it gains that victory over our selves which is more than any earthly conquest.

Conquest by convict on.
The greatest opposition to the Spirit of grace, is in our selves. It were
easy to ruin all the world, and in such conquests and conversions men have
showed their might and manhood: but to enter the house held by the strong man,
both of corruption in our selves, and suggestion of Satan out of our selves,
is a potent and powerful work of grace; Gods Spirit alone is able to beat
down these holds, help in the conquest of our selves, and subjection to the
Kingdom preached and offered us in the Gospel. He it is that brings in faith
to believe, and excludes infidelity; That raises up in us the comfort of
Christ's righteousness, and rejects our own; That teaches us holiness, and
how to deny all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and to live soberly in
our selves, righteously to others, and godly to our King and Commander: of the
several branches of conviction, we shall entreat afterward, and show what
sins are convicted and controuled in us, and how we ought to see them, and
sorrow for them, etc.

Conviction by supportation.
The Spirit in this Kingdom of grace, works and effects another strange
work and operation upon the world, in giving his subjects power of conquest in
trials, and to triumph over the world, and all its workings and mischiefs,
Romans 8.37. In all these things we are more than conquerours: What things? even
the worst that the world can do unto us, and that is to make us Martyrs, and
themselves murderers, yea even to murder themselves to see us so little
affected with their torments. We stand still and do nothing, and see our
salvation of God. To conquer by passion is clean contrary to the world; for so
the world is conquered, and he that suffers becomes subject to another: but we
are slain (says the Apostle) and our slaughter is our victory; nay, more than
victory; in so doing we conquer the conquerours, and command our oppressors.
More than conquerours, is more than any Caesar achieved unto, or ever Monarch
effected in his greatest victories. Who can say so, but Christians? Emperors
have conquered with difficulty, and lost with greater facility all their
kingdoms. They have been less than conquerours, and never gotten victory,
but left it to others to gain it from them. O the honor of this spiritual
kingdom, and excellency of grace, that even thriveth best under oppressions
and worldly violence.

The regression of the Kingdom.
All the honor of this Kingdom redoundeth unto Christ, and shall then appear
when he appears to take his Kingdom and great dominion. He should have had no
subjects but for the Spirit, and none so victorious, but for Martyrs, who as
they have first honored Christ by death, shall of him again be first graced
with life. Those that are alive and converted, shall be a glory to Christ, as
he will be a glory to them. It is for the persons in the sacred Trinity,
mutually to raise glory one to another: We are therefore ordine retrogrado,
come from the kingdom of grace to the Kingdom of power, from the
administration of the Spirit, to the administration of the Son, and seek after
three things as glorious as the former, and yet more outward, but not less
spiritual; for perfection in the Trinity, is both ways observed and effected
in progression, the Father perfects his work in the Son, and the Son in
the Spirit: so in regression, the holy Ghost perfects grace in power, and the
Son perfects power in glory. We will speak of the Sons taking, ruling, and
delivering up of this kingdom of power.

Christ's taking of the Kingdom of power.
Heb. 2.5. mention is made of a world to come, and the subjectio^ thereof to
Christ. This we see not (says the Apostle) as yet accomplished, but we see
Jesus Christ crowned and made a King in heaven. His presence on earth as yet
we have not, save in the holy Ghost. But he will appear in his body, and
take this Kingdom and whole world to himself, and turn out of it all the
ungodly in the earth. His enemies that would not suffer him to reign over them
by his Gospel, are then to be brought before him and slain in his presence.

The taking of his great power.
Revel. 11.17. At the last trumpet, and the last woe, all Kingdoms fall to
Christ. But how I pray you? mark the text, He shall take to himself his great
power, and reign. To himself immediately, to himself for form and manner of
government. He left it in the hands of the Spirit, and now takes it again to
himself, no more depriving the Spirit of the honor of it in the
re-assumption, than he did himself, when he deposed it into the hands of his
Spirit. Now the question will be how this is done? The answer is, with great
power; greater than ever before; for it destroys them all, that now destroy
the earth.

How is it taken?
Daniel assoi^es this doubt, and makes it glorious and wonderful in his
extraordinary description of it, Dan. 7.9, 10. etc. First, the Lord Jesus takes
it from his enemies, and casts down their thrones, and makes them seats for
his Saints. Rev. 20.7. he takes it from the last beast, even because of the
little horn, and his blasphemous and bloody words. Secondly, he takes it from
the Ancient of days, who in a glorious and most illustrious manner installes
the Lord Jesus into his kingdom. Thirdly, he is attended and waited upon by
the innumerable company of Angels, by whom he is brought to the Ancient of
days. Read the rest and admite at this inauguration and solemnization of the
day of Christ's coronation upon earth, who now in heaven is crowned with glory
and immortality.

When it is taken.
2 Timothy 4.1. At the Epiphanie of his kingdom, Mark 13.26. Luke 21.27. when
the powers of heaven are shaken, and the stars that shine in them are humbled
to the ground. Earthly potentates that are advanced above others shall be made
low. The fall of such stars will not hinder the sight of Christ, but honor
it. Other stars being bigger than the earth, would overlay it and men, and
suffer no man to stand upon earth to see the Lord Jesus come in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory.

He must be seen of all eyes, and therefore it is most safe to give the
sense of the Scriptures by the Scriptures, and to say of this day as of the
former shadows of it in Babylon and Egypt, Isa. 13.10. and 14.12, 13. Ezekiel.
32.7, 8. The stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give
their light. The Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon
shall not cause her light to shine, the bright lights of heaven are put out,
when Pharaoh falls by the Babilonians, and Lucifer son of the morning,
ascended into heaven, above the heights of the clouds, and stars themselves
to be like the most High, comes down to the ground; when by the Medes and
Persians Belshazzar is pulled from the orb of his height and honor. Christ
the bright shining star of Jacob, and the advanced Scepter of Israe, is
risen, and shall rise to smite all corners, and subdue all Nations. Let us
therefore advance him from the taking of the kingdom, to the ruling of it.

Christ's ruling and reigning in his kingdom.
Dan. 7.14. On this day dominion is given to Christ, Zech. 14.9. One Lord, one
name, and that over all the earth. In this day will he reign in and over all
mankind. Rev. 11, 15. Now the world does not acknowledge him for one Lord, as
being ruled by many; neither does it worship him by one name, as being
distracted into many religions: but this will Christ remove at his day, and
rule by a more equal power, and uniforme worship. Paul is our witness, 1 Cor.
15.24, 25, 26. etc. that the end and delivery up of this kingdom to God, even
the Father, cannot be, till rule, authority, and power of devils in hell, men
upon earth, and even death, the last of enemies be fully vanquished and
subdued: and for this purpose, I might produce all the Prophets and holy
Apostles, speaking glorious things of Christ's reigning and ruling at the sound
of the last trumpet, and coming of the last woe, Rev. 10.7. All the Prophets
are witnesses; and St. Peter speaking of the same thing, adds to them all the
Apostles, 2 Pet. 3 2.

They have ill done, that have muzled up the mouths of the Prophets with a
Consummation and conclusion in Christ's incarnation. The Jews dispute, Dan.
2.35. and 7.11. That Messiah must come when the Monarchies are as chafe before
the wind, and quite blown out of the world: When the feet and foundation,
even the ten divided toes in the bottom of that terrible image are crushed,
and conquered by the victorious stone, whose kingdom becomes a mountain,
filling the whole earth. He must then take place when the last beast is
slain, his little horn (having eyes to watch the ten horns, and to speak
blasphemies against God) is consumed. Utter ruin must befall all Christ's
enemies before he take from the Ancient of days his dominion and universal
command over all the world. Hence they would conclude against Christians, that
their Messiah is not come, for they urge us by our own confession, that he
came in the days of Augustus Caesar, when the last beast flourished most, and
was far enough from chafe or clay: it was not then come to the ten toes,
or ten horns, in which it has held to this day, and therefore as yet Messiah
is not yet come.

Stay (stubborn Jews) we will not take these texts from you but grant them,
and yet deny your consequent: for Messiah by the testimony of the same Prophet
must first come to redeem, Dan. 9.24. Your weeks are gone, and might assure
you Messiah is come, and has made reconciliation for you and us. He is gone to
heaven, and has left his kingdom in the hands of his Spirit; against him you
have rebelled, and brought upon your selves the end in my text: repent and he
will return to you, and you shall see him, as Daniel has delivered unto you,
and witnessed by an Apostle of Christ, Act. 3.19, 20, 21. and is the only and
last reason of the stay and slackenesse of his coming, and performance of his
promise to you in special, 2. Pet. 3.9. Would God you were at as good agreement
with our holy Apostles, as we are with your Prophets, we should soon and
suddenly both meet in this kingdom of power.

Balaams prophecy, Numb. 24.15. to the end.
Of this kingdom Balaam is forced to speak, and by a star and his shadows
gives in parables an excellent prospective for the view of things a far off
but not nigh, at a great distance of time, but not present in this age. The
star smites Moab in the shadows of it: but it shall unwall all the sons of
Seth, immediately by it self and last appearance, Amalecke the first of
Nations is destroyed by the prayers of Moses, and sword of Joshua, true types
of Christ; and Chittim the last of Nations shall by Christ himself immediately
perish. Of both these it is said more than of all the rest, They shall perish
for ever. The reason is plain, Amaleke was the first that fought with the
ancient Israel in the wilderness to hinder their passage into Canaan; and
therefore must be smitten for ever. Now is the surrogate Israel of God in the
like wilderness, Rev. 12.6, 14. and Chittim only makes war with it, and
therefore as Amalek of old, must perish for ever.

To Ashur all Nations were smitten by the shadows of the rising star: but
from Ashur to Chittim, the star Christ, by conjunction and secret influence,
makes one Star smite another, and as he sets the. Egyptians against the
Egyptians, Isa. 19.2. so be sets Ashur against Ashur, and Chittim against
Chittim, and both against Heber, till his honor come by Christ. Ashur is the
land of Assyria, Chittim is put for the Isles of the Gentiles. Ashur begins with
Nimrod, Genesis 10. a son of cursed Cham. He is the first mighty hunter after
honor, and begins his kingdom with Babylon, the building of confusion, both
for religion, language, and love. From Babylon he hunts into Ashur or the land
of Assiria, and builds Nineveh, and at length fills the great Continent of the
world with his Monarchy. The Babylonians take it and hold it, till the Medes
and Persians become Lords of their kingdom and Continent. Thus the Lord
dasheth kingdom against kingdom, and like a potters vessel breaks them one
upon another.

From the Continent to the Isles of the Gentiles, the same Christ translateth
the Monarchies, and ends them in the Sons of laphet. Chittim a son of
Iaphet, Genesis 10. being divided from the Continent by the Seas, finds posterity
in time to pass the Seas, and by ships from his Coasts carries Alexander the
Great, Dan. 2.32, and 7.6. and 11.3. 1 Maccab. 1.1, with his Army; who kills
Darius, and from Ashur to Chittim translateth his kingdom. The rising star
knows how by his secret opperation to stir up Chittim against Chittim, and
to punish the Isles for Idolatry and tyranny; he sets the inhabitants thereof
together by the ears for their sins, and by the Romans at length brings the
Monarchy from the Graecians to us, and settles the glory of it in Rome, where
it slourished to the birth of Christ, and long after. At length this massy
monarchy drencht in blood, even the best blood, the blood of Saints, began to
reele and totter, and from one Caesar falls to ten Kings, from iron legs
strongly united to ten toes weakly divided; they hang upon the same feet of
the Image, but their division is fatal to the Empire.

These toes in the Image, and ten horns on the head of the last beast, are the
last of Chittim, and remain to this day for perdition by Christ, as far as
Iaphet is not persuaded to dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.22. what now
remains but that the third Son of Noah always chosen of God for his chief
servant, should obtain the kingdom, and that Heber hitherto afflicted by
Ashur and Chittim, should be made glorious at the coming of the Lord Jesus?
The promise of the new heavens and the new earth is made to them, Isa. 65.17,
18. and 66.22. this quoted by S. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.13. applied by him to the
Jews, and by them to be expected in the day of judgment, when he takes his
great power to reign. The same is repeated, Rev. 21.1. and applied to
Jerusalem, verse. 2. of this as a mystery, S. Paul speaks, Romans 11.25. and
quotes Isaiah, who Isa. 59 18. brings it in with the subversion of Chittim, or
the Islands. What shall I say more? let Peter expound Isaiah, and Isaiah, Peter;
and we, shall quickly resolve of this mystery.

Of the length of the day of Judgment.
Zech. 14.7. Having spoken of Ierusalems desolation as Christ did, Math. 24.
comes in the like manner to their consolation, and says, The Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee; then describes the day of judgment; 1. by
light, to manifest all deeds of darkness. 2. by the purity of this light, it
shall not be clear and dark, that is, one part light and another dark, like
a day of creation, but it shall be light without darkness. 3. the unity of
this day, it is to be one how long soever; Christ will not be interrupted in
his kingdom, or stayed in his judgment. 4. the knowledge of this day, both
when it shall begin, how long it should continue, and when it shall end, is
only belonging to the King that shall rule in it. 5. to take away all doubt of
a day, it shall not consist of the parts of a natural and created day, not
night and day, which by the ordinances of heaven are perpetual: but this shall
be a voluntary and arbitrary day, depending upon the will and motion of Christ,
and no measure of stars. 6. contrary to all the days of the creation, this
shall be light at the evening, yea, then shall be the greatest light in the
regression of the kingdom triumphantly from Christ to his and our Father.

The light of grace breaks forth into the light of power, and the light of
power into the light of glory. What then shall be the glory of this day, called
the great, notable, and terrible day of the Lord? Joel 2.32. Jude verse. 6. Rev
16.14. etc. shall it vanish in the twinkling of an eye, and that mystery, Rev.
10.7. pass in a moment? No assuredly, we are resolved by Christ, that it shall
be a day comprehending days, Luke 17.22, 26. many days that shall afford
times of refreshing and restitution, Act. 3.19. days and times shall be upon
this great day, and reason is fair to favor this sense. Christ, takes his
kingdom and power upon this day to reign and rule, and therefore it is
reasonable to yield him some time before the delivery of it up to his Father,
to show the glory and the excellency of it. It agrees well with the regression
to perfection, that some stay should be made, for the honor of Heber, and
glory of the King.

Shall I offer other texts, and tell you what they teach you to believe? I will
not command your faith, where it is fit for me to suspend my own. It were
presumption to resolve before the issue, and read the ridle before it be
plain in the action and event, as well as in the prophecy and prediction.
Zech. 14.8. the Prophet seems to describe unto us the day of judgment, and to
compute it by a day in summer and in winter, and then the great day will mount
to a year at the least.

Isa. 65.20. If the new heavens and the new earth, fall out upon this great
day, as Peter seems to expound it, 2 Pet. 3.13. then Isaiah will seem to
speak of an hundred years at the least, 2 Pet. 3.8. Rev. 20.4. If one day in
Peter be a day of judgment, as the verse upon which it is inferred seems to
speak plainly; then such a great day with the Lord Christ, or to the Lord
Christ (as Zechary phraseth it) is as a thousand years, and a thousand years,
as such a day: One day, says Zechary; one day, says Peter, and both seem to
say one thing.

But a thousand years will be put for eternity, and so no time is expressed,
but that which waits upon God, and shows him to be eternal: but yet S. John
will answer this, and by an invincible argument take it from us, if his
thousand years have relation with Peter to the same day; for after eternity
there is no history of time, or relation of any succession; but S. John places
a little season after the thousand years, and that wipes out the opinion of a
thousand years to be put for ever. I will neither dispute nor relate any more,
we have too many new opinions, this is old enough, and by carnal Chiliasts
made both odious and erroneous. It is fittest we be silent, and prepare for
this great day, let it be of what sength the author pleases; for to his
liking must it last, not in living to carnal lusts, but heavenly joys. God
give us grace to look for it, and enlarge our petition, with calling for the
perfection of grace, in the perfection of power. We live (God knows) as if we
were some seven months birth, vital, but weak. The kingdom of power will
rouse us up; for Christ takes it not only to destroy our enemies, but to
stir up our graces. In the new heavens and new earth righteousness shall
dwell; it is now banished from kingdoms, Chittim oppresses it, and a few sons
of Iaphet are persuaded to embrace it: but the time shall come, when it shall
possess mankind plentifully, and not Shem, but all the sons of Seth shall
embrace it. Numb. 24.17. Moab as an enemy perishes: Sheth as a friend is
subdued, that Christ may have subjects. I will touch the great change that
Christ's kingdom shall make in the world at his coming, and so hasten the
return of it to the Father.

Alterations by Christ's coming.
Isa. 32.15, 16, 17. etc. The Spirit that now is come to the Gentiles, and
departed from the Jews, must again be powered on them, and then is wrought in
the world: wonderful change. 1. The field of Chittim that now flourishes in
the hands of wicked men, shall be turned into a forest, and made as barren
and desolate as the wilderness. 2. The forest of the Jews shall alter into a
fertile field, and by Christ himself shall be made giorious. Thirdly, this
goodly and flourishing field shall be planted and sown with judgment and
righteousness, they shall even dwell in it; and take up the whole possession
of it. Fourthly, the fruit shall be peace and quietness, no war, no
molestation shall disturb them. Fifthly, this Harvest of happiness shall be
with assurance for ever. When Christ takes his power to reign, none shall any
more rule over him or his. Both he and his Saints have suffered of this wicked
world, but the woe thereof comes quickly, and speedy vengeance will pay for
all delays. Be admonished (my brethren) you are by the consent of Divines,
come to the second woe, Rev. 9.13. above 300 years ago. The next is the day
of judgment, and is ever delivered with this Item, Behold it comes quickly,
Rev. 11.14. add to this, Luke 18 8. Revel. 3.7. and 16.15. and 21.12. Other
woes linger and last long, as being executed by men: but this will be speedy,
as being immediately done by Christ himself, who will not stand long about his
enemies, though his friends may enjoy a longer time of rejoicing in his
presence.

The delivery up of his Kingdom to his Father.
1 Cor. 15.24. compared with 2 Timothy 4.1. teach us the Epiphany and end of
Christ's administration, and we have heard what falls out between these two
terms. I must needs conceive it absurd, till better reason convince me to
conceive of an Epiphany of a kingdom and an end together: let who will so
conceive and conjecture, I am not as yet of their mind; some duration and
succession of time will be from the Epiphany to the end, when the end is come
(best known to Christ) he will return all to the Father: but you will
object, Revel. 11.15. He shall reign for ever and ever. I answer, the
delivery up of the Kingdom, is not an exclusion of Christ from reigning, for
as the Father reigns in the Son, and both of them in holy Ghost: so in the
regression, the holy Ghost reigns in the Son, and both of them in the I
ather. O ravishing Society, and blessed Communion we shall enjoy in our
Fathers house, when all is given up unto him, and yet in him all to be enjoyed.
In him we enjoy Christ, and the blessed Spirit; we are no losers but gainers by
these ways of Divine and deep wisdom.

The regression of the Kingdom to the Father.
1 Cor. 15.28. That God may be all in all, v. 24. God even the Father. God
essentially shall bless us, but the Father in special shall be glorified in
us. This was Christ's prayer upon earth, John 17.21. That we might be one in the
blessed Trinity, as they are one in themselves, and have all conspired to make
us happy. Christ prays they may be perfect in one, that they may be where he
is now, etc. The holy Ghost and the Son conclude in the Father, and so must
we for our full happiness, Zech. 14.16. Why not the Passover to be kept in
the great day spoken of before? this was the greatest feast in Israel: but the
feast of Tabernacles has a more apt allusion to those times. Our Mansions are
in heaven; as long as we stay upon earth, though under assured safety and
freedom from danger, yet we are not at the best. In the Kingdom of Grace we
are well and happy. In the Kingdom of power we are better and more happy: but
in the Kingdom of Glory we are best of all.

We have thus far digressed, and I hope transgressed no rule in Religion. We
can easily recall our selves to our first intention, concerning the coming of
the holy Ghost. And when he is come, he shall convince the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgment.

Of Sin.
That is, want of faith in Christ, the sign of all sin, for we can expect no
discharge without it. All sin in one sin is convinced of the Law, we are
guilty in Adam, and of this sin we are guilty in the Gospel. The sins of
the Law are strong enough to condemn us, but this firm brings in our great
condemnation, Ioh. 3.19. the Law is not that light that contains life in it,
that light is Christ, Ioh. 1.14. He came into the world both as the light and
life of it, and yet men loved darkness more than light, not only because
their deeds were morrally evil, but because they esteemed not to have them
mended by this new principle of faith in Christ. Infidels come not to the light
of the Gospel, because that does most convince them of sin. The Law is more
sparing than the Gospel, for it charge man no further than of original and
actual sin. But the Gospel extends to his wants of such faith,
righteousness and holiness as the Law leaves at liberty. It commands us faith
in God, and is silent of faith in Christ. It bids us be righteous, but not in
another. It bids us be holy, but that is from our own virtues, and not
spiritual graces.

The Spirits light is too strong for weak eyes to look upon it. It blunts and
blindes him to think his deeds so ill, as God does not approve the best of
them. It is strange to him to believe, that without faith in Christ, nothing
that is done by him is accepted of God. He conceives better of himself, and
trusts that his good meanings, and virtuous actions are not so out of request
with GOD, but he shall gain some favor and friendship at Gods hands, to be
esteemed of better then of the worst and most wicked man. He must therefore
know that if the Gospel prove him guilty of the want of faith, no sin is
spared or pardoned any more to him than the lewdest liver in the world. He
must therefore learn to love the truth of the Gospel, and come to the light
thereof, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God and
the power of his Spirit, and not in or by any of his good dispositions.

Let us in the holy fear of God look to our lives, and never applaud our
selves by our own virtues. The whole world is guilty of a sin it has no
sense or feeling of, and even the best are in worst case: let the^ come to
trial, and by a conviction more than legal, see what the Gospel reproves,
let them thus reason with themselves; It is too gross and sottish to say I am
a sinner, I am worse, I am an Infidel and wrapped up in the worlds
condemnation. It is high time for my soul to be dealt withal, and that by a
more powerful cause than the morrall Law or mine own conscience: I must to
the Gospel and conviction of Gods Spirit, and never rest till I find the
Spirit present and come home to my heart.

I shall afterward entreat of all the heads of this first conviction. I will
first open the sin: secondly, who are guilty of it. Thirdly, how they must be
dealt withal. Fourthly, by whom. Fifthly, in what manner. The same method
shall be observed in both the other convictions, that by the instance in my
Text of the Jews disobedience and judgment, we may learn to tremble and
fear to live either without Evangelicall faith, Evangelicall righteousness,
or Evangelicall judgment.

Three things in the Gospel inseparably lincked together: He that believes in
Christ, has righteousness imputed; and he that has righteousness imputed,
has holiness infused to reject Satan and his service, and receive the true
judgment of the Spirit to be at his command and Kingly government. I shall
wish every head propounded, may have it is use and application.

Use 1. Let the want of faith in Christ, and righteousness from him, and an
holy subjection to Gods Spirit, more perplex us than all earthly wants. Let
such especially as are profane think of it, who beside the burden of the Law
grossly abused, have the Gospel to beat home their condemnation, and bear them
down headlong to hell for contempt of great salvation tendered them in their
sins. But especially let the more moral men mark themselves, and if they
were as forward as Paul to know none, or little evil by themselves, yet to
think they are not so justified: but the Gospel can bring upon them a greater
condemnation than the Law, and challenge them for more than ever was dreamed of
by their own account and reckoning by the Law. Lastly, let carnal Gospellers
descend and see their presumption, that will be sure of faith without
conviction. They suppose it is soon gotten and lost, and that to play at fast
and loose with God, is no danger. They will have faith when they list, and
easy convictions lead them any ways. It is time for them to learn a better
lesson, and to be soundly lashed from our Text, that the convictions of Gods
Spirit are no easy and moral persuasions fitted to our inclination, but sound
convictions taking from us all excuses, be they never so witty, and laying us
low before God to be dealt withal at his pleasure.

Use 2. These wants are common as well as dangerous; thousands dye and are
never sensible of any hurt this way. The world is to be dealt withal to take
notice that these wants are the greatest poverty of it.

Use 3. It is pity the danger being so great and so common, but that Ministers
should faithfully preach and convince these sins before all others. Sins of
the Law light more clearly upon men's consciences, but these sins find
conscience not only asleep, but livelesse, as never stirring in any thoughts
that such evils lie at the door, more to watch us with damnation than any
other.

Use 4. There is no preaching or means effectual but that is accompanied by
the Spirit. There is a difference between Preachers, as there is between an
Infant and Giant, drawing the same Bow. Yet the Arrow of a Giant shot against
the stone wall, pierces not, but reboundeth back again with the greater
violence. So the most happy and dextrous Preacher, flocked after for his gifts,
may shoot as unprofitably as a weaker Teacher; his arrows and errands to the
soul speed no better for the hardness of it, than if he had never lost his
labor, or spent his strength in vain upon so stubborn spirits. Christ and
all his Apostles were resisted by the unbeleeving Jews: their stiff necks
would never bend to the yoke of the Gospel, or uncircumcised hearts believe it.

Use. 5. Must be for true trial and examination of our selves, whether the
Spirit be come and has convinced us to give over all opposition, and yield to
live by a new principle, rest upon a new righteousness, and be ruled by a new
Law. I shall give the trial in my further search unto this Conviction. Luthers
three School masters have helped me in these thoughts. Afflictions and
accusations have set prayer on work, and both have put forth Meditations.
Humble repentance, said that worthy Chancellor of Paris, is the first staire
of the Ladder of Contemplation. I will not complain of my wrongs, yet if they
had never been, thou might never have had my thoughts so legible. I thank
God, I never found the hands of Authority so ready to smite, as evil tongues
to accuse.

1 Pet. 4.17.18. What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?
Where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

The great sin and endless sorrow of Gods household Enemies.
HAving discharged my self of the first part, concerning the sharp and strict
government of Gods Family, I come to the sharpest and severest of his
judgments upon their enemies. Peter instanceth in the Jews, for to them he
writes both his Epistles, and in both he aims at three things; 1 the
consolation of believers; 2 the destruction and just punishment of their
enemies. 3 the future promises made to the Nation of the Jews at the coming
of Christ. Believers had strong trials when S. Peter writ his Epistles, and
even their own Nation was worst to their profession. This Nation Christ
threatens with an end, and Saint Peter now applies it, and by the
accomplishment of signs, gives assurance that it is now at hand. Judgments
are begun at his own house and family, and therefore will end suddenly upon
their enemies. This was the year when Nero made Bone-fires of the bodies of
Christians, and to extinguish the ignominy of his own setting Rome on fire,
fireth Christians as Faggots, and makes their flames to give light the whole
night. This is the fiery trial believers are told of, verse 12. and deserves
to begin the first persecution. It shall not be long before it bring an end
upon the Jews and their Nation, for obstinacy and cruelty to their brethren.
It is supposed Saint Peter and Saint Paul suffered in this first fiery trial.

Their sin and disobedience.
They are taxed in this Text for the violation both of Law and Gospel, neither
Justice nor Mercy affect them. They disobey the Gospel, and against the Law
they are found guilty both of impiety and uncharitableness. They are cast in
both Courts. In the Court of Justice they are here arraigned for ungodly
persons under the charge of the first Table, and sinners and unrighteous under
the charge of the second Table. In the Court of Mercy, they are branded with
the Gospel, as a rule disobeyed, and a remedy despised. Justice might be
pacified by Mercy, and the Law taken off by the Gospel: but these faithless
and fearelesse wretches care neither for rule nor remedy. They neither are
mindful of that which is against them in the Law, or might do them good in
the Gospel.

Of the Gospel sins.
To disobey the Gospel is by Saint John, Chap. 16.8. summoned up in three
particulars; First, in the want of faith. Secondly, in the want of
righteousness. Thirdly, in the want of holiness. The disobedient Jews found
no want of faith in Christ. They supposed they were full of righteousness in
themselves, and that they wanted no spirit of grace to displace Satan in his
government, and set up the government of Christ in their hearts. I will from
the instance and example in large my self in laying to the charge of the whole
world this Gospell-sinne here applied to the Jews, and by way of warrantable
explication follow St. John as a Commentary upon Saint Peter.

Three Gospel Controversies.
John 16.8. And when he is come, He will convince the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment. Here lie three great Controversies between
God and the whole world. First, what that sin is which the world counts no
sin. Secondly, what that righteousness is which in the esteem of the world is no
righteousness. Thirdly, what that judgment is that the world reputes for no
judgment. There is a Law from God, and conscience in man, that tells the world
of many sins that it yields unto, that gives information of righteousness
applauded in the virtues and actions of men; and it takes from both a form of
judgment and government, that for it own safety it allows and likes well of:
but alas, in these three there is neither Law nor conscience to inform us;
nay, to both they are ridiculous, conceiving nothing reasonable in all these,
but that which is moral and natural to our condition in the state of
innocence, and remainders thereof in our corrupted natures. Adam in Paradise was
not apprehensive of these disputes, neither were such doctrines agreeable to
his insight. These are for new creatures, conquered and convinced by Gods
Spirit.

The unknown Sin.
All the world is ignorant of faith, and would so perish but for the Gospel. It
was not the Law (the Jews so much insisted upon) yt could reach or resolve
their reason in discovery of this secret; and because they would know no more
than Moses Law, they perished in this sin. This finne is expounded to be want
of faith in Christ, verse 9. It is either the root or sign of all other
sins. He that wants faith in Christ is discharged of no sin. Convince him
of this, and convince him of all.

How great a sin it is?
Want of faith in Christ is of all sins the greatest. it denies the mercy of
God, and makes a man the murderer of himself. It tals for Justice, and
refuses a pardon. It convinces of sin, and rejects the remedy. It casts a man
into the jaws of death, and cares not for help or hand that should pull him
out. Moses Law is not without punishment, but this without escape. If the
Gospel deny us mercy, our misery is irrecoverable.

The neglect.
Heb. 2.2, 3. The Law of Moses in every transgression and disobedience, is
repayed with recompense and reward. All the benefit is that an escape is
granted from the rigor of this Justice: but if we neglect the great salvation
of the Gospel, we have no way to avoid vengeance and wrath to come. Lose the
opportunity of the Gospel, and all is lost. We may recover the losses of the
Law, but if we look not to the Gospel, our case will be desperate.

The Contempt.
There is no mercy, Heb. 10.28. to the despiser of Moses Law; and yet ver. 29.
there is sorer punishment to him that despiteth the Spirit of grace, speaking
in the Gospel. No mercy is the hight of misery, and yet Moses Law cannot be
strained so high, as to deny all mercy. It may inflict death, but the Gospel
may take off the eternal punishment thereof: but alas, if the Gospel be
abused, and mercy denied, what Law shall remove that curse, and be able to
release the sinner?

Evangelicall Apostasy.
We are all fallen in the first man, and are for our Apostasy to be loathed and
left of God without pity: But the Lord dealt not so with us for our sins.
He had mercy upon us, in the Mediator, and made him a means to reconcile us
again, and bring us into favor: but read with trembling (all Apostataes from
the Gospel) and see with horror your dreadful, doom, Heb. 10.38. If any
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Woe unto us if such words
had been uttered against us for our Apostasy in Adam. The Lord never set his
soul against us, but even with it pitied us and pardoned us graciously: but
now to Apostatize and forsake his mercy, his very heart rises against us, and
we are most loathsome and abominable in his eyes. He abhorres for ever to cast
a favorable look upon us, or once to vouchsafe us acceptance again.
Christian Apostataes are the worst of men, and shall have wages with the
greatest vengeance. Matthew. 12.31, 32. Blasphemy against the Gospel cannot be
forgiven: All legal blasphemy is pardonable, the Father pardons it against
himself, the Son will remit it for his part: but if it proceed to touch the
Spirit, it passes all mediation. I will not be peremptory, and yet I presume
never any man committed this sin against the Law. I conceive it only to be a
Gospel-sinne that will admit of no pardon in the rejection of mercy. The Jews
committed this sin in the Scribes and Pharisees, and I fear all this rabble
here condemned in Peter, were not far from it, having had the Gospel so long
continued, and so violently and wilfully opposed. It is enough that I have
touched it as the height of disobedience against the Gospel, and have wished
men to take warning of this woe and wickedness.

Evangelicall despair.
The preparation of the Law, is to bring the sinner to despair in himself and
all worldly help, and so is a means to bring him to Christ: but Evangelicall
despair of mercy after the means of the Gospel offered and contemned, is
deadly and dangerous, and few ever went out of it. Men lie long under the sense
of their own misery without comfort: but they may with confidence wait and
expect to the last, and rest in hope they shall not always be denied their
suites and supplications. Only desperate contemners of the Gospel when they
fall into some extraordinary judgment of God, and the horror of their own
consciences, are little better than Devils, waiting for the damnation and utter
perdition of their souls. Satan will be sure to persuade men first that God
will not punish, and then that GOD will not pardon.

The world is guilty of this sin.
Want of faith in Christ is as common as it is dangerous; for Saint John
sticks not to charge all the world with it, and truly either in the penalty
or the sin, we may judge no man exempted. Where the Gospel is not preached,
it is the punishment of their first rebellion. God is not tied to give faith to
any, or to afford him his Gospel. These mercies are transcendent, and of no
mutual right between God and his creature. The Gospel was preached in
Paradise, but Adam had no Covenant that it should be hereditary, and follow him
and all his posterity. The Law was intailed, but the Gospel is the free
blessing of Almighty God.

Want of faith, the penalty and punishment of all Mankind.
Faith in a Mediator, and faith in God, are of a large difference. The Law in
commanding, threatening promising, is to be believed, and the want of this faith
brought Adam into sin, and it is the root of all sin, and deserver of all
judgment. What GOD commands, that the creature must believe to be his duty;
what he threatens he must in faith and fear yield unto, and what he
promises, he must likewise with the same faith embrace. Now this faith is an
affection or rather a piece of Gods Image, framing the affections in a
conformable power to all Gods commands, co^minations and promises: but
Evangelicall faith is no part or piece of the created image of God: but a new
principle put into the soul in place of original righteousness to bring
forth actual obedience, both in the inward and outward man. The want of this
faith (as I said before) is not the root of all sin, for where there is no
Gospel, the want of this faith will never be imputed for a sin. The want of
that other, is truly and indeed the root of all sin, and original of all
punishment. Not to believe in God was the sin of Adam and all his posterity.
But want of believing in Christ, is not of the same extent. It is a sign that
no sin is discharged, and we may safely say, it is the desert of all men, for
the want of the first faith to be deprived of this. Negative Infidelity
condemns no man for sin; take away the means of Conviction, and the sin
cease. Non positis medijs, etc. Deny men the Gospel, and free them of the
Gospel-sinnes: but positive Infidelity is a sin, and where God affords his
Gospel he looks for obedience, and condemns the contrary.

Want of faith the sin of the Church.
To want faith where the Gospel is preached, is an heinous and horrible sin;
better such men had never heard it, than that the sound of it should pass away
without sense and sanctification. This is that, that truly makes the world
guilty. Legal sin may bind us to the penalty, and want of faith in God may
punish us with want of faith in Christ: But want of faith in Christ, in
Christians and Professors of the Gospel, is a guilt above all guiltiness.

The worlds conviction by the Gospel.
Ioh. 15.22.24. The Jews had been without the sin of the Gospel, if by the
Gospel Christ had not convinced them. This Co^viction takes away every cloak
from sin, and leaves no covering to cast over a sinner, Ioh. 9.41. If the
Jews had remained in their blindness without the Gospel, they had in
comparison been without sin: but saying we see better than thou can teach
us, therefore Christ concludes against them that their sin remains, that
is, their sin against the Gospel. But here comes in the great doubt and
difficulty, what power have men to be convinced by the Gospel, and how is God
righteous in these Gospel-punishments? I shall answer as follows.

Man's capacity of Conviction.
That man is capable of Evangelicall Conviction is by no man to be denied. We
are not stocks and stones under the words of reproof. We have understandings
and wills, and by the same created understanding, I apprehend the Law, by the
same I apprehend the Gospel, and by the same will, I obey the one and the
other: but these powers are too remote to remove the doubt, we must not speak
of faculties, but their obedientiall and conformable power to the Laws given
them by their Creator.

Man's conformity to Conviction.
God having made man the free beginner of his own ^ctions, besides the
faculty of will and understanding, gave man original righteousness, to
further him in the production of actual obedience, that if he pleased, he
might in all things conform himself to his Creators commands. If God had done
no more for Adam than made him reasonable and free, he had wanted the
obedientiall power, and had been unable to conform himself to the commands,
comminations and promises of the Law; Therefore God to perfect his work, added
a further help needful for obedience, in placing in man his own Image, and
printing upon his soul a perfect pattern of all that he was to follow, and
to imitate his Creator in. Having lost this Image, yet there still remained
sufficient for conviction and condemnation: But we are now to try whether this
will teach the Gospel, of the law no question is made.

Of power to believe in Christ by creation.
Many learned and godly Divines have asserted and assured us, that Adam in his
innocence had power to believe in Christ. Of the capacity no man doubts: but
that will not solve the difficulty; for all the question lies upon the
obedientiall and conformable power of Adam. This he had not to the Law without
original righteousness, and I believe we shall be puzzled to find it in Adam
without a new principle in the place of his first righteousness, being
expulsed by sin. Without faith it self, I fear no man can conform himself
to the Gospel; not that faith which was a part of Gods Image by creation: but
that faith which is the principle of the life and obedience of the new man.
Such a principle as never came within the kenne or cognizance of Adam, upon the
best day of his creation and perfection. I will press but three arguments, and
leave them to the answer of those that are wedded to this opinion.

The principle of life and Religion.
No power is obedientiall and conformable to GOD without a principal, as well
as isntrumental causes. The faculty is subservient to the principal cause. It
may livide from it, but without it (...) cannot do well. Man had reason and
will to know and obey God, and to both was added by the Almighty, his own
Image or original righteousness, that both reason might be directed, and the
will ordered to obey and serve him. Man had power to separate his understanding
from true knowledge, and his will from a holy and righteous impression of Gods
Image in special upon it. He might refuse to do well, but to attain that end
without such grace it was utterly impossible. The like must be understood of
man in his lapsed estate, he is not deprived of will and understanding: yet
such faculties are not sufficient without faith infused, that may as a
principle help us to action and pleasing of God. Not faith in God, for that
turns the mind to legal obedience: but faith in Christ, which serves us to
obey Evangelically: contrary principles cannot produce the same effect, or
bring to the same end; we cannot by the same faith live in Christ, and live in
our selves.

Contrariety of commands.
There is no obedientiall power that can yield at the same time to do contrary
things. The Law commands us to do and live, the Gospel to believe and live. He
that must conform to the one, cannot by the same power immediately conform to
the other. Whiles Adam stands bound to the Law for life, he cannot stand bound
to the Gospel for the same. It is impossible for any man to have power (in
believing his duty is) to be saved by his works, and at the same time to be
saved by faith. It were a strange subjection to command the creature to live by
his deeds, and then at the same time to cross it, and say, not so, but by the
same power, Believe and thou shall be saved. Such teaching we may suspect, and
seek for better satisfaction by some more reasonable, fair and even
resolution; for in truth this is rather subversion than subjection of will and
power.

A power needless and needful.
Adam in the estate of innocence, had no need of faith in Christ, and then ^e
give him power to believe in him: Man fallen, has need and necessary use both
of power and faith, and then he has lost both. Poor creature, God abounds in
goodness, when thou have no need of his help, and forsakes thee in the
extremity and greatest necessity. Are these the ways of Gods wisdom, to be
lavish of power where man has no need, and to leave him where his help is of
use: no certainly, God does nothing in vain, but gives man what is useful,
and reserves himself to give more when, where, and to whom he pleases.

A power to believe in Christ by Redemption.
Faith is the free gift of God. It was necessary by creation that man should
not want the sanctified affection of faith to believe in the Creator. It was
debitum naturae, Natures debt to engage God to make his creature holy and
righteous: but now it is of grace to give him the new principle of life to
fetch from Christ both righteousness and holiness for the whole man. Here is
nothing hereditary or natural, the Gospel is free when, where, and to whom to
bestow it. It was given in Par^dise to all the sons of men, yet descended not
by propagation from fathers to children. Adam might have propagated original
righteousness, as well as original ^inne. But be neither propagates
Evangelicall faith, or the want of it to his posterity. It is personal both in
the habit and privation. No man is saved but by his own faith, or condemned
but by his own infidelity. The want of faith in Christ is every man's proper
sin, and can be imputed to none without the Gospel. We make it the Churches
sin, and not of all the world.

Gods preparation and donation of faith.
Leaving the power of Man's innocence, and universal freedom to believe
legally or Evangellically, we fall into the safe way, and say, that
wheresoe^^^ the Gospel is preached, God gives or is prepared to give faith in
Christ. He mockes no man, but is serious in the salvation of every soul, to
which the Gospel is sent. Every hearer in the Church is zealously persuaded to
repent. The Ministers mind and Gods meet in his holy ordinances, and the Word
is earnestly spoken to every ear. God himself goes with his message from
seat to seat, and from man to man, with true and hearty desire of his
conversion; yet notwithstanding he gives not equal grace to all, as shall
appear in our distribution thereof.

The donation of faith.
Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, beloved. To the Elect
he gives faith. He is not only prepared to preach unto them his Gospel, but
he prepares their hearts to receive it. He gives unto his chosen ones, the
blessed Gospel of peace and reconciliation, and he gives them faith to believe
it. We have all the same capacity: but not the same conformity. Our powers are
alike in understanding and will: but that obedientiall and filial subjection
to God and his Gospel is peculiar to some.

God is prepared to give faith to all that hear his Gospel.
Matthew. 23.37. I would, ye would not. It is the will of God by the Gospel that
all should be gathered unto him. Man's will resists Gods will, and makes that
Gospel of none effect that should be effectual unto all. God may add further
grace and give men hearts to receive as freely, as his Gospel is offered unto
them: but such grace is a royal prerogative, and reserved for some of many.
All are beholding to God, but some find and feel the very riches of his
grace, and are never able to be thankful enough, that they above others
should receive so much.

Of the righteousness of God.
To require performance, and give no power, is as unequal in the command to
al, as it is in the gift to some. To seek where he sowes not, and to reap
without labor is unreasonable, if not unrighteous. Man never had power to
obey, and therefore a heavy and harsh command is imposed upon him.

Man's power to obey the Gospel
There is never a man but is guilty of that power that God has given him, and
does less than he is enabled by his own freedom. There is no man, but he may
frequent the means, and come to the place of Gods worship. Secondly, being
come, he has ears to hear. Thirdly, he has an understanding to know the
logic and language of the holy Ghost. Fourthly, by that knowledge to come to
an historical faith. Fifthly, to affect, reverence and regard both Ministers
and message. Sixthly, to bring forth some fruits. Seventhly, to attend and wait
daily for the regenerating Spirit, that may convert and turn him truly unto
God. This power man uses not, and is justly condemned for the abuse of it.

Want of faith in Christ simply no sin.
If condemnation were absolutely and originally from faith, a power were
necessary to believe: but in diverse cases faith is found to be no sin in the
want of it. Adam in the estate of innocence, had no faith in Christ as a
Mediator, and was blameless, because no Law enjoined it. Secondly, men that
need this faith and yet want the Gospel to convince them, are guiltless of
the sin, though in some sense they may be said to be guilty of the
punishment. Every curse and want of favor being due to every son of Adam. It
therefore remains that they only are to be taxed that have the Gospel.

Sins of the Gospel are aggravations of the Law.
It must be presupposed that a man is guilty of sin and death before the
Gospel charge him with a greater measure of evil, and make him worse both in
sins and sorrows. It is not the want of faith barely that turns a man into
hell; for find payment in thy self, and satisfaction to the Law, and God will
challenge thee no further: but that is impossible, and therefore the Law casts
the first stone at thee, and bears thee over with the blow of death; then
comes the Gospel and buries thee under that stone without all hope of mercy. A
man is blind and rejects a cure: his wilfulness has made him the worse and
more worthy of greater woes: so the Gospel tenders thee a pardon, thou
contemnes it, and for contempt deserves the sorer punishment. It is not
therefore necessary for God to give every man power to be^eeve, but it is
necessary for every man to be careful he abuse not the power he has, and so
double his terments and punishments in ^e^l.

Conviction is the work of the Spirit.
The Father gives over the administration to his Son, the Son to the
Spirit, and he is the first that argues and disputes with men of mercy and
salvation. In his hands is now the kingdom of the Father and the son, and
this kingdom is (...) reggum violentiae, the Kingdom that suffers violence,
Mat. 11.12, 13. Luke 16.16. In this kingdom, the Saints in suffering are more
than conquerors, Romans 8.37. This is more than ever any Emperor could utter,
who have gained and kept their conquests with hardness and hazard. Matthew.
28.18, 19. the power of Christ is to preach and proclaim that he will take his
power, and reign in and over all men. He is merciful in giving warning before
the execution, and leaving his Spirit to make preparation for his kingdom,
which shall be (...) a kingdom of power, Rev. 11.17. ruling and overruling
all the world. Christ having ended the subjection of the world shall give over
his kingdom to his Father, which is (...), 1 Cor. 15.24. O the divine
administration of the Trinity! The Father the first person, passes all to the
Son, the Son makes it descend again to the holy Ghost. The same is the
order of regression, that was in the progression, as formerly we have declared.
The holy Ghost the first possessour of the kingdom returns it into the
possession of the Son, and the Son leaves it in the hands of his Father
where he first had it, that he may be all in all. From him was the proceeding,
and by good reason it must be to him again.

The coming of the Holy Ghost.
The Gospel convinces no man in the absence of the Spirit. We must pray in
hearing of the Word, Come holy Spirit and visit our hearts, bring home the
convictions of Grace, that we may not with these stubborn Jews disobey thy
Gospel, and bring upon us and our habitations, their end and misery. And thus
much of their first sin, I will speed on in the rest, and spend less time in
my discourse. It was needful to beat this sin home, and make the greater
stay, because the greater stir has been made about it.

The denial of righteousness.
Morrall and civil men never knew the meaning of Evangelicall and Christian
righteousness. What Law acknowledges a man just by another man's justice, or
wise by another man's wisdom? Papists deride it, and the world has not
learned how to conceive of it. It is a great sin to live in this ignorance,
and an assurance to a man, he wants wisdom to know his own justification.
He rests in hope he is righteous, and wanting the knowledge of Christ,
perishes in his own pride and presumption. Christ is both righteous in
himself and for us, and so is no man in the world.

A world of unrighteous men.
We have a world of wicked men that are destitute of common honesty: but if we
add to them even another world of honest men, that know no more than good
neighborhood, what a vast heap and confusion have we of men and women
unrighteous before God, and destitute of Jesus Christ? A world is here
condemned for want of righteousness: and alas how did the blind Jews oppose
this righteousness, and seeing themselves just by another Law than the Gospel,
are now frying in hell for their disobedience.

Conviction of righteousness.
It is pity the world should perish without reproof of this sin. It is that
which Christ and all his Apostles labored to bring the Jews unto. They
condemned Christ for a malefactor, and by his resurrection and ascension he
prooved plain that he was both just and the justifier of sinners. Here is
strong conviction by reason and force of argument. No man can go to God the
Father that is unrighteous. There is no acceptance of such into heaven. Now I
have many witnesses (says Christ) of my ascension. You shall see me ascend,
and see me no more upon earth. You are my faithful ones, to you I make
demonstration of my righteousness, that you may demonstrate the same to others.

The office of the Spirit in this conviction.
The world lies in sin and is held by Satan in strong condemnation. It was a
lie at the first that murdered himself and all mankind, John 8.44. He stood
not in the truth, it was that which he opposed from the beginning. First, by a
question, Has God said, etc. Secondly, by a contradiction, Ye shall not dye
at all, etc. Thirdly, by disputation, God knows, and ye may know, that to
eat and fear no death, will make you wise and worthy to be like God himself,
etc. Thus was man murdered and by a lie deluded of his happiness, and became
a loser of that righteousness that God imprinted in his soul, when he first
breathed it into his body. This loss can never be repaired by another of the
same stamp; and therefore the Spirit of God beginning with fear to put a man
beside himself and his own presumption, opens unto him his bondage and
baseness in sin, and from the very bottom of hell recovereth him by the
righteousness of Christ, and puts into him a more ingenuous Spirit to look up
to God in Christ and call him Father, and by adoption and grace to find
himself the child of God, heir of righteousness, and inheritour of the
Kingdom of God, Romans 8.15.

His coming for this end.
The great Doctor CHRIST JESUS absenting himself, sends another to be present
with us, both for counsel and comfort. He counsels us to seek the best
righteousness, and comfort us with the fruition of it. He persuades us to
deny our selves, and make sure to be found in Christ clothed with his
righteousness. I wonder not to see civil honest men to wander naked of this
clothing in the nasty rags of their own rotten righteousness; they have no
better spirit, than the spirit of the world to teach them a moral lesson, and
to grow proud to see themselves before their neighbors in the honor of their
own virtues. This is the applause the best men of the world seek for, and
rest in it as their summu^ benu^. Such were the Pharisees and the Jews here in
my text, that disobeyed the Gospel, because they saw in their own thoughts, a
better way of justification than Christ by his Spirit taught them. But all
their supposed comfort is a poor and beggarly payment in the praise and
applause of men, with their coming short of heaven. I disgrace not morality
and civilitie in the world, I wish there were more of their rank, so they
rested not in that righteousness, but reached at an higher price, even the
invaluable treasure in Christ, willing in humility to let all go for the gain
thereof. Yet I must conclude against the underlings of moral honesty, yt all
such as are inferiors to them must needs come short of heaven, because they
come short of them, that by Christ's verdict are before them. Now the best
moralists come short of heaven, and therefore must they needs come short, that
are left many leagues behind them. Gain the Spirit, and grace, that in
holiness we may exceed them all, as we shall do in righteousness by Christ.

Want of judgment.
This is the great sin of the world in advancing against Christ Satan's
sovereignty and superiority. He reigns, and rules the world, and is a
special enemy to Christ's kingdom. Holiness is the companion of
righteousness; we may not grow wanton, because the grace of justification has
abounded. God has not left us to our liberties, as if by the way of hell, we
might advance to heaven. Judgment and spiritual government is appointed to
order us in our ways, and to waft us by safe conduct over the Sea of this
world to our harbor and haven in heaven.

A world of people without grace and sanctification.
The subject that the Spirit is to season, is the unsavory world. Holiness is
a byword amongst men, and derision has banished it by the conceit of precise
and strict walking with God. A Saint is the worlds spectacle and a very
gazingstocke, as if he were as much run out of himself and mad, as he is
run from the world and his merry company. But the wonder is in the world it
self, wild in wickedness, and wretched in the hands of Satan. His judgment
is followed, and government extolled in all places and persons. We can but
exempt a few from being followers of him, no more than Saint John exempts the
world from guilt in this place. He is plain, and charge the world with the
Devils government, and freeth none but by the Spirit from this misery.

Conviction of the best government.
The setting up of the Lord Jesus in the hearts and souls of men, is the best
Commonwealth. It was that the woman travailed for Rev. 12. She lives in the
Pagan Empire, and is pained as much to make it a Christian, as she is pinched
by it. The strong argument of persuasion is, that Christ by his death and
resurrection has judged the prince of the world, and defeated him of all
judgment. He held a right in the world till Christ removed it. He is a Father
of all that he murdered by his lie in Paradise, and therefore challenges a
right in his children. Christ to be partaker with these children, takes their
flesh, and by death subdues the murderer, and delivers them from bondage,
Hebr. 2.14, 15. It is therefore good reason that the children should be subject
unto him, leave the liar, and live in conformity to the new Law of the Gospel.

The Spirits application of judgment.
It is just, Satan should be expulsed and cast out by Christ, and he
confesses against blasphemers, that his command over Devils was executed and
effected by the Spirit, Matthew. 12.28.29. He enters into the strong man's house,
and being stronger than he, binds him, and spoils him of his possession. He
casts down in us the strong holds of this adversary, and brings us into
subjection and obedience to Christ and his rule and regiment; and for this end
also must the Spirit descend and dwell with us. Thus have we the sin of
disobeying the Gospel in want of faith, righteousness and holiness, the use
follows.

The worlds insufficiency and danger.
First, I look upon the world, and wonder at pride and arrogancy. Men neither
know their debt nor danger. They see not the charge of the Law, nor discharge
of the Gospel. They live as men set at liberty by their own lusts. They look
up and fear no account: Faith they mind not, neither do they feel or find
any want of it to get them a discharge. Insufficient to believe, and yet
confident all is paid. Trusting they are righteous, and yet scorn to be
beholding to any for justification. They will barter with God and by
commutative justice give him as much as they receive. They plead innocence,
and yet impleade holiness. They will be honest and yet hate sincerity. But
seeing the guilt is most where the Gospel is preached, let us see our
professors, and pry into their sufficiency. Many we have less morrall than
Turks, and more ignorant than Heathens of their own Religion. They hear the
Gospel, and understand nothing. Better these men had lived Turks than
Christians in name, to incur all the guilt of the Gospel. Others presume they
have faith, and never knew they wanted it. They were never acquainted with the
conviction of Gods Spirit, whose office is first to persuade men they want
faith in Christ, before he work it in them. They would loath be such Infidels,
as once to know or acknowledge the time when they believed not. Ever since they
were borne they have had a good faith, and they hope they shall dye so. God
help them by his Spirit to search their deceitful hearts, and to change the
time of their untimely belief, and learn to know that the first of
convictions is to find faith wanting in the heart. Either conviction of the
wat must precede, or the gift will never follow: but this was touched before,
though never too much.

The Spirits sufficiency.
Second Use is to see how well Christ has left us, not to an insufficient and
deficient Teacher: but to a complete and perfect Doctor armed with all
arguments of conviction, to bring us from infidelity to faith, from
condemnation to justification, and absolution from all our sins, from
uncleanness to holiness, and from the thraldom of Satan, to the liberty of
sons. God be blessed for his Spirit, hasten his kingdom that we may be
prepared for Christ to reign and rule in us when he destroys the world, and
triumphantly having ended all his victories, he may bring us bodies and souls
to his Fathers house. Amen.

The Christians trial.
Third Use. Disobedience to the Gospel is a fearful sin, and brings a
fearful end: we may by degrees make sure our safety, if we search and seek
to climb to heaven by these stairs or staves in Jacobs Ladder, Matthew. 5.3.
First gain poverty of Spirit, labor to be an indigent beggar, Know thou have
nothing but what must come from Christ. Secondly, be sensible of thy poverty,
be no sturdie beggar that will not stoop and stir from his flashes and
flourishes in a bold and impudent seeking, as if the giver were as much in his
debt for the receipt, as he will be in the givers for the gift. Verse 4. learn
thou to mourn and to grieve that ever it was thy hard hap to fall into such
misery as to incur Gods displeasure, of all plagues the greatest, greater
than Hell it self. Mourn to have that taken off more than any judgment. Say
not with Pharaoh, take away the plague of my Land, but the hardness of my
heart. Say with David, take away the trespass, and for the rest, say no more
but this, here I am, Lord, do and deal with me as thou pleases. Thirdly,
ascend yet higher, and be possessed of a meek spirit, even to the Lord, as
well as to men. A man may mourn and remain stubborn and unbroken, but verse
5. be thou blessed with a meek and mild heart. Mourn till thou be meeked
and tamed for the Lords use. Fourthly, raise up thy self to hunger and thirst,
verse 6. even for that righteousness that will satisfy thy meek and
mournful spirit. Empty thy self first with sorrow and subjection to Gods
will, and then be assured thou shall be filled. Fifthly, bless thy self with
a merciful heart to others. Say unto God, if thou had mercy in store, thou
would bestow it liberally; say thou art so eager for it, that it would do
thee good to see God, in denying it thee, to give it to others. It is that
above all, thy hunger and thirst is bent upon, and by the want of it thou
know the worth, value and price of so rich a commodity. Certainly it
cannot be long before the Lord will reach mercy to thy heart that art so
merciful to others, and even fill all thy desires, verse 7. Sixthly, having
obtained mercy to pardon all thy sins and to justify thy person, forget not
the third conviction in studying for holiness, gain a pure heart, for that
will bring thee still nearer unto God, to see him in his Ordinances, in this
world, and in his glory in the world to come, verse 8.

Seventhly, being at peace with God, thy self become a peacemaker for others.
Study that all may be partakers of thy peace, both with God and man, verse 9.
Eighthly and lastly, take in the last beatitude, and think thou have made no
ill bargain to suffer persecution for righteousness sake. Thou thy self art
at peace with heaven and earth, and desire war with no man. If they make
war with thee and falsely, smite thee with their tongues, be patient and
rejoice, that heaven is and will be more propitious and favorable unto thee
than this vale of misery. And so I end the Gospels disobedience, and come to
the punishments, leaving the legal sins untouched, which every man's
conscience will touch without an interpretour. The Jews were unbeleevers, that
was their great sin: but their own Law of which against the Gospel, they
made their boast, was transgressed in every branch.

The punishment of the Gospel.
Consists in an end in this world, misery in the world to come, ignorance of
that misery, and shame unsupportable as you have heard. The unbeleeving Jews
are now within five years of their end, and yet I know not (says Peter) what
their end shall be. It were well with them, if their end here did end their
torment hereafter: but I stand amazed and confounded to think what torments
wait upon them living, dying, and dead, such as they shall never be able to
know or understand. They shall never see their worst, or what woe may further
be laid upon them: yet so much shall they see and sorrow for, as to be
confounded for ever, and not to know where to appear, or how to look up to
behold his face, whom they can neither avoid or abide.

The temporal end of the Jews.
Matthew. 24.6.13.14. The end is thrice repeated and appyled to Jews, as may
appear by the signs, v. 5. I came in my Fathers Name, and could not be
admitted. Others shall come in their own, and be graced of you with an us
recipietis. But this will ^ell you roundly in both ^^ares, of what you feared
to lose by me and might have saved: The Romans will come and take away your
kingdom verse 6. No marvel rumors of war rise in all places for rebellion:
but these two signs will not bring the end, for others are to follow, these
are but the beginnings of sorrow, v. 9. Persecution beginning at Gods house,
will be another sign and sure token of an end upon Rebels, more against God
than men. verse 10. Apostacy will follow persecution, and cold Christians will
soon shrink with the first affronts of evil: but the promise is if any will
ride out the storm at a safe Anchor of hope, when the end comes, he shall be
saved and not perish with Rebels. Verse 14. The departure of the Gospel is
another evidence of the end, Dan. 9.26. and non ei, is a short and sharp
speech, as abrupt for Ierusalems ruin as they sense: To Messiah shall the
Jews be longer a people. Matthew. 21.43. The kingdom goes in effect when the
Gospel departs, Dan. 9.27. One week is granted for the stay of it, that is, as
before we have delivered, seven years, beginning when Christ began to preach
to them, and so held on all his days, and three years and an half after,
that is, from the thirtieth year of his Incarnation to the 38. And in that
year was the Commission enlarged, Act. 10, 11, 12. etc. a vision and voice
from heaven assures Peter he may go to Cornelius the Roman, and preach the
Gospel. This vision is alleged often for confirmation of the passage of the
Gospel to the Gentiles, and is further confirmed by the gifts of the holy
Ghost, bestowed upon them with the Gospel. I take it for certain, that our
Savior in the related places, spoke of no other end but this of the Jews,
which in four things I will express as follows. The history of their
calamities upon earth, may be as an instance for all people to be warned by it,
and take example of rebellion against the Gospel.

The loss of the Gospel.
Matthew. 21.43. The Jews rejected the stone that God laid in Sion for
salvation, and all to rest upon; for this rejection they are rejected, and the
first thing that removes from them is the Gospel, and then falls the stone
Christ heavy upon their Nation. They first stumble at it and stir it by their
strength and rebellion, and then it rebounds upon them, and grinds them to
powder, Ezekiel. 9.4.18. and 10, 22, 23. Diverse removes before Gods glory depart,
and enemies draw nearer.

The loss of their Kingdom.
The Kingdom of God goes first, and then their Nation perishes. The Gospel
moves from them slowly. Seven years it stirs not though they ill deserved
it. It begins with Cornelius in a private house, passes more publicly to
Cities and Regions of the Gentiles. God still provoking the Jews to recall it:
but they rather persecute it and all that profess it; and therefore judgment
and the end hastened; and within less than the doubling of thirty eight years
the Jews perished. In the first of the last of seventy years Christ came, in
the middle he died, and in the end destroyed Jerusalem, Dan. 9.24. Seventy
weeks contain seven times seventy years. Every seventy is famous, but the
last excels all the rest, as being the time of Christ's birth, passion, and
perdition of Rebels; but we repeat our former notes. The Jews might have been
wise out of Daniel, and dealt better for themselves: but prophecies are of none
effect to those that are devouted to ruin.

Epistles to Jews that give warning of this end.
It is observed by a learned Divine, that I am to honor with all respects of
love and friendship (Master Joseph M^de) that Apostolical Epistles written to
the Gentiles, express nothing of an end at hand: but rather upon mistake of
Epistles to the Hebrews, give warning to the Gentiles of the contrary, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. I will by his directions point out some passages, Heb. 10.37. The
Apostle exhorts believing Jews to patience, because sudden vengeance is
ready to fall upon their enemies, the unbeleeving Jews. Christ had threatened
their ruin, his long stay and lingering was tedious to flesh and blood,
especially being tired by troubles: Paul therefore cheeres up the hearts of the
hearers with assurance Christ will not tarry long, but come quickly, and
revenge his own blood and the blood of his Saints upon that persecuting
Nation. It shall glad our hearts to see Christ as good as his word in the ruin
of Rome, James 5.7, 8. Be patient, etc. The same exhortation, and the same
argument, 1 Pet. 4.7. The like theme and disputation, 1 Ioh. 2.18. We have an
Advocate, etc. and not we only that are Jews: but also the whole world, etc.
the Epistle is general, yet may have special direction, and that to the Jews
in my apprehension. He tells them it is the last ^oure, for he lived to see it
(...) the destruction of Ierusasalem, and gives one of Christ's signs, Matthew.
24.5. in false Christ's flocked after by the Jews.

The calamity of the Jews.
Dan. 12.1. Matthew. 24.21. never greater, 1 Pet. 4.7. the end of all things, as
if it ^ad been Doomesday, as many understand Peter, who should be cross to
Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. except he were thus understood. I writ to you Jews
to be sober and to watch unto prayer, for our Nation is ready to suffer and
lose all. Weep and howl, Iam. 5.1. ye rich Jews, for your miseries ready to
come upon you. You have but gathered your wealth for your enemies, and such
canker and rust of sin cleaves unto it, that it will witness and work
against you. Your pleasures, profits, preferments and wantonness have fed and
filled your hearts for the day of slaughter. You have killed the just without
resistance, but by their patience and your persecution, you are now to perish,
and the Lord is nigh to execute the same upon you. I touch still what I have
taught before, because I would be remembered, and made fruitful to my Reader.

The loss of their lives and liberties.
Never died people more desperately, and the market they had made to sell the
blood of Gods servants for nothing, is now made for them. The Romans buy theirs
as cheap as ever they sold Christ's. Never Tragedy more lamentable; and if
Jesus Christ had not taken some pity upon them, there had not been left one
piece of their flesh untorne in pieces, Mat. 24.22. Neither was captivity
better than death, Ier. 22.10. That was never more verifyed tha^ now, for to
this day have they lived in their remainders, as the most remarkable wretches
in the world. Let this end of the Jews be our instruction and admonition, that
we may be wise, and not perish for the contempt of the Gospel.

Their misery in the world to come.
The blood of Christ pursues them to Hell. It is not satisfied with the blood
in their bodies, but deservedly makes them a prey to Devils as well as men. It
were an harsh censure to say they went all to Hell that perished by the Romans.
We will examine their case by Scripture, and a fearful presage thereof in the
Revelation.

The eternal end of the Jews.
Matthew. 24.13. He that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved. Men
even amongst you will apostatize and fall to the Jews again: but whosoever
shall hold out till their end come, shall not perish with them; v. 15. Men are
bidden read with understanding: An Item set upon no other sign but this: When
you see the Roman Army placed in the Mount of Olives, escape for your lives.
But how shall they escape when the Army lies in their way, and a watch against
them on every side the City? I answer, God raised the first Army, and gave
liberty to all that would read and understand, to be gone: and now went the
Christians to Pella, as I have showed, this prophecy for their safety being
seconded with a sound from heaven, saying, Go to Pella, go to Pella. The
promise is that Christians sound and sincere in faith to the end, shall escape.
History tells us they escaped: who then perishes but rebels to the Gospel? The
Text tells us, that the believing Jews had the beginning, and that the end was
for all those that obeyed not the Gospel. It give men leave to be charitable,
but I desire sin may have his due, and especially Gospelsinnes. Let men
tremble that have a mind to treat more favorably of this end, and see what
it is to call for the blood of Christ to be upon them.

The presage of their eternal woe.
Saint John lived to see it, and penned his Revelation after the destruction of
the City. He alters the style of Hell, and gives it a name that no Prophet or
Apostle did before him. He deserves to be named that helped me to this
knowledge, Master Joseph Mede, whose praise, to Gods glory be it spoken, I can
never blazen too much. I shall recall what I quoted in one place for the style
of Hell, Rev. 19, 20. The Lake of Sodom, or fire and Brimstone. A new
appellation of Hell upon this accident, as that judicious and industrious man
relates it. Multitudes of Jews being met withal by the Romans, upon the
banks of Jordan, are miserably slaughtered, as formerly was touched, and their
dead bodies buried in the River: But GOD will not suffer them there to rest,
but by the strength of the stream tumbles them from place to place, till he
plunge them into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for their burial and graves. A
sad spectacle in my judgment, and no small conjecture that their souls were
buried in hell. Saint John seems to intimate so much to me. I will not bind
any man to the strict observation of it, still my desire is to press the
punishment of disobedience to the Gospel. Such notes I am sure thou may
credit better than Popish legends and fables to make men fear hell, into
which by Idolatry they teach them to leap, and never listen after any legend
or reading to prevent that. I will now wholly leave the instance of the Jews,
and teach all the misery of Hell, in the lamentable extremity of it, and
extreme lamentation. Matthew 13.42. A furnace of fire, there is the lamentable
extremity: wailing and gnashof teeth, there is extreme lamentation. The
extremity we will express in four terms; first, fire; secondly, darkness;
thirdly, worm; fourthly, perdition.

The fire of Hell.
Fire and water as they are of best use, so we say of them, they are without
mercy. It is their nature to do what they do: but it is the nature and
property of God to have mercy, and therefore most unnatural to be without
mercy. It is just with God to change his mercy into justice, and kindle for
the damned an unmercifull fire. We can quench our unmercifull fires with
water: but in hell no water, no not a drop will be allowed, not to quench, but
not so much as to cool the heat of that flame upon the tippe of the tongue.
The fire is a fearful extremity that nothing can allay it. Spirits are agents
too subtle to be patients in our fire, they are more quick in avoiding than
that element can smite them. It has been much questioned by Schoolmen what
we might deem hell fire to be. If corporal, how shall it torment spirits and
souls of men? If spiritual, how bodies and the flesh of men? It were casie to
answer, by adding to fire the breath of the Almighty, who is able to extend or
contract any creature to touch bodies or spirits with what torments he pleases
I had rather rest in some lively example, than busy my self with rules of
uncertainties. Our blessed Lord and Savior is best able to tell us by
experience, what fire that is that God kindles against sin, and with what
extremity it scorcheth and scourges the poor soul that must buckle and bend
under it. I will present unto you, for an example, Jesus Christ in the Garden,
and upon the Cross.

Christ's agony in the Garden.
Fear and sorrow begin his Passion. The objects that fear Christ, and work
him to sorrow, are no easy scarcrowes and spectrums of men. Nay, all the
Devils in hell are not able to put Christ into a Passion. To make him heavy in
heart and soul, is no small weight of woe; to complain it presses him to the
very death, is a sad symptom of some severe and unspeakeable sorrow. Pass we
to his prayer, and see with submission how he entreats for the departure of
it. Father, if there be any possible means to redeem man without me, and
save me from the sorrow I am in, let the bitter Cup escape my taste. It is not
a thing I sue for once, but again and again I continue my fuite, and seek
more earnestly than ever formerly in any prayer I expressed my self unto thee.
It was no small burden that Christ would have shifted from his shoulders, and
settled upon some other means and mediation. He will not shrink to have man
saved, but it would glad him to see himself eased. If it be possible, my will
is to be eased: but thy will be obeyed, what ever I suffer. From sorrow
Christ falls to prayer, from prayer into an agony, and then he prays more
earnestly as the burden is increased. Now he sweates and drops with blood. It
passes through the veins, flesh, skin, not like some thin dewie sweat by
an ordinary transsudation, that Physicians discourse of for cause and cure: but
it breaks violently out by great lumpes, and leapeth forcibly from his veins,
and with a strong current is cast from them to his upper garments, rumbling to
the ground. To talk of diseases when veins burst, break open their mouths,
or have their coats and containers thinned to sweat out the blood, is idle, to
tell us of examples of the like, blasphemous. Never was there sickness,
sorrow, or example like this, merely from apprehension and true consideration
of his own sufferings to be thus perplexed, no cause antecedent or conjunct,
but what passed between Christ our Savior and Surety, and his Father angry
and displeased for our sins. This first combat had been enough to have
annihilated or swallowed up a mere creature, Angel or Man.

His Passion upon his Cross.
His preparation in the Garden brings him better armed to his Cross, he
passes by the wrongs of men and Angels: yet the one with the power of the
hand, and the other with the hand of power, do to him their worst for diverse
hours. The power of darkness, after man's malice was ended, laid at him, and
left him not for many encounters. He that in the Wilderness assaulted him
thrice, and often afterward in the course of his life, brings now all the
power of hell, and for his farewell to the world, hopes to have success in his
and all our ruins and destructions. But these are light skermishes and mean
affronts to that which followed. All these are not worth the speaking of he
never opens his mouth to complain of such dealings and deeds of darkness,
enough to plunge the best of us into hell: but after these troops of
wickedness shaken off, he falls to the greatest shocke and meets with his
match. His Father now takes him to task, and turns him to another tune. He is
compelled to cry out, and utter words of complaint, fearful for despair, if
that word My Father, had not supported his faith; My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? here is apprehension of dereliction and desertion, there is
nothing that keeps Christ to God but faith. On his Fathers part he complains
of desertion, on his own he will not despair, as long as God is his in
application. The Father leaves; the Son cleaves and claspeth close about
him. Suppose the case had been man's in either of these assaults; he had upon
the first apprehension been, not only dismayed, but confounded. Yet this would
have put him into desperation and despair for ever. He had not been able to
lispe one word of a better life, or laid the least of his thoughts upon God. In
stead of my God he would have blasphemed and gnashed his teeth at his
tormentor. Dear Christians, dread this fire that fastened upon the Innocent
Son of God, and think what extremity it would be to you, but to touch the
most utmost flame. Learn for ever to obey his Gospel, and be thankful for
his mercy and deliverance.

Viter darkness.
The greatest comfort of the fire is light, heat without it is an hell in our
bodies, and we see a burning Ague how it scorcheth us and sends forth nothing
but smoke and poison. It distracts men with rage and madness. Poor souls,
we never felt such a fire in the sharpest Ague, as we shall find in our souls
when hell fire enters us, and we it. Utter darkness is but a privation, yet
the loss will make it a sensible torment. The Father of lights is God, that
will be gone. The Fountain opened to us is Christ, but he will not visit us.
The light of Grace and Glory vanish with the Spirit. No inward or outward light
to comfort us will show it self. Heaven and earth will curse us, we shall be
blind in our selves, and burn without sight of our own miseries. Sense shall
not be wanting, nor sorrow to our senses. Let darkness dismay us to disobey,
and let the light, whiles we have it, stir us up to follow it.

The never-dying Worm.
The worm that gnawes upon the living man, and eats him up being dead, may
both be killed and consumed with us: but this Worm is as immortal as our
selves. We may desperately send our souls from our bodies: but sin and
conscience cannot be dismissed. We may sooner part with our selves than with
our tormentors. It were well a man might be as a flint in a rock of stone,
which as it finds no pleasure, so it feels no pain: but this will not be
granted, his wounded Spirit will never leave him, Prove. 18.14. A man sustained
by the Spirit of God, may bear any infirmity: but when his own spirit is as
much wounded by God as himself, what man shall bear it? Once again remember
the Gospel, and let it help and heal this misery.

Utter perdition.
We often pity men when we hear Briefes of utter undoing, and we commonly
complain of lamentable losses, as if all were gone when we have parted with no
more than our worldly goods. Never think men of being undone in spiritual
losses. There is not the poorest Beggar in the world, but in losing his soul,
he leaves more than a King that is cast out of his kingdom; nay, his loss is
greater than to lose the whole world. Better the soul be saved, than a world
purchased; and yet sottish sinners to seek wealth upon earth, will hazard
their souls. I lose my goods, yet I am not utterly undone as long as I have
friends. I lose my friends, yet I am not utterly undone, as long as I have my
self. I lose my life, yet still I am far from being undone, as long as God
stands by me. But then I am undone indeed, when I have lost God, then have I
lost my self. And all good Christians, once more hear me friendly and
favorably: fear God, love his Gospel, live well, and never fear to dye ill.
Many wretches fear to suffer ill, that never fear to sin, and of evils they
ever fear the least, looking to their temporal life, and never regarding
their spiritual. Thousands fear to dye a corporal death, that never heed
what it is to die an eternal. Fear were better placed upon sin than sorrow.
If we would fear to sin, we should not need to fear to suffer; and in
suffering we were better place our fear upon the second than first death.
Utter perdition is not in this world, that is reserved for the day of death,
and dungeon of hell.

The misery of the place.
It is sometimes called a prison, and judge what an hell it were to live and
lie in a dungeon with Monsters of men in this world. It is Tartarus of (...), a
Pagan name, for fearful and formidable Spectacles. They have imagined hell
full of horror for such shapes and shadows as they have fancied and fabled by
their Poets: but those are poor affrightments to the dreadful and terrible
face of God and his frowning countenance. Conscience will skarre them more than
shadows, and darkness, than doting dreams. It is Tophet or Gehenna, a
merciless place. Infants yelling in the fire of Gehenna, had their voices,
cryings and shrikings drowned by Drums from being heard of their parents. The
brands of Hell may roar in the Lake, and none will be found to pity them.
They cry too late, the door of mercy being shut against them, and God of
heaven turned their irreconcilable enemy.

Extreme lamentation.
They shall weep their bellies full, and to weeping add wailing, and wishing
they had never been. They shall wring their hands and curse the day they were
ever borne. And when sorrow shall do no good, gnash their teeth and grind
them against God for their excessive plagues. Tears shall not be taken for
repentance, but serve to cool the heart and dant the spirits, so that
extremity of cold may make their teeth chatter and gnash together. Heat and
cold with all excesses and aggravations of sorrow may meet together. We have
but lightly touched what they must deeply taste; would God it might teach us
by so miserable an end to make a happy beginning of our salvation and
subjection to the Gospel in this world. I will now dispatch the rest more
briefly and wish thee the benefit in the whole.

Unknown misery.
Peter questioneth what we quarrel withal, and say hell is not so hot as
Preachers make it. Peter knows not how to make it hot enough. He had rather
ask the question and say, What shall the end be, than determine. It were some
comfort to a subject of hell to know his worst. Men so solace their souls upon
earth, with a stubborn resolution to their tormentors, do your worst, I know
what you can do, and there is an end: but it will not be so in hell, their
sturdy stomachs must come down, and not dare the Almighty to the trial of
his strength. The reasons why in hell men shall never faddom the bottom of
their woes, are these; first, he that smites is infinite, and therefore can
augment every blow he gives. We whip our children often till they be
senseless and careless of the rod: but God will work them feeling, as well
as whipping, and if need be, by an unwonted blow fetch blood out of another
vein. Men shall sooner be weary with suffering, than he with smiting, and
every touch shall dear them more than other. Secondly, man shall never know
his own capacity. He has enough to day to fill him to the brimme, his
vessel shall be stretched and strained to hold as much or more the next day,
and so for all eternity he shall be enlarged to receive torments. Thirdly,
eternity of extremity can never be brought to light; there is still behind,
whatsoever the measure be for the present. We only that obey the Gospel know
our worst, and what can be done for us in this world. happy time we suffered
for God and his truth, that we may never suffer for sin in hell.

The confusion of unbeleevers.
Where shall they appear? Sinners and ungodly persons shall be ashamed to be
seen, and shall find no place where to hide their shame. A marveilous
alteration shall befall them, and it shall be a wonder to see what a change is
made in all their behavior. Impudency and boldness did attend them in all
places, now fear and shame shall accompany them where soever they are. I will
touch them in two things here related, their appearance and place: as no ground
can hold them from trembling; so no sight but it will put them to shame.

The appearance of unbeleevers.
It can hardly be credited with what audacious boldness, and bold audacity,
men and women, dare appear before God in this world, not once thinking that
they are either in his debt or danger. They prepare not for their audite and
account. They are like that impudent Ruffian that pictured upon his Target God
and the Devil, with an inscription under both. Under God was written, si tu
nolis, if thou will not have me, I am at a point with thee of defiance, etc.
Under the Devil, directly opposite to God, iste rogitat, I am for the Devil
and his service. God must take them as they are; for they mean not to mend,
and if he like them not at their worst, take them Devil. Men live as if they
were either to be happy here, or without hope hereafter. To gain the world,
they count all things lawful, and judge they have nothing to enjoy when they
leave it. This makes them appear empty before God, and ashamed of their
madness and misery.

Our speech and language might learn us the lesson of our folly. We say when
we would be credited for certainty, It is as certain as death, and then like
fools we cross our selves, and alter the style when we have forgotten our
selves, I did no more think of it than my death. I judge you by your own
mouths, and manifest your madness. You believe there is nothing that is more
certain than death, and confess there is nothing you less think of. As God
shall judge me, is as ready as words, and yet by works you deny it, fearing
nothing less than his judgment. To contemn his Law, and despise his Gospel,
is your ordinary practice. He may command, you will not obey. He may threaten,
you will not fear. He may promise you will not believe. His justice you dare
affront, his mercy control, his anger does but provoke you, his goodness
emboldens you to sin. You resist and rebel against his Spirit, outface and
disgrace his Ordinances, rage and rail against his Ministers, scoff and
scorn at your brethren, and there is not any wickedness you blush at, or once
check or challenge your selves for the wrong you do to God and men, Law and
Gospel.

But tell me what you will do, and how you will deal at your appearance and
meeting with your judge: you have made others tremble defore you, and according
to your authority have lorded it over your inferiors. Think seriously of your
standing before a greater Lord, and gain an Advocate to plead with him. You
shall not be able to show your faces, or open your mouths without him. Laugh
no longer (ye impudent sinners) at your audacious practices, take counsel
betimes. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble your selves in the fight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up, Iam. 4.9, 10. Lift not up your selves and
brow-beat his Ordinances, but bear down the stout and stubborn heart to be
ashamed betimes, and the Lord will encourage you in the evil day. Presumptuous
persons will prick on in their pride, and perish in the end. It will be
terrible for them to appear before God, that never appeared before him in
prayer, but always against him. Think of this appearance and by the Gospel
make your preparation.

Unbelievers have no place free from fear.
Where shall they appear? They may not hide themselves, and yet no place shall
be safe for their appearance. They will be calling to rocks and mountains to
fall upon them and cover them from from the direful and irefull Judge: But no
hill will be entreated to hide them, no rock to rush upon them. Miserable
wretches that can bear their sins with ease, had rather lie under hards
rocks and massy mountains, than the least touch of Gods wrath. Sampson took
the Gates of Gaza with the posts and bars upon his shoulders, and bare them
to the very top of the hill; such stout Sampsons are our sinners that stick at
no sin, break open the floud-gates of all impiety, pull up all posts and
bars that should shut them up, and carry all down before them, and raise up
to the very top of the hill, the hight of their horrible crimes. All places are
defiled with their uncleanness, and they leave no room in the earth for
righteousness to dwell in. Such as they brew, such must they drink, and God
will not leave them a place where to show their heads or shelter themselves
from danger. No Cave shall cover them, no den of darkness keep them from
eternal darkness. I will conclude with Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, but we are made manifest
to God, and trust also, are made manifest in your consciences. If the terror
of the Lord (as we have touched it) were made manifest unto men they would be
persuaded: but, alas, it will never work till men apply it to their
consciences: in them have I labored to fix this work, and have found ill
hearers of it. My comfort shall be with assurance that to God we are made
manifest, we deal sincerely, and wish it may work kindly in all for their
timely conversion, and holy conversation to the end, Amen.

FINIS.

