A TREATISE OF THE HONOR OF GODS HOUSE:

OR, THE TRVE PATTERN Of the Church, showed in the parts And piety of it;

With a Discovery of the true Cause and Cure Of our present Contentions,

And an answer of such Objections as may Offend the weak.

CANT. 6.12. Return, return, O, Shulamite, return return that we may behold
thee; what shall you see in the Shulamite, but as the company of an Army.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for William Cook, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Furnivalls Inn Gate in Holbourne. 1637.

Perlegi hunc tractatum, cui titulus est (A Treatise of the honor of God
House, etc) in quo nihil reperio sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribut contrarium,
quo minus imprimatur.

Ex Aedibus Lambeth. Jun. 15. 1637. JOHN OLIVER Reveren. in Chapter Patri and Dom.
Dom. Ar. C^ant. Sacell. Dom.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL CLEAR TALBOT, Dr. of Law, Comissary to the Reverend
Father in God, the L. Bishop of Norwich, one of his MAJESTY'S Justices of Peace.
Worthy Sir,
I Am forced to set forth my self as well as my Sermon, and to satisfy some.
I must tell them as well what I am, as what I have said. A short Sermon is
often the occasion of much discourse, and many like the Athenians delight in
nothing but to hear and tell news, and some like the devil are not so idle,
as ill occupied in slandering of others. The biting of mad dogs admits of
medicine to help it, but there is no Physician that knows a remedy against a
slander. All the comfort is, that Mala opinio been parta delectat, a man's own
conscience may be his cordial: Vnus mihi pro populo erit, one understanding
man is better than a multitude, whose very wisdom (as the Wiseman says) is
to be despised, Omnis honestae reimalus judex est vulgus, the common people are
corrupt judges, Eadem probamus, eadem reprehendimus, hic est exitus omnis
judicij in quo lis secundum plures datur, in number of voices there is no
certainty of truth, satis est unus, satis est nullus, one or none may be
sufficient to satisfy in a good cause, which as I am persuaded I have
undertaken. I am not ashamed to pass it from the Pulpit to the Press, and to
Print what I preached. In both I have your request, and it is some part of a
requital to say, Hoc ego non multis sed tibi, I owe as much as you have
desired, and will not be dainty by your hands to deliver it to others. That you
have found the approbation you sought for, is to me a second confirmation, it
may do more good than I expected: I shall be glad to help the weakest, and
not to receive him for controversies of disputations. I have not stirred the
stone they stumble upon, nor moved their minds with noveltie, Qui intempestive
monet ille nocet, a monition must be as a medicine seasonably applied. When
there is no motion of humors in a body, their very agitation is dangerous, and
no pacification to be expected by their purgation; but the Aphorism is true,
when they move remove them, least they do mischief, Si quid movendum move
humores, qui turgent purgentur.

Me thinks our diseases are discovered by Saint Paul in the right method, Tit.
1.10. Many are unruly, vain talkers, deceivers. Authority is disobeyed.
Secondly, disobedience is defended. Thirdly, the defense deceives others. These
diseases are apparent in many, whose malady is contention with their
Superiors, which they defend by books, and by the same, poison most of the
people, who look not so much into the cause as the complaint, and complying in
affection with the Authors, lose the apprehension of the truth, which whosoever
shall reveal it to them, shall not be heard for the prejudice they have
conceived. Prava dogmata, wicked doctrines make Heretics and poison their
minds: but diversa studia, small differences will make Schismatickes, and set
them out of good thoughts, withal they cannot affect. Saint Paul disputes the
case charitably, 1 Cor. 11.10.19. he believes it in part, and passes not the
same sentence upon all, and mitigates the matter further by an effectual
gradation from Schism to heresy, as from the less to the greater. No marvel
you are divided in Rites and Ceremonies, and contrary Customs, wherein we for
our parts contend not, neither the Churches of God; but study peace and quiet,
as counting them no matters of moment to cause contention. Such contentious
spirits make Gods people come together, not for the better but for the worse,
where is the fault? not in the Church, but the bad humors of it, in such as
are in the Church, but not of it, in such as have least to do with it, yet
make work enough for them which have most to do, and set all into a
combustion. I say the holy Apostle helps the staggering Christian, and labors
to make him stand upright.

First, I believe it to be in your company, and only of those that will not be
of you. Secondly, it is from a bad cause to a good end. The devil moves it,
but God will have the glory of it, and you shall have the good, in being
approved to him. Secondly, in being made manifest to others, and that first,
that you are not the Schismatickes: secondly, that you are such as the Church
approves: thirdly, you need not wonder at Schisms, when Satan can raise
heresies. That's a happy Church that is without weeds, and a thousand
separations are not to be trusted, that seek safety where Satan shall not find
them; America is no more the place than Rome, Satan is to be feared has found
and will find their societies, but I will not accuse them so much as defend my
self, and tell all men what I am, sure I should be, if I be righ^.

I am unus in corpore, as well as unus in capite, one that strives as much for
one Church as for one Christ, and as it is my duty to name my self a Christian
from my communion with Christ, so shall it ever be the same to surname my self
a Catholic from my communion with his body. Seeing you have drawn me out to
say some thing, I say it for the Church, and seek pacification of that which
is now in agitation; and because the Altar breeds the greatest quarrel, I
will first labor to take away the offense in the name; secondly, I will
examine whether every Altar induces a sacrifice; thirdly, whether the
sacrifice superinduceth the sin of Idolatry; fourthly, I will set before you
several instances of the excellencies of Gods House to bring us in love with
it; fifthly, give directions to avoid danger; and this I am forced to fix
before my Sermon to make it more acceptable in the reading. I know it is not
all one to Preach in a Pulpit, and speak out of a Press, my desire is to make
way by a Preface, that no prejudice may remain in a short Sermon, to say it
was Preached indeed, but nothing proved. I am to take my leave of you, and
know not whether I shall give you thanks for that you have brought me upon the
stage, or say I should have thanked you more to have buried all this in my
study. Your thanks and mine are to be alike. Howsoever I will think you meant
me well, and for that I thank you, and rest, and remain.

Yours to be Commanded JOHN YATES.

The danger of an Altar in the name and use, the dignity of it in standing
before God, and directions how it ought not to stand before Idols.
2. King 16.
THe Altar of Damascus removes the Altar of God, Mysterium iniquitatis. Act.
17.18. (...). 1 Cor. 10.20.22. (...). 1 Timothy 4.1. (...). These Texts have all
one meaning, and the mystery is this in the Original, office and worship.
Their Original celebre^ viri defuncti, they are the best of dead men. Their
Office, (...), Mediators between God and men. Their Worship. Acts 17. (...)
ver. 24. (...) ver. 23. (...), ibid. (...). 1 Cor. 10 20. Temples, Altars,
Images, Sacrifices. ver. 22. (...), and (...) are as much as Sacrifice and
Altar. St. Paul calls the Athenians (...), worshippers of dead Mediators, to
which he opposes Christ as the living and sole Mediator of Mankind, which to
them was (...). Act. 17.18. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. (...). One Lord to mediate to one
God, and many Lords to mediate to many Gods, the two maine mysteries in the
world.
and the Syrian gods the God of Israel. As it is Gods greatest honor, to have
his own Table or Altar to stand before him, 2. King. 16.14. Ezekiel. 41.22. Rev.
9.13. So is it his greatest dishonor to have either stand before an Idol. 2.
King. 16.14, 15. Act. 17.23. We will do our best endeavor to deliver you from
the danger, by determining the dignity of an Altar before God, where no Idol
intercedes, but God immediately is worshipped in it, or before it. It is no
humane invention to place a Table or Altar immediately before God, as is
clear, Ezech. 41.22. 1. Cor. 10.21. Rev. 9.13. There is no difference between
the Table of the Lord, and the Table of dead men, but that they in their
pictures and persons come between him and us in our worship.

Acts 17. well considered, will declare the whole mystery in this form. First,
an Altar, which if it were to a known God, and that according to his Will were
no sin, but an exceeding honor done unto him: but there be two things more
that make all this most abominable, and like the Altar of Damascus. First, a
visible Idol, called sbasma, Act. 17.23. Secondly, an invisible Diety, called
daimnion v. 18. To speak plainly, there is above the Altar an Image to be
worshipped, and the Soul of a dead man conceived to be in that Image to hear
our prayers, receive our offerings, and to mediate for us with Almighty God,
these two things are the great abominations that the Scriptures detect, and
discover unto us, to incite our detestation: these things we teach not the
people, but take occasion in our ignorance to wrong God in his worship, and
say, the Table is an Idol, and we worship it; and so being stark blind in the
great mystery of iniquity make that an Idol, which never Pagan, nor Papist,
nor any man in his right wits ever imagined so to be.

The Idol is either the visible image above the Altar, or the invisible and
false Deity in the image, which to worship is Idolatry: but remove these two,
in which is all the danger, and suffer God immediately to come in with the
Altar, and then prostration before it is without danger, because it must needs
be to God, and no Idol; except you will make it one, which as yet was never
imagined by God or man: And shall we be the first to find it out, to trouble
the Church in a needless disputation, that none will raise, but a mere
ignoramus in that which St. Paul 1. Tim. 4.1. calls didaskala^ daimonon,
interpreted by Epiphanius thus, mthou tn nekrn, fables of the dead, and
delivers it in the example of Baal, whose sacrifices and ceremonies the
Scriptures determine to be done to the dead. Levit. 19.28. Deuteronomy. 14.1. 1. King.
18.28. But I will answer to that which they suppose in several particulars.

1. Danger; an Altar is scandalous in the name.
Ezech. Ezech. 44.16. The Table or Altar shows who are nearest God, and freest
from Idols. Matthew. 5.23, 24. Donum offerre, and ad Altar afferre sine
charitate, non est Christia^um, impium est accedere ad mers^m Domini sine
fraterna c^aritate. Ergo corsilium Christi est generale et quod vis Altar
signifieat, sive I^daeorum, five Gentium.
41.22. This Altar is the Table before the Lord. Mal. 1.7. You have polluted
mine Altar, in that you say my Table is contemptible. ver. 12. The Table of the
Lord is polluted. Both places show that the Holy Ghost is not so curious, as
these men are captious; to call an Altar a Table, and a Table an Altar; and for
ought I know, in allusion to our times, we have an Altar of Incense, Rev. 18.3
and of that speaks Ezechi. and compared with Exodus 30.2. it exceeds the Legal
Altar a Cubit in the hight, and a cub^ in the length. This Prophet mistakes not
his measure, but shows the mystery and meaning to be in the times of the
augmentation of grace, and so Malachy applies it to the Gentiles, Mal. 1.11.

It would be observed that of the two Altars, the Altar of prayers is applied
to us, Rev. 18.3. and it is that at which Christ stands, (...), He stood by the
Altar; that must be by the sense that some give, At himself, Rev. 9.13. (...),
The Altar before God: That is, if we believe our former Expositors, God before
God. If this Exposition displease, as it must, then take and try this of mine,
Act. 2.42. Breaking of bread and prayers, are joined together; where we break
bread, and pray, there Christ Jesus stands, that is, by his holy Table, or
Altar; where we do both, and may do them without offense to any that will not
be wilful in ways by themselves.

An Exposition of t ern, and kat' kon, Acts 2.46.
IT is necessary we expound the good example of the first Christians; and
because we speak so much of their Altar, it would be known where it first
stood, and in what manner it was placed. Acts 2.46. tells us of the Temple, or
holy place frequented by Christians: but there their Altar would not be
admitted, or their breaking of bread permitted. Now it was necessary that
Christians should receive the Lords Supper, and break their Sacramental bread
with holy prayers and services meet for such a Mystery: where this was done,
the same Text teaches, that it was kat' kon, Secundum domum, which phrase well
understood will help much to know what holy places Christians held beside the
Temple.

Romans 16.5. 1. Cor. 16.19. Colos 4.15. Philem. ver. 2. kklesa kat' kon, its the
local description of the Church, and all laid together, makes us understand
the reason why bread must be broken out of the Temple, when the Christians were
daily in it serving God. No man needs to doubt of it, that it was because the
Temple received no such sacrifice as Christians were bound to offer, nor such
an Altar or Table as served for that use. And here we must inquire, whether the
place were common, or consecrate; Saint Paul resolves us, 1. Cor. 11.20, 21,
22. When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the
Lords Supper, etc. Have ye not houses for common eating and drinking, etc.
Despise ye the Church of God? A man may despise the place as well as the
people, and by irreverence shame himself as well as others in his behavior.
Women, when they worship, must remember that where they worship, the Angels
give their attendance, and for prefencesake must present themselves in a
seemly manner.

Seeing it must be kat' kon, that cannot be ^n t er, I would demand whether in
so holy a service, as receiving the holy Sacrament, that which is kat' kon,
ought not to be ^n t er, that what is done at any house in this kind, ought it
not to be done as in a sacred place? My resolution is, it must; and that Board
where we receive so holy a Sacrament, and that place where so holy a Board
does stand, ought to have no other employment.

The first Christian Church amongst the Gentiles was in Cesarea, and began in
Cornelius the Captains house, and had that good success, that when St. Paul
landed there, Acts 18.22. he found the Church assembled in an upper room; not
as Beza makes bold to interpret, Ho^ came down to Cesarea, and went up to
Jerusalem, etc. but (...), is. He ascended, and saluted the Church in Cesar^a.
When Judea was the Inquisition-house to persecute Christians, Cesarea was their
Sanctuary to deliver them. A good Cornelius converted, is a Captain to
Christians, and commands them peace where he has power to rule. At Ephesus St.
Paul procures the School of Tyrannus, Acts 19.9, 10. and for the space of two
years makes it his chair of Doctrine, and place of Gods service. Tyranuus to
me is no Schoolmasters to teach profane Arts, where St. Paul teaches
Divinity; (...). Tyrannus was the Doner or giver of the place, which being
void, is peaceably possessed of Christians for holy uses.

Acts 28.20.30, 31. St. Paul's hired house was an holy place for the Word and
Sacraments. Romans 16.5. Aquila and Priscilla at Rome hire their house, and fit
the fairest room for the Church, (...). Being banished from Rome, Acts 18.2.
they are left of St. Paul at Ephesus, where they do the like, 1. Cor. 16.19.
Nymphas does the like at Laodicea, Colos. 4.15. and so does Philemon ver. 2.
For the Colossians, and Archippus their Pastor lives in his house. It is said
of Gaius, Romans 16.23. that he was Hospes sancti Pauli, and totius Ecclesiae,
That he found St. Paul and the whole Church house and hatbour. I hope all this
will yield some help to explain what is meant by meeting, (...), a holy
convention of the Saints to celebrate the holy Sacrament, and set a part both
place and Table for so holy an use.

Our Savior, Mar. 14.15. Luke 22.12. shows four things in the place where he
supped before his death: First, (...), a place elevated from the earth, and it
is Saint Na^ianz^ns note, that the very place teaches us with what thoughts we
ought to come to the holy Sacrament. Secondly, (...), great and spacious for
use and service. Thirdly, (...), trimmed and beautified. Fourthly, (...),
furnished and prepared with all necessary Vtensils, etc. Such places had
Christians; and as they neglected not the (...), whiles they might enjoy it: so
it pleased God in the end to give them (...), stately Temples to serve God in,
and therein Constantine, like another Solomon, was appointed of God to enlarge
the straightened limits of poor persecuted Christians. I will add to their
breaking of bread that which also went with it, their breaking of bread to the
brethren. 1. Cor. 16.1, 2. Phil. 4.18. Hebr. 13.16. Thus did Christians
converse and come together in the primative times, and did all things with
gladness and singleness of heart. Would God their pattern of piety might
pass in our days, and that (...), with one accord in the Temple God were
worshipped of us: But alas, we must do it (...), when nothing foreeth us
thereunto. Our Temples are open, Tables prepared, and we fling away, and fly to
Conventicles, where I hope to show, nothing can be done lawfully by those that
leave us.

1. Cor. 10.18.21.
Our second proof is the New Testament, and it lies in comparing Altar with
Altar, and Table with Table; for so the Apostle compares them to the
Corinthians. As for example, the Altar of the Jews with the Table of
Christians, and the Table of Christians, with the Table or Altar of Pagans.
Israel after the flesh eats the Sacrifices of flesh, and are partakers of the
Altar that receives them: so are Christians that eat one bread, partakers of
that Altar where they receive it: And so he expresses it ver. 21. Partakers of
the Lords Table: but you will say the phrases are not equipollent, because the
Apostle does not so use them. I answer, they are; for the Table of Damons, or
dead men is an Altar, as all know, and if I may expound a Pagan Table an Altar,
why not a Christian Table an Altar?

Will you have it yet more full and plain? Jews and Pagans have Tables and
Altars, so have Christians; they are partakers of their Altars, so are
Christians; their participation is by eating, so is theirs, their eating is
Sacramental or fedorall in the Rites of their Religion, so is that of
Christians; and in this sense we are allowed to make our Covenant. Psalm. 50.5.
Call my Saints that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifices, which is the
fedorall Rite of all Nations; and such is the Sacrament: 1. Cor. 11.25. The Cup
is the New Testament in my blood, that is a fedorall Rite of my Covenant with
you. Sacrifice or Sacrament, Table or Altar is all one to the Apostle, so our
communion be correspon^ent thereunto.

The place to the Hebrews is of the same stamp, comparing Altar with Altar,
and participation with participation: We Christians have an Altar as well as
the jews, we are partakers of it as well as they, and that by eating which is
fedorall and Sacramental. We desire not to exclude Christ from the Altar, as
some exclude the Altar from him, more to satisfy their own fancy, than follow
the truth.

Ignat Epist. ad Philad.
His Testimony is full in three things: First for the Sacrament in plenary
words Sacramentu^. (...).
. Secondly, for the Altar distinctly expressed Altar. (...).
. Thirdly, for the Preisthood fully delivered Sacerdotiu^. (...).
. To say the Altar is Christ, is first a vain repetition: Secondly, an
impossible imagination: for to Christ the Altar there needs no Preisthood, or
practice of man, Hebr. 8.2. and 9.11. No humane hands have to do with this
Altar, but the Lord himself; who as he is the Sacrifice and Altar, so he is
the Priest to himself.

If any object that one Altar to the whole Church must needs be Christ, seeing
in the other sense we have many according to the multiude of Churches. I
answer by the words following, a^ he understands one Bishop in the place with
Presbyters and Deacons, so one Church under that government. There is not one
universal Bishop to all the world, as Papists would have it, and would triumph
in such a testimony to advance their Pope. But we understand the Father of such
a Bishop, as with Presbyters and Deacons, was appointed to govern the Churches
within their own Jurisdiction.

Col. 4.12, 13. Philem. ver. 2. mention Epaphras Archippus and Philemon, for
the Church of Colosse, which had but one Altar or Table for their Communion.
The like may be said of Laodicea and Hierapolis, which seem likewise to be
under the care of Epaphras, and enjoyed but one Table for their Sacrament, as
was fit and meet for every congregation. And here we have a double testimony of
an happy union, strongly confirming the Churches in the sole intercession and
mediation of Jesus Christ. For we profess by one Alta, that we have one
Mediator; and the profession of many Altars in one Church dedicated to Saints
and Angels, is an argument of Idolatry.

The second danger is the introduction of a Sacrifice, and the destruction of a
Sacrament.
To this we satisfy in two things: First, every Altar induces not a
sacrifice, as is plain; Josh. 22.23.26. We have not built this Altar to turn
from following the Lord, or to offer thereon burnt offerings, or meat
offerings, or peace offerings, or any facrifice, but to be a witness,
testimony, or memorial, etc. Origin in Lev. Hom. 5. secundum literam non
instauramus sacrificia, We according to the letter restore no sacrifice, but
rest satisfied with the memorial of one sacrifice once sacrificed for us.
Secondly, every sacrifice destroys not the Sacrament; and in this I had rather
hear my Ancients speak, than spend more words of my own. St. Aug. l. 10. de
Civit. D^i. cap. 5. Sacrificium quia signum very sacrifieij. lib. 10. sent^nt.
prosper sacrificium est significante mysterio Epist. 23. s^u Fulgent. lib. ad
Petr. Diaconum commemoratio sacrificij, memoria, etc. St. Chrysostom. in epist.
ad Hebr. Hom. 17. S^. Aug. Epist. 59. St. Paul tells us of the sacrifice of the
Gospel, Romans 15.16. and our Church in the like sense of the sacrifice
professed in the Sacrament. Here we offer and present unto thee O Lord, our
selves, our souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and living sacrifice
unto thee. As in the Gospel, so in the Sacrament of the Gospel we offer up
our selves. 1. Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is slain for us, therefore let
us keep the Feast with sacrifices of sincerity and truth: And because all our
actions may be called (...), those sacred and Sacramental Actions of
Sanctification, Distribution, and Participation at the holy Table may much more
be so named. The first cannot be without prayer, and prayer runs along with
every action: It Is before, in, and after our receiving, and our book of common
prayers adds further Our sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving; and so does
David, Psalm. 50.14. To all which if we add David's other sacrifice, we have all
sacrifices Psalm. 51.17. that may be required.

The third danger of Transubstantiation and Adoration.
It were to be wondered if the Church of England should article against it
self, and teach us that which it so plainly condemns; read but the Articles
of our Church, and be resolved, we must renounce them before we can believe
Transubstantiation, or admit adoration of the Host. Cornelius de lapide has a
strange saying, and I think him more stupid than a stone that will believe it.
In Isai. c. 7.14. Per verba consecrationis vere and realiter uti
transubstantiatur panis, ita producitur, and quasi generatur in altari adeo
potenter and efficaciter, ut si Christus necdum esset incarnatus, per haec
verba, Hoc est corpus meum, incarnaretur corpusque humanum assumeret, uti
graves Theologi d^cent, Sacerd^s est quasi virgo Deipera.

The dignity of Gods house.
HAving freed you from the danger, let me now deliver unto you the dignity of
Gods house, for majesty, for mercy, forbeauty, for delight, for order, and
happy unity. The first place that ever God called his people unto was Mount
Sinai, called his Sanctuary, Psalm. 68.17. a place of majesty and terror. In
the Tabernacle more mildness and mercy was showed: God descending comes down
to them (as it were) in an ambulatory Sanctuary, and walks as a friend in the
midst of them. From a Tabernacle he brings them to a stately Temple, and
requires to be served in it in the beauty of holiness.

It Is the very Garden of pleasure and plenty. Cant. 6.2.
Hinc frutices surgunt, nitide and cum floribus herbae,
Balsama cum Casia, Thus, Myrrhaque Nardus, Amomum,
Narcissus, Viola, and nimium Rosa plena pudoris:
Acorus, Hyssopusque, Althaea lavandula, Caltha,
Et cum Lactucis, Cariophila Zinziber, illine
Ambrosia, and Bacca semper frondentis Acanthi;
Ruthaque Serpillumque, and suave rubens Hyacinthus, etc.
A very Heaven upon earth, Rev. 12.1.
Hinc nitet Arctophilax, ostentans fulgidus ursas
Praelustres, fulgent hic lactea sidera Cigni,
Pegasus, Andromede, Cepheusque, and Cassiopaa,
Orionque ingens toto resplendet Olympo.
Indo Cants rutilans, stellataque cernitur Argo;
Ast Argo in summa mieat inclyta stella Canopi;
Syrius atque ardens, sic lucida stella Leonis;
Hic nelcat alma Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Hesperas, Hermes, etc.
A City compact together. Psalm. 122.3.
(...). In vestra urbe habitat Eunomia, pulchra legum moderatio, ejusque
sorores Justitia inviolabilis, fundamentum civitatum, and pax concors
conservatrices opum, auriae filiae Themidis consili^ valentis, students arcere
omnem petulantiam, quae fastus temeraria matter est.

The first rule or direction from St. Paul, Acts 17.23. concerning Altars and
Images.
It is clear by Celsus, that Images were made as monuments of the dead: No
man, (says Celsus) except he be a very child, does think Images to be Gods,
but their signs, symbols, and monuments; and being pressed with the authority
of Heraclitus, the Ephesian Philosopher, that men did confer with Images, as
if they did talk with their houses. To this he thinks his answer is
sufficient: yet Clemmens Alexandrinus the master, and Origin the scholar,
replied as unsatisfied, Protrept. ad Gent. page 25. Graecolat. contr. Cols. l.
7, p. 373, 384. prodigiosi sunt qui lapides adorant, they are Monsters which
make Philosophical discourses of a true God, and yet worship stocks and
stones; how wise so e're they seem to be in their own way, Romans 1.22. (...),
they became stark mad. It is impossible, says Origin, that one should know
God and pray to Images. John. 4.22. Ye worship ye know not what: that is, not
God as a Spirit, which is the truth; but God as a body, which is a lie. Hab.
2.18, 19, 20. they must needs teach men lies of God; and therefore he does
not only forbid them, Exodus 20.4. but shows by his example, that he that
best knew himself, never taught his people by pictures to conceive him Deuteronomy. 4
12.15. Saint Paul lays open all the Pagan mystery thus: First an Altar, and
that stood before an Image: the Image was dedicated to a dead man, and the dead
man was a mediator to the never dying Diety, (...). It is certain by Celsus,
that Pagans held dead men for inferior Gods, and that they were to the most
supreme God, as Satrapae and magnates Principum, as the Peers and nobles of
Princes. St. Paul cuts off all this in these words, (...). That unknown God
which you ignorantly worship in Temples, Altars, Images, and the Dead, him I
show unto you. It is your ignorance to conceive it necessary for God to have
such a habitation, and adoration as you imagine for him, by sacring of Temples,
Altars, and I mages; you suppose to catch dead men's souls, and tie them to
your Temples, and having made bodies for those souls, you doubt not to call
such Images, sancta animalia, holy living things inspired to do you good. Upon
this ground Origin, Minutius-Felix, Arnobius, and Lactantius, said, that
Christians neither had, nor ought to have Temples, Altars, Images, or
Sacrifices, as if God could not be worshipped without them, neither was their
religion insensible, and inexplicable, because they wanted such means, non
occultamus quod colimus, we hide not what we worship, or have an invisible
faith, or communion within our selves; for we profess openly, both what we
worship, and how we ought to worship him, though it be not in your way, which
were wickedness and impiety to Jesus Christ; yet had they Temples and Altars
for their Savior, and St. John uses both words, Rev. 11.1. and 14.17.18. and
16.7. in which both Angels and men do him service; for the very Angels are
said to come out of his Temple and Sanctuary, where his people worship him: and
as of old the Tabernacle and Temple were called his palace and throne,
especially where the Arc stood; so now in the New Testament his Temple is
called (...), Gods Basilica, especially the place where the Altar stands. St.
Ignatius uses both words, and tells us, how the people did suntrchein flock
to the Temple and Altar of Jesus Christ.

Me thinks we should take from him good direction to see manifest difference
between Christianity and Pagan Idolatry. We come to our Temples, not as
impious Pagans to tie God to them, we have no bom before an Image, but a (...),
or Altar, rightly named before Christ Jesus. This is all we profess, and say
with the Prophet Ezekiel. 48.35. Jehovah Shamma, the Lord is there, and not the
Lord is this, and upon his Altar and Temple, we write as in Zach. 14.20, 21.
Holiness to the Lord. Princes have their Arms and Inscriptions upon their
Chariots, which are not Images of their persons, but ensigns of their honor
God keep from us sebsmata and daimnia, Dead men and their pictures to be
worshipped: and blessed be God we have public testimony by burning their
books that maintain such evils: that we detest their doctrine and practice
in this kind.

The second rule of St. August. in Psalm. 113, Concerning Images and instruments
in Gods Worship.
The Gentiles worship that, which they themselves have made of gold and silver.
But we also have diverse instruments made of the same matter and metal: For
the celebration of the Sacraments, which being consecrated by this very
Ministry, are called holy, in honor of him, who for our salvation is honored
thereby. And these Instruments and Vessels, what are they else but the work of
men's hands? Yet have they any mouth, and will not speak? have they eyes, and
will not see? do we supplicate to these, because by these we supplicate to God?
that is the greatest cause of this mad impiety, that the form, like unto one
living, which makes it to be supplicated unto, does more prevail in the
affections of miserable men, than that it is manifest it does not live at all,
that it ought to be contemned by him who is indeed living; for Images prevail
more to bow down the unhappy soul, in that they have a mouth, they have eyes,
they have ears, they have nostrills, they have hands, they have feet: then
correct it, that they will not speak, they will not see, they will not hear,
they will not smell, they will not handle, they will not walk. Images what
they seem to be, that they are not, and what they are indeed, that they
seem not to be, and so bring the simple into a double deceit; but
instruments serve truly to the purposes, the Church has appointed them, and
for the ends, the holy Scripture allows, in order, decency, and edification.

The third rule is from St. John in a necessary duty, and decent Ceremony.
To worship the Lamb is without dispensation, and prostration before him
admits no prohibition; we perish if we do it not. Psalm 2.12. But the Ceremony
before the Throne, Rev. 4.10. and 7.11. is left us by the example of Elders and
Angels: the manner whereof we know not exactly, and therefore it is wholly
left to the Church to prescribe the form. St. Gregor. says, in unitate fidei
diversa est consuetude, and St. Aug. more fully Epist. 118. ad Januar. cap. 22.
in his nulla melior disciplina prudenti Christian quam ut eo modo agat, quo
agit Ecclesia ad quamcunque devenerit: quod enim nec contra fidom, nec contra
bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendum. Churches customs shall
command me where I see they corrupt neither a true faith, nor my duty to God.

I shall always wish with St. Augustine, that Churches Ceremonies may have
these conditions: First, that they be Numere paucissimae. Secondly,
Observatione facillimae. Thirdly, Significatione utilissimae. I confess, they
that can bear none, complain of all Ceremonies as too many. Our wisdom must
be, to let them judge, that know better what is good for us than we our selves.
Study to be as pure as you please, so you be peaceable; and let that property,
James 3.17. take special place in you, upeith^, easy to be counseled, when
you cannot counsel your selves; and rather yield to the Church, than these
heates of humors, that like an aguish distemper, will suffer you to relish
nothing. I am resolved the Scripture will lead no man into an error, though it
may seem to follow it by force: find but the opinion, and the same fancy that
found it, has Scripture to confirm it. Every man seeks to establish Non quae
vera, sed quae suae est opinio; and we stand in the Church like Cato and
Scipio in the Senate, with mihi videtur, and mihi non videtur; and all comes to
that end, as a Father complains, Inter licet nostrum, and non licet vestrum
nutant and remigant animae Christianorum. God stay these staggers: It Is pity
we should stumble upon an Altar, and raise an altercation about that, which
should be the only argument of our reconciliation.

Our Ancients in imitation of our blessed Savior, and his Evangelicall
counsel, Matthew. 5.23, 24. proclaimed by the Church-deacons, (...), Let no man
have ought against another, but be reconciled, and at peace, before he presume
to come to Gods Altar. It cannot be any custom or Law amongst the Jews,
seeing Ezech. 46.10. the very Prince is commanded to come and go with the
people. And Luke tells us, the people waited for the Priests dismission. Luke
1.21. And we find no tradition of the Elders to urge such a Law as our Savior
inforceth to be followed by his Disciples. It is most Evangelicall, and a
degree above Pharisaicall righteousness, to seek such peace as he preached in
the Mountain, and surely not without an eye to our Christian Altar, though it
may seem somewhat to anticipate the institution of his heavenly Supper. Would
God our coming to one Table, or Altar, might end our strife, and lay aside a
verbal contention, to make us real in that which is material, and it shall
be all our desire yet further to discover the same unto you. It is not to be
wondered at, that we read so often in Authors strains to our own senses, and
every man is willing to force a Testimony to his own mind. I shall wish no
more than to take my Author in his own words, and never use corrections that
may prove corruptions, His censure of Ignatius.
as Vedelius in (...), reads (...), the Senate of sacrifices, the Senate of
Saints, as more willing to advance the congregation, than the Priesthood. I
hope to bring no Author to my self, but my self to them, and leave the
evidence to the judicious Reader.

GODS HOUSE AND GODS HONOR.
GENESIS 28.17. How dreadful is this place, this is no other but the House of
God, and this is the gate of Heaven. GENESIS 35.7. And he built there an Altar and
called the place El-Beth-El: nothing but Majesty inhabits Gods House, and
teaches us to give him honor in it.
Deus-Domus-Deus.
CHAP. I. Concerning an Insinuation of the honor due to Gods House, with the
heads of the ensuing Discourse.
EVery house is known best by its owner, and it bears his name, great men
display their Arms where they are disposed themselves to live, and their very
Chariots have the inscriptions of their Honor. The Cherubins are called the
glory of God, Ezekiel. 1.20. and every place where he appears takes denomination
from him: Jacob calls the^ place of Gods appearance unto him twice by the Name
of God, and it teaches us, what it is that makes a place holy and honorable,
even the Name of God, and this remains at this day in our Temples as a
remembrance of Gods holiness in his House; we need not ask the question why
Gods House is more holy than an other place? or resolve it as some do upon
false grounds, of presence and virtue, either in the people or place it self:
It is not holy because an holy people meet there, or for popular presence,
which is more likely to pollute than exciteto any holiness, or for any
qualities in it to make them more holy, but because of God whose name it
bears, and whose presence fills it with the signs of his glory; and who there
especially sanctifies and accepts holy service; a Relative, no inherent
holiness, a Relative it is to God and not to men, his house it is, not theirs,
wheresoever God men and Angels meet, and are made known one to another by
voice and vision, there is Gods House and holiness; when God appeared to Jacob
and spoke unto him, Genesis 28. the blessed Angels accompanied him, and waited
upon him in the Ladder of his Providence, and assured Jacob that they would go
with him in every step of his journey, both forward and backward: Nay, Jacob
saw in his journey the very ladder of heaven, and his way to eternal
happiness, Ios. 1.51. and 8.56. It would be observed what made the place
dreadful, and yet a gate of heaven, Surely the Lord is in this place and I
knew it not. Ignorance of an invisible presence deprives us of our comfort
therein, and therefore God by vision and voice so works upon our eyes and
ears, that they may let in Majesty and mercy together, Power and Compassion,
Grace and Glory, etc. These signs want not their use in our days, and deliver
us our duties in the like expressions of Majesty to us: Our signs are milder,
yet not less Majesticall than of old, now we are all so for voices, that we
in a manner contemn all Visions, and our ears are so open to hearing, that we
heed not what our eyes should turn us unto. When God appeared to Moses Exodus 3.
he had a Vision and a Voice; when he appeared to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.28. he had
the like; Cornelius and Peter had both of them Visions and Voices to direct
them, Act. 10. And as in the extraordinary, God takes this way upon him, so in
the ordinary course he observes the same, and sets before us, as well signs of
his Presence, as Voices to inform us; Mass is made a matter of just reproach
to them that take away the teaching and intelligible voice to turn it into the
pleasure of the eyes? yet there be of itching ears too, that step over
duties and look not to their feet, when they enter consecrated places to give
God any honor at his memorial in his House, and sight of any sign of his
presence: They say they are ready to hear a good duty, but that is not
enough, if they consider not the presence of God and Angels in the place, and
give not some testimony more than the ear, that they come to obey; Remember
the house and the honor that I shall in this Discourse set before thee, and
esteem better of the place for his sake that ownes it, and to whom thou owe
humble service, I mean to speak of Gods House in all the partitions of it,
and to vindicate to my power all his honor in making him the only object of
divine worship in it, my endeavor shall be to use Gods Word and Church
customs as candles to light us, and not as clouds to hinder our sight. The
Persians by beholding the Sun and Moon become Idolaters in odoring of them,
but David, Psalm. 8.3. makes a better use to see in them a finger of the divine
power, and so considered as the star led to Christ, Matthew. 2. they serve to
lead the quick to the living God, and not to dead Idols. The over suspicions
of superstition, become mossuperstitious to avoid it, and who can hinder the
forge of a seduced heart to form what fancy it lusts, waves beating against
a rock are dissolved into froth, and every imagination against the truth is as
an hasty pursuit running out of the way, and like hounds that are swift of
foot but not exquisite in sent, which spend their mouths and courses in vain
[Our insolent Separatists having hissed a while like Snakes, turn themselves
into fiery Dragons, and spit out all the poison they can against us. Other
adversaries we have that like the Panther into which the Dragon creepes in the
Revelation] seek to deceive us by subtlety, Rev. 13.2.
in whose wiles many are caught before they be aware, and before they attend to
keep him at a distance. It is not without cause that the Dragon is said to
have the Panther for his successor, for Satan is subtle to change his skin,
and do the same mischief in a more secret, as in an open evil way. Pagan
Idolatry is odious to all Christians, and the show of the Dragon is enough to
make them fly him: Rev. 13.1.
but see, when God brings him to his stand, and drives him to vanish where he
had his first original, yet the Text says he stood upon the sand of the sea,
Dan. 7.3.
and gave way to the Panther to rise out of it and succeed him, pnther dictus
quod omnium animalium amicus sit excepto dracone. Isidor. c. 12.2.
The Panther and the Dragon are the greatest opposites, and so is Pagan and
Christian Religion, but the devil will devise their reconciliation, and make
friends of the greatest foes: The Panther is so called because he is a friend
of all Bruits, except the Dragon [The Cannon does not so much hurt against a
wall, as a mine under it, nor a thousand enemies that threaten, so much as a
few that conspire and take an oath to say nothing. Gods House and Honor are
much suspected, and many accused and libelled against, as if they were the
Panthers of our time: so that now we suspect all; but certainly we must either
blush for shame, or grow pale for fear, our accusations may shame us if we
cannot prove them, and our punishments apale us that we cast our selves into
prison and perils, because we are peevish interpreters of the minds of our
Superiors. My labor at this time shall be to select some one sentence that
may set us on work, to see and search if there be as great cause as we
complain there is of complaining of our present times.

Revel. 7.11. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the
Elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the Throne on their face, and
worshipped God.

Gods House or honorable Palace has the partition according to the persons,
first in respect of God, The seats of the Elders. The four Beasts.
here is a Throne, secondly in respect of his Ministers, there be seeds
seniorum, Rev. 4.4. thirdly, in respect of the people; there be four Animalia,
or as David expresses it, Psalm. 58.10. and the Septuagint translates it (...),
and S. The people ordered in their standards dwelt in it.
Hierom reads it Animalia tua habitaverunt in ea, that is (the people ordered
in their standards dwelt in it;) fourthly, in respect of the Angels, there is
their round and guard set in the House of God, they are the chief attendants
upon the Majesty of God, and where he places his Court or Sanctuary, there do
they give their attendance, and therefore in Gods House we are bidden look to
our words, because we are before Gods Angels, Eecle. 5.6. 1 Cor. 11.10.
and women are bidden to wear a veil, which as their hair is naturally given
them for a covering, may be a sign of their modesty, and being under covert
and subjection, Because of the Angels. This made Jacob in his journey count
the place dreadful, where God and his Angels appeared unto him: In the words
of the text without straining them, Gods House upon earth, in all the parts of
it: There is the place of Majesty, called the throne of the Lamb, secondly,
the place of the Ministry called the seats of the Elders; thirdly the place of
Auditory, called the four beasts, or standards of the people; fourthly, the
place of the heavenly guard, called the round of the Angels.

The honor is answerable to the house, and it may be for our better method
divided into four parts, 1. the object which is no ((...) or sbasma) Altar or
Idol, Act. 17.23.
but God alone: They worshipped not the Throne when they fell down before it
but God, and therefore the accusation is shameful of many in our Kingdom,
that they worship the Altar when they bow down before it; I might as well
accuse the holy Angels to worship the throne, because they fell down before
it, as many blame those for worshipping the Altar who bow toward the holy
Table or Altar, such fault finders will not discern that the bowing is before
the Altar the adoration to God -- and a like howsoever the holy Table be sited.
But some will be wise to make others wicked, and holy to make others thought
horrible Idolaters worse than any; for I never yet read of any that worshipped
Altars, Idols by some, and Images by others, upon or above Altars, I know have
been and are still worshipped, and therein the Panther and the Dragon are
reconciled; Baals Priests leaped upon their Altar, and it may be upon their God
too, to awaken him and shed their blood in sacrifice upon him, but I do not
hear they adored their Altar, or called upon it, but hear us O Baall;
secondly, as God is the Object of divine honor, so the kind of honor that is
due to God, and him alone is worship and adoration. Arrius was not only an
heretic in denying the Godhead, but an Idolater in worshipping the bare
Manhood, we may honor Angels and Saints, but we may not worship them; every
one that worshippeth honors, but not on the contrary, every one that
honoreth adoreth, Its Gods prerogative Royal, and so incommunicable that none
may partake with God in this honor: thirdly, we have the most humble gesture
expressed in this honor, and that is prostration. The very Angels of God may
teach us reverend gestures in the House of God; fourthly, here is the directing
of the gesture, and that's toward the Throne: Gods people in captivity were to
look toward Judea, in Judea toward Jerusalem, in Jerusalem toward the
Temple, in the Temple toward the Mercy seat; when we pray in Gods House, we
must turn our face toward the Throne of Majesty, and so doe^ the Elders, as
well as the Angels, Revel. 4.10. the text singled out will talk with our
times, God enable me to give the right sense, for I will seek to strain
nothing, but as closely as I can clear every passage.

CHAP. II. Of the place of Majesty in the Church, that is, the holy Table or
Altar, and the enclosure thereof.
FOr the place of Majesty in the House of God, Saint John has given it the
name, either in the Altar, or place of it, Rev. 14.18. and 16.7. (...), The
Angels that are Gods attendants in Gods House go out and in as he commands
them: They do not go into the Altar and out of it, and therefore Beza boldly
translates the one place ab Altari, from the Altar, and the other E Sanctuario,
out of the Sanctuary, neither is he senseless therein, for ab Altari shows
the term from which the motion begins, and E Sanctuario, the place out of
which they move; and the blessed Angels wait both upon the Altar and stand in
the Sanctuary to do service as the are commanded. It was a fearful voice in
the Sanctuary ( Test. Joseph. de Bello Iudaico, l. 7. cap. 12.) which often in
the night was heard, sounding these words, Let us go hence, undoubtedly it was
the voice of those blessed Spirits forsaking the Temple, and leaving it to the
rage of the Romans: In the captivity, Ezekiel. 10.4. the glory of the Lord
departed from the place of Majesty, first to the threshold, Ezekiel. 9.3.
secondly above it, Ezekiel. 10.4. These were the first warnings in open view,
thirdly, the glory returns to call out the Cherubins themselves, and they
present themselves at the East gate with their wings and wheels, and the glory
of God over them, as ready all at once to be gone, Ezekiel. 10.18. fourthly, from
the^ gate of the Temple, and the midst of the city the glory of the Lord
departs and stands upon the mountain, which is on the East side of the
city, Eze. 11.23. The captivity of the Temple comes a pace when the glory of
God is gone from it, I say that's the place of Majesty where God shows the
signs of his presence, aad sends his Angels to give their attendance.

In the new Testament, the Sanctuary or chief place of Majesty, is where the
Altar stands, for the word either signifies an Altar or the place where it
stands. It was not so in Israel, for all their Altars were placed out of the
holy of holies, God did shut up himself in the place of Majesty, and gave no
admittance but to the high Priest once a year to enter that sacred place, but
now it is more common and of daily use for Gods people, yet not without
distinction, as we see it is constantly observed by Saint John in his Book of
the Revelation, for these four parts are never confounded, but always recited
with their due distinctions and distances: In Saint Chrysostom is observed,
and it is concluded of the whole Church of Constantinople, as a constant and
common custom of speech to call the place of Majesty (...), and I know no
reason of the appellation but from the Altar, which the same Father calls by
the name of the holy table, but not so precisely as some call it now, and count
Saint Paul to be of their minds, who so calls it every where as they say, and
no where an Altar, which if it were granted, could conclude nothing for them,
that therefore of purpose he restrained from the name of an Altar any more than
Saint Chrysostom. Neither is it to be shunned either in respect of Jews or
Pagans, for the Pagans never used the word for an altar, but bom, as Saint Paul
testifies Act. 17.23. and I believe upon curious search the word will be found
merely Ecclesiastical, and used only by Churchmen, and therefore we need
not to avoid it as a Pagan word, as they have avoided bom, which I never read
was given to Gods Altar, neither is it to be avoided in respect of the Jews,
for Saint John uses it often in application to Christians and the service of
Christ, S. Paul avoides it not in the meaning, 1 Cor. 10.14. Flee from
Idolatry, his arguments are two, one from the Jews, verse. 18. another from
the Pagans, verse. 20. partakers of the legal sacrifices, are partakers of the
legal Altars, and such is our communion with God, as our service of him, Heb.
13.10. We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle. They that stick to Moses against Christ cannot be partakers of
Christ, Christ's Altar and a Jewish Altar cannot stand together, Israel after
the flesh eats the sacrifices of flesh, and partakes with an altar of flesh,
and therefore cannot partake with Christ. The Argument is undeniable, that the
Communion is according to the service, and therefore to eat with Idolaters, in
Idolatrous Temples, at Idolatrous Tables is Idolatry, and we are to flee the
Communion if we will avoid the corruption; I say the holy Apostle aims not in
a Table to avoid the name of an Altar or of a sacrifice, but of the Communion.
The Table in the Temple of Idolaters is an Altar, their meat and drink
offerings sacrifices. They both eat and offer: but first offer and then eat;
for common things cannot be sacred to God, till we both set them apart, and
sanctify them for the use of his service, for nothing is Deo sacrum, which is
not Deo oblatum, The very separation is to God, that he might sanctify unto us
what we first offer unto him; S. Paul makes communion oblation, participation,
etc. to sound all to one sense, we other the with to God that it may be
blessed, he gives the C^p to us with the blood of his Son, the Cup is the
Communion of blood; call a Table an Altar, and an Altar a Table for me without
offense, so I am sure Ezekiel does, Chap. 41.32. and (...) seconds him, Cap.
1.1^.1^. (...) Paul for ought I know might have called the Table of the Lord an
Altar, as well as he calls the Altar of devils a Table. But we are intended
in our days to wrangle and wrest all truths to oppose adversaries, more than
confirm them by fair and fast binding our selves to give them intertainement
in their best demonstrations.

It pleases the Holy Ghost as far as I can apprehend it, to call the place
of Majesty the Sanctuary in Gods House, or the place where Gods Table or Altar
stands; for this purpose, I have produced both Beza a modern Divine, and
Saint Chrysostom a more ancient Writer, and will now proceed to say more from
Theodoret, lib. 4. cap. 4. lib. 5.13. Zorrat, Hist. lib. cap. 25. Zozom. lib.
2. cap. 28. from Eusebius in his Panegyric Oration at the dedication of the
Temple of Tire, from the Council of Laeodicia, Can. 44. sixth Council in Trullo
Can. 69. Council. Arcl. Can. 15. Council. Constant. 5. and 6. Can. 69 Saint Cypr.
lib. 1. Epist. 9. and from Saint Ignatius, I shall leave my Reader to enlarge
himself, and only set before his eyes what I have searched for my own
satisfaction. I will begin with Theodosius the Emperor, and Saint Ambrose a
Bishop, the Emperor enters the Church at Millaine to act his solemn
reverence, and his first reverence is the prostration of his whole body, using
the words of the Psalm 119.25. adhesit (...) men, etc. my foul e^eaveth to
the pavement, in humility of soul and body he kisseth the very dust and
stones wherewith the Church was paved, and powered forth his tears abundantly:
and preparing himself to receive the Sacrament; (which is enough to stricke
dead the point in (...)) (...) with equal (...) he went up the steppings of
the Altar, I may have (...) amiss (...), i^ palatium in gonere, Gods house in
spec^^ called Basilica, but that's not enough here, for (...) in the plural
number signifies the degrees or steppings to the Altar, (...) 5. when he came
to the Royal stay^^^ be w^^^ again as abundantly as when he first entered the
Church. Then according to his custom at Constantinople he went within the
rail, but S. Ambrose by a Deacon (...), he taught him that places were to be
distinguished in the Church, (...), that it was for Priests and not for Princes
to come within the rail, (...), come forth and communicate with thine own
rank, and remember in Gods House to hold the perfect pattern of the difference
and distinction, Purple makes Kings not Priests.
of a Prince and a Priest, (...), Princes robes and Priests ornaments are not
alike, so neither are their places. At the Council in Trullo Can. 69. Non
licet ulli little omnium qui in laicorum numero sunt, ingredi intra sanctu^
Altar nequaquam tamen ab eo prohibita potestate and authoritate imperiali,
quandocunque vol^er i^ ^^catori dona offerre ex antiquissima traditione; It is
not lawful for any that be in the number of Laics to enter within the rail
of the holy Altar; yet the Imperial Majesty and Authority is not thereby
prohibited ingresse when (...) he has a will to offer any gifts to the
Creator by a most ancient tradition, for the most ancient use of the Church
was, that lay Christians might have access to the Altar to present there their
especial devotions, or receive Priestly absolution, etc. otherwise they were
not to enter, but receive the blessed Eucharist, and place themselves without
the rail, as the Council of Laodicia is express for women. Saint Ignatius
who lived in the Apostles days, Epist. ad Trallens, Qui extra Altar est, est
(...) qui five Episcop^ and presbite^is and Dioconis ali(...); and (...) Qui
est extra Altar, ille pollutu^ est (...) and est in^idels deterior, He which
is without the Altar is he who does ought without the Bishop, (...) Deacon^;
and again, he who is without the Altar he is polluted in conscience, and
worse than an In^^^^^^, where he is said to be without the Altar, not who may
not come within the rail, but who may not participate of the holy Table, for
so the^ Church Canons exclude him: and in such case are all our Conventicle
keepers, that both without and against lawful Bishops and Priests walk their
own bywayes. As Christ was known to his two disciples in breaking of bread;
so were the Primitive Priests known to their people by breaking the
Sacramental bread, and it was held the symbol of Christian Communion to be
partakers of the Altar, and to receive from it the holy Sacraments, Ignat. ad
Tralleuss. qui intra Altar est, purus est, igitur and obedit Episcop^ and
Presbyteris, he who is within the Altar is pure, therefore also he obeys the
Bishop and Priests. He is within the Altar that may receive the Sacrament, and
he only may receive the Sacrament that is in obedience, or due order, subject
to the Bishop and Priests: Sine his Ecclesia electa non est, non caetus
sanctorum, non congregati^ sanctorum, without these there is no elect Church,
no observation of holy things, no congregation of Saints, ad Ephesians. Epist.
(...) (...) he that is not within the Altar is deprived of the Bread of God,
that is, he that has no Communion with his Pastor at the Altar, is to be
denied the Sacrament, still the Altar hangs upon the Priest; and fellowship
with him proves fellowship with the other. The Apostles Doctrine, fellowship,
prayers, and breaking of bread are all closely comprised together by this
Father, Epist. ad Magn. (...) in faith and concord, (...) praesidente Epis^^p^
Dei lot^, the Bishop being president over them in the place of God; the Bishop
succeed the Apostles in plenarie power; the Presbitere the seventie whom our
Savior adjoined to his Apostles. (...) that such a Senate might meet to
consider of matt^^^ of peace and truth. Act. 15.6. (...), that all might (...)
in one place to pray, (...) run to the Temple of God, as to one place of
Majesty, or one Altar, and one Jesus Christ (...) and (...) are as one, for
the whole Church is Gods Palace, especially the place of his Altar where the
people are made partakers of Chist himself, Temple must be taken away says
Vedelius, as a corruption contrary to those times that professed they had no
Temples, and so must Altars too, for they professed against them, and then
nothing is left but Jesus Christ who must be found out of Temples, and Altars
too may be in the Desert and secret chambers, where there is neither the
Apostles Doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread or prayers; but a confused
rabble without all order or observation of Gods Ordinances, as he has
appointed them, (...) and (...) are acknowledged by Saint John Rev. 14.17, 18.
in such a sense as they ought to be, where God, Angels, and men meet, and as
the whole place may be called Gods House or Temple, so the Sanctuary or Altar
is the special place of Majesty, One Eucharist, one Flesh, one Blood, one
Bread, one Cup, one Altar.
Epi. ad Philad. (...), here I am sure is the Sacrament with all the signs and
the things signified, and what shall the Altar be? Christ will some say is one
Altar to all Churches, for Tables they may have many. Not so, but as there is
to us one Christ, so one Altar, and we profess no more to express the
Majesty of our God, There is one Altar for the whole Congregation.
many Altars in one Church were never heard of in the most Primitive times, let
these look to them that undertake their defense, for I say with S. Ignatius
(...).

The fist general Council speaks of concourse to the Altar, that there was
running (...), and Saint John has (...), Rev. 4.4. and (...). v. 6. All I
seek for, is some sympathy betwixt the holy Scriptures and Primitive
practices. A throne of Majesty there is in the House of God, or some visible
sign of Gods invisible presence to make the partition as S. John has set it
down. At the Dedication of the Temple of Tyre^ I read of the (...), compassed
about with neat works, ^he holy Al^^.
and the reverent placing of Pauline the Bishop with his clergy in Cathedra,
and Exedris about it; I read of Alexander the holy Bishop of Constantinople in
the case of Arrius and the desperate storm threatened against him, and the
Orthodox faith to have fallen at the foot of the Altar and prostrate to
Almighty God, to have prayed that God would evert that judgment from his
poor Church, etc. I conceive we may well conjecture we are not farne from the
sense, the same sense may yet further be fetched from three places of
Scripture, to which he alludeth in the expression of the Christian Theater upon
which God represents his glory in the world.

CHAP. III. Touching the Throne of Majesty in Sinai, and the Tabernacle, etc.
FIrst he alluds to Sinai Gods first glorious Sanctuary among men, Rev. 4.5.
as may appear by Lightnings and thundering and voices which issue out of the
Throne, as they did upon Sinai when God appeared, Exodus 19. and in these
declared his Majesty, and set bounds to all Israel to be kept with the
greatest diligence, least danger befall the intruders to their ruin; God made
all the Mount the place of his Majesty, and he himself spoke in terror to
his people, so that they petitioned there might be a middle between them and
him, and that Moses and men like themselves might speak, and that first
division of Majesty and auditory, of God speaking and men bearing being too
terrible, might be turred into a more mild and middle way of Ministry
intervening between himself and them, Exodus 24. The multitude are to keep
the station, and not to stir at all to draw any nearer to God, Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu with seventy Elders are to go u^ with Moses into the Mount, and
there must they Minister ^^^weene God and the people; whiles God gives the
^^^fect pattern of all things in the Mount, he makes the Mount the first
draught, and draws the form in the place of their standing, as a throne of
Majesty, seats of Elder^ and a boundarie for the people, and the blessed
Angels to keep their rounds and gaurds of attendance in all places as God
appoints them. Exodus 24 10.17.
Majesty is in the pavement, and where the feet of the Almighty plant
themselves, there is as the body of heaven in his clearenesse, the (...) of the
Maunt was like devouring fire, and all to set forth his glory that is most
invisible: No picture of God, but passing signs of his presence, and warnings
which way they were to worship him, and be wrought into an holy fear of so
dreadful a God, as he showed himself to be i^ the said expressions: God is
far more mild in the Christian Church, and his Sanctuary is set upon Mount
Sion which may be approached, and from whence God speaks more mildly unto us,
and in which the innumerable company of Angels keep their watch. I see not
out the holy Table may be set as a sign to distinguish the place of Majesty
from all the rest: Our Ancients made that Regal which was in the steppings and
degrees of the Altar, and therefore the Altar much more may express Majesty.
If any ask me why is God in one part of the Church more than an other, and why
is one part more holy than another? I answer it is not from any inhession or
inclusion of God and holiness in that place, as Pagans imagine in their
Temples where they include their Gods. Against these Saint Paul disputes at
Athens, and so do Origin* Minuti^^ Felix, Arnob^us, and La^tantius, and are
(...), as i^ they ^ried down Temples and Altars: for such Temples, Alt^^^, and
Images, as they confute are impious and forbidden to Christians, because the
Heathen did Revoca^^ (...) mortuorum ad Templa, Altaria, Imagines, revoke ^he
souls of the dead to Temples, Altars, Images, and put^n them Divinas virtut^s,
etc. they placed divine vert^^^ in their Temples, Altars, and Images, and
sought for (...) by their presence, as being filled with Celestial power to do
them good; but we believe of our Temples and (...) Solomon did, that God is in
them of grace and (...) to his people, and that they are holy in relation to
him, as the House is his, the Table his, where he will feed his people, and
fill them with his favors. It pleases him to have his Throne, and as ever, so
(...) a Co^^t of Majesty which he daily opens to his people, when (...) them
to his heavenly Table. His Table is enough to make it holy, and separate from
common use, and to be the daily monument of divine benediction where Church
Prayers have been said, nay have the preferment, and be counted the most
sacred place in Gods House, in which he offers himself to his people, and
they take him, as truly present; for real presence is not demed, when
transubstantiation is rejected, but Christ really present i^ the holy Sacrament
is an object of our faith, not of our sight or seen, as Gods House and Honor
go together: so the chief place invites the worship of God toward it,
according to the decency of Religion. Secondly, Saint John alludes to the
Tabernacle in the Wilderness, and Temple in Canaan, as may appear by the
Lamps of fire and Sea of Glass. Now that in both these were distinctions, as
the Court of Majesty, Court of Ministry, and Court of Auditory it needs not
inqu^^ing. The Tabernacle in the Wilderness, which in the whole is often
called Gods Throne, was pitched about in that goodly order, that the Priests
and Levites encamped next to the whole Tabernacle, the people at a greater
distance, Number. 6.2. and as some imagine two Englis^ miles. Their doors were to
open upon the Sanctuary, and they were to do their devotion, both going out
and coming in: so that when the Sanctuary was open for service, there was a
threefold divisio^, into the couit of the people, court of the Priests, and
Court of God; when it was shut up the division was three fold, the Tabernacle,
the Camp of the Priests and Levites, and the four Camps of Israel under 4.
standats, as we shall hear afterward. The Arc, the Mercy-seate are often
called Gods Footestoole, and his Throne. Lastly, Ezekiel showing Gods little
Sanctuary in the Babilonian captivity and destruction of Solomous Temple
teaches the same, where we have four Beasts, and over them a Firmament, and
above that a Thro^^, Eze. 1. The four Beasts may well point at the four
Standards of the twelve Tribes. To the East was Judah, Isachar and Zabulon,
with the Ensigne^ of a Lion; to the South, Ruben, Simeon, and Gad, under the
sign of a man in the flagge: To the West, Ephraim, Manasses and Benjamin, with
the banner bearing the sign of a Bullock. To the North, Dan, Ashur and
Naphtali bearing the Ensign of an Eagle: Its probable that Ezechiel has this
meaning, if we mark his standing, looking into the North the place of the
captivity of Judah, Ezeck. 1.4. the first face that meets him, verse. 10. is
the face of a man, and that's Rubens quarter to lie upon the South, on his right
hand is the East, and on that side appears a Lion, where Judah quartered, on
the left side the face of an Ox, and that's the West, where Ephraim encamped.
The North needs no character, and that is the face of an Eagle where Dan was
appointed to pitch about the Tabernacle, so that four Beasts are characters of
the places of Gods people, when they form a part of Gods House or Sanctuary.
The Firmament or expanse is now the void place where God may be heard and
seen of his people: The Beasts let down their wings and stand in silence, and
from the Firmament above them, a voice is uttered, etc. This is the middle
space betwixt God and his people. Above this appears the Throne, and one in
the appearance of a man sitting upon it: here is mention of precious stones as
in Saint John, and of a Rainebow, and all together show our distinction of the
place of Majesty, Ministry and Auditory, and Angels of God as secret spirits
to keep their rounds and guards as God himself that guides all pleases; and
that of the Throne of Majesty, which God has always had it in his Church.

CHAP. IV. Of the seats of the Elders, the station of Bishops and Priests that
serve at the Altar. Seeds Seniorum.
HAving done with the Throne of the Lamb, we seek for the Thrones of his
servants, or seats of such Elders, as he selects to fit about him; in heaven
all Saints sit down with Christ in glory, but their several seats are higher
one than other according to their degrees in grace here, none attaining to the
seat of Christ, which is the Throne of Gods Majesty far above all
principalities, etc. In the Church militant on earth, Christ chooses Ministers
to sit down in seats under him for the government of his Church; but it is
wrong to the Lord Jesus to lift one man out of the seats of the Elders into
the seat of the Lamb, and set him above all the rest in such absolute and
sovereign authority as is only due to Christ himself, who is not absent
from his seat, but in grace and holy concourse is with his Ministers in their
seats to the end of the world, where two or three of them are gathered
together in his name, there is he in the midst of them: he may allu^e to the
setting up seats for judgment in Israel: The greatest number we read of in
that Nation was seventie or seventie one, the lesser 23. the least three. Duo
qui judicant eorum non est judicium, when two Judge they have no Judgment,
because they want a casting voice, yet our Savior speaks of two agreeing,
having power to judge, and to whom he gives the Keys, Math. 18.16.17.18, 19,
20. that he will answer to whatsoever they ask and ratify their sentences:
He makes good the seats of his Elders in all places, and gives them authority
to bind and loose, remit and retain all sins. We will inquire further of
the number, names, offices, ornaments, order of these Elders in Gods House, and
before his Throne: the number of Seats and Elders consists of 24. 1 Chronicles.
24.4.19. The exposition is easy, as Gods House was ordered in the service of
it by 24. Orders or courses of Priests, so now is it served by the like number
of Presbiters, yet their honor is greater, as having seats and great
authority. Luke in the Acts tells them the Apostles fellowship: and holy
Ignatius joining with the Bishops the Presbiters, calls them (...) Epist. ad
Magn. A Synod appointed of God to serve at the seat of his Majesty, for his
Throne were empty without them; for Bishops with their Elders we have chaires
and seats warranted both by Gods Word, and the ancient practice of the Church,
see Pauline with his Presbiters at the dedication of the Temple of Tire, and
you shall be taught to learn a good lesson against Papists and Schismatickes
in our days, that ding down with their Axes and Hammers the seats and
societies of Gods Elders; one Pope must Lord it over all, and have a seat
above all Bishops. In the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship no such thing is to
be found, and when the Fathers allege their seats against Schismatickes,
they never make one seat the rule of all: Our Schismatickes that pass from us
and reject the seats of Bishops, and set up a lay-eldership, and put them into
chaires to judge, I marvel whence they have it, for all the Presbyters in the
^i^^^it of Saint John's Theology are Priests. A strange succession they will
make in Gods House, and bring into the Apostles fellowship, no breakers of
bread, but Church Canons, no Priests to pray to the people, but to prate
against them, and to take the highest place of a seat to judge. Its the
Fathers wisdom against Heretics to (...) them only by the Word of God;
against Schismatickes to condemn them wholly by the Chaires of the Church; and
sure I am against these seats they cannot stand out, and as in Nehemiah 7.64.
they that wanted a Register to reckon their Genealogy were put from the
Priesthood as poluted, so these that contemn the chaires of Bishops, and care
for no Episcopal succession, but will succeed where was never succession: As
to have Ministers from Magistrates, and men never ordained by others, is to
cast themselves from all communion with the Church, which never held any that
was not successively from the Apostles. Gal. 1.1. Saint Paul professes
himself to be an Apostle, but neither of man nor by man, neither of man as the
author, nor by man as the instrument, but immediately of God and by God, as
author and means of his vocation. A plain distinction of a threefold calling,
whereof two are as the extremes, and the third as a mean between both, first
some are called of God and by God immediately, and this is the extraordinary
calling of Prophets and Apostles, who are the first founders of our Religion,
and the chief Governors under Jesus Christ, Secondly, some are called of men
and by men, and such are all humane callings in Gods Church; I deny not but
many may be appointed to do service in the Church that have no divine calling,
but that which is merely of men, and such are Churchwardens, Sidesmen, yea
and higher callings, as Chancellors and Ecclesiastical Judges which are
laymen, whose authority is no more contrary to Gods Word, than the
appointment of seven Overseers for the poor, or Church treasury, Act. 7.3.
Look you out seven men, etc. I find no other election made but this in all
the New Testament, that in the Act. 14.23. Ordination of Elders by election, is
both a corruption of the text and of the truth, for none were ordained Elders
in the Apostles days by election, Act. 2.3, 4. the holy Ghost is given without
hands to the Pastors, as also to the people, Act. 10.44.

Extraordinary gifts were common to Pastors and people; but the calling of a
Presbyter or Priest was either of God and by God immediately, or else of God and
by man mediately, and this for Ordination, was always the imposition of the
hands of the Apostles or Bishops, Act. 8.15, 6, 17. Philip Preached and
Baptized and converted Samaria, but had not the power to confirm or ordain
them Pastors, therefore is sent unto them from Jerusalem, Peter and John to
impose hands and give the holy Ghost: the Bishops the Apostles left to succeed
them; had the power of Ordination, and every Pre^byter had it not: and it was
the he esie of Aerius that denied Bishops this p^erogative above others: That
seat is not sure, nor Ordination justifiable, that is not by a Bishop, who is
able to derive his succession in that respect from the Apostles. Bell. de Eccl.
lib. 4 cap. 8. says truly, that an argument from succession proves negatively
against Schismatikes, but not affirmatively for Heretics, Adferri praecipue,
ad probandum non esse Ecclesiam, ubi non est successio, ex quo tamen non
colligitur ibi necessario esse Ecclesiam ubi est successio, there can be no
visible Church where there is no succession from the chaires of the Apostles:
But the Greek Churches prove as good succession this way as the Latin, and
therefore both being suspected for Doctrine, we must have recourse to that
memorable faying in Act. 2.42. They continued st^dfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship and in breaking of bread and in Prayer. These notes will
torment all our Adversaries; Papists with Doctrine, Schismatics with the
Apostles Fellowship, and both in breaking of bread, the one, because they
break no bread in substance, the other because they distribute mere bread. As
they dislike an Altar, so they dislike to be within it, by denying communion
with Bishops, and doing many things without them. Prayers except they be
private cannot please them, and Church prayers specially at an Altar, they spit
and spend their tongues in talking against them. They say we take Gods Name in
vain by advised repetitions, and remember not their own iterations and sudden
irruptions to be incident to vanity. I have stood the longer upon the number,
to show us the course of Ministry, and must make haste in the rest, as not
able in a short Treatise to insist fully on all our heads.

Their names are Presbyters, contracted Priests, and we cannot abide the title
of the holy Ghost, because our times have polluted it; I will not be so nice as
to name the child otherwise than it was first Christened. Their offices are
honorable, in waiting immediately upon the Lambs Throne: their Ornaments are
either a white vesture for the body, or crowns of gold for the head. They are
no ordinary Priests, but of the chief rank: Eusebius in his Panegyricke
Oration discribes them to be clothed like Christ himself, Rev. 1.13. (...).
It must needs be a Priests garment Rev. 4.4. and to him that will read
Eusebius and Saint John together it will prove a white Surplesse; or a white
garment down to the foot: He has likewise this to make S. John Historical
as well as mystical to every man's meaning; the Priests in the Temple of Tire,
are said to have upon their heads Caelestes gloriae coronas, crowns of
heavenly glory. Order, is, that they begin the Church Service and end it, Rev.
4.9. must warily be read, least we make the people go before their Pastors
when they are about to give glory; then rise the Elders from their seats and
fall down first. The Churches Service is performed by singing, Rev. 5.8, 9. to
the end. The Elders and the Saints about the throne are furnished with Harpes,
and Vials, instruments of Music and Melody, be they Voices or other Organs
of Gods praise, for I will precisely determine nothing, their gold Vials are
said to be full of odors, and these odours to be prayers, a right service in
Gods house. Their song is a new song of the Lamb, (...) to the Lamb, with these
join the holy Angels, and in divine strains of the sweetest music, sound
with a loud voice in Gods ears and as they end with blessing so all creatures
like an Echo lay hold of that last word, and say blessing, etc. Then conclude
the Beasts with a voice as a thunderclappe, for so speaks Saint Hierom of the
word Amen.

The Elders end the service as they began with prostration, for as that is
before confession, Phil. 2.10, 11. so it is after all service, and the whole
body is prepared, before that member the tongue take in hand to utter a word.
He were impudent that would talk standing with his God, and begin to speak
before he has showed his fear by falling down to so great a Majesty as he
seeks to serve, neither were it fit a man should stand by and take his leave,
as if two equals were met (we neither come so into the presence of out
parents, neither do we so depart from them) and shame our selves as if we had
met none in Gods House better than our selves. The Elders as they fall first,
so they are found last in the like posture, and so we leave them, and come to
our third thing in Gods House.

CHAP. V. Concerning the standards of the people, and the gurd of Angels, that
is the place of Lay-Christians, and the attendance of holy Angels in Gods
House. Signa Sanctorum.
REv. 4.6, 7, 8, 9. The Standards, Ensigns, Banners, and Badges borne by the
Congregation of Israel in the Wilderness have ever been the description of a
people gathered together before God to serve him, and I conceive the old and
new Testament, in the accommodation thereof to have no other meaning and
mystery, though I know this is not made of it by many, both Modern and Ancient
Divines. In one Psalm Beasts are Emblems of the Camps and Companies both of
the godly and ungodly. Psalm. 68.10. the word is Caiath or Caiah, which
signifies the wild beasts, Genesis 1.24, 25. because in them is the greatest life
and liveliness, and it is applied by David to Gods people, in whom there ought
to be in the service of God the greatest spirit and life: Its likewise ve. 30.
given to sinners; and the Chaldee translates it Armies of them, and further, 2 Samuel 23. its put for the troops of the Philistines, and 1 Chro 11.15 the word
Machanes is used for it, which every learned man knows to be a Camp or Leager,
Genesis 23.2. Jacob calls the place where the Angels met him Mahanaim, two Hoasts
or Camps, for as Laban in the rear, and Esau in the front came against Gods
servant; so his blessed Angels came for him, and made two Camps to cross
them both. In the song of songs it is concluded that the Shulamite should
convert to God as it were a double Army, tither of Jews and Gentiles, or as
the children of the Jews converted to their fathers, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just. Can. 6.13. Luke 1.17. I may hold my resolution, and
take the four Beasts for the congregation of the Gentiles, or all people that
come in and encampe about the throne of the Lamb, and seats of his Ministers,
we will consider their names, number, orders, office, and actions.

Names, Beasts better as in Ezech. 1.5. living creatures of the most vigorous
nature; Quatuor sunt superbi, vel qui emineant in mundo, Leo inter feras, Bos
inter Iumenta, Aquila inter volucres, and Homo cui Deus supra omnes
pulchritudinem largitus est, ut omnibus imporaret, Schindler, page 266. d. Gods
people should be as courageous as Lions, as patient in bearing their burdens as
the Ox is in labor, and submitting to his masters yoke. They should quit
themselves as men in their best reason, and rule and subdue their lusts to Gods
Spirit. They should like Eagles fore aloaft into the contemplation of divine
things, and be speedy in the dispatch of all their business, their number is
four, and that is from their quarters or camps, as they lie East, West,
North, and South. Their Catholic concord and universal consent in all things
is divinely described by Ezechiel. Their faces, and wings, feet, and soles of
their feet, wheels and rings, are nothing else but their unanimous consent in
all things. Their faces are four, and yet but one face in their aspect, ver.
10. Four had the face of a man, and the face of a Lion, etc. They were not as
four he^ads looking several ways, but it seems as one head fashioned to
form four faces, and all looking one way: when they looked Southward, they
had all the face of a Man; when they looked Eastward, they had all the face of
a Lion; when they looked Westward, they had all the face of an Ox; and when
they looked Northward, they had all the face of an Eagle.

Universality and unity in mind and motion is that which ought to be in Gods
Saints: Their wings had the hands of a man under them, to show that their high
contemplations and foring into divine Mysteries was with humble and hearty
readiness to do the things they understood. Their wheels did carry them on
all sides in the same course, and the rings did unite them as one in motion,
and they were full of eyes to direct them to the true end of all their actions:
furthermore these four Beasts thus fashioned and formed, to express the faith
and fellowship of Gods people, and their universalitie to look to all Regions
in their Religion, and not Schismatically to profess one in a corner, or
command all to look into some division or part; the holy Catholic Church is
most universal, and binds us to all places where Jesus Christ has sent his
Gospel, and this must also be added, that the four beasts are divided into
twelve Tribes, and the order of three is in them all.

To every beast three Tribes are allotted, and then the whole number is twelve,
and this is a great mystery and most certain mark of a true Church in the
Revelation, Rev. 7. The tribes are sealed, and two for Idolatry separated from
the seal, as Dan and Ephraim, yet the number is made up, and twelve tribes are
sealed, and in each tribe twelve thousand, and twelve times twelve thousand is
the number of Gods people, Rev. 12.1. the crown upon the head of the Church is
12. stars, Rev. 22.12.14. Twelve gates, twelve foundations: on the gates are
written the twelve tribes, on the foundations the twelve Apostles, and what is
all this but a Church constant in the Doctrine and Fellowship of the Apostles.
Their order is strangely described, Rev. 4.6. they are in the midst of the
throne, and round about it, no circumference, but every point of it rests upon
the center. It was Saint Paul's joy, Col. 2.5. to see the order and faith of
that Church: faith plants a Church upon the foundation, and that's Christ; order
keeps all the members from confusion, and places them as members in the body,
that all may serve for the good of the whole. Their office is in their eyes and
wings, and it seems the one is outward, and the other inward, Rev. 8. their
wings and their works are to be seen of men, but their eyes that must guide
therein be within, and secret in themselves, and must teach them, that Gods
Service must be with understanding; God loves cheerfulness in our obedience,
and wisdom in all our works, their actions are to give glory unto God, and
not to rest night nor day in praises of his Name.

Castra Angelorum.
The last part is the invisible attendance of Angels, and shows the Majesty
of God to be exceeding great; Seven Angels are before the Throne, and these I
take to be the Princes of Angels, and the millions of the rest watch and ward,
and worship with us our gracious Savior. Our Church has added; Therefore with
Angels and Archangells, and with all the company of Heaven we laud and
magnify thy glorious Name, and evermore, praising thee and saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory, Glory be to
thee O Lord most high.

CHAP. VI. Containing an exhortation to constancy in the Doctrine, Fellowship,
Sacraments, and Prayers of the Church, Act. 2.42.
HE that will not be an Heretic and deny the truth, must continue steadfast in
the Apostles doctrine, and he that will not be a Schismatic and depart from the
Church, must keep himself in the communion of the Apostles, that he may be
partaker of the Altar and Prayers of the Church. Saint Ignatius in his Epistles
very often makes the communion of the one to flow from the communication with
the other. Take away the Apostles fellowship, and you take away the breaking of
bread, and prayer at the Lords Table: except there be a Priest within the
Altar, the people are wholly without it. I say, it is Saint Ignatius his
constant determination, that the people must so depend upon their Pastors,
that they do nothing without them, Ep. ad Polycarpum, (...), As nothing must
be done without the mind of the Bishop, so the Bishop must do nothing without
the mind of God.

The Apostles and Bishops he makes next to God in the Church, he acknowledges
none above them, respecting the Ecclesia sticall Ministry. Epist. ad Trall.
(...), Be subject to the Bishop, as to Christ, for he watches for you. He
applies the Apostles words, Heb. 13.17. to the Bishop, and defines him in the
same Epistle, lest we should imagine his name to be common to all Pastors,
(...); what is a Bishop but one that bears sway and authority above all others?
Epist. ad Smyrnenses, he says thus, (...), As in all the world there is none
greater then God, so in the Church and Order Ecclesiastical, there is none
greater then the Bishop. The same Father exhorts in Epist. ad Ephesians. (...). The
people should concur in their consent to what their Bishop teaches them
according to God, (...), that they may concur and accord in Gods mind: and
again, (...). The people must live after Gods mind, and the Bishop must be
their guide therein. As in the Apostles days, the head of the Churches
fellowship was from them, to which our Savior added seventie Disciples; so in
the succession, the Bishop is the head and chief to which the Presbyters are
added, and of them Saint Ignatius says thus, (...), etc. be subject to the
Presbytery, as to the Apostles. This he explains after, when he makes a fuller
narration. Epist. ad Trall. (...), The Bishop is the type of him which is the
father of all. Priests are the assessors with God and the band of Apostles. The
Apostles fellowship, as it was in the the 12 Apostles and 70 Disciples, so
afterward it continued in Bishops and Presbyters, and as the Apostles had
committed unto them the calling of all ordinary Pastors, and correction of all
men's manners, that is, God appointed them to ordain and censure, and without
them the seventie could not execute any such power: So the Bishops above all
other Pastors have this power, and without them it cannot be executed by any
inferior Minister. And I never read testimony in the Word of God, or any
ancient Writer to the contrary. Saint Paul decreed the Excommunication of the
incestuous person, and commanded the Church of Corinth the execution thereof,
and reprehended them for their neglect. As we are to receive our doctrine from
the Apostles, so our fellowship, and all proof of succession in the Ministry
is taken from thence, Tertull. lib. de praescript. c. 32. Evolvant ordinem
Episcoporum suorum, it a per successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille
Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis
perseverarit, habuerint auctorem and antecessorem hoc enim medo Ecclesiae
Apostolicae census suos deferunt: sic Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum a
Ioanne collocatumrefert, sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit. Let
them examine the order of their Bishops, that so has held by succession from
the beginning, that, that first Bishop might have for his author and
predecessor, some of the Apostles or Apostolical men, yet such as have
persevered with the Apostles, for so the Apostolical Churches gave their
Suffrages. So he relates of the Church of Smyrna, where Polycarpe was placed by
Saint John, and shows the like of Clement, ordained by Peter for the Romans.
Cyprianus l. 2. Epist. 20. or Pamelii 42. laborare debemus, ut unitatem a
Domino and per Apostolos nobis successoribus traditam obtinere curemus, we
ought to labor, that the unity from the Lord, and by the Apostles to us his
successors given, through our care might be retained. S. Augustine in Psalm.
44. quid est, pro patribus tuis nati sunt tobi filii, patres missi sunt
Apostoli, pro Apostolis filii nati sunt tibi, constituti sunt Episcopi? Hodie
enim Episcopi, quisunt per totum mundum, unde natisunt, Ipsa Ecclesia patres
illos appellat, ipsaillos genuit, and ipsaillos constituit in sedibus patrum.
What means this, in stead of fathers, sons are borne to thee? the Apostles
are sent fathers, for Apostles sons are sent to thee, Bishops are
constituted; for the Bishops at this time, that are through all the World,
whence are they born? the Church it self calls them fathers that begot them,
and that constituted them in the seats of the fathers; many more such passages
might be cited and sent both to Rome, and some other Churches as citations,
nay, as sentences of condemnation for two errors, both contrary to this truth,
as they are also contrary one to another; and agree in nothing but falsehood;
first, Bellarmine l. 4. de Pontific. cap. 25. says thus, Magnum est discrimen
inter successionem Petri and aliorum Apostolorum. Nam Romanus Pontifex propree
succedit Petro, non ut Apostolo, sed ut pastori ordinario totius Ecclesiae: at
Episcopi non succedunt proprte Apostolis; quoniam, Apostoli non fuerunt
ordinarii sed extraordinarii pastores, quibus non suceeditur, nisi improprie.
But God appointed his Apostles, such as should be succeeded: for how otherwise
is his promise made good of being with them to the worlds end? Others to avoid
the Pope and all Bishops, say this fellowship may come from all Pastors, and
that they have power to ordain, nay, some are so absurd, that they stick not to
say, Pastors maybe made by the people, and Magistrates may set up Ministers,
and never be beholding to Rome, or any Bishops or Pastors that were ever
ordained by them. Saint Ignatius Epist. ad Ephesians. (...), obeying the Bishop and
Presbytery with immovable and steadfast mind, breaking one bread, etc. He
shows plainly that breaking of bread must follow our undivided fellowship from
the Apostles and their successors: and surely how can we have the Sacraments
duly administered, if we be not truly informed of our Pastors calling, and the
coming of it from the Apostles?

Let me exhort all good Christians to keep close to these notes of the
Church; first, sound Doctrine, which the Apostles have only delivered.
Secondly, an holy fellowship, fetched from the Apostles, and kept by the
faithful in all obedience to their Bishops as the chief of Pastors, and the
Presbyters, (...), Epist. ad Trall. as his consiliarii and assessores, english
it as you will, so you err no more in your base account of Bishops. What has
not Rome made offensive to vulgar ears? the name of a Bishop, Priest, Altar,
Sacrifice, and all Church Service is set at naught, and we abhor to hear of
veneiable antiquity, its to small purpose to press any thing upon them that
have sworn to believe nothing but their own novelties, and late inventions of
discontented persons set on foot to trouble the peace and quiet of our Church,
which (I believe) holds in the most holy manner the Doctrine, Fellowship,
Altar, and Prayers expressed, Acts 2.42.

Storm not at the word Altar, for breaking of bread cannot be without it in
that sense which is so often inculcated in the Epistles of Saint Ignatius, and
think no man can be ignorant, that will not wilfully blind his eyes with
prejudice to an Altar, and rather make it any thing then an holy Table: surely
from fellow ship with Bishops he concludes his Altar, as Saint Luke does
breaking of bread from fellowship with the Apostles. I would wish the
separation of our times to take need lest to avoid Pope ry, they part with
purity it self, and do not so much find as forsake what they seek for, if
they take not ministry from us, they have none. Then they can have no
Baptism, break no bread, and where will they find the marks and notes of their
Church, if they brand ours for none of Gods? our Doctrine, Fellowship, Altar,
and Prayers, will find footing, when I fear they will fail in all, if they
opposeus in any. May I conclude, and not be thought to flatter? for I profess
what I have said has ever been my opinion, that Bishops are by divine
institution.

CHAP. VII. The Cause and Cure of all our Contentions.
Unity in the Church is the path of peace, which Papists and Sectaries
disturb in a contrary course. The one misplacing the head, the other the feet,
and both set them where they should not. The Papists place their Popc, where
they should place all Bishops, and Sectaries seek that in the feet which is
only to be found in the head. Saint Cyprian de unitate Eccles. compares the
universal power and jurisdiction of Bishops to an head, which derives all the
virtue to the body. To a root which feeds and fills all the branches. To a
fountain from which flow all streams. To the Sun that sends forth all rays
and beams, etc. This head, root, fountain, and Sun, the Papists make their
Pope, and all Bishops but members, branches, streams, and beams of him. Ab
uno Episcopatu tanquam ab uno capite, radice, font, sole oriuntur omnes
Episcapi, and hujus Episcopatus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. A singulis
in solidum, every Bishop holds wholly for his part whatsoever is in the whole.
The head, root, fountain and Sun are similar and alike in all the members. The
same virtue is in one Bishop that is in all Bishops, and the body being
univocall, has but one essence in all the parts of it. Order, jurisdiction is
the same, and nothing heterogeneall, but the Popes challenge to take all to
himself, and make Bishops stand to his courtesy for their calling and power,
as if all the Sea were in Tyber, or the whole Sun in the Roman Sphere, the
root in one branch, and all the virtue of the head in one member. Sectaries are
as senseless that take off the head to give life to the feet: raise up the
root, that the branches may flourish. Cut off the fountain, that the streams
may flow, and remove the Sun out of its Orb, that they may enjoy the light.
These be our diseases, whose causes and cure we are now to seek out, and hope
it will help us to recover our misery.

I suppose I may reduce all the causes to two heads, Envy and Ignorance, Envy
of the persons, Ignorance of the calling of our Bishops. Their persons and
practices are so hated, that Timothy and Titus must be unbishoped for their
sakes. We imagine corruptions in Bishops, and cast such eyes of discontent upon
them, that we cannot abide to hear of their calling. I am confident, till that
be established, our contentions will never cease. They are the words of holy
Ignatius, breathing with the sweet spirit, that was in the beloved Disciple,
(...), fly the division of unity, his arguments which are as medicines to cure
the disease are four, Epist. ad Philad. First, (...), one faith to be believed
of all. Secondly, (...), one predication of the same as an effectual means.
Thirdly, (...), one Eucharist to seal it, wherein are many unities to persuade
us from division. First, (...), one flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ given for
us. Secondly, (...), one blood shed for us. Thirdly, (...), one bread visibly
broken to us. Fourthly, (...), one cup distributed to us all. Fifthly, (...),
one Altar or Table, where we communicate. The last argument, is, (...), one
Bishop together with the Presbytery and Deacons. This laft unity being
disturbed, disturbes all the rest, and because all the spite is against the
Bishops wherein lies the Churches unity, we will vindicate the truth thereof,
and prove plainly, that Bishops as the best instruments, derive all power and
peace to the Church, and that without them no unity can possibly in all the
rest be imagined or mayntained.

We will begin with the mayn text, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. There is a double calling for
a threefold end. First, extraordinary, in Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists.
Secondly, ordinary in Pastors and Teachers. Upon these two hangs the perfection
of the Saints, work of the Ministry, and edification of the universal Church.
In the first we have that calling which is of God, and by God alone. In the
second, that which is also of God, but by man, and here we must inquire by what
men? the Scripture resolves us, by the Apostles, and by no others; and therefore
Timothy and Titus could be no Evangelists for two reasons: First, because they
were not called immediately of God and by God, but of God by man: and Saint Paul
witnesses, he ordained Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.6. and no question, the same is to
be said of Titus. Secondly, both these ordained others, which was effected by
no extraordinary persons before them since the Apostles. The objection is, that
Timothy is bidden do the work of an Evangelist, and therefore is one of their
number. By this reason I must reckon also the four Evangelists, and reduce
them to the same order, and so confound Apostles and Evangelists. A clear
distinction will remedy this confusion. First, some Evangelists were writers
of the Gospel. Secondly, others Preachers of it, and both these are so called
from the object of their employment, and not from the author of their calling.
We must therefore find out in the third place Evangelists by calling, such as
was Philip, Acts 21.8. who being compared with the seventy, Luke 10.1. seems
to be an example of that calling. First, they preached, so did Philip.
Secondly, they wrought miracles, so did Philip. Thirdly, they went before
Christ to make way for him, and his Ministry, so did Philip before the
Apostles, as will appear, Acts 8.5. and not only he, but many more, Ver. 4.
which Christ had called before his death, of the seventy, the Apostles
remaining at Jerusalem, Verse 1. which followed Philip, when they heard of his
success, Verse 14. and ordained Pastors where he had begun the Gospel, Verse
17.

This immediate power to ordain, Christ gave his Apostles, and by ordinary
Pastors they are succeeded, and not by extraordinary, and Timothy and Titus
are examples, so is Epaphras Colos. 4.12. who was one of Colosse, when he was
at Rome, for it is not following of the Apostles that makes men Evangelists, or
every absence, that denies them to be Bishops. In Colosse, we may conjecture
that Epaphras was Bishop of that place, and had Laodicea and Hierapolis
adjoined unto it, Colos. 4.13. Archippus may be counted for the Presbyter with
the Bishop, and Philemon, in whose house he was the Deacon, for Saint Paul
styles him in a manner, as Ignatius did the Deacons in his time, snergo,
fellow laborer, sndoulo, fellow servants, for such work together in their
Masters business. This order being observed, the Apostles and Bishops continue
the succession, and without the^ there is none in the Church. In these two
Jesus Christ immediately communicates his power of the Keys to the Church, and
none receive it ordinarily but from some one of them. The Pope abuses all
Bishops to fetch them under his power. The people profane Gods ordinance when
they appoint Pastors. We must confine our selves to these two heads, or else
we miss Christ's order, and this is not my conjecture, but the conceit of
antiquity, and by modern Divines is brought against the Popes usurpation above
Bishops.

Saint Cyprian in the Council of Carthage, has these words, neque quisquam
nostrum, Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad
obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigit. The Monarchy of one Bishop in
the universal Church is a plain tyranny, and so is a Presbytery in every
Parish, where there is no remedy as well against the popular as papal
jurisdiction. If the Pope infect the Church it must needs perish, because there
is no power above him, so must the Parish, for none can help it, being so
independent in it self, and absolute from the command of all others: both
these take away all liberty of calling Councels, and are uncontrouleable in
their own ways. This cannot be of God, to leave his Church desperate of means
to help it. Between both there is a middle way, and that is to have the
Churches power in the hands of many, so that one may help another.

In the first Council, Acts 15. the Apostles as heads with the Elders, meet in
consultation and determine what is best for the Churches in Antioch, Syria, and
Cilicia, V. 23 and wisely apply the remedy according to the disease, for it
seems to some good Divines, that the act involves no more then are mentioned
in it, and that Corinth and other Churches were not tied by this Canon: but
might eat of meats sacrificed to Idols, and only were to use charity and
discretion at such times as it might offend the weak Apostles and Elders,
consider of the matter, Verse 6. dispute and determine it, and disperse abroad
the Decree to be observed of those Churches that are specified in it. A clear
and evident truth. How the Apostles attempted to do nothing without consent.
Its a true rule, that no one man makes Canons for all Churches, and there was
never any Bishop save the Pope that challenged all power: but as men most
peaceably sought to govern after the divine Canon, and approved Customs and
Councels of Gods Church. No Bishop makes Laws, but takes (as he ought) the
sole power to see them executed; for if God trust them with his power to see it
executed, shall the Church distrust them with her Councels?

Bellarmine would help the Pope into his chair by this poor shift. Bishops
are absolute in their Dioceses, and have none above them, therefore is the Pope
so in all the World. An Argument of an ill consequent, and contrary to Christ
and his Church. To Christ Jesus, to deprive him of his Monarchy, and order of
ruling, who began with many, and Ephesians. 4.11. makes mention of all his officers
in the plural number, and in no rank can we thrust in one to be above al;
when the Apostles were above the 70 they were many, and it is but a miserable
begging of the question to bring in Saint Peter, as the head of all the rest.
We find that in a multitude, yet well ordered, and see in the extraordinary
calling a number of Apostles above all the rest, and in the ordinary we find
numbers of Doctors and teachers, yet not confused, as to set them all in one
and the same indifferency and equality of place and dignity, for this would
bring the Church to an anarchie; for where there is no order, there is just
contestation that no man is bound to any obedience to another, and whiles all
strive to be equal, the Church will never cease to quarrel. I must therefore
think the tyranny of one and all alike; for what the Pope pleads to have none
above him, so all plead the same that they will have none above themselves. To
say none are above Bishops, makes them equal, and such an equality stands
with the Churches peace, and without it, it will never be obtained or
mayntained. Vnus est Episcopatus, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur.
Cyprian. de unitat. Eccles.

Before I produce my testimonies for them, three mayn objections would be
cleared. First, From their election, they may be chosen of others. Secondly,
they may choose others to ordain with them or for them. Thirdly, they are the
Churches invention. Others may choose them, Saint Ignat. Epist. ad Philadel.
(...). It behooves you of Philadelphia, as the Church of God to choose a Bishop,
and Saint Cyprian for all Priests, Plebs maxim habet potestatem eligendi
dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusaudi, Council. African. apud Cyprian.
Epist, 68. If the people may choose Bishops and Priests, their power is not so
immediately of God, but the Church may intercede and act a part between God and
them, as it did, Acts 1.23. and 6.3. and 13.2.3. Saint Ignatius will give us
light and leading to answer sufficiently all these testimonies. It behooves you
of Philadelphia to choose a Bishop for the Church of Antioch in Syria, ut obeat
legationem Dei, and concedatur illis in eundem locum congregatis, etiam
glorifioare nomen Dei, that he may undertake Gods delegation, and that the
people of the same place may congregate, and give God his due glory. Without a
Bishop to order the Church assemblies, they are mere conventicles and
unlawful meetings. Here by the way observe that the Father speak of such
help as one Church may and ought to afford another. Annunciatum est mihi
Ecclesiam Antiochenam esse pacatam: it is reported unto me, that the Church of
Antioch is quiet and peaceable, and needs your help, that enjoy a worthy
Bishop, and I would wish you to do as Gods Churches have always done, ut
semper secerunt proximae Ecclesiae, quorum aliae misere Episcopos, nonnullae
vero presbyteros and Diaconos, that the next Churches some of them have
supplied their neighbor Churches with Bishops, others with Priests and Deacons.

Rome outreacheth and straineth this testimony upon the largest last, and
helps to stretch it with her teeth for the Pope, that he ought to choose all
Bishops for the Churches. With his leave, the words serve for any Bishop with
his Church to help others to able men that want them, and for our Novelists
they may not once name this text, that will choose for themselves, and suffer
no others to meddle with their right, when all Churches have, and ought to have
a common right one in another. For the words of Saint Cyprian, they may be
expounded that the people being peaceable as it was with the Church of Antioch,
and keeping concord amongst themselves they may then with one consent use all
their power to gain worthy Priests, and engage it to the uttermost to oppose
them that are wicked and unworthy, and their testimony is to be heard of their
betters. The Church separates two, and God makes choice of one, seven honest
men are looked out of the society of Saints, and appointed by the Apostles to
the business of the Church, Paul and Barnabas are separated by the Church to a
special work, signified to them by the holy Ghost. Let the people on Gods name
in these peaceable ways walk with the Church, and for the Church, and I know
none will condemn them: but they are to know all these elections are not of
the essence of a Bishop, for he may be so when he is sent from one Church to
another, and therefore to speak distinctly, and avoid confusion, Ordination
belongs to a Priest, Consecration to a Bishop, and Translation is when he is
removed from one place to another. These three are the forms of the Church,
and Rites she uses to express her self: but the Episcopal power is that
which God gives unto them, whom he uses as his immediate means to convey it
to the whole Church.

For the second objection, that Bishops ordain with others, and by others is
easily answered in Timothy, that he was ordained by the hands of Saint Paul,
and may be the hands of the Presbytery, that is, of others that joined with
him, or it may be the office he received by S. Paul's hands alone. The question
is not whether Priests may join with the Bishop: but whether they may do it
alone without the Bishop. There is some thing said for Chorepiscopi, or rural
Bishops that they have ordained, which were unlawful, if ordination were
solely Episcopal. I answer, what the Bishop may do by deputation is nothing
to my disputation. I speak of Gods order, and that which is divine, of the
humane Laws of the Church, and what power Bishops have to depute others I leave
to them. I look upon that which I conceive to be Gods appointment, and the
constant course of the Scriptures, which signifies unto us that either the
Apostles, or such as Timothy and Titus ordained, and not one word of any
Evangelist or Prophet, or of all Pastors, but some special ones selected by
the Apostles before their death. So Timothy ordained as an Evangelist, and you
at once affirm two untruths, 1 that Timothy was extraordinarily called, and
secondly, that such an one being none of the Apostles number might ordain:
Timothy was made a Minister by imposition of hands, and to Timothy was
committed the power to impose hands upon others: but both are arguments against
his extraordinary calling, and he that makes Evangelists or Prophets by
imposition of hands says that which no word of holy Scripture will warrant
him, either by one example or precept in all the new Testament.

The third objection is, that Bishops are the Churches invention, in Schismatis
remedium. I am glad, they that like not of Bishops to be of God, will confess
them to be of men, for so good an end, and it shows what we have said to be
absolutely true, that without Bishops, the Church must needs be filled with
faction, and sure I am, the quarrel with them is the cause of all our doleful
contentions and grievous complaints, and if men could work them out, and have
their wills, it would not be, So many men, so many minds, but millions of
mischief and misery to this our Nation. Its well they see such wisdom in the
necessity of Bishops: but is not the original dangerous to censure Gods
Providence of defect, and men's inventions of Idolatry. To say God provided not
for Schism is to me a secret Atheism, and check to him that better sees
what the Church needs, then to leave it in so main a matter to the policy
and piety of men. Again, the remedy is worse then the disease, and of
desperate cure to them that call all humane inventions in question for
Idolatry. I hope a necessary means to prevent division in Religion is a
special ordinance of God, and to make it humane is worse in my thoughts then
to make it divine.

Saint Hierome is the most welcome autour they have, and yet, contra Luciferan.
he says, the Church consists of many degrees, and makes the highest end in
the Bishope, and Dionysius Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 5. affirms not of one, but
of all Bishops, that immediate in Christum terminantur: and the aforesaid
author, ad Euagrium, says, summum tenent locum, and Saint Cyprian. Epist. 65.
Pamel. l. 5. Epist. 9. Episcopi omnes Apostolorum sunt successores. It were
easy to multiply autorities that speak home in this business. Saint Ignat.
Epist. ad Smyru. Laici subjecti sunto Diaconis. Diaconi Presbyteris, Presbyteri
Episcopo, Episcopus Christo, ut Christus patri. The subordination and
succession is full, Laymen must submit to the Deacons, the Deacons to the
Priests, the Priests to the Bishop, the Bishop to Jesus Christ, as Jesus Christ
to his Father. Epist. ad Magn. ut praesideant Episcopi loco Dei, and
Presbyteri, loco concessus Apostolici, etc. Bishops are placed in Gods stead,
Priests accompany them as the Apostles did Christ. He called them to work
with him, and so Bishops call Priests to preach the Gospel, and propagate the
faith with them. We must lay the comparison thus, as the Apostles were to
Christ, so are Priests to Bishops. The similitude holds in the subordination,
not in the equality, as if either Bishops were equal to Christ, or Priests to
the Apostles, but the accommodation of the sense must be as the Author means it
in the order of things, and not the jurisdiction; for here the distinction will
hold and help us, that is by Papists absurdly applied to the Apostles, to make
them equal in the one, but not in the other: when we are certain of them,
that order, and jurisdiction is the same.

Isiodorus de officiis Ecclesiasticis l. 2. c. 7. explaines fully what Bishops
and Priests hold in common, and what is proper to the one above the other. His
sicut Episcopis, dispensatio ministeriorum Dei commissa est, praesunt enim
Ecclesiis Christi, and in confectione divini corporis and sanguinis consortes
cum Episcopis sunt: similiter and in doctrina populi, and in officio
praedicandi: sed sola propter autoritatem summo sacerdoti Clericorum ordinatio,
and consecratio reservata est. Chrysostom sola ordinatione Presbyteros
Episcopi superant, atque hoc tantum plusquam Presbyteri habere videntur. Saint
Hier. in Epist. ad Euagrium, quid facit Episcopus, excepta ordinatione, quod
non faciat Presbyter, Saint Cyprian. Epist. 65. says thus, Dominus, Apostolos,
and Episcopos elegit, Apostoli elegerunt Diaconos. He vindicates the Bishops
power from a proud and insolent Deacon, and calls him to consider that there is
some thing between his calling and a Bishops, as having men and not Christ
immediately to appoint him. Nazian. in Apolog. Fug. has this short saying,
Episcopi (...) Christi in sacerdotio collegae sunt, they are Christ's companions
in the Priesthood, Aug. in lib. Quaest. ex vet. test. c. 35. Episcopus Christi
imaginem habet, ut rex Dei. Ambr. in 1. Cor. 11. Episcopus habet personam
Christi, and est vicarius Dei. I will end with two of their own, that would
draw from Bishops to the Pope, that which is not his due, which these are
forced to affirm.

Alphon. de Caestr. l. 2. c. 24. de justa Haeret, punit. Cajetani sententia est
ipsamet falsitate falsior, and est contra sententiam omnium sacrorum doctorum,
nam etsi ritus consecrandi Episcopi est ab Ecclesia, tamen potestas Episcopi,
concessa illies a Deo est, non ab homine. The Church may consecrate Bishops,
but it has no power to confer their authority, which is given them of God, and
not of man. Caesar Baronius in Annal. Anno 58. says it is most certain, that
the Apostles had their dignity of Christ, and therefore Bishops that succeed
them must needs have it from the same fountain.

I hope, I may now conclude, that Bishops as they are holy in calling, so they
ought to be honorable in our account, and that our causes of contention ought
to cease, for certainly, as long as we imagine their vocation to be humane, and
their actions inhumane, so long we must needs live at distance, and true
devotion will be devoured up with damnable practices, of which our age is full.
If Ismaels tongue be persecution, Gal. 4.29. then I believe they are persecuted
which seem to persecute others. Never did any man, convicted, go from the seat
of judgment without complaint, and exclamation of accusers, witnesses, or
judges. Men shall gnash their teeth against the most righteous judge and
revenge that with words, or an irefull countenance, which they cannot compass
by their power. I profess its difficult to dispute with Adversaries, and not
to answer them with their own language.

Despisers of Dominions, and ill speakers of Dignities are compared, Jude,
verse 9. to the Devil, who defends himself by lies, and all manner of
lewdness: but those that will dispute with these, must be like Michael the
Arch-angell, not so much as to dare to bring railing accusations against any,
but say, the Lord rebuke them that speak evil of those things they know not,
and in the which they corrupt themselves like bruit beasts, who are enraged if
any man do stir them never so little. Saint Aug. de doct. Christ. 4. cap.
24, dicat sapienter, quod non potest eloquenter: it is better be wise, than
^loquent in this way, and it is true wisdom that knows how to preserve truth
and peace together. This will carry no water about it to quench zeal, but
only so much as may sprinkle it that it may burn the better within compass,
and not fire the house, which is intended but to warm, Governors should have
the less work, if men would walk by this rule. I know scandal will hardly be
escaped in the best intentions, we have to others. But S. Augustine shall
answer for me, Si de veritate scandalum sumitur, utilius permittitur nasci
scandalum, quam relinquatur veritas, if any man will be offended with the
truth, its more profitable to permit the scandal, then part with the truth.
Consider what is said, without passion, and the Lord give us understanding in
all things.

AMEN.
CHAP. VIII. Touching some additions to illustrate some former passages, and
give satisfaction in the use of a day to God, a place for God, and his blessed
Name to be adored above all names.
IGnorance of antiquity breeds the errors of noveltie, Its a ready, but a
most rude answer to an argument from authority, I care not a button for a
Father, I fear not to find the form of Gods service better in I.C. and T.C.
then in holy Ignatius which lived in the times of the Apostles. Liturgies they
like not, all their learning lies in themselves, and they are able in public
to publish the form of prayer before they have made it, and if it were not new
in the motion of their own private spirits, it would spend it self and
languish in the dead letter of a public and common practiced pattern.

For Doctrine and Discipline they will trust nothing but the Scriptures, and by
them they will be tried, but then they must expound them by their private
interpretation, lest the public prove poisoned with humane inventions. Thus
we condemn, and then contemn, judge, and then despise our betters, For my
part, I esteem one blessed Ignatius above all modern Writers for my warrant in
the service and society of the Saints, If they should all set themselves
against him in the government of the Church by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
and the communion of the people with them at the holy Altar, I had rather rest
upon him for a constant and ocular witness, then wrest and wring all to the
new form of this last age.

The Acts of the Apostles may be an history of the Churches plantation for
some twenty years, but Saint John, that saw Churches planted and established,
might well say more, and set down the exact pattern in his Prophecy written
thirty or forty years afterward, and blessed Ignatius living with Saint John,
might speak that plainly which Saint John expressed mystically, yet by his
allusion to the Church of the Jews, might let us see our surrogation into
their place, and cast the form after that fashion, then the which there could
not be a better, setting apart the types which were fulfilled in Christ, for
besides them, we might serve God upon our holy days, as they did upon theirs,
in our holy places, as they did in ^heirs.

Saint John resembled our place of Majesty by theirs, our place of Ministry
by theirs, our place of Auditory by theirs. They kept one day in a week, so do
we, they kept Feasts and Festivals, so do we, as Easter, Pentecost, the
Nativitie of Christ, etc. We are Christians in that wherein they were Jews, and
show that their shadows are converted into perfect light, Revel. 12.1. we have
that under our feet which was the crown of their head, and that upon our whole
body which they looked for. The Sun the Emblem of our Church, and the measure
of our time and service. Their Feasts were all lunary, ours solarie, and
months in Saint John are apposed to days and years, Revel. 11.23. and 12.6.14.
and 13.5. and makes the distinction between a true and false company of
Christians.

I say the Sun is a great ceremony in the Christian Church, and so is the
East where it rises, as may be seen in the solemnity of Baptism, which Saint
Peter mentions, 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism is the interrogation of a good
conscience, and saves the Church from the flood of Apostacy, as Noah's Arc
did eight persons from drowning, Revel. 7.1. The four Winds that shake the
four corners of the earth are barbarous wars, sometimes compared to great and
mighty waters, sometimes to terrible and tempestuous winds, these cast down
Kingdoms, and cause confusion, and there is nothing that can stand these
blasts but the sealed society, and Baptism well understood, will reach the
meaning, as being both the seal of our service and safety with God, if we
keep it, it will keep us, and bind as well God to us for safety, as it binds
us to him in a service as a master.

The making of our vow in Baptism, is wonderful solemn, if we search out
the ceremonies of speaking and standing at the Font or Fountain to be
baptized. The interrogation is Saint Peter's expression, and it was made to the
conscience of the believer, abrenuncias? abrenuncio. Credis? Credo, more
largely thus in the answer of the party to be baptized, (...), etc. I disband
my self from thee (O Satan) and from all thy Angels Autors of Idolatry, and I
do bid a farewell (...), etc. to all thy mediators for me to thee, as a
deceitful God, and I utterly abhor all thy pomps and vain services, etc.
Hereby the way understand how our Ancients made Pagan Plays, the renunciation
of Baptism, and most damnable to all Christians, because they were services to
the dead, and hellish honors to the infernal fiends, foes to Christ Jesus,
and furtherers of all Idolatry against him. The Christians abrenunciation
should be remembered as the feale of his service and safety, if he return
again to false Mediators, he loses the benefit of his Baptism, and
becomes, as it were another man's servant, and seeks safety from another master.

Having made his renunciation, he begins again, and says (...). I bind my
self, and bind my self for ever to thee, o Christ, as my sole Redeemer and
Mediator, and will gain God, or go to God by no other, but thy self, and I
believe, etc. read but the Churches Catechism, and the Churches Baptism, and
we shall find Saint Peter's interrogation, and the answer of a good
conscience made by the party to be baptized.

The standing will stir more the coals of contention, but I cannot help it,
to relate to a reasonable man, what may well be received. In the abrenunciation
of the Devil, the party was to look the Devil in the face, and set it
Westward toward the Devils throne, or his Idol and Altar, and testify his
defiance, and departure from him, and to spit at him in token of great
detestation, Fie, get thee hence, what have I to do with Idols, pomps and
vanities of Satan? This ceremony ended he turns his back upon the enemy, and
looks into the East, and earnestly vows himself to Christ, and from hence
follows the ceremony of prayer into the East, and placing the house of Prayer
ordinarily that way, and also placing the holy Table in the East end, and
making that the Sanctuary. The whole Tabernacle and Temple stood in the mi^^st
of the people of Israel: But when they entered the Courts, the Court of Majesty
in both places was in the West. The Church is Gods throne in general, as was
the Temple and Tabernac^, and Gods peopled well about it, as Israel did, both
in the Wilderness, and the Land of Canaan: But the special throne in the
Church is the holy Table where we have our perfectest communion with God, It
begins in Baptism, ends in the Lords Supper, and they are the best Saints that
are admitted unto it, some reason there is of all that is said from the
distinction of times, The Jews and Gentiles before Christ by their looking
into the West professed the darkness of their days: we by looking into the
East, profess our times to be light.

Its small wisdom to multiply needless questions, and as great wisdom to
answer them that be profitable, To satisfy the weak and the wise alike is
impossible, and whiles one man cries one thing, and some another, the greater
part know not what they do, or wherefore they come together.

It has often been checked in Preachers to speak of needless matters, but
shall that be needless, which the times make necessary? let them ask no
questions, and raise no quarrels, with our Church and we shall count it
needless to contend with them, that are convicted both of our faith and order,
the only two things in Saint Paul's greatest joy, Colos. 2.5. we should be glad
to preach nothing but faith and the fruits of faith working by charity for
salvation, but there is a necessity to preach for order, when they that
profess to be children of our Church, nevertheless appose her holy Orders.
This my addition is not to pursue but pacify the quarrel. Its my duty to
stand for the Church, and persuade with all the members to be of one mind and
mouth.

He that says to me, why is one place more holy then another? I may say to
him, and why is one day more holy then another? Shall Saint Paul resolve us in
one word, upon one ground, for one end, Romans 14.5, 6. Estimation makes the
distinction, fullness of knowledge must warrant it, and the glory of the Lord
Jesus must be the end of it. In Religion every day is alike to a Christian that
will not be a Jew, and one day is above another to a Christian that will not be
profane, He that keeps no day to the Lord, gives him thanks that he is not
bound to keep it, either as a Jew in yearly monthly, or weekly days, for
the Apostle absolves a Christian from all days, Colos. 2.16. and makes the
observation of them to frustrate the Gospel, Gal. 4.10, 11.

I say further, or to keep it as a Christian Jew, that is, to except as some
do the weekly Sabbath, and say by Sabbath days, Col. 2.16. is meant yearly,
but not of the weekly Sabbath, this is prejudice to Christian Religion, that
brings full freedom first to make all days alike before a Christian can make
his choice of any day, There must in this point be a full abrogation of the law
of days, before a Christian be able to observe any other day to the Lord.
Estimation of days with fullness of knowledge to the glory of Christ is first
to keep no day against him, and then to keep any with thankfulness for him
that has redeemed us from the bondage of the Law, Our duty is to serve him,
and our freedom to make choice of such days as may be esteemed to his glory,
not only the Lords day in every week, but all other days esteemed by
Christians above others to the honor of him whose servants they professed
themselves. He that esteems one day above another may be a Jew, and obstinate
in his ignorance, yet a good Christian that holds all days alike in the
fullness of persuasion, may likewise in the same hold one day above another,
and give God glory in both, yea, greater then he that is entangled either to
profane a day that is lawfully commanded, or to be superstitious in keeping
one of his own will, and say it is commanded, when he cannot prove it but upon
the ground of his own imagination.

The fourth Commandment once commanded the seventh day in express words, but
never the first in the like terms, it always commands the duty of a holy
day, and when all days are alike it cease not to command the duties of a
holiday, which are to be observed according to the determination which God has
left to the Christian Church, which has made the first day of the week above
all other days, what advise he gave the Apostles to begin it, we read not,
their example is warrantable upon two grounds. First, because Christ made all
days alike, and therefore they had liberty to choose. Secondly, because he
made it lawful to esteem one day above another, and the assignment has been
to the first day, and it were a sin either to deny the first as a Jew, or
neglect the second as a profane person.

I will conclude with the Apostle. Who, Gal, 4.10. in a full enumeration
confirms our point in hand, and takes away time as our Savior takes away
place, John 4.21, 22. for they are holy alike, and common alike, so that a man
would admire what they mean that plead holiness of time, and implead
holiness of place. If God be no where to be worshipped, he is to be
worshipped at no time, for the solemitie of the one inferres the solemnity of
the other, and the nullitie of the one the nullitie of the other.

Time and place are but elements of Religion, and in themselves weak and
beggarly, and commonly the weakest desire them, and see not their bondage. God
knows how to begin the A B C, but he likes not men should learn no further.
He compares time with time, and tells the Galath^ans that once they knew not
God, but did as it were kindle their own fires, and compass themselves about
with their own sparkles, walk in the light of this fire, warmed themselves by
these speaks, and for reward of their bad service might have lain down in
sorrow. Esaias 50.11. But God in mercy altered their condition to know God, and
that which is more to be known of God, in obeying the voice of Christ to
receive light in him, to trust in his Name, and stay upon him as their God. To
this all other things are darkness, and yet as Philosophere teach us, non
dantur purae tenebrae, there is no p^^e darkness without some mixture of light.

Their service and their seasons wanted signification. Their service unto them
which by nature were no gods, testified of a duty done to an undue object, him
whom you ignorantly worship (says Sa^^^ Paul) I declare un^o you, Acts 17.23.
Their seasons were now out of reason, and especially to mix themselves with the
Jews, and to observe their days, that is, their weekly Sabbath. Month^, that
is, every new Moon. Times, that is, their three Feasts of Easter, Pentecost;
and Tabe^macles. Years, that is, every seventh year, and the Iubile. And here
Saint Augustine must be a guide unto us, lest we take hold of time, and turn
it quite from God. Contra Adamant. Manich. cap. 15. Nos quoque and dien^
Dominis um and ^n Pascha soleuniter ^e lebitam^^, and quasli^ alias
Ghristicanas dierum fest^^ (...), se^ (...) quo pertioneant, non temporae
observamus, sed quaeillis significantur tem^: poribus. We keep the Lords day
and his Passover solemnly, and all other Christian Festivals, but yet ^ee
observe not times, but the things signified i^ them, because we understand the
ends to which they are appointed. Christians having liberty, use their time to
his glory, to whom they owe themselves, and as the Apostle^ kept the Jewish
Saboath, to gain them by the opportunit^ r^^tie of the day. They kept also the
^ ordaiday in marvelous: equity, to remember him that had redeemed them, and
no man will deny that it is most equal that Jesus Christ should have such a
part of our time, (...) Creation move us to yield him the last day in the (...)
Redemption will much move force (...) find him (...) thy of the first.

Wednesday and Friday are kept fests, and the one is in memory of the treason
of Judas, which must be thought of, as ours, to humble us; for Iuda^ could
never have betrayed Christ, it our fins had not done it, and we cannot remember
this but with detestation of ourselves, and grieve that we have done wrong to
the most innocent, as well as the most holy God. Aperpet^all fast would never
expiate the evil, yet to remember it always ways and by the day to keep it
in memory is a duty no godly man will deny, and his service that day may well
be the Letanie, as very fit in many passages to excite the humble soul to
lamentation. Friday is the memory of the curse for our treason; no malediction
had been upon our blessed Savior, if we had not laid it upon him, and sin,
and Gods curse, and all the causes of our lamentation, which as we must never
forge^, so there will be reason found why the Church chooses days to remember
them.

It is true that Saint Augustine tells us, we observe not times as Jews, and
put Religion and confidence in a day, as i^ we had done a great work, and
deeply meritorious with God. But we know there significations, as the Lords day
to remember his Refurrection: Festival days, to rejoice in the triumphs of
his servants; and set their examples before us as pat ternes of piety. Fasts
to humble our selves for our sins, and Gods curses upon us, to feeke some
special blessing upon our selves, and such Ministers as the Church ordains
for us, as the quatuor jejunia etc. Indeed we make Ceremonies of substance,
and substance of Ceremonies. Some stand for a day, as if it were all their
religion. Others abhor their signification as superstition, and little use is
made of any thing to give God due glory. I wish Saint Augustines words were
well remembered that Christians observe not times, but their godly signification
and holy use; and so I end for time.

The same liberty that is purchased for days, is also obtained for places.
All places are alike to a Christian, that is not a Jew, and one place is above
another to a Christian, that is not a profane person, and dare say the Church
and Table are common when Gods people are not in them. The Temple is a type of
Christ, and therefore but one Temple. Christ is come and has made all places
alike, and he were a Jew that would defend either the Tabernacle of Moses, or
Temple of Solomon to take away his coming, John 4.21. We believe that the
hour is come, that neither in Mount Gerizim nor Mount Sion, but every where
God is to be served, yet what place soever serves to record his name is above
all other common places, and holds the Ancient distinction of places in respect
of the persons meeting, to wit, the throne of Majesty, the place of Ministry,
and the place of auditory.

Neither let it seem strange that we speak of the East or of the Altar, for
both are warrantable by better authority, then can be brought by him that is
set to appose Solomon's Temple, as the Tabernacle before it had all the honor
in the West, so had the most ancient Temples of the Gentiles, and both are
worldly and beggarly rudiments of the times of darkness, in comparison of our
times of light. A thing I could show at large, but now I will limit my self to
a few testimonies to declare. I speak not without my betters.

Clemens Alexandrinus l. 7. p. 724. says that, (...). The most ancient Temples
looked into the West, and that a Christian turning from such Temples and their
service did (...), etc. stand opposite to Idols, that is, with his face into
the East. He first renounced the Idol with his face into the West, and then
to signify his conversion looked into the East, (...), etc. was taught to turn
into the East, It is plain that confession of Faith, and the prayers of Faith
were with faces into the East, (...), etc. As light shines out of darkness,
etc. A Pagan looked into the West the place of darkness, so did the Jew upon
the same reason, though not with the same Religion. The one is an Idolater, and
confesses blindness, the other a true worshipper, yet looking Westward for
want of the Suns appearance, Satan is Gods Ape, and seeks in the Ceremony to
abuse God, yet may the Jew no more forsake the West, then the Christian the
East, because the Devil will be doing with both, Saint Hier. ad c. 6. Antor in
mysteriis primum renunciamus eum qui in occideus ^st, nobisque moritur cum
peccatis, and sic versi ad eraeutem, pactu^^ inimus cum Sole justitiae, and ei
nos servituros esse permittimus, In the mysteries, first we renounce him that
is in the West, and dies to us with sin, and so turning to the East, we enter
a covenant with the Sun of righteousness, and promise that will we serve
him. Dyonis. l. de Eecles. Hier. c. 2. ad occasuminversus Satanam abjurabis,
rursusque ad ortum te converteris Deum confiteberis, being turned to the West,
thou shall abjure Satan, and again converted to the East, thou shall
acknowledge God, Ambr. cap. 2. De iis qui mysteriis initiantur, ad Orientem
converteris, qui enim renuncia^ diabolum ad Christum convertitur, illum directa
ceruit obtuitu, etc. Thou art turned to the East, for he who renounceth the
Devil is converted to Christ, and beholds him withdirect look. Saint John
seems to me to allude to this custom. Revel. 7.2. The Angel asconds from the
East, to meet and embrace them, that look toward him, and seal them with the
safe tie of the Sacrament by which Christians seal their service unto him.

Saint Chrysostom calls Baptism (...), the very word used by Saint John,
Saint August. calls it regium characterem, Nazian. (...). Clem. Alex. (...),
and Saint Basil explains it to the sense of Saint John, Nisi signatus sit super
te vultus Domini nisi characterem in te agnoscat Angelus, quomodo pro te
pugnabit, aut ab inimic is vindicabit. Nicet as ^choliastes, quin per eum
consignuti cujusnam Domini sim^s, agnoscimin, at que a^^sidi^s; tuti
conservamur? Baptism is the ^eale, and the Angel brings it from the East, and
at (...) day the custom is observed in the Church of (...), by the witnesses
for children that first look in to the West, and then into the East.

For an Altar, four arguments persuade me in the Apostles words, to take it
for the holy Table. Heb, 13.10. First, it is that which Christians have for
their communion in opposidon to Iewer. Secondly, it is such an Altar as we may
be partakers of. Thirdly, this para king must be by earing, in opposition to
their eating. Fourthly; this eating is sacramental, and a sign of Christ
exhibited as their^ was of Christ still to be exhibited, and so the sense is
the same with partakers of a Table, 1. Cor. 10.21. in opposition to a Pagan
Altar, for the Apostle compares Table with Table, and Altar with Altar, and is
indifferent in the appellation, as the Holy Ghost is elsewhere, Ezekiel. 41.22.
Mal. 17.

This because it is the sign of our greatest communion with Christ, is also
the chief sign of his presence, and serves to set forth the place of
Majesty, All men have communion with Christ in the rest of his Ordinances. All
may come to the word, be prayed for, but in this only the faithful are
admitted, novices to be instructed, Penitents to be absolved, and Petitioners
not yet admitted, must all be gone when there comes the celebration of the
Sacrament, and only the faithful distinguished from all the rest, must draw
near to the holy Table, and take from it the holy Sacrament.

Say not, why be not the Pulpit, Font, Deske, etc. as holy, as the Table, you
may receive a reason if you will from Gods more special pretense, and our
greatest communion with Christ; Its the highest advancement a Christian has to
be fed at Gods board, and with Gods very bod y^^ and I see no error to conclude
as I have done, that the holy Table is Gods Throne first to signify his
Majesty, as being the Sanctuary and most holy place in the Church where it
stands. It signifies likewise his presence with his people, that though they
see him not, with their bodily eyes, yet they may be assured by their faith to
find him where he fixes his throne, Christ is not absent from his Church, no
needs he a Vicar to supply his place, but he give us good assurance of his
presence and by many testimonies tells us he is with as, and in nothing form
(...) really as in his holy Sacrament.

Lastly, for all the names of God they are alike to a Christian, except he be^
Jew and hold one name more ineffable then the rest, and yet one narhe may be
above another (...) a Christian, excopt he will be profane, and show no
reverence where he has the greatest reason, first, from Christ himself that
merit^ a name, Secondly, from all creatur^^, which show it to be better then
theirs. Thirdly, (...) selves, that have no name of, God that con^ins us and
(...) one; which is Jesus. Fourthly, in respect of God who is best known to us
by this name.

First from merit, that Christ merits salvation for us, (...), that he merit
^ought for himself is denied by some, but in this the Scripture is more then
man's authority, Phil. 2.9. Therefore because he humbled himself God (...) him
a name (...). 1^4. which he has obtained as a Son, as a Savior, as an
heir, as a Redeemer, Heb. 2.9. Ye see (...) for suffering (...) with honor
and glory. That which Jesus merits alone that is his due, but he merits honor
at his Fathers hand, and therefore his Father will have us give it him, and
reverence Jesus above all names, and whosoever denies it, does not his duty,
and to him. I leave him, that will not put up the injury of the stiffe-knee,
and untamed tongue, its merit, and therefore must be given to him, Thou art
worthy to take the Book and open the Seals, thou wast killed and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood, Rev. 5.9. worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power, riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing, Verse
12. As God he has this name by nature for who is the Savior besides the Lord,
Christ has by merit of his obedience title to glory and the exaltation of his
name which are otherwise and without that of right belonging to him by the
prerogative of his divine nature, and hypostaticall union, but by desert of his
humiliation, he has merited, that his Deity should be acknowledged,
nevertheless for compunction with our nature, that as man he be adored with
the honor of God, and his Name advanced above all names. As man he obtains it
by grace, not the grace of adoption, but of personal union which is peculiar
grace in Christ, for manhood cannot deserve to be united to God, but it is of
unspeakable grace to grant such a privilege to our flesh in the Son of God,
as God and m^n, his virtues are meritorious, and his whole obe^^en^^ both
active and passive, a full purchase of redemption to us, and of glory to
himself, His exaltation is the fruit of his humiliation, and the lifting up of
his head, of his drinking of the break in the way, Psalm. 110.7. Now a name
were nothing without the honor, and therefore (...) his name, in his name, or
to his name it is due both in the subjection of the knee, and confession of the
tongue, and that of all, first, of those that have righteousness and strength
in him to be saved, Esaias 45.^4. Secondly, of them that are incensed against
him, and which at the day of judgment shall be ashamed that they have been
enemies to him and his in this world. Esaias 45.24. and made no use of his
redemption and death for them, who as their Lord redee^ing them and raising
them, will be their judge, though they would not have him their Savior.

This place is the original text to which that, Romans 14.11. and that other,
Phil 2.10, 11. are branches, which are miserably chopped and cut off from the
true sense to be set against our Churches Canon, which gives an excellent
reason for veneration at his name, took from the perfection of merit, and from
this that all graces and assistances are in him and from him, and no defect in
him, but in our selves, if we be not saved, who therefore in naming his sacred
name Jesus, is with all lowly reverence to be honored in such ceremony as
ancient custom, and the authority of our Church requires.

The second is from the names of all the creatures put together, which are not
for excellency to be compared to this one name that the Son of God has
obtained. I know, Heb. 1.4. the name Jesus is not mentioned, and to avoid it
our adversaries will not have it so much as to be understood, because all is
said of the son, yet I am sure the words immediately preceding are for Jesus
humbled and exalted, first, by himself he purges our sins. Secondly, sits
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, his honor and humility go
together, and the one is the cause of the other, Jesus humbled is the cause of
Jesus exalted, Jesus crucified, Acts 2.36. is therefore made Lord and Christ,
because he willingly for us suffered so great a reproach, and the two titles
are not greater than the virtue meriting, and the name merited, as some have
said and written it upon their own warrant, but they are as common attributes
to a proper name, in which is the reason why they are given as dignities to it.
Jesus is therefore crucified, that he may be Lord of all, and declared as the
anointed of God, in whom there is fullness of redemption.

The name that is better than Angels, and so consequently above all creatures
is to be worshipped, but such is the name Jesus given to the Son of God, we
need not fear a sound for that is less than Angels, and if it be Idolatry to
worship them, then much more to adore a word, Jesus is both the name and the
thing, Phil. 2.9. A name above every name, of the creatures, and that serves
sufficiently for the force of this argument, that we may worship the name
Jesus, if we make it better than Angels, and therefore no Idolatry to
reverence, bow, or bend in at or to the name, for we are not to seek evasions
in the variety of the words used promiscuously in the Scriptures, we may not
take Gods name in vain, and the reverence of his name is the worship of it, for
Gods name is himself, and to say, as some do, I dare not, that reverence of
Gods name, and adoration of it are not the same, It may be so in his Word and
Ordinances, which I reverence but adore not, because they are not God: but of
his name and himself I cannot so speak, Esaias 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my
name, and my glory I will not give to another, etc.

His name, himself and his glory are alike, and may be given to nothing less
than himself, I speak of the name Jesus, not as given to some men by humane
imposition, but as given to our Redeemer by God, with a command of his
adoration, and so I end my second argument.

Thirdly, from the benefit which is ours, we never name our benefactors, but
with great reverence and respect. Of all the names of God, this is above all
names to us, for all other names contain God himself as he is against us,
this only includes us, and our salvation in it, and therefore is given of God to
us, so to think of it, and how can it be in our thoughts, above all other
names, without reverence and respect unto it, Acts 4.12. as there is salvation
in no other person, so there is no other name to express it, and therefore we
may well make our expressions of reverence at the mention of it.

Lastly, from God himself made known unto us, Exodus 6.3. As he reveals
himself, so are we to worship him, and as he does this by one name more than
another, so may we acknowledge it without offense. Now of all names none more
expressive of Gods goodness unto us, than this name Jesus, and therefore we
esteem it, of all the names of God most precious, and in which he is most
delighted to be worshipped, to confess, that Jesus is the Lord, Phil. 2.11. is
a glory to Christ, but the text says it is to the glory of God the Father; and
therefore no wrong done to one person, when we perform worship in the name of
an other.

Shortly, In Religion
All days are alike, one day is above another. All places are alike, one place
is above another. All names are alike, one name is above another.

There is no contradiction nor opposition to Gods Word, when all days are
alike, to make one day above another, when all places are alike to prefer one
place before another, when all names are alike to advance one name before
another, Estimation begins the difference, and where it puts none against God,
it may set up one for God, Estimation must be grounded upon knowledge that we
be not ignorant in our thoughts, and all must be to the glory of him who has
purchased our liberty from the bondage of the one, and granted us freedom in
the other, to make our choice of such circumstances as may advance and
advantage our Religion.

Acts 16.3. Gal. 2.3. in Timothy and Titus, teach us wisdom how to walk with
the wise, and yet to the wicked to give no place by subjection for an hour, to
prejudice the truth of the Gospel. Emissaries and Spies in the Church must be
avoided, and it was Saint Peter's great fault, uk rthopoden, to give offense in
seeking to avoid it, and his fear to offend was his greatest offense, and that
which is most to be lamented, (...), his hypocrisy is the cause of others
dissembling with him, and Barnabas, Saint Paul's companion is corrupted in this
evil concord, and the Apostle left alone to vindicate the truth of the Gospel.
He that went furthest in the Ceremony and circumstance of Religion, is the
strictest and stoutest to stand for the substance.

A good pattern for our days of peaceable proceedings in the Church, Acts
21.21. Saint Paul is accused not to live after the Church customs, advised to
show the accusation to be false, and to submit with four men to purify
himself, and be at the charges of shaving for a Nazarite, and although he
vowed not with the four men, yet he had not avoided that vow, Acts 18.18. and
now readily to give satisfaction undergoes the whole counsel of his brethren
and although the event proved not successful: yet was it sufficient to show
his care to be at the Churches command to the utmost, not to offend any zealous
of the Law, especially believing, and in whom there was hope to be reclaymed
from holding Moses against Christ. Would God this moderation were in our times,
and that people could discern between circumstances and substence in true
Religion.

Jude, Verse 23. hate the garment spotted with the flesh, is strangely taken by
some, and compared to a shadow, when it includes a mayn substance as fire to
devour, and out of which, nothing can save but quick pulling out. Creepers
into houses, Verse 4. murmurers and complayners of their Governors are
compared to a leprous infectious garment, which we must fly as the Plague. I
see no such pestilence in a Surplesse as in these, from which Good Lord,
deliver us, and let every good man pull away his neighbor from pinning
himself upon their sleeves, that slily creep into corners to seduce men from
our Church, and let all learn to lay this text more against an Heretic and a
Schismaticke, than a Ceremony of the Church; for certainly the sense is more
in that, than in this.

1. These. 5.23. Abstain from all appearance of evil, is another proof against
Ceremonies, and yet it is clear, the Apostle means it of prophecy. First, we
must not despise it, if we mean not to quench the spirit. Secondly, prophecy
must be tried. Thirdly, what is good must be held. Fourthly, that which is
evil, the very appearance of it must be avoided. This is ill applied to
Ceremonies; for it is not the evil appearance of every thing we must abstain
from: for then we should hold nothing that is good, especially the best things;
for commonly they most offend, and find sense an ill judge of them: but here
again, as before, take heed not only of evil doctrines, but their very
appearance. Or if any will have the words general, they must be applied to
that which is evil, and that by a gradation. Evil must be avoided, not only
in the substance: but the very circumstances, we must not admit the least of
evils, and therefore the thing must be evil that we avoid. To say it may
appear, so to be, is not enough; for what will not some with their wits work
into ill apprehensions, and make the people like bird-eyed-horses start at any
thing. Let men be solid, and not superficial. Study to be serious, and not
verbal, in setting false faces upon things.

I have done, and must add my conclusion from the Canticles, and wish we may
see the times set forth in these words, Cant. 7.1. How beautiful are thy
goings with shoes, O Princes daughter; the joints of thy thighs are like
jewels: the work of the hand of a cunning workman. O God, thou art the cunning
workman, and only able to set our joints like jewels, and make our thighs
stable, and the very wheel-bones (for so the word signifies in the
articulation) ready to holy motions and conversions to thy self, and then I am
sure we shall have our feet shod, and not walk barefoot upon these sharp
stones, and scruples daily cast in amongst us. We have thy Gospel of peace,
shoe our feet with the preparation of it, Ephesians. 6.15. and put an end to these
miserable wars amongst us. Thou that give us the fignes of thy presence,
preserve us in thy truth. Let thy Ministers be clothed with holiness, and thy
people rejoice in thy salvation. Let the blessed Angels pitch their tents about
us, and watch for us, They are thine honorable attendants, let them be from
thee to us as our Corps-du-guarde, Amen.

AMEN.

