A MODEL OF DIVINITY, CATECHISTICALLY COMPOSED. WHEREIN IS DELIVERED THE
MATTER AND Method of RELIGION, according to the Creed, ten Commandments,
LORDS Prayer, and the SACRAMENTS. BY JOHN YATES, Bachelour in Divinity, and
Minister of Gods Word in St Andrews in NORWICH.

PSALM. 40.10. I have not concealed thy loving kindness, and truth from the
great Congregation.

Gregory in Ezekiel. Hom. 3. Let the Preacher like beaten burning iron, not only
heat his next neighbors, but cast sparks a far off to others.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for Fulke Clifton, and are to be sold on
New-fish street hill, under St Margrets Church. 1622.

TO OUR DEAR MOTHER THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
THy Children [deare Mother] are grown more nice then wise, and fallen into
those humors that are fitter for controlement then observation. I desire to be
no challenger of my Brethren; yet is it my duty to be a lover, yea, and (as I
am able) a Champion of thy truth. I am deceived, if this be not one of the
maine grounds of that universal decay of knowledge, wherewith our people are
commonly checked, to wit, that they are not either catechized at all, or else
in as many forms as they have change of teachers: one teacher (as it were)
making work for another, and so pleasing the fantasy of their Scholars, that
like some woman with child, that longs for that piece which she sees upon
another trencher, and swounes if she miss it, or some dainty Dames, that
dote upon every beauty, they are every day loue-sicke a new, 2 Timothy 3.6.7.
and like S. Paul's silly women, are ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth. My care shall be to bring them home again to their
Mothers diet, and let them see both the meat and milk she has plentifully
provided for them But before I enter upon her store, I must acquaint them that
all their travel abroad to fill their brains with new learning, has but bin
to go Northward for heat, and in vain to seek that candle which they did
carry in their own hands. What plenty of water can there be, where the lead
of the cisterne is put all into the Pipes? We have made so many conveyances of
the Art of Religion into the brains and breasts of our hearers, that if a man
would yield to run after his eye or appetite, he shall never know where to
rest, and after many idle excursions, shall lie down weary, but unsatisfied.
Art like Sampsons hair is fair and strong. Art quasi Arx, quia s^ma and
pulchra.
Strong in precepts, beautiful in method. And if both these be to be found in
any Catechism, ours shall carry away the honor of it. Others that swerve from
ours, are but like a continual pumping, without mending the leake. Where
confusion for want of method, runs in faster, then precepts like nails can
fasten themselves. Some teach the Commandments before the Creed, as if they
would teach a man to go before he live; others cut the Seals in the midst of
the writing, as if that which seals all should not hang at the bottom of the
bill, bond, or bargain, etc. But our rule of Religion is to begin with faith,
by which we live, then to come to the law of life by which we walk: after all
this to lead us to Prayer, least we should faint in faith, or wax weary of
works, and lastly, finding faith but weak, obedience imperfect, and prayers
not as they should be, brings us to Gods seals as the safety and security of
all our estate; Ephesians. 1.13.14.
for being sealed with the holy spirit of promise, after our faith in God, we
have the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession. But I desire not to be like a tedious Musician, ever tuning, never
playing; I come therefore first to let you see the milk of our Catechism, in
a brief and short view of it, and then having brought you from the spoone to
the knife, to let you behold your more solid meat out of it. You shall find
it sufficient both for babes in Christ, and grown men And if you be expert in
the first, then may you remove a form higher; for I would not have a Christian
like a dying man, or one sick of a Palsy, that having his senses, memory, and
speech, should want faculty loco-motiue, or power to stir his hands, or his
feet: that being neither deaf nor dumb to hear or answer, should yet have
withered hands, or lame legs to live as a Christian. All that I wish is that
we first labor for the happiness of knowledge, and then join with it the
happiness of practice. Some Artisans might live as well as landed men by their
earnings, if they had not a worse boon with so excellent a faculty, of
idleness, and ill husbandry. It should be a shame for us to have the
Philosophers stone of the truest riches, and yet to live like beggars. Behold
(O Christian) the transcendent objects of thy aspiring thoughts, and ever keep
thy soul upon the wing in meditations of the kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof: loathing those muck-wormes of the world, which like the
Gentles breed of putrefaction, or Beetles feeding in the dung, can relish
nothing but earthly things, or think of no other godliness but gain. 2 Timothy
2.7.
Consider (I pray thee) what is said, and the Lord give thee understanding in
all things.

Celeberrimae apud Cantabrigenses Academiae, bonarum omnium literarum and
Christianae pietatis Nutrici, and alteri Anglicanae Ecclesiae Seminario gratiam
and pacem in Christo sempiternam.
NObis Musarum aemulis (Illustrissima Matter Academia) (...) clausum and
reconditum plusquam Herculano labor retexisti, and iudicij acrimonia velut
clave quadam aperuisti, repagula obstantia sustulisti, fores velut divina
virgula tactas effregisti, luceque linguaru^ and artium illata, reipsa probasti
quod (...) dicere solemus: (...). Nos igitur sic literarum mellinijs sub tuo
auspicio (...) operae pretiumfacturi videmur, si hanc ex alvearijs tuis
concinnatam (...) tibi exhibeamus. Si rem spectabis ipsam, sacrosanctae Dei
veritati (...) est: si nostras lucubrationes aestimabis, perexiguum and
levidense id quidem est, and scriptum crassiuscule. Caetorum operosum, mea
quidem sententia, foret totius (...) vtilitates vel percensere, nedum fando
(...) explicare: cum de ea statim dicturo occurrat (...); praecipuas tamen,
velut exerto digito monstrabo, vt artium studioso, si fieri queat, calcar
animumque addam, ad earum diligentem multamque lectionem.

Ens primum est omnium bonorum (...), and ens a primo corundem (...): illud est
Artium author, hoc subiectum; illudagit, hoc patitur: and quia omne agens agit
ad modum recipientis; hinc Deus (...) quoad nos (...) demonstrat: egregie tamen
(...) rerum creatione, gubernatione and obsequio depingitur. (...); quia
efficax primi entis sapientia, vt est ab ipso profecta primum, sic ad ipsum
reversa demum est. Eruditio in circulo idem habet principium and finem; hinc a
deo in deum quasia puncto in punctum (...) digitum ad remintendit. Et quia,
sicut punctum tenuissimum, aciem fugit, nobiscum per circulum agit. Est enim
(...) omnium entium et artium a Deo pro subordinatione finium ad vltimum finem
accurata comprehensio. (...), quia finem non attigerunt, (...), and illi (...),
principium ad finem non applicantes.

(...), respectu sui motus ad finem est (...): respectu terminorum a quo in
quem (...); and respectu subiecti recipientis (...). Atque in hoc subiecto est
and refracta and distincta. Refracta ab ente primo per totam suam creationem et
providentiam. Nam sicut literae refractae specillis ocularijs and maiores
factae ab hebetioribus oculis percipiuntur: sic ens subtilissimu^ and
spiritualissimum in ente a primo sui-ipsius vestigia impressa relinquit, ne
rationis (...) offendat. Excellens enim sensibile corrumpit sensum. etc. Hince
e creaturis circularis ista sapientia irradiatione acta in speculum
intellectus, ab eodem primo recipitur per rationum intelligentiam, and
axiomatum scientiam. Secundo, vel intus exagitatur per sapientiae discursum,
and prudentiae methodum, vel externe reflectitur ad rem faciendam per artem,
hominem instruendum sive verbo per doctrinam and disciplinam, sive scripto per
libros. Sic (...) incomparabilis beneficium, Deo (vt habet proverbium)
hominibusque plaudentibus, tanquam (...) e caelo prolapsa est.

Deinde haec ars entis a Deo proprijs subiectis distinguitur. Rebus enim certis
a Deo concinnatur. Ratio, oration, Quantitas, natura and bonum quasi entis a
primo (...) generalia cum eo concreta and conflata sunt. Ex Ratione oritur
dialectica; ex oratione pura, Grammatica, ex ornata, Rhetorica. Atque tres
istae arts generales appellantur: Non ratione subiecti, quod per (...)
proprium est, sed (...) quod per (...) agit vbique. Ex quantitate oriuntur
Arithmetica and Geometria, illa ex discreta, haec vero ex continua. Ex natura
proficiscitur Physica, cuius propagines sunt fere infinitae. Ex totius mundi
fabrica Cosmographia, Partium, elementorum Geographia, Hydrographia cum art
nautica etc. Elementarium, primo ex inanimatis, lapidibus (...), and hinc ex
preciosis ars Gemmaria, etc. Nec non ex vilioribus Lapidaria, Carbonaria, etc.
Ex metallis (...), and hinc (...), cum reliquis quae occupantur curca argentum,
aes, plumbum, stannum, etc. Ex viventibus, plantis (...), ex Stellis respectu
motus Astronomia, praedictionum Astrologia. Ex animalibus (hominibus, scil: and
Brutis) innumerae arts recensentur. Enascuntur etiam arts ex rerum naturalium
qualitatibus vt ex sonis, Musica, visu, optica, coloribus, arts pingendi,
tingendi, etc. Atque ista quasi per transennam praetereuntes strictim aspeximus.

Ex bono, sieve vltimo rerum fine Theologia emanat, ex cuius font and radice
propagatur Ethica; ex decalogo enim enascitur, estque vel vnius hominis, qua
ergaseipsum sebene gerit, Velplurium, quae oeconomicae and politicae nominibus
insignitur, Atque ex quinto praecepto originem ducit. Sed audax sum ego, quod
hoc inclytu^ artium Athenaeum illustri hominu^ (...) exornatum his recensendis
suspensum detineam. Ne igitur matrem diutius demorer, exponam quorsum haec
dictasunt, scil: vt Deum artium omnium authorem admiremur, and creatur as non
hominum phantasmata pro artium subiectis (...) scrutemur, ex quarum latifundijs
literae reconditae eruuntur, and Deo gratias agamus, quod observatione diuturna
notandis rebus nos fecit artifices, idque artem (...), non (...). Lectissima
Matter, iste (...), quamvis long infra gravitatem tuam subsidat, tamen, nisi
mihi ipse sim Suffenus, magis ab (...) tua veniam, quam soveriorem ab (...)
censuram expectat. Caeterum (...) and prurientes ingenij homunciones tantum
morcr, quantum, aut numeru^ lupus aut torrentia flumina ripas. Consultius enim
esse iudico, me vt verberent homines audaciae calumnia, quam vt tu desideres
nostrum aliquod officium and observantiae testimonium. Affero igitur tibi quas
potui mandragoras in agro Theologiae repertas: limatulis and politulis illis,
quibus verba quam veritas pluris est, nullae sunt herbae in nostro calatho,
nisi forsan nimiarum elegantiaru^ gravedine laborantes hinc petant (si placer)
(...), quo veluti Sabaei veternum discutiant, sensuque hebescentes
expergefaciant. De verbis minus fui sollicitus, fretus te sermonis infantiam,
nec spectare nec curare; vna veritas and tibi and mihi proposita est. In cuius
vestigatione Alexandrum Richardsonum, olim puerum lactentem, and in gremio tuo
sedentem, mammamque appetentem leviter presso vestigio persecuti sumus. Deus in
perpetuum tam pulchra faciat te prole parentem. Hactenus invictos pugiles in
promptu habuisti, qui percellant and delumbent Antichristum, and aevo
sempiterno confidimus te fruituram. In votis hoc vnum habeo, vt munus hoc
nostrum tenuiculum pro voluntate emetiri velis, and in bonam partem accipere
digneris. Valeto. Anno vltimae patientiae sanctorum. 1621.

Tibi in Christo addictissimus Io: Yatesius.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr GEORGE BYRCH, Mayor of that famous and renowned
CITY of NORWICH. AND TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sr THOMAS HIERON, one of the
Governors of the same City, and for this year high SHERIFF of NORTHFOLKE.
TOGETHER WITH THE WHOLE Senate and Society of the worthy and worshipful
Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Common Council, Commoners and
Citizens, I. Y. wishes the prosperity of all true peace and piety.
I Should not (Right worshipful and worthy Society) have presumed to offer
this place to so famous a City, but that the parts do ever, or at least
should, follow the nature and process of the whole. Our common Mother, in and
by whom we are all borne (...) brought (...) Christians, challenges our first
service. And because some of you as well as my self have enjoyed so excellent
a Nurse and Foster mother, cherishing and feeding us with the purest and most
pleasant liquor, til we came to some full and perfect age, we should do
amiss, if we should forget her in the chiefest and noblest of our thoughts.
To you therefore I come, as being sent from the breasts of my Mother, to give
you a taste of her milk. Only remember who it is that must give the increase
both to her in laboring, and you in profiting. Rebecca may Cook the Venison:
but Isaac must give the blessing. We can but speak to the ear, God must
speak to the Conscience. I wish we could condescend to the infancy of our
Nurcelings, and become all unto all, rather studying to make our people
Scholars, then to show our selves Scholars unto them. When the Jews heard
Paul, Act. 22.2. to speak in their mother tongue, they both kept the more
silence, and gave the better audidence. Accept therefore the following
Treatise, as a due acknowledgement of my love and thankfulness, wishing not
only with Philosophers prosperity, Physicians health, the common people joy,
Romans safety, S. Paul, welfare, but also with our blessed Savior, Mar.
9.50. Peace powdered with piety: otherwise these congratulations of our joy,
shall but aequalize a drunken Nabals Sheep sheering, or the fatting of some
Epicurean hogs, or the celebration of the festival revels of the dissolute
crew, whose diet and dainties are the Devils food. Cleanse therefore the Augean
stables of our drunken Tavernes and Tippling houses, with all the blind vaults
of professed filthiness. The City of Alexandria in Egypt, nourished the great
Bird Ibis, to devour the garbage and offall of it, and to cleanse the
streets; but he left of his own filth and beastliness more noisome behind
him. They are the Devils deputies not Gods, who being set in their places, like
the Kites feed themselves with the offalls of the people; I mean, bribes to
pervert the course of Justice. They who in reformation seem to amend the
exorbitances of their places, and do it not heartily, imitate the Physician,
who in an Hecticall body, labors to kill the itch, etc. Rouse up your
spirits, awaken your Christian courage, and set your selves heartily against
the crying sins of these times. But I must take heed least I run into the
inconvenience objected by that Spartane to the Athenians, That wise men did
consult, and the ignorant give sentence. We may easily judge our superiors
(consulting of remedies) to be guilty of the increasing of the maladies and
mischiefs of the State. Drunkenness and the nurseries of it, usurping
Sobrieties kingdom, as Adoniah did Salomons, have gotten so strong an head,
that they can hardly be resisted. Only let the Magistrate take to himself a
firm forehead, courageous heart, busy hands, and not partial, execute laws
with strictness and resolution, and God shall bless the same with happy
success: If otherwise, God will suffer wickedness to punish it self, and
that no power can turn the stream, because God will have it carry the
offenders headlong to their perpetual ruin, and his own revenge: yet must
the good Magistrate, even swim against the tide, knowing that without
conquest, it is glorious to have resisted: in this alone he were an enemy if
he should do nothing, because he sees so little good come of all his traveile.
Let but (worthy Magistrates) the endeavor be yours, and you may with comfort
leave the success to God; and so I cease, never ceasing to pray for you.

Yours in all Christian duty and service, JOHN YATES.

An advertisement to the READER.
THe truth and trial of this treatise (careful Reader) may I hope the better
be accepted without distrust or distaste, because it has passed through the
fire, fan and furnace of two judicious and learned Divines, whom for honors
sake, I am bound to mention unto thee. The one is the Reverend and worshipful
Mr Tho: Goad, Dr of Divinity, by whose labor this work is carefully
corrected, and iudiciously supplied, where it might offend through want or
weakness, in any part or power of it: his stars or his spits (that I may use
Origens notes) have been welcome to this my Tractate. I expected his
impartial sentence, and he has done justly to shut his friend out of doors,
while this work was discussed. Know therefore with me (good Reader) by whom
thou have profited, and be thankful. The other is Mr Alexander Richardson, now
deceased, to whom I have done the office of a Christian brother, in raising up
seed to the dead, to continue his name, that his memory and worth might not be
put out of Israel. This skillful Artist has cast and coined the heads, and I
would to God he had handled them before his death. Some few specialties are
upon necessary cause altered, but they are of so small moment, that they make
no great breach in the body, neither in thy knowledge in viewing of the order
and method of Religion. I know if the discourse as well as the heads had
proceeded from the same hand, they would have been more accurate and perfect.
A shaft shot by the hand of a Giant, and a child differ much; yet will I not
in a fond admiration, and apish imitation of any person make all his deeds and
doctrines like the reflection of a looking glass, to frame all thoughts and
things by his shadow. This were but to catch Doterels, and show feats of
actiuitie, to deceive the simple. Again, if some little thing be censured in
the first inventor, I hope they that love him, will not think, as good friends
as they deal with him, like Gnatts, which after they have made a sweet kind
of Music, evermore sting before they depart. I fear not thy profit in it, if
thou will submit both it and thy self to the true touchstone, I mean the
sacred Scriptures; otherwise with Perillus thou may perish in thy own
inventions, and thine own cunning at the last will fail thee, and leave thee
as Absolons Mule left his rebellious Master between heaven and earth. Consider
therefore what is said, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things,
that thou may be no less wise, then good. Amen.

The Table of Religion, containing the Creed, the ten Commandments, the Lords
Prayer, and the Sacraments.
Religion, whose parts are

Faith it self In God Which is every man's own, I believe. who is one in
essence. In three persons Father Almighty. Maker of heaven earth.

Son who is by name Jesus. Christ.
that only begotten our Lord.

who humbled himself in Life by being both Conceived by the holy Ghost. Borne
of the Virgin Mary.
and by Suffering under Pontius Pilate. being Crucified.

Death Dying and being buried. descended into hell


Exalted First by rising again from the dead the third day.
then by his ascending into heaven. and sitting at the right hand of God. his
coming to Judge quick. dead.





holy Ghost.


of the Church which is holy. Catholic.
whose benefits are in this life Communion of Saints. foriuenesse of sins.
in the life to come Resurrection of the body. Life everlasting


The works of faith The Law the rule of holiness, which is the worship of
God. Table 1. who is to be worshipped alone. Commandment 1. with his own
worship. 2.
which must be handled with all reverence. 3. leanred with all diligence. 4.

Justice, which is our duty to man. Table 2. In special, our Parents.
Commandment 5. general, when we must preserve life. Commandment 6. then his
chastity. 7. and goods. 8. good name 9.



with the whole man. 10.

and prayer where there is a reverend place. whose parts are either petition
where we crave graces Spiritiall. The Hallowing of his name. 1. or the
enlargeme^t of his ki^gdome 2. doing of his will, as in heaven, so in earth. 3.

Temporal, the giving of us our daily bread this day. 4.
deprecation Forgiveness of sins, as we orgiue others. 5. Not to be
delivered into temptation, but delivered from evil. 6

thankesgiuving, wherein we acknowledge that to God belongs for ever. The
government of all things, for thine is the kingdom. as also power. glory.


the shutting up thereof Amen.

Sacraments Baptism. The Lords Supper.




The Catechism defined, and distributed.
CHAPTER I. Of Faith in God.
Question.

WHat inducements to Religion are prefixed before your Catechism?

Answer.

Four; first, the giving up of my name to God in Baptism, and that in the
dreadful name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Secondly, that being not able
to give it up my self, it was done by others, according to the ancient
custom of the Church, ever conioyning Baptism and confession together, Math.
3.6. Aug. epist. 24. Papists would have it to contract spiritual kindred, but
surely it makes honest love amongst neighbors. Thirdly, they that gave it up
for me, did promise in my name, that I should live according to Religion.
Fourthly, I believe in conscience, that I am bound to perform what they have
promised. Thus because I am Gods, and bound to him by sureties, vows,
promises, and Conscience it self, It is my duty being now come to years of
discretion, to learn to believe in him, and obey him.

Q. What then is Religion?

A. It is the acknowledgement of the truth, which is after godliness, Tit. 1.1.

Q. What are the parts?

A. Faith and works; the sum of the one is contained in the Creed: of the
other, in the ten Commandments, Lords Prayer, and the Sacraments. Tit. 3.8.

Q. What is Faith?

A. A confidence in God, grounded upon knowledge, Ioh. 16.30. We know and by
this believe.

Q. How is faith grounded upon knowledge?

A. In regard of God and his Church: the maker of the Covenant, and the people
with whom it is made, Ier. 31.33.

Q. How in respect of God?

A. As we believe in one God, and three persons for our happiness, Ioh. 14.1.

Q. How in one God?

A. In respect of nature, essence, and being. Deuteronomy. 4.35.

Q. How in three persons?

A. Three in regard of divine relation, or real respects in that one most pure
essence, Math. 28.19.

Q. What is the essence?

A. That whereby God is of himself, the most absolute and first being. Isa.
41.4.

Q. What is a person?

A. That one pure God, with the relation of a Father, Son, and holy Ghost, 1
Ioh. 5.7.

Q. Does the relation add any thing to the essence?

A. Nothing but respect or relation, as Abraham the Father of the faithful has
the same nature as he is a Father and as he is a man.

Q. What is the Relation?

A. It is either to send or be sent, and both these are done either by nature,
or counsel. Ioh. 15.26. the spirit proceeds from the Father and Son by
nature, and is sent to us by counsel.

Q. Is there no other Relation?

A. Yes; either to beget, or be begotten, and the Father begets his only Son
by nature, and the rest of his children by Counsel. Heb. 1.3. Iam. 1.18. A man
having the relation of a Father is said to beget Children by nature, or
counsel, as adopted children are freely begotten, not of the body but the
will. Iam. 1.18. Of his own will beget he us, not so his only Son, who is
as natural to his Father, as burning to the fire, and as Isaac to Abraham.

Q. What then is the first person?

A. God the Father, who by nature begets his Son, and by his counsel creats
the world. Heb. 1.2.5.

Q. What is the property of the Father?

A. To beget, and not to be begotten. Ioh. 3.16.

Q. What is his manner of subsisting?

A. To be the first person; for, the begetter is before the begotten, and yet
being Relatiues they are together in nature, for no man is a Father before he
have a son, though in order the Father be first.

Q. What is the Fathers work?

A. Creation; for, I believe in him as maker of heaven and earth: and the
reason is, because he is the first person, to whom the first work belongs.

Q. What is Creation?

A. A work of the Father, who of himself by his son and spirit, makes the
world of nothing, exceeding Good, Genesis 1.31. Heb. 1.3.

Q. What is given to the Father in respect of Creation?

A. Almighty power; for, the Father in himself is pure act, which act is
power as it may be felt of his creatures, which are in power to be.

Q. What is omnipotency?

A. It is that whereby the Father is able to do all that he does, and more
then he does, if it contradict not his own nature, or the nature of things.

Q. How is Creation divided?

A. Into heaven and earth. Genesis 1.1.

Q. What mean you by heaven?

A. The third heaven, with the Angels, both which were made perfect in the very
first beginning of time. Genesis 1.1.

Q. What mean you by earth?

A. All that matter which was closed and compassed about with the third heaven,
and was made at the same instant with it to prohibit and keep out vacuitie,
or emptiness, and fill up the whole compass of it, otherwise the parts of
themselves would have fallen together to have kept out that enemy of nature.
Genesis 1.1.

Q. Are we to understand no more by earth then that first matter?

A. Yes, we are to understand the forming of it into the four elements, fire,
air, water, and earth; as likewise the filling of it and them with
inhabitants, both above and below: as also the providence of the Father in
preserving and governing of them all to their ends and uses: for the Father
carries the work according to his proper manner of working, until we come to
Redemption, and there the Son takes it upon him in a peculiar manner.

Q. What is the second person.

A. The Son, who is begotten of the Father by nature, and by counsel
redeemes mankind.

Q. What is the Relative property of the Son?

A. To be begotten. Heb. 1.5.

Q. What is his manner of subsisting?

A. To be the second person in order, not in nature, for the begotten in
relation is naturally as soon as the begetter.

Q. What is his work?

A. Redemption. Ephesians. 1.7.

Q. What is Redemption?

A. It is a satisfaction made to the Justice of God the Father for Man by a
Redeemer.

Q. Who is the Redeemer?

A. Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord.

Q. Why call you him Jesus?

A. Because he is a Savior of his people from their sins. Math. 1.21.

Q. Why Christ?

A. In regard of his offices, as he is anointed our King, Priest, and Prophet.
Psalm. 45.7. Luke 4.18. Act. 4.27. and 10.38.

Q. Why his only Son?

A. Because the Father can have no more sons by nature but one.

Q. Why our Lord?

A. By the right of Redemption. Romans 14.9.

Q. How is our Redemption wrought?

A. By the humiliation and exaltation of the Son of God. Luke 24.26.

Q. What be the several degrees of his humiliation?

A. Seven; There be some others left out of the Creed; but these expressed are
the principal.

Q. What are they?

A. 1. His conception; 2. his nativity; 3. his passion under Pilate; 4. his
crucifying; 5. his dying; 6. his burial; 7. his descent into hell.

Q. What are meant by all these?

A. That Christ must not only satisfy in general, but that he must pass
through the degrees of our sorrows, and bear our afflictions. Isa. 53.4.5.

Q. What be the several degrees of his exaltation?

A. Four; which are his Resurrection, Ascension, Sitting at Gods right hand,
and return to Judgment. As in his humiliation he took our receipts, and
tasted the bitter potion for us, so all Physic being ended of that kind, he
gives us his receipts of Redemption, Ephesians. 1.7. Justification, Romans 3.24.
Reconciliation, Colos. 1.20. Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.2. Entrance into glory,
Heb. 10.19. These are Cordials for us, and for him after all his penal receipts.

Q. What is the third person?

A. The holy Spirit, who by nature proceeds from the Father, and the Son,
and by counsel applies Christ to the Church, and every member thereof, the
Father being the first person elects, the Son redeemes, and the Spirit
sanctifies. Ioh. 14.26. and 15.26. Romans 8.16. 1 Cor. 2.12. Ioh. 3.5. 2 Cor.
1.21. Romans 8.23.

Q. What is his Relative property?

A. To proceed. Understanding begets an Image of it self, and loves it, and
so from the best understanding to the best object of it, proceeds a mutual
love. The begetter loves the begotten, and the begotten loves the begetter, and
their love is equal to themselves, and proceeds from them both, and to us.
The will of the Father, by the wisdom of his Son, and power of his good
Spirit is said to do all.

Q What is his manner of subsisting?

A. To be the third person in order, for proceeding from two, he must needs be
the third, and yet in nature as soon as either of them; for the lovers and the
loved, are Relalatiues, and therefore together in nature.

Q. What is his work?

A. Application, or Sanctification, Ephesians. 5.26.27. The Son having prepared
the remedy, leaves it to be applied by the Spirit, Ioh. 16.7.

CHAPTER II. Of the Faith of the Church.
Hitherto of Faith in God.

Question.

WHat is the Faith of the Church?

Answer.

Whereby believing in God, we also believe, that we are of the Church, and
made partakers of all good things promised unto it.

Q. What is the Church?

A. That number of all those that are applied to Christ by the spirit; Now as
this union is made by faith, it is called the militant Church, as by vision,
the triumphant.

Q. Why is it called holy?

A. Because it is an holy Society of Saints, in regard of the Spirits work. 1
Pet. 2.9. Reu. 11.2. and 21.19.

Q. Why Catholic?

A. Because it is universal, in respect of all times, persons, and places, a
family both in heaven and earth. Math. 26.13. Ephesians. 3.15. 1 Ioh. 2.1. Reu.
7.9.

Q. What are the benefits God bestows upon it?

A. Two in this life, as the communion of Saints, and remission of sins: and
two in the life to come, as the resurrection of the body, and life enerlasting,
Lamen. 3.23. Psalm. 68.19. Col. 1.5. and 3.3.4. 1 Ioh. 3.2.

Q. What is the communion of Saints.

A. It is our communicating with God, and the godly, both in grace and glory,
or that fellowship that we have with Christ our head, and all his members.
Psalm. 16.5. and 73.26. Isa. 55.1. Act. 4.32. Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 4.3.4.5.6. Heb.
10.24. Phil. 2.1.2. 1 Cor. 10.16. Reave. 3.18. and 6.20.

Q. What is the remission of Sin?

A. It is a work of mercy, whereby the Father being offended, and reconciled
by his Son, does witness to our consciences by his holy Spirit, that all our
sins are discharged, and that we are graciously received again into his
favor. Job 33.27.28. 1 King. 8.47. Hos. 14.2. Isa. 33.24. and 62.11. God in
forgiving our sins does both cover and cure them. 1 Ioh. 1.9.

Q. What is the resurrection of the body?

A. It is a standing up from the dead, by the power of Christ's resurrection,
whereby our corruptible bodies are made incorruptible, and filled with all
glory and excellency, Job 19.25.26. Ioh. 5.28. Act. 3.19. 1 Cor. 15.42.43. 2
Cor. 5.1. Heb. 11.35.

Q. What mean you by life Everlasting?

A. That most blessed and happy estate in which all the Elect of God shall
reign with Christ their head in the third heaven, after this life, and after
the day of judgment, and that both in body and soul for ever and ever. Psalm.
16.11. Isa. 64.4. Ioh. 17.20.21. 1 Cor. 2.9. and 13.12. and 15.28. 2 Cor. 12.4.
Phil. 3.21. Reave. 21.22. and 22.2.

CHAPTER III. Of good Works.
Hitherto of Faith.

Question.

WHat are the works of Faith?

Answer.

That ready act of faith to do as we are bidden. Romans 6.16. 1 Samuel 12.25. Iam.
2.14.17. Ioh. 14.15. 1 These. 1.3. Tit. 3.1.8.

Q. How are these works divided?

A. They are either our walking with God, or conferring with him, or receiving
from him. 2 Cor. 7.1. Phil. 1.6. 2 These. 1.11. Heb. 6.17.18. Faith bids the
cleansed, go away and sin no more, but walk after the Spirit, it prouokes
to prayer, and gives us full confirmation of Gods love.

Q. What is our walking with God?

A. It is our due observation of his laws in all our ways. Psalm. 119.6.

Q. What is the law of God?

A. The rule that God has prescribed us, for the holy performance of all our
actions. Isa. 8.20. Romans 2.15. and 7.7.

Q. How is the Law distributed?

A. It is either concerning the worship of God, or love of our neighbor. Mark.
12.29.30.31.

Q. What is the first Commandment, concerning the worship of God?

A. Thou shall have no other Gods before myface. Genesis 39.9. Job 31.23.24. Psalm.
112.1. Pro. 3.5. Isa. 8.13. and 51.12. Hab. 1.16. Luke 12.45. Phil. 3.19.
Colos. 3.5.

Q. What is the sum of this precept?

A. The having of the true God, and him alone, and that with the whole man, in
the best of all his powers.

Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. Exodus 20.4.5.6. Psalm.
44.21. and 106.35.39. Deuteronomy. 4.12. Isa. 42.2. Hos. 14.8. Hab. 2.18. Math. 15.9.
1 Ioh. 5.21.

Q. What is the sum hereof?

A. That we worship God with his own worship, and not our own devises.

Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. etc. Deuteronomy.
28.58. Psalm. 5.16.17. Dan. 4.34. Math. 6.9. Romans 11.33. 1 Timothy 6.1.

Q. What is the sum thereof?

A. Due reverence to be showed in the worship of God.

Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Neh. 13.15. to 22. Exodus
20.8.9.10.11. Isa. 58.13. Ier. 17.27. Reu. 1.10.

Q. What is the sum of this law?

A. All diligence in public Prayer to God, and in learning the will of God,
especially upon his own day.

CHAPTER IIII. Of Charity.
Hitherto of holiness in the first Table.

Question.

WHat is that Justice that we owe to our neighbor?

Answer.

That we do to him, as we would he should do to us. Mark. 12.31.

Q. What is the first Commandment of this Table?

A. Honor thy father and mother, etc. Exodus 20.12.

Q. What is the sum thereof?

A. Due respect to our superiors, inferiors, and equals, to honor all
according to their place and degree.

Q. What is the second precept?

A. Thou shall not kill. Exodus 20.13.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. Preservation of life, as far as may stand with the good of the Church,
and Common wealth.

Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery. Exodus 20.14.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. Chastity, both inward and outward, in affection and action.

Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20.15.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. Justice and equity, a virtue that readily gives every man his own.

Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness, etc. Exodus 20.16.

Q. What is the sum thereof?

A. Truth, and our testimony thereunto as often as it shall lawfully be
required.

Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet, Exodus 20.17.

Q. What is the sum thereof?

A. Contentment, and resistance against all concupiscence.

CHAPTER V. Of Prayer.
Hitherto of the Law.

Question.

What is Prayer?

Answer.

It is a moving of God the Father, in the name of his Son, by the power of his
Spirit, with things agreeable to his will. Romans 8.27. Ioh. 16.23.

Q. Where is the sum of this contained?

A. In the Lords Prayer.

Q. How is that divided?

A. Into a Preface, the Petitions, and the conclusion.

Q. What is the Preface?

A. It is the preparation of the heart in coming to God; for, as we are to
come with boldness, so must we also come with reverence of his Majesty that
fills the heavens, Psalm. 26.6. and 115.3. Eccl. 5.1. Isa. 66.1. Luke 15.18.

Q. What are the words?

A. Our father which art in heaven.

Q. How are the petitions divided?

A. They either concern God, or our selves.

Q. How many concern God?

A. Three

Q. How are they divided?

A. They either concern his Glory, or the means of it.

Q. Which is the petition concerning his Glory?

A. Hallowed be thy name. Where we desire, that God in his nature, attributes,
word, and works, may be sanctified by us, Leu. 10.3. Ezekiel. 38.23. Act. 12.23.

Q. What are the petitions concerning the means of his Glory?

A. Two; The coming of his kingdom, and the doing of his will.

Q. What is meant by thy Kingdom come?

A. That the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, both by the inward working of
his spirit, and also by the outward means, may be enlarged daily, until it be
perfected at the coming of Christ to Judgment. Psalm. 122.6. Isa. 62.7. Romans
14.17. 2 These. 3.1. 2 Timothy 4.8. Reu. 22.20.

Q. What is meant by the doing of Gods will upon earth, as it is done in heaven.

A. That all obedience be given to God in the most holy and heavenly manner,
Psalm. 86.11. and. 119.36. Mal. 1.6. Act. 24.16. Romans 8.29. 1 These, 4.3. And for
want of exact performance, daily prayer for pardon, with a complaining of our
wants, Psalm. 143.2. Romans 7.18.

CHAPTER VI. Of requests for our selves.
Hitherto of blessings concerning our sanctification of Gods name, coming of
his kingdom, and performance of his will.

Question.

What blessings concern our selves?

Answer.

Either such as concern this life, or a better; the body, or the soul.

Q. What is the petition for this life?

A. The giving of us our daily bread, that is, that God would provide for us
all things convenient for this life, walking faithfully in our vocations, and
in all things submitting to his heavenly will, and good pleasure. Psalm. 37.5.
Prou. 10.22. and 16.3. and 30.8. Hag. 1.6. 1 Timothy 6.8.

Q. What are the petitions for a better life?

A. I regard of the present, forgiveness of sin, and for future deliverance
out of all temptations that may any ways draw us to sin.

Q. What mean you by the first?

A. That all our sins may be forgiven, and never laid to our charge, either
to condemn us here, or to confound us hereafter, and that most freely in Jesus
Christ, and as we heartily forgive them that have offended us, wherewith goes
an humble confession of them to God. Psalm. 40.12. Luke 11.4. 1 Ioh. 1.9.
Confession and deprecation must go together.

Q. What mean you by the second?

A. The not leading or leaving of us in temptation, but his most gracious and
merciful deliverance of us out of them all; and in this request, we either
lament our estate to God, or complain of the wicked who molest us. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
and 13.3. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Psalm. 13.2. and 55.2.3.

Hitherto of Petition.

Q. What is thanksgiving?

A. A grateful acknowledgement of all the benefits of God, and ascribing unto
him dominion, power, and glory, for ever and ever, Amen. And this is the sweet
concluding of all our Prayers. 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Psalm. 29.2.9. 2 Cor. 1.20. Phil.
4.6.

CHAPTER VII. Of Sacraments.
Question.

NOw we come to the celebrating of a Sacrament; what then is it.

Answer.

It is a seal of righteousness by faith. Romans 4.11.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. Two; Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Mat. 26.26. and 28.19. Genesis 17.11.12.
Romans 4.11.1 Cor. 10.1.2.3.4.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. A Sacrament of our entrance into Christianity, or of our ingrafting into
Christ. Act 8.12.38.

Q. What is the outward sign?

A. Water, with the sprinkling of it in the Name of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost.

Q. What is signified by it?

A. The washing away of our sins, and presenting of us holy to God the Father.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. A Sacrament of our continuance in Christianity, or our daily growing up
with Christ, 1. Cor. 11.23.

This memorable Banquet, proportioned in the outward Elements and inward Graces.

Q. How do the outward Elements teach the outward man?

A. Either in themselves, or their uses.

Q. How in themselves?

A. Both for substance and quality.

Q. How for substance?

A. As the bread is the staff of life, and as the wine glads the heart of man.

Q. How in their qualities?

A. As they are common and sensible, sensible, to the eye and cares, feeling,
smelling, tasting.

Q. How in their use?

A. Either as they are handled by the minister, or by the receivers.

Q. How by the Minister?

A. First, in setting them apart. Secondly, in blessing of them. Thirdly, in
breaking of the bread, and pouring forth of the wine. Fourthly, in delivering
them to the Communicants.

Q. How by the receivers?

A. First, by taking the bread and drinking the wine. Secondly, by digesting of
them: first, in the stomach, then in the liver; lastly, in every part, whereby
they are made powerful to humane duties.

Q. How does all this teach the inward man in respect of grace?

A. In proportioning them to Christ, both in himself, and in his use.

Q. How in himself?

A. Both in his nature and quality.

Q. How in his nature?

A. As his body is the bread of life, whereof whosoever tastes shall never
hunger, and his blood is drink indeed, that for ever makes glad the heart and
soul.

Q. How in the quality?

A. As his body and blood were common with ours in all things (sin only
excepted) and that he is made sensible, both to the ear bored by the Spirit,
the eye anointed with eye-salue, and to the feeling of the sanctified
affection, also to the smelling of joy, and tasting of the hungry soul.

Q. How in the use?

A. Either as he is appointed of the Father, or received of us.

Q. How of God?

A. First, as he is called to this work. Secondly, endued with grace. Thirdly,
as his body is crucified for us, and his blood powered out for the washing of
our wounds. Fourthly, as he is delivered and given to every believer.

Q. How received of us?

A. First, he is taken by the hand of faith, and his body is fed on by
meditation, and his blood spiritually drunken to wash our souls, then he is
digested, first, in the understanding, and then in the will and affections; and
lastly, distributed to every faculty, both of body and soul, by which we are
made able to every good word and work, which is the happy life of every
Christian. (*)

ERRATA.
Some faults escaped in Printing, which I entreat thee courteous Reader to
correct; the material ones are these following.

PAge 2. line 33. weakened for wakened. p. 6. l. 1. our for the pa. 7. l. 3. at
for as. p. 22. l. 8. our conversion for our conversation, p. 43. l. 7. to it
self for in themselves. p. 64.7. most excellent for the most excellent. p. 73.
l. 36 deadly for dead. p. 149. l. 32. as diaptron for as a diaptron. p. 153. l.
34. fly for shie. p. 189. l. 16. found for sound. p. 200 l. 33. art for act. p
223. l 3 take out othor. p. 232. l. 3. require for acquire. p. 256. l. 32. fit
for unfit. p. 263. l. 2.9. embatement for embasement l. 34 rigorous for
vigorous. p. 262 13. received for reviewed p. 266. l. 12. authentical, Jerome
for authentical Jerome. p. 268. l. 5. babes for bags. p. 292. l. 24.
overcome for overcome it.

A MODEL OF DIVINITY, CATECHISTIcally Composed.
CHAPTER 1. Of Religion.
Question.

IS there any thing that is called Religion?

Answer.

Romans 2.14. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law: they having not the Law are a law unto themselves, which
show the effect of it written in their hearts, their Conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing. Let Pilate
hear of a God and he will fear, Ioh. 19.18. Felix. of judgment, and he will
tremble, Act. 24.26. So powerful is conscience, to put back the swellings of
the proudest Jorden. Josh. 3.19. And dare boldly tell every man, as that stout
and resolute Tragedian told proud Pompey; the time shall come wherein thou
shall fetch many a deep and deadly sigh, and sorrow desperately, because thou
sorrowedst no sooner. It is the demand of Nature it self, What shall we do to
have eternal life? and because Natures means are not able to resist the force
and fear of death; no people so savage, which has not thought upon some
supernatural help, though ignorance have cast them upon superstition, etc.
Oh, that the miserable estate of others which wander in darkness, and wot
not whither they go, could give us understanding hearts, worthily to esteem
the riches of the mercy of God toward us, before whose eyes the doors of the
kingdom of heaven are set wide open. Should we offer violence unto it? it
offers violence unto us, and we gather strength to withstand it. It is the
fault of corrupt nature, and not the least, that as she has dim eyes, so
they are for the most part, even in the best things, exceedingly misplaced. She
looks still, either forward to the object she desires, or downward to the
means she uses; never turning her eyes either backward, to see what she is,
or has been; or upward, to view the true cause of her good. Alas! What a
little spark, and poor piece of Adams old ingenuitie is left alive in us,
like one of Jobs messengers, to bear witness of our great loss, and what
divine light is extinguished in us? It can bring us to the object of our
confusion, unable to show us the least glimpse of the object of our
consolation. O foolish reason, how sharp art thou to see thy mischief? and
yet how blunt, how blind art thou to foresee it? O poor remnant of pictie,
only so much goodness left, as to make us languish in our own evil. How are
we weakened, how are we weakened by these relics of right reason? not to see
our misery, that we may implore Gods mercy, but despairing in both, as if we
were banished from our right wits, cast our selves more violently into the
jaws of the Prince of hell. O cursed and accursed wits, that for ease, teach
the poor sinner, either to drink down his damnation with a greedy swallow,
or else through horror to chocke himself with his own morsels. Conscience is
not always loud and clamorous, neither are the deadliest enemies ever up in
arms against us: yet with still murmurings and secret twitches it bewryes his
mis-likes, and for want of true peace evermore works privy and hidden
unquietness in the heart. There is a lamentable and odious disease, called
Ileos, or misercre mei Deus. Nature in expelling superfluities, contracts and
gathers it self from above downward, but being often and again hindered by
inflammation, opilation, and exulceration, the fibers do from below gather
themselves vpwardes against nature, and by a peristaltick motion sends back
with violence the excrements by the mouth. So diligent and circumspect is
nature to unburden it self: so conscience that from above would work upon the
will and affections, being hindered; gathers it self from below, even from hell
it self, and finding the sinner secure, makes him miserable, and leaves him
desperate. Go too ye Miscreants of matchless mischief, monsters of men, and
all ye brethren of the sword, earue to your selves the largest morsels of
sinful pleasures, and with your most able gorges of Chiucrell consciences
swallow and digest them; yea, with the same hands, embrued in blood, receive
the body of your Savior, and make him bleed again with your sins: yet I
believe all will be bitterness in the end, and howsoever you cheer up your
selves, and satiate your minds with these husks of pleasure, yea, cry out, we
have lived the only royal and ioviall life in the world; yet you shall never
persuade me that your hearts do laugh with your faces. Such vanities may shake
the spleen, the conscience they cannot comfort, be assured, the kindest
courtesies of sin, like a bemired dog, do but defile you with fawning, and
leave you worse for intermedling. You say you are merry and secure, I hear you
well. But every foul that has a seemly feather, has not the sweetest flesh;
nor every tree that bears a goodly leaf, brings forth good fruit: glass
gives a cleerer sound then silver; many things glister besides gold: a
gorgeous chest is not always the sign of a rich treasure; nor a fair die, of
a fine thread; nor a costly seabbard, of a sure blade: nor a merry countenance
of a mind, either pleasantly disposed, or set at quiet. We may be assured
many a man's heart bleedeth when his face counterfeits a smile. We see how some
will laugh at the beating of their heads against stone-walles. Yea, but then
they are mad, you will say; true, but not so dangerously mad, as they who will
smoothly smile at the satisfiing of their sinful desires. Glow-wormes in the
night may make a fiery and lightsome show, and yet pressed are nothing but a
lump of crude and cold moy sture; so the lamp of the wicked in the night of
his ignorance may glister, but it is soon put out by the pressing convulsions
of a distempered conscience. Do your worst (you desperate sinners) peck out
your eyes, or suffer the Devil to seize on them and you, as Ravens do on
sick sheep, that having plucked out their eyes, devour their flesh: yet your
consciences shall not be shifted off. You may run from your selves, and the
soul may fly from your bodies: but your consciences will not part from your
soul, not sin from your consciences. The mute, dumb, and deaf Devil
charged by Christ, found a tongue, Mark. 9. 26. so shall thou before thou be
discharged of thy sin. Quench, and quell the heart of thy heart, roll upon
it the irremoueable stone of hardness of heart, seal it up in the grave of
oblivion, till with Lazarus, ( Job. 11.39.) it be grown vnfauory, and would
stink with stirring: Yet shall thou not want a witness from the dead, to tell
thee of a just God, a holy Religion, and a fear efull damnation, even in that
thou know not wherefore thou were borne, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Oh then that it
would please God, to give us that true wisdom that has both clear eyes, and
right set, that we might see further then the dim eyes of nature are able to
reach, that we might understand wherefore we are borne, and know that invisible
hand, that by most happle rules directs all things to their ends. Just is it
with thee (O Lord) to with hold what thou would give, and curse that which
thou bestowest, because we abuse the very light of nature. Romans 1.24. yea,
trample upon it with daily sins, as men do the engrauings of Monuments with
durtie shoes, till nothing be left legible. We must not therefore presume much
upon an appeal to a blinded conscience, only it may force and fasten this
upon us, by way of conclusion: first, that man is made, secondly, made for an
end, thirdly, an end better then himself, fourthly, which end in God, fifthly,
which God he is to serve, sixthly, serve by a rule: lastly, which rule is
Religion.

Q. But does God require it?

A. Mal. 1.6. A some honors his father, and a servant his master, if I
therefore be a father, where is my honor, and if I be a master, where is my
fear? Mic. 6.8. He has showed thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee, etc. Whatsoever then may be our level, God must be our
scope, at whom in all our affairs we must chiefly aim. O then let not the
thought of this last end, be the least end of our thoughts: we must never
think our selves in good case, so long as we are unwilling to think of our
God, who is infinitely good, not only comprehending, but exceeding the
perfections of all things, and therewith also the last end of humane desires,
and perfect rest of the reasonable soul. All the springs and brooks of our
best affections must run into this maine, neither must we suffer the least
riveret to be drayned another way, only this must be our care; that neglecting
the counsels of flesh and blood, we learn to depend upon the commission of our
Maker, not daring to attempt any action before we have his warrant, least it be
said unto us, who required these things at your hands? Isa. 1.12. No action is
good without Faith, and no faith is good without a word. The Centurion, when he
would describe his good servant in the Gospel, says no more of him but this, I
bid him do this and he does it. And the chosen vessel gives an everlasting
rule: His servants we are to whom we obey. Romans 6.16. So that our service we
owe to our end, is briefly nothing else, but a readiness to do as we are
bidden. All arts serve but two ends immediately, God and man, and from them
both, take their denominations of Divinity and humanity. Say now to thy
self, how have I lived, or rather not lived, consuming precious days in time
eating vanities? Thou art an exquisite humanist; but such wise dome and
knowledge will increase sorrow and grief. Eccl. 1.18. till thou come to the
conclusion. Eccl. 12.13. And if grace scorn not to learn of nature, as Moser
refused not the good counsel of a Midianite, then as humane knowledge brings
all things to thee; so let divine, bring thee unto God. If God preserve all for
thee, for whom then do thou reserve thy self? What for gold, or some
Herodias? Can thou offer God or thy self a greater indignity? Are all Arts
(Philosophy bearing witness) divine or humane, and the one subservient to the
other? How then can we make the creature our standing mark, and not so much as
roue at the Creator? Shall humanity teach thee what is good for thy self, and
not divinity how thou art good for God, or else for nothing? For shame reckon
that the greatest part of thy life, is the least part wherein thou have lived;
for all is spent in vain, that helps not to obtain thy last end. From hence
forward recover, and recollect thy self, before thou go hence, and be no
more. And if the excellency of humane Arts exclude all mean and mediocritie,
think no ecstasy high enough for the obtaining of Divinity. We must not like
sullen lades lie under our burdens, but reviue our spirits, and with a maine
and manly courage encounter all doubts and difficulties.

Q. But how shall we know it?

A. Psalm. 34.11. Come children hearken vntome, and I will teach you the fear
of the Lord. Knowledge is easy to him that has a desire to understand, plain
and right, if we seek after it as worldlings do gold, Pro. 14.6. and 8.9.
and 2.4.5. The Mine and Mint of true happiness is plainly and plentifully
chalked out unto us in the holy Scriptures. Nothing remains but that I call
upon you, as Chrysostom did of old, Hear O ye worldlings, get you Bibles.
Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Colof: Here lie those glorious heaps, which may eternally
enrich us: so that if we go away with our hands and skirts empty, how worthy
shall we be of a miserable want? And who shall pity them, that will not pity
themselves? Gods whip is the best alones for so lazy and wilful a need. Oh
that in these our days, we might see those times spoken of in ancient Story,
wherein the secrets of the Scriptures were known familiarly to Tailors,
Smiths, weavers, Seamsters, Delvers, Near-heards, etc. Theod. de corrig:
Gracorum affect. lib. 5. What a shame is it for us in England, to see daily so
many heavenly showers fall beside us, whiles we still like a Gedeons fleece
want moisture? Where are our worthy Matrones, that may be compared with S.
Hieromes women, Hieron. in Psalm. 133.
who contended in good earnest, who should learn most Scripture without book?
Alas, alas, most of our scholars, like boys, slubber out their Books before
they learn their lesson. Old Origin, in number: Hom: 27. said, that of all
torments, to read the Scriptures, was the greatest to the damned spirits,
against that blasphemous Papist, that said it was the invention of the Devil.
Mart. Pares: de trad. l. 44. But alas that which they cannot read without
soruple, we read too often with neglect and contempt. With whom does the
Apostles exhortation take place, Coloss: 3.16. Let the word of God dwell
plenteously in you? Let us then to avoid further shame, like diligent Scholars
(which repeat their parts to each other, to be made more perfect) mutually
recall over the rules of our well-liuing. Give me but one (says Augustine)
that loves, and he shall feel what I say, but if I speak to a cold
Christian, he understands me not. O then to prepare you for this art, do but
as you use to do in the morning when the Sun rises in his strength, open
the doors and windows of your hearts, to partake of this comfortable
brightness. Let the beams of the glorious truth of Gods word shine clearly:
open your eyes and endeavor to be illustrated by it. It is not credible, how
much good Art and precepts may avail us. We cannot but speed well, if we
begin well, and proceed orderly. A false method is the bane of all hopeful
endeavors. We shall find it in spiritual matters, as in our estates: small
helps with good thrift enrich us, when great patrimonies loose themselves in
the neglect. It is wonderful to see what some can do with the help of a
little engine, in lifting up that weight alone, which many helping hands by
their clear strength might endeavor in vain. I know grace is not tied either
to number or means: yet usually works by a common course of Art and
precepts. Only this must be our care, that we mint not Gods worship in our
own deceitful brains.

Q. What is Religion?

A. Religion is an Art (or rather a doctrine) to live well. Art is in the frame
of the creature, and may be learned by observation. And so was Divinity by
creation the very imprese of God; but now by corruption both the Art and the
frame are spoiled, and as he that comes from a bright candle into a dark
room, is so much more blinded, as his light was greater; and as the purest
yvory turns with the fire into the deepest black: so, man being fallen from
God is so much the worse, by how much he was made more worthy in himself.
Teknee from Teknaomai, because Art is ever to be seen in his own fabric,
facture, or fashioning. Man therefore having blurred, blemished, and blotted
out his Art and excellency, is left to the teaching of Gods spirit, to learn
that by divine instruction, which he cannot by humane observation. 1 Timothy 6.3.
Paul calls the lesson a doctrine; and David prays often in his Psalms, that
the Lord would open his eyes, teach him his statutes, and bring him into the
way he knows not by nature. Psalm. 119.18.33. The manifold wisdom of God
distinguished by proper subjects, and broken (as it were) upon them, by
creation, government, and obedience, from hence by irradiation, or shining, is
acted and dispersed upon the glass of the understanding, as light upon the
eye, and there received and understood, is again from the mind reflected upon
others by word, and then it is doctrine or discipline, or writing, and then we
call it a book or Bible, and from hence may be observed our teaching by
Scripture, doctrine, discipline, Art, science, and inspiration, Hos. 8.12. Heb.
1.1. Prove. 8.10. 2. Tim. 3.16. etc. God has written and spoken, and inspired
men to do both, and yet in all this a mere stranger to the judgments,
thoughts, affections, speeches, and actions of the most. So that beside all
this, God must inlighten and inliuen our hearts, or else there will neither be
Art, nor heart, nor part to think upon him. It is safe no where to complain
of nature, but where grace is, and where that is once had and affected, It will
readily ascribe both inward and outward teaching to God. Our rule may be called
Scripture as it is written, doctrine as it is taught, discipline as it is
learned, Art, as it is framed in us again, science as it is known of us; and
because none of these are now to be had by the irradiation of nature, it
pleases God of his infinite love, that we should have them by the inspiration
of grace. There are three things (says Bernard) which God properly challenges
unto himself, from all co-workers, men and Angels: viz. pradestination,
creation, and inspiration. The husbandman may plant, prune, dig and dress
his Vine, but rain upon it he cannot: if he would water it, yet must it be
with Gods water. He may draw from the fountain, but God must drown it; he
may ducere rivum, but it is God that must implore fontem. Yea, when he has
planted and watered, he cannot give clusters to the branches, form to the
fruits, quality to the seeds, temper to the seasons: God therefore that can
do all is the best husbandman. Man therefore that has expired his first life,
must have God to inspire him again, or else he cannot live. And this will
appear in the very name we give our rule. Religion is to tie again. Our love
to God, like the new cords of Sampson, was quickly snapt asunder, God,
therefore, that he might bind us to himself by a stronger cord, has chosen the
grace of faith to reunite us again to himself. And so Religion has his
notation from the first part of our rule, which is faith in God. Or else may it
take his denomination from the second part, which is obedience toward God. The
law that was to be read by creation, was obliterated, and in a manner scraped
our by corruption, but now again by religion is written in our hearts. Ier.
31.33. and so is to be read again. Life consists in union and action, now by
faith we have the one, and by the law we perform the other. The rule of life
is called Divinity, in regard of God the end of it, Theology in regard of the
subject matter, 1. Pet. 4.11. logia Theou, words of God: but of all names this
comes nearest the form of our Art, which signifies either our tying again to
God, or reading again the things of God. This bond is the surest, Isa. 54.10.
Ier. 32.40. And this book is the plainest, Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8. For as
faith binds us to God, so it gives and gains such power from him, as we may
walk acceptably before him. Luke 1.74. And here we see how pitiful and
plentiful a God we have, in raising of us from corruption to greater
perfection, then ever we enjoyed by creation. This second bond is invincible,
for so it becomes the Almighty to proceed in his works. He that has showed
man what he can do for himself, shall now see what God can do for him. And
God were not faithful, if there were either final or fatal Apostasy from a
justifying faith. It is folly to imagine, that God should go from one
imperfection to another. Love was for try-all, faith is for trust. God has
tried the weakness and wickedness of our love; It is now for us to trust him
upon the faith of our salvation. Water cannot suddenly be cleared, but with
leisure, and by degrees, and some time must necessarily be required to bear
and beat back those abuses whereunto we have a long time been envred. Time
and industry will eat even through Marbles. Give God credence, and he will in
his due time give thee riddance of all the rubbish of thy sins. But to this
our own safety, our own sedulitie is required; for as it is in vain, Psalm.
127.1.
for men to watch, except God keep the city: so will it be in vain for God
to keep, except we watch. The husbandman must not burn his Plough, or the
Merchant neglect his Trade, because God has said, I will not forsake thee.
Father keep them in thy name. Ioh. 17.11. does not intimate that we should be
careless to keep our selves. Indeed till the Lord inspire, we but lamely and
blindly re-aspire to any good. We live groaping, as the Sodomites, after life's
door, and having wearied our selves, go away wanting the thing, we both
wished and waited for. Take away the Sun from the world, and the soul from
the body, and earth becomes earth as it was at the first. Genesis 1.2. So sever
God from the soul, and what is man but a dead carrion? All the elements and
elementaries lighten and darken, cool and warm, die and reviue, as the Sun
presents or absents it self from them; so we live or die, feel or faint, as
the Sun of righteousness, parts or revnites himself unto us. Whereby we are
taught, that primarily and principally we live by God, as the soul of our
souls; and secondarily, by faith, as the Spirits. The bond of soul and body
here is that heat, or heavenly breath, that knitts God and man together in an
indivisible and insoluble knott. If the Lions, Dan. 6.16. ravenous beasts by
nature, and made keen with hunger, adore the flesh of a faithful man, shall
any worldly thing change his heart, alter his affection, or Gods to him? Romans
8. the earth shall sooner shake, the pillars of the world tremble, the
countenance of heaven apale, the Sun loose his light, the Moon her beauty,
the Stars their glory, etc. then a man knit to God by Religion, be once
separated from him again. The fire has proclaimed it self unable so much as
to singe an hair of the head of the godly. Dan. 3.27.
Thus then you see how Religion may put us in mind of the wonderful mercy of
God: Now hear how it remembers us of our woeful misery; we are found of God as
rotten roots without any life or virtue, as barren ground. bringing forth no
fruit but sin, shame and damnation. As a dead body, or decaying bough cut off
from the tree perishing and withering to nothing: yea, we are so much more
miserable, by how much we were once more excellent and eminent. The more
unnatural any quality is, the more extreme will it be; a cold win de from
the South, is intolerable; and the purest wine becomes the sharpest vinegar.
The few sparks of good that lie covered under heaps of cold ashes, are no
ways able t kindle the fire of a godly life, no, not so much as to give a
glimmering light to lead to heaven. The wisest Philosophers, never so much as
ghessed at this Art, the doctrine of it never came within the fadome of their
reason. If they few any thing, it was a far off, even as heaven it self,
upon which they looked with desire and admiration, knowing not the right way
thither. Natures skill is something in the end, nothing in the means. It has
taught without controlement, that there is a blessedness for man to seek
after, but what or where, was removed from their Academie, assuring us that not
Athens, but Jerusalem must reach us this lesson. The wisest Ethnic does but)
as S. Peter speaks) Mnoopazein, see glimmeringly, and uncertainly in this
Theme. 2. Pet. 1.9. And like Zebul in holy Story, either take men for
mountains, or mountains for men. Judge. 9.36. and for inconstancy, like
Absolon, and the Elders of Israel, come off and on in their opinions, and
always believes the worst. Sometimes the counsel of Achitophell is approved,
and then presently the advice of Hushai the Archite is a great deal better. 2.
Sam. 17.4.14. The Barbarians almost with one breath curse and bless the
Apostle. Act. 28.6. Shall we therefore praise nature, or trust it in this? No,
we praise it not. With what presumption has it undertaken to write books of
the souls tranquillity? but that must needs be performed with much
imperfection, which is practiced without a rule. Sundry capricious fancies and
fables are handsomely framed and glued together by moral Philosophy, to keep
the mind in an equal poyse: but as Balances ill matched, in their unsteady
motions come to an equality, but stay not at it: so the scoales of an
unregenerate mind, if at any time they seem to be even, are easily swayed by
contrary passions, sometimes up to the beam, through lightness and
overweening opinion of prosperity, and suddenly down again to the lowest
pitch, being depressed with any load of sorrow. There is no heart makes so
rough weather, as never to admit of a calm. When the wind stirs not, the
waters and waves of the Sea seem to be silent; so the man that is most
disordered, may have some respits of quietness. It is not enough to avoyde the
imputation of madness, to be sober many Moons; for he that rages in one, is
no better than frantic: so, how quiet so ever these masters have made
themselves, yet their rules have never countervailed all their troubles. The
wisest and most resolute Moralist that ever was looked pale when he was to taste
his poysonfull Hemlock. Courage and constancy against all crosses and curses,
and then to be least shaken, when mostassayled, comes from the rules of an
higher art, then natural wisdom was ever able to teach. Hasty hounds amd
swift on foot often spend their mouths and courses in vain, for want of sent:
so how easy is it for nature to over run Religion, that so seldom is lead
by right reason? Wandering Empiricks may say much in tables and pictures, to
persuade credulous Patients: but their ostentation is far from approbation of
skill, when they come to effect their cures. How many ships have suffered
miserable ship-wracke, for all the glorious titles of the Triumph, the
safe-gard, the geod-speed, etc. So, how many souls have been swallowed up
with the fair hopes of their fained religions? This task of faving souls is
left whole for grace to busy her self about it. Alas, nothing is left in us
but the ruins and relics of our sins, and the judgments of our God. Nay,
the soul diepred with her own blood, shrinkes not at the face of death
following it. That goes best down with the sinner, that is freest from grace.
And as hunger makes riffe raffe and odious viands toothsome; or as the vicious
stomach can feed hungerly on coals and ashes: so the greedy sinner can with
delight devour the murdering morsels of his own misery. In darkness, Stars
of the greatest magnitude are not to be seen, nor the millions of moats that
lie in blindness: so, who knows the magnitude or multitude of his sins. O Lord
if thou shine not upon us, we sleep in darkness. If thou save us not in thy
son, we perish in our selves. O that we could be netled with the news of our
misery. Can we see our Savior mourn for it; whiles we have no grace to
mourn for it our selves? Should not this strike us in the very striking, and
fetch tears from our eyes? If he that was without sin would not be without
stripes for us, shall we think to be cockered, like Adoniah, of our heavenly
Father? Lord strike our hearts with the rod of thy word, as Moses smote the
hard rock, that our stony hearts may gush forth plentiful rivers of tears,
because we have not kept thy Law. Let us no longer like fools laugh when we
are lashed of our sins. Transplant us into thy Son, for as we are, both the
stock and the griffe are evil; It was only for our Savior as a sweet Impe
to grow out of a Crabstocke. But if thy mercy feoffe us not in the blessings
and virtues of thy Son, as our sins do feoffe us in the curses of our
parents, we perish. They are gross faltterers of nature, that tell her she is
clean, yea, alive. O the unspeakable mercy of our God, that whiles we
provided him the sin, he provides us the remedy. Behold an expiation as
early as our sins; the pure and innocent Lamb of God slain from the
beginning of the world. Thus, thus, whiles the clamor and fear of our fall,
to our affrighted consciences runs on like fire in a train, to the very
utmost ranks of our bodies and souls, every part and power fearing their
fellows, no less, then themselves are afraid: even then to the true believer
behold the blood of him, who purges our consciences from dead works, Heb.
9.14. Nay, so admirable a lenatiue, that it leaves no more conscience of sin.
Heb. 10.12. But from the name and notation, let us come to the definition; and
fist, that which is general, a doctrine. Our once lost law of life is left to
the teaching of the word, and Spirit. Sinful man being dull and deaf of
hearing, had need to have his heart prepared and made ready by all means to
receive the truth. The Scriptures are not penned like an Art in order and
method; and the reason is, because the truth could not be offered to man
directly, who looks asquint, but on all sides, that he may be hit with them on
some side. The first thunderbolt that did strike through the soul of man, was
Adam, thou have sinned, and art the child of death. By creation in wonderful
silence was the law written in the fleshy Tables of our hearts, and as things,
which are written in barks of trees, did daily grow out by corruption;
therefore he thought it high time to write in in tables of stone, as more
faithful monuments then our hearts. And when he comes to drive it into the
iron hearts of men, he takes state upon him, as one that will be trembled at,
in his word and judgments. There was nothing in the delivery of the Law that
might not work astonishment. The eyes dazzled and dimmed with lightnings, the
ears torn with thunders roaring in them. The voice of the Almighty wrapped
in smoke and fire, and out-speaking both, the clamor of the trumpet, and
clappes of thunder, and that in such a manner, as he did rather seem to
threaten then teach, forbid then command, deter then define what he would
have done. More negatiues in opposition to what men would do, then
affirmatiues in direction to what men should do. By which we are to
understand that he that was so terrible a Lawgiver, would one day appear as
severe a judge. If he were so dreadful in the proclamation, he would be as
fearful in the execution. Oh! how will this fiery Law flash terror in the
face of every hard and impenitent sinner, when at the day of judgment his
conscience like another Sinai, shall tremble and quake before the Judge? then
shall he see the Law that was given in fire, in fire to be required. By this
promulgation I plainly see how difficult a thing it is to teach a sinner. If
God should not change our hearts. Ezech. 11.19.20. his Messengers might as well
(with our venerable Countryman, Mr Beda) preach to heaps of stones, as to the
stony hearts of carnal men. There is none but God, that is able to give the
first charge, neither any to hear it but such as are taught of him. There must
be a putting in of the rule, before there will be any putting forth of man to
obey it, Ier. 31.33. and 32.40. the noise of the word. Ephesians. 5.4. shaking of
afflictions. Ob 33.16. or day light of the Gospel. Romans 13.11.12. are but
secundary helping causes, and do nothing without the principal. He that is
asleep awakes not till his natural heat return, having digested all those
foggie mists and vapors that did bind up the senses: no more is there any
awaking of the sinner, till there be a return of that supernatural heat of
grace, whereby the vapors of fleshly lusts may be dissolved within us, which
darken the cogitation, and oppress the heart. 1. Pet. 2.11. Ephesians. 4.18. Luke
21.24. only here is the difference, that this is a dead sleep, whereby the
hear of creation is utterly extinguished; so that a new spirit must be put
within us, or else we never crucify the flesh with the lusts and affections
thereof, which would keep us in a perpetual sleep, far surpassing the seven
sleepers in the time of Decius the Emperor, or Epimenides the Cretian, which
slept fourscore years in a Cave: so says the Author of fables, and take his
word alone, I am not his surety: but this is no forgery that many a man
out-sleepes his natural life. It is reported of Dionysius the Herocleote, that
he felt not when men thrust needles into his fat belly: so sinners, whose
hearts are as fat as grease. Psalm. 119.70 feel not their misery. Nay, like the
Fencer that laughed to see his wounds lanched by the Surgeon. The bears spoken
of in Pliny, that could not be stirred with the sharpest prickles, come short
of a thick skinned sinner. Alas, how many shutt all their senses, that they
may not be troubled with the terrible threats of the Almighty. Even as the old
Italians, in the time of thunder, shot off their greatest Ordinance, and did
ring their deepest bells, to drown the noise of the heavens: so wretched
offenders know how to outcry and out-roare the highest. But they that thus
harden and hearten themselves against Gods word, shall one day be taught to cry
to the hills and mountains to cover them from the presence of him whom so
often they have despised. The Lord teach us to listen to him here, least
neglecting the light of his word, we feel the heat of his wrath in hell, and
be made to find that to our cost, which never had our care, and to sinart with
pain, for what we never heard with patience. But if I should insist upon every
head as I might well, and with profit, I should write a Salmeron-like
Commentary upon Petrarches remedies, and yet doubt whether so this work would
be perfect: sure I am a life would be too little to write it, and but enough
to read it. I will hereafter go on with the heads as shortly as I may, and
give as much good counsel in a narrow room as I shall be able. Brevitie where
it is neither obscure nor defective is very pleasing, even to the daintiest
judgments. I will as near as I may in so large an Art imitate those that draw
great personages in little tablets, and describe worlds of Countries in the
compass of small Maps: I hope if we have special care of matter and method,
we shall make this Doctrine more portable for memory, and readier for use. If
our precepts as nails drive out one another, you may justly impute it to want
of Art. I shall follow him that is now with God, and which I confess has
broken the Ice before me. The form of the Art is to live well. There is a
natural life which we live by the union of body and soul; and there is a
spiritual life, which we have by the knot spoken of, to wit, our union with
God by Religion. Now all men, in that they will have some Religion, may be said
to live spiritually, but they cannot live well, because they want a true rule
of life. The follies of the Heathen are baits for babes, no books for
Christians: which only depend upon God and his word, to teach them truly how
to live, but let us clear our definition by Scripture. 1. Tim. 6.3. A doctrine
according to godliness. Tit. 1.1. The acknowledgement of the truth which is
after godliness. First, this Art is in God. Secondly, we receive it from him
as the pattern and patent of his will. Thirdly, our examples are to accord with
it. Hence godliness in the example, must answer godliness in the rule, and
godliness in the rule must be according to that which is in God. God plots
the rule, then he publishes it, as his will and command; and lastly, looks
for obedience at our hands. A king first plots his government in himself, then
by Proclamation makes it known unto his subjects; and lastly, under penalty
enioynes the keeping of it. A Scrivener first makes letters in his head, then
pens them down with his hand, and guides the Scholar accordingly: So, God is
the Author of Religion, then he publishes it, and we are to live after it. To
live well in practice, is to live well by precept; and precept that brings us
to the Prince of our happiness. Pro. 2.5. it is called the fear and knowledge
of God. Iam. 3.15. It is said to be wisdom from above. 2. Pet. 1.3. through
this knowledge we receive of God all things that pertain unto life and
godliness. To conclude, give thy self wholly to learn this Art, and defer
it not to thy last: will thou charge this greatest burden upon the weakest
beast? If thou can not pass over the foord when the waters are low, how will thou do when they are risen? Twigges at the first will bend to every hand,
which afterward will not be bowed with all thy might. Sparks are sooner
quenched then flames, and green wounds sooner cured then festred sores: he
that drives a nail, first strikes easily, and afterward redoubleth in
strength, in so much as the more blows he strikes, the more it is fastened,
and the harder it will be to draw it forth again: so betimes break the bands,
shake off the shakles of sins, and be daily laboring to save thy poor soul.

CHAPTER II. Of Faith in God.
Question.

What are the parts?

Answer.

Faith in God, and obedience toward God. In the old Testement is divided into
fear and service, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Josh. 24.14.1. Sam. 12.24. Ob 28.28. Psalm. 2.11.
Eccl. 12.13. Fear is the head or beginning of this wisdom, Psalm. 111.20.
Pro. 9.10. and therefore to serve God without it, is a head-lesse Religion. Yet
on the other side, what comfort can we have in such an head, or Masculine
disposition, if with the Israelites brood it should be smoothered in the birth;
or recoile like Zarah in Thamars womb. So perfect is this Art, that we must
have clean fingers as well as clean hearts. It is the plea of Ignorants in
doing evil, to sy they have good hearts; which undoubtedly are the worst; for
these two parts will ever go together. Divine Philosophy will teach us to
refer all our speculations to action, yea, our very affections. Fear in
Scripture is ever accompanied with service, and seeing God has so wedded them
together, let no man presume upon any condition to devorce them; as Papists do
with a dead faith: but their dispensation therein is the dissipation of the
truth, which will have service and obedience the true probats of faith and
fear. And as Dalilah said to Sampson, How can thou say thou love me when
thy heart is not with me? So how can they profess they love God, whose hearts
obey him not? In the new Testament, Religion is distributed into faith and
lone. 2. Tim. 1.13. Keep the pattern of wholesome words, which thou have
received of me in faith and love. Love springs from faith. 1. Tim. 1.5. And
faith works by love. Gal. 5.6. and love fulfils the law. Romans 13.10. not by
action, but intention; for it is the end of the law. 1. Tim. 1.5. God accepting
sincere love for perfect duty. By faith we are spiritually glued and cimented
to God, that we may be one spiritual body with him; in which sense it is
said, He that is glued to the Lord is one spirit. 1. Cor. 6.17. Cords will
bind, so will the cords of love. Hos. 11.4. Zach. 11.7. But cords may be
vnknitt: Nails will fasten, and we have the words of the wise as nails
fastened by the masters of the assemblies. Eccl. 12.11. but yet nails may slip,
or leave a chinke: only the glue of faith. ioynes all close together, or
rather both these parts will cause us, with full purpose of heart to cleave
unto the Lord, Act. 11.23. The heat of faith and love will digest this whole
Art, that it may be distributed into the veins of every good word and work.
These two will make up a perfect pair of compasses, that can truly take the
latitude of this Art. And first must we have faith as the one foot pitched
upon the Center, which is God, whiles obedience as the other walks about in a
perfect circle of all good duties. The fire of faith, and light of life, will
evince against the gates of hell, the undoubted truth of Religion. So that by
these sweet and cordial flames may the soul of every Christian warm it
self, against all those cold despaires whereunto Satan tempts.

Q. What is Faith?

A. The first part of Religion, whereby from knowledge I believe in God; the
first act of faith is passive in receiving what God gives. And so lays hold
of happiness, works it not: Faith makes just, as the hand makes rich, that is
filled with the wealth of another; or, as the Iewellers box, base in it self,
is made precious for the pearls it contains: Here may we justly say, it is
a poorer and meaner act to believe, then love; nay, rather passion then action;
for, we are first apprehended of God before we apprehend him again Phil 3.12.
This grace is most freely graced, that it might the more frankely reflect all
upon God a gain. And because it is the root of all the rest will teach
humility, and exclude boasting: like the full ear of corn that hanges down
the head toward the original, or if any be so graciously exalted, and freely
favored above his fellows, that his stalk is so stiff, that it bears him
up above the rest of his ridge, then faith will make him look up to heaven
above, not in the thoughts of pride, but in the humble vows of thankfulness,
and say with Mary, the Lord has regarded the low estate of his servant. Thus
will faith (rightly understood) teach us to knead nature in the dirt and dust,
and spoil our free will of all her proud rags, loading her with reproaches,
and give all glory to him, that says he will not give it unto another. Papists
being of late more ashamed then before, do confess all is given: but (say
they) is it not all one to pay a sum, and have so much given me as may pay
it? No doubt, Faith receives a full discharge, makes it not. We rather by Faith
receive an acquitance sealed in the blood of Christ, then the blood of Christ
to make our own works meritorious, which we may offer to God in payment for
our selves. Eternal life. Romans 6.23. is both merit and mercy, we take it as a
gift, Christ earnes it as wages, Ephe. 2.8. Salvation through faith, yet not of
our selves. Here lies the error of the Papists, even in faith it self, and
every other good grace of the spirit, that our free will has his intervention
and operation, betwixt Gods giving and our taking: so that if God will but
bear half the charges by his cooperation, man shall undertake to merit his
own glory, and fulfill the royal law so abundantly, that he shall have
something over and above, to be very beneficial and helpefull to his needy
neighbors. But the way of the law is longer then our pursey hearts, and short
legs can reach to the end and perfection of it. As Constantine said to
Acesius the Novatian, Set up ladders and climb to heaven: so I to Papists,
scale heaven by your works; as for us we have found another way, and that is
to ascend upon Jacobs ladder. We leave tuggling and struggling that way to
prevail, and fall with Jacob to wrestle with Christ for a blessing. And though
we go lymping by our sins, yet by our conquering Faith we shall be Princes
with God. By this therefore the vaunt of Papists, must needs avaunt: yet
further, faith in another act will cut the very winde-pipe of our free will,
and merit. It is wittily said of one, that faith in regard of his passive act
is rather a beggarly receiver, then a deserving worker: all our conversion is
passive; but see faith in our active conversion, and you shall see works a
form too low to come in any such request, as to justify. For what is faith,
but as the hand of the soul? and what is the duty of the hand, but either to
hold or to work? This hand then holds in the first part of Divinity, and
works in the second. Now without all question, Justification is to be taught
in our first part, and therefore goes before obedience; and faith, which is as
an instrument or hand, for to hold Christ to justification, is mighty and
operative both for sanctification and new obedience. Works therefore are the
effects of sanctification, and sanctification is the effect of justification;
hence is it impossible to be justified by works as causes, as effects and
fruits they may show it. If then the secret apprehension of the closed hand of
faith hide what it holds; see the hand of faith open to justify the cause by
the evidence of the effects, and in this sense works may justify and perfect
faith, as the second part of any Art does the first. Iam. 2.22.24. Papists
against the whole order of Divinity would have our works to usher in our
Justification, nay, as parents to beget it. Whereas they are in very deed the
companions and pages, or honorable attendants of faith, and the righteousness
it holds. Faith is both the minds testimony in regard of the word, and the
wills Amen, in regard of the spirit. Creed comes of credo, which signifies to
see a thing certainly, and yield to it affiance. It is compounded of cernere,
and dare. Pro certo videre, and pro certo dare. Hence Faiths motto, Caco nulli.
By faith we know whom we have believed. 2. Tim. 1.12. And our Creed puts us
in mind of knowledge and affiance in faith: so the word it self teaches no
less; for Faith comes of Fides, and fides of fiat dictum, where we have God to
say the word, and we say Amen unto it. The ancient Romans at the very gate of
their Pantheon, pictured faith with two hands closed together, intimating, that
there was no coming to God but by the hand of faith. And Grace, which scorneth
not to learn of Nature any good (though not Athens but Jerusalem must teach
this lesson) can take this advice, as Moses heard the good counsel of a
Midianite, that he that comes to God must believe that God, is, and that he
is a rewarder of all them that seek him diligently. Heb. 11.6. That faith is
the first part is clear. Ier. 31.33.34. and 32.40. First, God writes in us
this principle of life, and then we obey him. Ezekiel. 11.19.20. and 36.26. First,
he puts in his spirit, and then causes us to walk in his statutes. Such is
the servile, or rather brutish nature of man, that he can neither be stirred,
or stayed in any good course, except there go a new forming of his heart,
before there be any reforming of his life. As dead bodies are rubbed without
heat: so do we in vain force upon our selves, an heartlesse Religion without
faith; all our life here is but a vital death without it; till we live that
life we do but carry our carcasses up and down carelessly, and do nothing
pleasing unto God. Heb. 11.6. secondly, that faith is from knowledge, appears
Ioh. 6.69. and 16.30. and 17.3. Heb. 11.1. and that with affiance in God. Psalm.
40.4. Mark. 11.22. hence faith is a confidence in God, upon a particular
assurance from God, that he is my God. Mark. 9.24. Romans 4.20.21.2. Tim. 1.12.
Faith lays not hold of God, as we take hold of a tree, or some such like
senseless thing, but as we use to do in our salutations, when there is a
mutual embracing and kissing of each other. [aspasamenoi] Heb. 12.13.

Q. Seeing faith solely rests upon God, what is God?

A. God in regard of himself only knows himslefe, as dwelling in the light
vnaprochable, whom never man saw, neither can see. 1. Tim. 6.16. Ioh. 1.18. 1.
Ioh. 4.12. The Sun and the fire say of themselves, come not too near, how
much more the light which none can atraine unto. Here the well is not only
deep, but we want a bucket to draw withal. God to Moses, Exodus 33.20. gives
both the rule and the reason; thou can not see my face and live: for, there
shall none see me and live. I must contract my meditations, least the Art grow
too big with amplifications. It would be an excellent work, to write a book
by it self of the knowledge of Jehovah Elohim: It shall now be sufficient to
lay down the precepts, with short expositions, and as pregnant proofs as we
can.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That God is both incomprehensible by reason, and vnnameable by words, and
consequently above all Arts; for Grammar and Logic are the most general, and
go before all other sciences, nothing being to be conceived without them. Job
11.7.8.9. God is not to be found out by reason, therefore he cannot be measured
by quantity. Job 36.26. too great for the finite understanding. God being the
first is most intelligible, for prioritie of nature, ever goes with
perspicuitie of apprehension: But this is in God himself, who best knows his
own being, yea, better then any thing beside it: although man better knows
other things then himself. Genesis 32.29. Judge. 13.18. Gods name, as his nature,
is secret, and not be sought; and this does wonderfully strengthen faith; for,
if God were not greater then our apprehension, he could not help us
infinitely. The holding of God by faith, is better then our beholding him by
reason. Ephe. 3.20. God is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all we can
ask by words, or think by reason. (...).

Q. May we then inquire nothing?

A. Duet. 29.29. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but things revealed
belong to us, and our children for ever. Exodus 19.12. The people may not go up
into the Mount, yet may they stand at the foot to hear God speak unto them.
Exodus 33.20.23. We may see Gods back-parts, but not his face. Romans 1.19. that
which may be known of God. something is not to be known, as being too
subtle for the eye of any creature. The beams of the Sun are made visible
by reflection: and letters being refracted and broken in a pair of spectacles
are made liable to a dim eye: so Almighty God by his word and works shining
in his creatures, as in a glass, is seen of us. Psalm. 19.1.7. and 104.24. and
119.105. Romans 1.20. Iam. 1.23.25. but most of all by the eye of faith, looking
in both. Heb. 11.3.27. We cannot look upon the body of the Sun, neither can
we see at all without the light of it: so, as we cannot look upon the face
and essence of God, so neither can we see any thing at all without him; he
therefore must name himself, and so describe himself as we may apprehend him
by his own Logic and Grammar. It was well and modestly spoken by that
Emperor to Ambrose, We speak of these things, not as we ought, but as we
can: I have ever thought with my self that here a foolish wisdom is better
then a wise ignorance, and that it is sufficient to be one of Gods Court,
though I may be none of his counsel. I will labor to know all that I need;
and all that I may without prying into God's Ark; assuring my self that he
that is thus content to dwell with his poor servants in these smoky cottages
of their mortality where we (through our unquiet corruptions) will not suffer
our selves to have the full fruition of him, shall have wonderful happiness
in our dwellings with him in those eternal Tabernacles that are above. Alas,
whiles the shadow of our sinful mass hides his beauty from our eyes, it is
well if we can see any thing. This earthly Moon of the Church, has her fulls
and wainings; and must have so long as she wadeth in this planetary world: It
is enough when she is fixed above, to be in the full of her glory. Here we
have but the dim shadows of our future blessedness. Only at the right hand
of our God are pleasures for evermore; and such pleasures as if ever they could
be fully expressed or conceived, were not worthy of our longings, nor able to
satisfy us. For as God is infinite, and never to be comprehended essentially:
so our joys are bottomless, and ever springing up with new occasions of our
blessedness. Oh then that we could so much the more long to enjoy them, by
how much less we are able to comprehend them.

CHAPTER III. Of Gods Backe-parts.
Question.

What may then be seen?

Answer.

His backe-parts, according or our measure and manner, that is, the measure of
our apprehension, and manner of receiving. All vessels are filled at the mouth,
according to their holding: so, God, according unto our necessities, knows how
to name himself, and that so plainly as our capacities may understand him.
Exodus 3.14. God names himself. Exodus 6.3. He appears by one name and not by
another: that is, by his sufficiency to give Canaan, not by his efficiencie in
doing it as yet. Exodus 33.19.20. God will not show Moses his glory, but he will
sit his goodness to pass before him: and ver. 22.23. he covers and vncovers,
as Moses might best see him. We (like narrow mouthed vessels) must receive this
knowledge by drops, and that with the greater difficulty, because we are full
already; for, as in nature there is no vacuitie, but either air or more
solid substance fills all: so in the mind, as it is empty of grace and
goodness, so is it filled with vain conceitednesse, which is an exceeding
hinderance to better knowledge; and therefore, as in a vessel, so much liquor
as goes in, so much air goes out: so, the understanding, as it is filled with
wisdom:, so is it emptied of folly. Hence it comes to pass, that the best
vessel cannot be quite full in this life, because of the remainders of
corruption. We must therefore neither be impatient of Gods delay in revealing
himself, nor content with our small measure; but ever be indevouring to have
one drop added to another, until it shall please God to fill our vessel to the
brim. There is nothing created, what hat his being and perfection together,
every thing grows from strength to strength, till it come to his complete
stature. Only herein grace is contrary to nature, ever strongest at last, and
at best changes not, like his fountain, in whom is no shadow by turning.
Surely, he that here makes profession of goodness, if he find not himself
best at last, may well fear he was never good. The rising of a river is
exceeding narrow and shallow, yet having coasted about, and drawing necre the
sea, begins to make a little sea within his own banks: so here slender
beginnings, will grow larger in the end, if they creep nearer and nearer to
God. I know when we are at the furthest, we can but see his back parts,
whose face we must ever adore in an holy ignorance. Our best knowledge of God
is but as an Echo to a large period, by which we hear the last found of that,
which has no beginning. We can but take up a taste in our hands, being no
ways able to lead our selves to the open fountain. We must use special
labor to learn a little, or else we shall get nothing: if the question be,
whether God must descend to us in teaching, or we ascend to him in learning?
wife moderation (I think) has determined it most equal, that each part remit
somewhat, that both may meet in the midst: we must not think it sufficient
(seeing God has so far condescended unto us as to show us his back-parts) to
eat the corn out of the ear, because we will not abide the labor to grind,
and knead it: neither must we be overcurious, least with the brightness of
his glory we blind our selves. Those things (says AMBROSE) which GOD will have
hidden, search not, those things which he has manifested, deny not; least in
the one thou be unlawfully curious, in the other demnably ungrateful.

Q. Will then the knowledge of his backe-parts suffice for our happiness?

A. We may not see further and live, neither need we see further that we may
live. Exodus 33.20.23. thou can not see my face and live, but my backe-parts
thou shall see, and therefore live: further then our rule we are to attempt
nothing, neither have we any faculty or power so to do. Stretch any thing
further then his compass, and it breaks or rends in pieces. To reach further
then our Art is to ouerreach our selves. Exodus 33.18.19. God both corrects and
directs Moses in the search of his glory: be not overcurious to seek me in
the greatness of my majesty, and thou shall find me in the goodness of my
mercy. O the bounty and fidelity of the Lord, Moses desires a sight of Gods
glory, he shall have more, the fruition of all his goodness: let us therefore
break all false glasses, that would present God in a face not his own, and
look upon those beams of brightness, which he is willing to cast about him,
so shall we take his own height aright by the shadow of it. We may follow the
current to the Sea by many banks, but then must we stand on the shore, and
admire the Ocean: the little streams of Creation empty themselves into the
great rivers of Redemption, and they into a maine Sea of goodness; and here
we must stand and wonder, keeping our selves within our rode and reach.

Q. What are these back parts?

A. All that may be seen of God: we cannot look on him for any thing that is
before him, and therefore we must cast our eyes after him in his word and
works. Exodus 33.23. Deuteronomy. 4.12. Job 4.16. The back-parts of God are some
similitude of his face and here it is fat all for our great doctors of Rome in
their Theology, to interferre as horses do, hewing hoof against hoof, and
to crosse-cut themselves in their own imaginations, devises, and groundless
conceits; for this similitude consists not in the works of men's hands, but in
the words of Gods own mouth, and the works of his own hands. Israel heard
the voyoe of words, but saw no similitude, save a voice. There is no use of the
Stars, when the Sun shines, no more is there of Popish Idols, where the
word is permitted to speak. Moses in the clift of the rock saw clearly, some
rays of radiant beauty. Exodus 33.22. but the divine proclamation taught Moses
more fully, Exodus 34.6. the line of the creatures can in a lively manner point
out the Creator: but the law is the life of this learning, Psalm. 19.1. with 7.
roll his word under thy tongue, chew on it in these meditations till thou
feel some sweetness in the palate of thy soul. Study, strive, endeavor to
believe it, as thou do in so difficult a point to conceive it.

Q. How are the backe-parts of God divided.

A. Into his sufficiency in being, and efficiencie in working: the one in his
nature, the other in his works, Judge. 2.10. They neither knew the Lord nor his
works. Psalm. 78.7. That they might set their hope in God, and not forget his
works. Exodus 6.3. God is first sufficient to perform his promises, and then
efficient of them. Romans 3.20.22. Abraham believed God to be willing and able to
do what he promised. Heb. 11.6. God in himself all-sufficient, and for us are
warder. Seeing this is so, let us never prescribe his wisdom, hasten his
mercy. His grace for the present shall be enough for us; his glory will be
more then enough. With men the rule is good, first try, and then trust: but
with God we must first trust him, as sufficient to help us, and then try him
in his works: and we may be assured, that it is as possible for him to
deceive us, as not to be. Either now distrust his being, or else confess thy
happiness, and with patience expect his promised consolation. Thus may we well
hearten and harden our selves for all attempts.

Q. What is Gods sufficiency?

A. Whereby be being all-sufficient in himself, be is also all-sufficient for
us. Genesis 17.1.2. Cor. 12.9. Hope of advantage is the Lodestone that draws the
iron hearts of men, why then should not God that is rich in mercy have more
suitors? Alas, shall a little absence in performance breed a lingering
consumption of friendship? Can we part with earthly things in present
possession, for hope of better in future reversion, and give the all-sufficient
no time for the reture of his promises? No age afforded more parasites, fewer
friends; we flatter with God, when we say, we love him, and leave him for
delay. The most are friendly in sight, serviceable in expectation, hollow in
love, trustlesse in experience; they will give God a glad welcome whilst he is
a doing for them, and as willing afarewell when he does desist, nay, a little
withdraw for trial: but he that truly knows the sufficiency of his God,
will wait upon his efficiencie without grudging. Rats and Mice run to the
full Barn, leave it when it is empty: So, dunghill creatures for their
bellies serve God, and flintch from him in their want.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. The consideration of the name Shadai, which is compounded of Sha, a
Relative, contracted of Asher, signifying which or what, and Dai, a Noune,
signifying sufficiency. So that the name by this reckoning is thus much, he
which is sufficiency it self. Or as others would have it from Shadh, a Pappe,
all (as it were) sucking their happiness from God. Others again of Shadhadb,
to penetrate or go through every thing, and so signifies Almighty. The
Grecians translate it by Antarkees, or Pantocrator: God being sufficient to
bless his own, and destroy their enemies. Genesis 28.3. El-Shadai, God which is
sufficiency it self bless thee. Joel. 1.15. As a destruction, Mi Shadai,
from the Almighty, who can crush the proudest and stoutest of his enemies.
Hence may we learn to humble our selves under his mighty band, and to cast
our care upon him. 1. Pet. 5.6.7. Remembering that all our safety and
sufficiency hangs upon him. Woe then when God our sufficiency is pleased to
try us with any woe or want, then (remembering our selves to be but worms Het
us not turn again when he treads upon us. If he call for his own, or cut
short ours desires, it is not for us to storm or startle, but quiet our selves
with our trust in him. I have seen ill debtors, that borrow with prayers, and
keep with thanks, repay with enmity. We certainly mis-take our tenure, if
we think our selves owners, when we are but Tenants at will. Or take that for
absolute gift, which our God intends as loan. It is Gods great bounty we may
have right to any thing, though not Lordship over it: of our very lives we are
but keepers no commanders. We may all say as the poor man did of the Hatchet,
alas master it is but borrowed. Out of Gods sufficiency comes all ours, and
therefore it is not for us to be proud of any thing, no more then for vain
whifflers of their borrowed chains, or silly grooms of the Stable, of their
masters Horses.

Q. Wherein consists the all-sufficiencie of God?

A. In essence, and subsistence, one God, three persons. He that is sufficient
to make us happei, must have a being to give being to our happiness, and
subsisting, that it may exist in us. Jehovah may give us being, and yet better
not to be, then be miserable. And surely, he that apprehends no more then the
divine essence, knows but himself to be wretched, and sure to smart by the
hand of divine justice. John 17.3.
Eternal life is in knowing the Father the only true God, and Iesies Christ
whom he has sent. 2. Cor. 13.13. The love of the Father to begin, the grace of
the Senne to dispense, and the communion of the of spirit to finish, are all
necessary to salvation. Math. 28.27. Baptize them in the name (not names) of
the father, son, and holy Ghost: one name, one nature, yet with this
threefold relation, of Father, Son, and Spirit: and here our thoughts must
walk warily, the path is narrow: the conceit of three substances, or one
subsistence is damnable. The breaking of Relatiues is the ruin of
Substantives. herein (if ever) heavenly wisdom must bestirre it self, in
directing us, that we may so sever these apprehensions, that none be
neglected; and so conioynethem that they be not confounded. The Son is no
other thing from the Father, and yet another person: and so the holy Ghost is
no other thing from them both, and yet another person. And here the gagling
geese (I mean the Rhemists) are worthy to have their tongues pulled out of
their heads, and (as Hierome said of his Vigilantius) made into gobbets: who
not contenting themselves, like Shemeies to rail on Calvin, and rattle up our
English Students for reading him, blaspheme in confuting his blasphemies (as
they call them.) That Christ is of God his Father is most true, as his eternal
essence is taken personally: but as the simple nature is considered in it
self, without relation of persons, there the essence is the same in all three,
and not placed all in the first person, and borrowed of him by the other.
Neither shall they, nor any other heretics once be able to hiss at the
reasons, or stand before the face of them, as the spirit of God lays them
down. Exodus 3.14. I will be, could not be predicated of Ghrist, if he were
not God of himself, Ioh. 1.2. Christ in regard of his person is said to be
with God, and in regard of his essence to be God, and therefore as his person
is from or with another, so his essence is of himself. Ioh. 17.20. All that is
Christ's is the Fathers, and all that is the Fathers is Christ's. The Father
therefore having the Godhead of himself, it follows that the Son has it
likewise of himself. Again, it is contradiction of say, God of himself, and
God of another. As likewise most absurd to hold one and the self same nature
begotten and unbegotten; for, so there should be a first, second, and third
nature, as there is a first, second, and third person, and so three Gods as
well as three persons. But this will better appear by the sequel. Oh, the
necessity of this high knowledge, which who attaines not, may babble when he
prays, and be superstitious when he worshippeth. Only here is our greater
help that we have the manhood of Christ, as a Jacobs ladder to climb up to
the Godhead. Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten
son of the Father, as out of his bosom, has revealed him unto us. So that
in this intricate way to the throne of grace, it will not avail us, as we now
stand, except we take with us the second person as a Mediator, whose presence
and merits must give passage, acceptance, and vigor to our prayers. Christians
must therefore learn to ascend from earth to heaven, and from one heaven to
another.

CHAPTER IIII. Of Gods Essence.
Question.

What is Gods Essence?

Answer.

It is that whereby be is the first and most absolute being. Being is that
whereby a thing is truly and really in essence, or existence. And it is either
the first being, or that which is from the first. Now God is the first. Isa.
41.4. and 48.12. and therefore essentially one. Isa. 46.9. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Eth. 4.6.
Furthermore, God is absolute, as being independent from any other. There was a
first man, and a first in every kind of creature, but no absolute first, save
God. Exed. 3.14. Ioh. 8.58. If any ask me why we define the essence of God,
seeing we formerly said it was not known of us, our answer is, we define it
relatiuely, not simply, to wit, as it is a first, and that absolute first being
is known best in it self, and so is God; for, there is nothing more
intelligible then he; yet of us nothing is less known, we come to him by
seconds, and the begins of other things. Which prove necessarily a first, and
that absolutely; for, two will prove one to go before, and dependent beings
will prove an independent. The Sun beams are more visible to our eyes, when
they are cast obliquely upon their objects, then when they fall directly: so,
we must show you God rather in the blessings we receive from him, then those
excellencies which are in him. It is the best and the longest lesson even thus
to learn him, and of surest use: which alone if we take not out, it were
better not to have lived. Oh, that we would often exercise, to acquaint our
nature, and draw it into some familiaricie with God, the very soul and being
of it. And though at first we make but our fire of green wood, yet not to be
tired with blowing, until our devotions be set on flame. If we endeavor, God
will help, by enlightening our understandings, till we be wholly enflamed with
a love of him. And as Moses, by often talking with God, had a glorious
glistering set upon his countenance: so, we by our often frequenting
conference with God, in prayers, and meditations, shall find in our selves,
though not suddenly, yet in time, a most heavenly change.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. The observation of the essential name of God; as, Lehovah, Iah, Eheie. The
first word delivers unto us such an essence as ever was, is, and shall be. Rev.
3.14. Ie, is a note of the Future tense; Ho, of the Present, and Vah of the
Preterperfect tense: and so is well expounded. Rev. 1.8. But ill expounded by
those, which by them would understand, the Trinity, giving the present to the
Father, past to the son, and to come to the Spirit. Yet it is true the Father
works of himself, and as the present begins time, so he the action: it is
also true that the Son works from him, and therefore passes on the action,
as that which is past does time. Neither can this be denied but that the Spirit
works from them both, and so finisheth te action, as the future does the
points and periods of time. But this word is essential, and not personal, and
therefore is given of God to express the essence, not the persons. Iah is
contracted of Jehovah, not to signify a diminute God, as if it were the
diminutiue thereof: but still for essence and present being. Neither is it
applied to Christ, humbled in the flesh, as if that were the diminution of it,
but it is the denomination of one and thee self same glorious essence in all
the persons. Eheie, is as much as, I will be, which no creature can
peremptorily affirm. Time changes all things, and there is none that has the
command of it, but he alone that gave it beginning, and continuance, and to
whom the account of our very hours are due, and best known. But I must not
lead you from Elins into the wilderness, and leaving the wells of water,
trouble you with the barrenness of man's brain. Take these Texts of Scripture
for confirmation, and further illustration. Exodus 3.14. and 15.2.3. Psalm. 68.4.
Isa. 42.8. Happy are we that we rest upon such a being, and may enjoy all
things in him, and him in all things, nothing in it self, so shall our joys
neither change nor perish: for, how ever the things themselves may alter and
fade, yet he in whom they are ours, is ever like himself, constant, and
everlasting.

Q. What follows in the second place?

A. That God is free and void of all power, either to be, or be otherwise then
he is. And therefore faith rests upon a most substantial and immutable being.
He has neither causes to over power him, or accidents to change him, and so
he is above all substantial and accidental power. Causes prevail in every
creature, but the Creator is void of them. And hereupon God is from himself,
of himself, through himself, and or himself. He that is An^^tios, without
causes, is Autoon, God of himself: yea, in virtue and power more then all
causes to himself. Go then ye wise Idolatrous Parasites, and erect Shrines,
and offer sacrifices to your God, the world, and seek to please him with your
base and servile devotions: it shall be long enough ere such religion shall
make you happy: you shall at last for sake those Altars, empty, and
sorrowful; for, both you and your God are beholding to a better being then
your selves. How ridiculous is it to plead for an Idollgod that has all the
causes put upon him. What fools will be persuaded to resign up their own
eyesight, and to look through such spectacles, as very sottishness does
temper for them. I will her presume to press in with an easy determination,
although it seem to me to be no other then a plain quarrel, between
stomach, and discretion, a small deal of wisdom might decide it,
especially, considering that all things are from God, and God alone from
himself, Blush, ye Gentiles, that use a Smith, and Carpenter, so weak
efficients, that they faint in drinking the strongest liquor. That make choice
of iron, brass, gold, silver, wood. etc. as matter to matte the making of a
God. But above all let them consider, whom neither the fumes of siery passion
do mist, nor sinister respects or preiudices sway down on either side, from
the pitch of just integrity: how silly and idle a thing it is to form a God
after the image of man, bird, or best, and that without the meanest life, far
from any Deity or Divinity, except it be by the late Masters of the Mint, in
the multitude of their modern miracles: but the Lord knows, that these coins
and stampes are far off the purest paths of verity. Alas, how do they ray
and rob God of his excellency, whiles they robe him in these rags of rotten
relickes? But this is the very hate of heaven, and in effect, the very gate or
hie way to hell, to give our selves unto it as our Summum Bomum, or chief
good. Whiles Dagon stands, the Philistimes fall down: but when Dagon was
fallen before the Arc, the Philistimes stood to lift him up. It is just with
God, that those which want grace, should want wit too; it is the power of
superstision to turn men into those stocks and stones, which they worship.
Methinkes their understandings, and wits should have waded further, if Dagon
fall, how shall we stand by him? If he cannot help himself, what shall he
profit us? Yet Idolatry and Superstition are not easily put out of countenance;
Dagon is up again, and the next morning (the fittest time for devotion) the
Philistimes hasten their speed, and flock to their Temple, to see how Dagon
had rested that night under his own Roof; and now behold in kindness their
God is come to meeto them in the way; some pieces parted from the rest salute
them upon the threshold; his head and his hands are over-runne their fellows,
to tell them, that neither his wit nor his power could stand before the true
God. And now whereas the threshold should have been hollowed to the Victor; it
is consecrated to their beaten God. As if it had been made more holy by his
ruin, then Gods revenge. Therefore God strikes them in their bodies, which
could not feel themselves stricken in their Idol. Pain must humble them,
whom shame cannot. And now they begin to confess, that Gods hand was sore upon
them, and their God. Yet they make account of confession as drunkards do of
vomiting: the Arc of the God of Israel shall not abide with them. Thus wicked
men upon all occasions are glad to be rid of God, but with no patience can
part with their siunes. And thus the Prophet by running through all the causes,
Isa. 40.18. with 44.12. derides the Heathen by making their gods. And then, as
if they were besotted, asks them, Have ye not known? Have ye not heard?
Has it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not understood it from
the foundations of the earth? It is be that is God, which is able to sit upon
he circle of the earth: stretch the heavens as a Curtains, and spread them as a
Tert to dwell in.

Q. What follows from hence, that God is without all causes?

A. First, He is without an efficient, or beginning. Rev. 1.8. and 3.14. And
from hence he is not subject or obnoxious to the creation, or annihilation of
any other, as are ll creatures; yea, the very Angels; and therefore God is
absolutely independent, and supreme. And here nature and good nature may bring
us to God. Reason has no where either bound or bank to restrain it, but at
this cause, hither will it bring us, and here will it leave us. I am the
beginning of the creatures, says Christ; therefore God: go by the creatures
as works, and they will lead us to their first efficient and beginning.
Secondly, God is without all matter; and therefore most spiritual: the less
matter, and the more form the creatures enjoy, the more spiritual it makes
them. By God therefore, so pure a spirit, are all things nourished with the
only dew of divine benediction: but this high way is so plain, that a guide
were needless. Furthermore, God being most spiritual, is likewise most
invisible, and impalpable. Too subtle for sinew or sight to sease upon him.
Luke 24.39.1. Tim. 1.17. It would present him for a furious and raving Bedlam,
that should once formalize God to his own fancies. Again, where matter is
wanting, there common nature is wanting; for, things communicate, as they rise
from some common stock, and stem. And because all specialls are contained
under generals, God wants that too; and therefore is properly, neither
essence, or being: but an Huperousios, or super substantial being by himself,
one only in number, neither dividing, nor divided; multiplying, or multiplied.
The wife is the husband divided, and the child is the father multiplied. But
God is neither so divided into three, neither are three so multiplied from one.
He is (if I may so speak with reverence) without all stock or kine. Therefore
when we say, essence is common, and person proper, it must be received with a
grain of salt. For the common nature is not distributed into parts, as into
persons; but as common to all, so it is one individual and singular essence in
them all, and that received of each person without parts or passions; for,
matter is the ground of both, and where that is wanting, they are not to be
found. I stay the longer upon these Negatiues, because we re not loosely and
lightly to slide over the things of God, as if they were vulgar, and trivial,
like our own. Thus far you have seen God, out of the rode and reach of the
efficient, and matter: see him now void of form and end; for in them likewise
consists power to be. The form in going and coming is the cause of all
generation and corruption; God therefore being without it, is incorruptible,
and therefore a God immortal and everlasting. Psalm. 102.26.27. Iam. 1.17.1.
Tim. 1.17. A choice and refined piece of high Quintessence of wit is that of
Papists in their breaden god, which yet never Church could distill out of her
brains, or aspire unto, besides their own. What generation and corruption do
they make of the everlasting bread of heaven? Here perhaps might we find
stuff enough (I will not say to lade an Argosie) but to over lade any man's wit
in the world to reply unto. It shall suffice us to think of God as God, and
man as man. Christ in heaven, and Christ in the Sacrament. Now if we add
further, without both matter and form together, then is God neither the whole,
nor the member of any thing, or any ways to be distributed or defined; I mean
with perfect definition; because he has no essence diverse from himself, and
therefore the definition, and that which it defines, are all one: so, that in
God Thees and Theiotees, God and the Godhead are all one. Lastly, having
neither matter, nor form, he wants all terms and limitations of essence, and
therefore as most simple, so most infinite in being. For end, God is endless,
being neither for any other, or having any other better then himself, and
therefore the chief good, and by communication our good, and so to be desired
above all. Math. 19.17. Psalm. 63.7.11 and 73.25. and 18.1.2. How easy is it
now for Christians to insult over worldlings, that think themselves worthy of
envy? and to turn off their darling with a scornful repulse? What if it
make us the Devils proffer, All these will I give you: Can we not return S.
Peter's answer, Thy silver and gold perish with thee? He alone that is
caussesse, shall cause me the happiness I expect, look, and long for.

Q. What follows from hence, that God is without accidents?

A. That he is both Aposes, without quantity, and Apoios without quality. In
regard of the first, he is neither augmented nor diminished; of the second,
neither altered nor changed. Even to your old age I am he, and even to hear
hairs will I carry you. Isa. 46.4. I am the Lord, I change not: therefore ye
sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal. 3.6. By this I see that all things here
below are as far from sincerity, as continuance, if they were sweet, as the
joys above, yet how should their fickleness cool our delights, and make us
esteem these drams of honey lost in pounds of gall, and guile? We laugh at
their choice that are in love with the deformed; and what a face is this we now
dove upon? See if our sins, cares, and crosses have not like a filthy morphew
overspread it; and made it loathsome (in comparison of the beauty of the
Creator) to all judicious eyes. I marvel then that we should thus love, what
woe cannot hold, and for a shadow of a smoke, and a dream of a shadow leave
him, whose light is neither variable, nor shadowed with turning. Iam. 1.17.
Here then, if we will be wise Merchants, thristie and happy usurers, let us
part with that which we can nor keep, that we may gain him whom we cannot
loose. These cottages of ours have been ruinous a long time, and the worse for
their accidents, and yet like fools we have not thought of their fall. Lord
give me grace to lean upon thee, then shall my fall be easy, and my rest
endless. Oh, thou which art out of the power of others, over power me to the
obedience of thy self.

Q. What will follow from Gods essence in the last place?

A. That God is one most pure and mere act; that is, his being and action are
all one thing. For as his essence is absolute, so is his working. There is
never a creature but he works by qualities, and so his act is first in the
power of them. The fire warmes not without heat, neither does man understand
without reason: a Bird might as easily flee without wings, and fire ascend
without lightness, as the creature produce his actions without faculty and
power thereunto. And hereupon it follows, that passion and resistance are
incident to all his works. The very Devils suffer, and are resisted of God,
and how soever their motion is too swift to be stricken, or slayed by corporal
instruments, yet God is quick enough for them, to make them both feel and
fear the dint of his sword. God therefore being so absolute an act, must needs
have his being and doing all one. Job. 5.17.
My father works hitherto, and I work, which shows, that Gods act is
eternal; and so creation as an act is from God, has no beginning, as a
passion in the creature, is measured by time. In regard of the first we call
him a pure and mere act. In regard of the second, omnipotent, being able to
make nothing as well as some thing, feel his work which before could not be
perceived. And therefore omnipotency, or Almighty power is not given to God
in regard of himself, but his creatures, which may feel that hand which
before was unfelt. Again, Gods being and act being all one thing, he must
needs do all things by his essence, which is purely one. Hence God is the
Archetype, or first draught of every eminent act. In which respect it must
needs be of sovereign use for the discovering and reforming of whatsoever
error time has soyled his actions withal. How are defaced copies, and
dissigured pictures better amended, then by reducing them to their original?
If the pipe fail, go we not to the head? O that his acts were set as a
frontlet between the eyes, and as a seal upon the hearts of all his
followers. Ought not all our actions to be as branches of this root? Surely,
this is the clear head-spring of all other ensuing brooks; and as little
streams empty themselves into great rivers; and they again into the Sea; so
must all run to this maine. Venerable it is for the very antiquity of it.
Considering therefore what price men do set upon old copies, coins, and
statues; Ignat: ad Marian: Cassob.
and that none will pass by a crystal fountain, bearing some ancient name
or date, but will taste thereof, though no thirst provokes him; I could not
well pass over this leaf without some lesson for mine own learning. If any
have passed a longer way, with more happy fruit of observation, I desire he
would not spare in some part to report the excellency of this travel. But to
keep me within the sphere of my profession. He that is so pure an act, must
needs be without all passion, and resistance. A pure act cannot suffer, Job
9.4 Romans 9.19.
because it wants that power which should submit it to another; neither can it
be resisted, for that which is overpowered, suffers in resisting, which to a
mere act is impossible. And whereas God says, Amos. 2.13.
I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that s full of sbeaues: His
meaning is, that their sin was so intolerable and weighty, that it was time
to ease himself of it by due punishment, Amos. 2.14.15.16.
not suffering the swift to escape by flight, or the strong by force, as the
next verses show. O then the misery of all those that will needs be rich with
injury, and grow great by being conscious of secret evils. Wealth and honor
without God, when they are at the best, are scarce our friends: but at the
worst, our tormentors. Alas, alas, how ill agrees a gay coat, and a festred
heart? What availes an high title with an hell in the soul? These are they
that must suffer. Sin owes them a spite, and will pay them home when they
least think of it, yea, when they are least able to bear it. I will therefore
prefer all the afflictions of Gods Isreal, Heb. 11.25.
before these pleasures of Egypt; and choose rather to eat the lamb Christ,
with these sour herbs, then all these fleshpots of sin. Let me be
miserable, so I be not guilty, and rather abound with sorrow then sin: so
shall the consuming fire that no water can quench, or violence oppose, have
mercy upon me. Heb. 12.29:
He is liberal, that I live; but he shall be munificent, in bringing a poor
wretch from all miseries to taste of the full cup of his glory. Hitherto we
have but heard of God by way of Negation, denying of him all the imperfections
of the creatures: Now, we are to speak of him by way of Affirmation, giving
him the most eminent and excellent perfections of his own works. The Schools
have laid us down a threefold way of knowing God. As the negation of
imperfections, the affirmation of perfections, and the causation of great
works. The two first we follow in Gods sufficiency, the last we leave as
proper to the efficiency.

CHAPTER V. Of the Attributes of the Essence.
Question.

But how shall God be apprehended of us, seeing he is simply one?

Answer.

In that he has made himself many attributes. It is fit that the object and
the understanding be proportionable to it self, an infinite understanding is
capable of an infinite object, and so God only understands himself. Now
because man cannot apprehend God by one act of understanding, the simplicity
of his face and essence is laid open by the multiplicitie of his backe-parts,
and attributes. So God revealed himself to Moses, when he proclaimed his
glorious Name: The Lord, the Lord, strong, gracious, and merciful, Exodus 34.6.
etc. And so Moses himself published Gods name: Ascribe ye greatness to our
God, he is arocke, is work is perfect: Deuteronomy. 32.3.4.
all his ways are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and
right is he. Prejudice is a great enemy to truth, and makes the mind incapable
of it. Hence it comes to pass, that most men despair of any knowledge of God,
and so fall into Atheism, or else they will fashion God to some form of their
own, whether of an humane body, or of admirable light; or if their minds have
any other more likely, and pleasing image; and so become Idolaters with their
own conceits. In matters therefore of so great consequence, I will first lay a
sure ground, and then believe, though I can argue no further; and will hold the
conclusion, in spite of all premises. He that teaches God upon the warrant
of his own brain, lays the brands together without tongues, and is sure (at
least) to burn his own fingers. I will therefore beware how I sail upon this
Sea without Compass.

Q. What are Gods Attributes?

A. That one most pure God, diversely apprchended. Hoare O Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
And 10.17.
the Lord thy God is one, great, mighty, terrible, etc. Faith, which is the
divine Logic of Gods spirit, rests upon testimony above all Arguments, and so
takes God barely on his word, without any further discourse: yet by the way of
understanding, which apprehends the knowledge of things by Arguments, distinct
from the things, and amongst themselves, Faith is so far content that Reason
show the way, in making the Attributes diverse from the essence, and amongst
themselves; but checks reason when it would make them opposite, or really to be
distinguished. It is above the Art of reason to teach the subject and all his
attributes to be one in nature; and yet thus far it may agree with reason, to
make them diverse. So that by faith and the way of sanctified reason, we come
to apprehend him that is simply one. Man's reason in matter of faith, as fire in
the first degree of her ascent may be a flame, next smoke, and then nothing.
The light may be good, if like fooles-fire we trust it not too long. Faith
stands like an ancient Pyramid; which the less it grows to a man's eye, the
nearer it reaches to heaven. Whereas reason for the most part, like Astronomy
begins in Nature, ends in Magic. If it may have the whole handling of
divinity, it will make it ridiculous before it leave it. Logic, the Heraldry
of all Arts, and the best array of indgement, is in the most exact knowledge of
God, either a skilful ignorance, or a wild knowledge. Almost as good discourse
to brute beasts, of the depth of Philosophy, as to mere carnal men of the
mysteries of Divinity. He that will believe no more, then he conceiues by
reason, can never be a Christian; or he a Logician, that will assent without
reason. And seeing God has made the soul as the lamp of the body, and reason
as the lamp of the soul; Religion of Reason, and Faith of Religion: Let us
use all these lights without confusion, and let not one trip up the heels of
the other, according to the dexterity of humane policy. In divine things what
we may, we must conceive, the rest believe and wonder. Not the curious head,
but the credulous and plain heart, is accepted with God. We will bolt out by
reason, what may help faith, not confound it. In brief, to open a little
crevise of further light, and give a little more glimpse to the point, let the
ensuing consectaries be well marked and observed.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That the attributes differ not really from his essence, or between
themselves, but only in respect of our understanding: Hence they are his
essence. I am that I am, Exodus 3.14.
teaches an Ocean of Divinity: where the attribute is, I am, as well as the
subject, and so nothing is given to God that is less then himself. God is
merciful, and his mercy is himself. Lo, with this word, I am, we may
happily wade out of those deepes, whereof our conceits can find no bottom. A
little further, here shall we not like Pagans worshipping the Sun, hold our
hands to the Glo-worme in stead of a coal for heat.

Q. What then observe you in the second place?

A. That all his attributes are given unto him, both in the abstract, and
concret; as God is merciful, or God is mercy it self; To have life, and be
life: to be in the light, Ioh. 5.26. With 14.6. 1. Ioh. 1.5.7. 1. Ioh. 4.7.8.
and the light: love to come from God, and be God are all one. Think of him,
as one, whose wisdom is his justice, whose justice is his power, whose power
is his mercy; and whose wisdom, justice; power, and mercy, are himself. Good
without quality, great without quantity, everlasting without time, present
every where without place, containing all things without extent. These things
are not to be weighed at the common beam of custom and opinion, but at the
golden standard of Gods Sanctuary. Job. 28.1.2.
Silver has his vein, and Gold his mine where it is found, iron is taken out
of the earth, and brass moulten out of the stones, but the place of this
wisdom is not to be found in the land of the living. Faint not in this
knowledge, neither be weary of well-doing: for though in rowing this vessel
upon so maine an ocean, the winds blow, and cross Seas rage, yet God our most
skillful Pilote, can straight send an Halcyon to let us on shore.

Q. What learn we in the third place?

A. That his Attributes are not in him by participation, imperfectly, but at
the first hand, and by themselves most perfectly. God needs to borrow from none
that which he means to bestow upon us, but being rich in grace, gives us of
his own. Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 36.9. Romans 11.3. Ephesians. 1.7.
As one Diamond fashions another; so is this sequel wrought out of the former;
for, he that is goodness it self, receives none from others. That man's face
is hatched all over with impudence, that dare arrogate the least good to
himself. It is virtue that will always clear her way as she goes; but vice
will be ever behind hand with it self. I know that God requires of our debts,
a reckoning, not payment. And I believe heaven to be the easiest purchase, for
we are the richer for the disbursing.

Q. What follows in the fourth place?

A. That all his attributes are in him in the highest degree, and can no ways
be intended, or remitted, though in regard of the object about which they are
exercised, they may less or more appear. Psalm. 125.4.5. Romans 9.13.
For as fire burns not in dry wood and green wood alike; so, Gods grace is
not to every person in the same measure. His abundance is infinite; and
therefore cannot admit decrease. Take a drop out of the Sea, and the water will
be so much the less: but here the very floods of Gods bounty, running all
abroad, do nothing lessen his store. If we receive sparingly, it is not for
want either of plenty in him, or liberality to us, but for very want of
capacity in our selves: even as they that come to the river, to draw water,
receive so much as their vessel will hold. Psalm. 81.19.
Open thy mouth wide (says God) and I will fill it. And here the Rule in
nature holds, That all causes do work according to the disposition of the
subject: Save with this caution, that God can dispose of the subject as he
pleases, for the holding of his mercy. Happiness and misery, are Antipodes,
and God can bring them into another world, that walk in the kingdom of
darkness. O pity not inferior to plenty, and love toward distressed sinners,
no less then infinite. A degree does either extend the quantity, as great,
greater, the greatest; or intend the quality, as good, better, the best: and
God is a degree above the Superlatiue, as, greatness, or goodness it self.
God is Great. Psalm. 77.13. Greater. Job 33.12. Greatest. Psalm. 95.3. Greatness
it self. Psalm. 145.3. Good. Psalm. 106.1. Better. Psalm. 108.9. Best. Phil.
1.23. Goodness it self. Math. 19.17. Genesis 15.1.
To Abraham God is a reward, a great reward, yea, an exceeding great reward. I
see it is difficult to avoid variety, I will not be curious in traversing
opinions. I study for simple truth, as one that will not lead you out of the
rode way, to show you the turnings.

Q. May there any thing yet follow in the fifth place?

A. Yes, That all the Attributes of God are equal between themselves, though
they appear not so to every man. Exodus 34.5.6. Psalm. 103.8. Ezekiel. 18.25.29.
Slow to anger much in mercy. Is not my way equal. Yours unequal? Man's
strength is but the vicissitude of rising and falling. His titles of honor are
as rattles to still ambition, his greatness is fames Butt, and fears Quiver:
It is only God that truly enioyes himself, and is best to be enjoyed of men,
who shall ever be found most equal, and like himself. If I were dumb, these
sweet meditations would make me find a tongue. If it be low water, the mill
may stand still, but such abundance of hearty thoughts will set the wheels on
going. I would be ashamed, that the earnest Discourses of unlearned Mariners of
their voyages; or, Huntsmen of their game, should exceed our divine Meditations
on this Theme.

Q. Is there yet any thing that may further be learned from the definition of
Gods Attributes?

A. This yet remains, that all the attributes are in him together, though
they appear not together in his creatures. Romans 1.20. Act. 17.17. Luke 10.21.
Some appear in creation, some in corruption, some in redemption. Justice and
mercy are as absolute in God, as wisdom and power, though they appear not to
us, before the application of Christ to the Church, where predestination may
most safely be handled. Ier. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love. Therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee. It always appears not what love God bears his Saints and
Sons. This life I count as a throng in a narrow passage: he that is first
out, finds ease, he in the middle worst hemmed in with troubles, the hindmost
that drives both out before him, though not suffering wrong, has his part in
doing it. Alas, where shall a man mew up himself, that he may not be a
witness of what he would not? What can he hear, or see, and not be either
sad or guilty? Oaths strive for number with words; scoffs with oaths, vain
speeches with both. Alas, is not God served with mouths full of curses and
bitterness, with heads full of wine, with eyes full of lust, hands full of
blond, backs full of pride, panches full of gluttony, souls and lives full of
horrible sins? Stews and Tauernes are better served with customers, then
Gods house with believers. Well, that is in God already, that shall one day
make these monsters of men smart for it. If with much pressure I can get
through the strait passage, and leave but my superfluous rags as torn from
me in the crowd, I am happy. I believe the destiny of all my sorrows is
written in heaven by a wise and eternal decree, and that no evils either come
by chance, or are let loose to light where they list, and therefore it shall
content me, that the faithful God that has ordained, moderates them. How
ever they appear for the present, their beginning and their ending are both
together in God. I care not what become of this frail Bark of my flesh, so I
may save the Passenger. And here Icast Anchor.

Q. How many kind of attributes be there?

A. Two, Exodus 3.13.
which show either what he is, or who he is. Moses desires to know what is his
name; and Pharaoh will know who he is, Exodus 5.2.
before he will let Israel go. To the first question God gave a short answer,
I am. To the second he made a large reply, till Pharaoh was compelled to
answer himself, the Lord is righteous. Exodus 9.22.
When we desire to be acquainted with some great Personage, we usually
inquire, who, or what is such a Person, even thirsting till we hear his name,
or titles: So, Faith cannot be satisfied without some knowledge of the nature,
or properties of God. 2. Tim. 1.12.
And must be inquiring whom or what she has believed. And here I know it will
be far more easy to fill the belly of faith, then the eye of reason. That
faith may therefore be as the elbow for a heavy Soul to lean on, we will
under prop it with both these pillars. I know that as the Sea receives all
streams, and yet has proper water in far greater abundance: so, in God
there is a confluence of the perfections of all creatures, and yet his own
perfection does infinitely exceed them. We are to meddle with the first, with
the presence whereof, all the powers of the mind shall be filled; all the
senses of the body shall be satiated: in so much as they shall, neither in
desire seek, nor in hope aspire, nor in imagination feign any greater pleasure.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a spirit, having life in himself, or of himself. He is (as we
have heard) both being and Act; Ioh. 4.24. With 5.26. 2. Cor. 3.17.
now we see both in our definition, not that he is compounded of them, but
expressed by them. In every creature there is a composition of matter and
form, out of which it has his essence and action: so in God, spirit is as the
matter, life as the form; I say expressing, not compounding his nature. And
the reason is lively, for God must be the most excellent nature, and the most
eminent act. Spirit is the purest nature, and life the quickest act. Observe
but in nature, and you shall find, that much matter and little form make
things gross and corporal: much form and little matter fine and spiritual.
Earth is more gross then water; water then air; air then fire; bodies then
souls; men then Angels; Angels then God. There is no creature free from
matter, for then should it be as spiritual as God. He only is without matter,
and therefore most spiritual; and consequently most active, as if he were all
form. Hence he is styled the living God. Ier. 10.10. 1. Tim. 4.10.
Deuteronomy. 32.40. Judge. 8.19. Ruth. 3.13. Ezekiel. 33.11. Dan. 4.37. by whose life we
are to swear as having most intelligence of the truth, and greatest power to
punish the liar. Being a spirit he must needs be strong and subtle to enter
where he will; being life it self he must needs quicken and quiet all desires
and appetites. Act. 17.28. Ioh. 1.4. And 5.21.26.
Alas, then how miserable are all those that want this God, or have provoked
him by their sins? As one that floateth, half choked and wearied in the
midst of the Sea, cease not to wrestle with the waves, to cast forth his
hands every way, although he graspeth nothing, but thin and weak water,
which continually deceives his pains; so, they that both swim and sink in
this depth of death, shall always strive and struggle therewith, although they
neither find nor hope for any help. O deadly life: O immortal death; if the
pain were no greater then the stinging of Ants, or of Fleas, eternity were
enough to make it intolerable. Ioh. 5.21.24. 2 Cor. 4.11. Gal. 2.19.20.
Lord quicken me from this death, and make me by faith to pass from it unto
life purposed and promised in thine own beloved. Happy are all they that
believe, and in believing serve this spirit of life in spirit and truth, Ioh.
4.24. Luke 1.75.
all the days of their life.

Q. What are the attributes that show us who he is?

A. His essential properties. And here the field is large for the describing
of God Simonides being asked of Hiero the King, what God was, demanded a days
respite, then two days, afterward three: and being asked the reason,
answered, that the longer he thought what God should be, the less he
understood of him. And another heathen said, It is hard to find a God; Plato.
but to understand him impossible. No wonder, these men had but the light of
Nature, yet thus far they aimed right, Quo enim prius eo notius natura.
and shot near, that God the most intelligible was least understood of us; and
that the infinite understanding was not within the compass and fadome of the
finite; but in helping that default by their own imaginations, went themselves
exceeding wide, and came not near the mark: which I ascribe not to any defect
of eye sight in those sharp sighted Eagles of Nature, but only to the want of
fixed contemplations in the book of the world, and more especially their utter
ignorance of the word of God. We therefore that enjoy the sacred Scriptures
may see far further into this mystery. Remembering always, that Divinity as
the Mistress takes upon her to direct her hand-mayd, and that the Bible is
the best man of counsel, for the greatest Clarke in the world, containing more
then all the Divines of the Heathen ever saw the shadow of. All which will best
appear by the opening of this rich Cabinet of Gods Attributes, and viewing the
several Jewels in it, by this torch-light, or rather Sun of the little
world. And it should be a shame for Christians, if it were not better known of
them then Lipsius his Bee-hiue, or Machiavels Spider-web; about which many
wits, like a Dor, end their flights in a Dunghill. Romans 3.4. Exodus 23.19.
Psalm. 46.1. With 70.5. Exodus 34.6.
And here I might enter an ample harvest of properties affirmative and
negative, proper and figurative, absolute and Relative. But here such
properties are to be handled as appear by themselves as no ways flowing from
the essence of the creatures, as all negative, figurative, and relative
properties do. Only one thing I cannot but mention in admiration of Gods
goodness unto us, which is, that God is content to take properties most
improper, as a body in respect of all the members of it, head, face, eyes,
eyelids, apple of the eye, mouth, ears, neck, hand, arm, right hand,
fingers, feet, heart, bowels, etc. Dan. 7.9. Exodus 33.20.23. 2. Chron. 16.9.
Psalm. 11.4. Deuteronomy. 32.10. Josh. 9.14. Psalm. 31.2. 2. Sam. 22.9. Ier. 18.17. Act.
4.28. Exodus 6.6. and 15.6. and 31.18. Psalm. 110.1. 1. Sam. 2.35. Ier. 31.20. So
likewise a soul coupled with the body and members. Isa. 1.14. so the senses
that rise from the union, both inward and outward; as, memory, forgetfulness;
hearing, seeing, smelling, etc. Psalm. 136.23. Isa. 49.14. Psalm. 14.2. and
5.1.2. Genesis 8.21. In brief, he assumeth the very affections and passions of
the soul, as joy, sorrow, anger, zeal, Jealousy, etc. Judge. 9.13. Genesis 6.6.
Romans 1.18. Nay, yet he goes lower, and by the wings of birds, horns of
beasts, the Sun, the light, their very shadow, the fire, rocks, and stones
he speaks unto us. Psalm. 91.4.2. Sam. 22.3. Psalm. 84.11.1. Ioh. 1.5. Psalm.
91.1. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Psalm. 71.3. yea, and to go to the lowest, by the works of
man's hands, as shields, and bucklers, etc. Psalm. 2.3. and 144.2. yet we are to
understand, that all these are attributed unto God improperly, and by way of
his gracious condiscending unto, and sympathizing with man's nature, because
being literally taken, they are derogatory unto his eternal glory, whereunto
simplicity, and uniformity are of absolute necessity. O Lord, do thou
speak so familiarly unto us, and have we so little knowledge of thee? I
cannot but blush to hear very Countrey-people speak statutes and husbandry
well enough, to make their neighbors think them wise men: yea, to be so well
skilled in Arithmeticke and rates, as they have eloquence enough to faue their
twopence. And yet (O Lord) what a world of blindness is there in conceiving,
and understanding of thee? O muckwormes of the world, which like the Gentiles
breed of putrefaction, and Beetles fed in the dung, relishing nothing else but
earthly things: thinking there is no other godliness but gain; no happiness
but to scrape and gather, to have and to hold. Let them know that the treasures
of wickedness and wrath will go together: and that they that make casting
Nets for all fish that come, will in the end get the Devil and all: like
Seruing-men, by the superscription of their livery, they tell us, without
asking, who ownes them, Romans 6.16.
and though they be not drunk, yet they are not their own men; for, his
servants they are to whom they obey. God make us more pliant to his will,
seeing so graciously he applies himself unto us.

Q. How many sort of properties are there that show God more absolutely and
properly?

A. Two, either showing how great, or what manner of God he is. Psalm. 145.3.8.
Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Great is the Lord, and gracious, and merciful, etc. Our God is the God of
Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible. Infinitely great
without quantity, infinitely good without quality. Who being both the
original, and the end of all things, cannot rightly be said to be any thing,
for he must needs be above all, and better then all: in regard therefore of his
incomprehensible nature, we must acknowledge, that darkness is his secret
place, Psalm. 18.11.
clouds and thick mists are round about him: yet so he has declared himself
unto us, that we may know him to be most wise in understanding, most mighty in
ability, and most loving in will to succor and save us. As are hiding places
from the wind, and refuges from tempests, ryvers of waters to dry places, and
as rain to the new mowne grass, etc. so shall we find him our stay, if we
seek him as we may.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Greatness of God.
Question.

What Attributes show his Greatness?

Answer.

His unity, in regard of quantity discret, Infiniteness and eternity, in
regard of quantity continued: such is his Greatness, that he is that one most
infinite and eternal. See now, that I, even I am he, and there is no God with
me; Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. In matter of life and
death there is none comparable to the Almighty; all are but ciphers, that stand
for a number with him, whose value and account is to be reckoned for naught.
Let all proud Herod's take heed, how they admit but the voice of a God. Act
12.22.23.
As no wrong can escape him; so least of all those which are offered to his
Majesty: he that made the ear, needs no intelligence of the tongue. All have
to do with a God, that is light of hearing; men cannot whisper any evil so
secretly, that he should not cry out of noise: and what needs any other
evidence, when the Judge is the witness? And though some sins do not ever
look the same way they move; yet this single eyed God can easily distinguish
betwixt the visor of actions, and the face: he therefore cannot want honor and
patronage, that seeks the honor of this God.

Q. What is Gods Unity?

A. Whereby he being one in essence, is also one in number. Unto thee it was
showed, Deuteronomy. 4.35. Mar. 12.32. 1. Cor. 8.4.5.6.
that thou might know, that the Lord he is God; there is none else beside
him. Thou have said the truth: for there is one God, and there is no other but
he. Though many are called Gods, yet to us there is but one God. Hence it
follows that we need not be distracted in the worship of this our God. Let
him carry us which way he will, make the passages never so troublesome and
perilous, yet the same hand that makes them hard will make them sure, and if
we be faithful to him, he will master all difficulties for us. O God as we
have trusted thee with the beginning, so will we trust thee with the finishing
of our glory. And though never so many or maine hindrances of our salvation
offer themselves, and after all our hopes, threaten to defeat us, yet faithful
art thou that have promised, which wilt also do it. For how should thou that
art one in number and essence, be otherwise then thy self. All things do
turn upon this point, and hasten to this center: if it were not for unity,
multiplicitie would destroy it self. Nature will run out of it self to do
homage to this uniform creator. What ayled thee O Sea, that thou fleddest, and
thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? ye mountains that ye leaped like
Rams, and ye little hills like Lombes? Surely, the earth trembled at thy
presence O Lord; at the presence of the God of Jacob. It is natural for the
preservation of unity, for weight it self to ascend: how observant therefore
ought all creatures be to him that made them? Alas, how could the rebellious
Canaanites stand out against him, or his people, who the Seas and rivers gave
way unto? With what joy might Gods people trample upon the dry channel of
Jordan, seeing behind them, Egypt, the Sea, and wilderness overcome, and
before them the promised land so ready to entertain them, that the very waters
being glad of their coming, ran back to welcome them into Canaan? O Lord,
if thus thou be one, that all must yield, how great is this unity, making and
comprehending all others? What a row of creatures follow thee, and what an
Army do thou lead? In spite of all Atheists, unity will Marshall all under
thy colors; and let them die by Marshall law that dare once break this rank,
and rebelliously set themselves against thee. There were no numbers if thou
were not first, and if there be many, thou art a God: No A theist in the world
shall be able to phillip off this authority with disdain. God is the first,
because in nature one is before two, and must begin in the order of
computation. Account the times, and tell me who has multiplied them? Think
on the creatures, and show me their beginning. I deem, all days and deeds in
their succession, will either prove nature a God, or a God of nature. And if
every grape must have his bush, and each suspicion his prevention, let the
Atheist take this answer. Nature is res nata, a thing bred and borne of, or by
another. Who is then this grand Parent of Nature? Your own Poets have told
you, we are his offspring. Act. 17.28.
The head of nature is God, who of his own will, of nothing begat all things:
I say of his will, not of himself; for, so should he and all his creatures be
simply one. And so we should need no other reckoning, the number would be
soon told. But he must be sedulous that will learn this secret, and by
telling a multitude, or an heap of unities, find out one simply first. But
why say I so, seeing two will prove one? let him then find any number in
being, and it will prove a God.

Q. What is Gods infiniteness?

A. Whereby he is without all limits of essence. As Gods eternity rises from
this, that he has neither beginning nor ending: so his infiniteness from
this, that he has neither matter nor form, which are the proper limits of
essence; as being most essential to every finite being. Indeed the limitation
of any cause, makes the effect finite. Genesis 1.2. the earth is said to be void
and without form. It was of nothing for matter, and it was all things for
form: yet wanting both these it was finite, as having his beginning and ending
from God, who alone sits upon the circle of it. Isa. 40.22. and above it
stretches the heavens, enclosing both, being enclosed by neither. Psalm. 147.5.
The Lord is of great power, his understanding is infinite. And here may we ever
be striving to perfection; and as the kine of the Philistimes, which drew the
Ark of God, though they were milch, and had calves at home; the one to weaken
them, the other to withdraw them: yet without turning to the right hand, or the
left, they kept on their way, till they came to Bethshemesh: so, having once
joined our selves to the yoke of Christ, and drawing forward toward this
infinite essence, and the fruition of our bliss in him, let us chearefully
bear the Arc of his Law upon our shoulders, in the way of holiness, and in
spite of all hindrances, keep on in our tract, till we be gotten where our
everlasting house and mansion is provided for us, and that by the hands of this
unlimited God.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. First, The Immensitie of God, whereby he is without all dimensions, that
is, of length, breadth, or thickness. He is higher then heaven, deeper then
hell, longer then the earth, broader then the Sea, etc. Job 11.8.9. Isa. 40.12.
Ier. 23.23. A God at hand and a God a far off. He that is freed from
dimensions, may pierce and penetrate, enter and pass whither he pleases
without probability, or possibility of resistance. A son feeling the love
of his father, creepes nearer under his wings, or elbow: how easy is it for
God to enter our stony and steely hearts, and draw them after him? They that
resist the holy Ghost, do it by gainsaying his word, not by frustrating his
work; for he shall convince the world. Io. 16.8. either to conversion, or
confusion. The altitude of pride, longitude of power, and profunditie of
policy are trampled upon by God. Proud Belshazzar (Dan. 5.27.) was weighed and
found too light; Gods wand soon found him wanting; and alas, how easily did
God penetrate the hard walls of his heart, to the horror of his whole soul,
and hastening of his death? Now as a Ship in the midst of a storm, tossed with
tempests, and beaten on every side, with winds and waves, and dangerously
driven, not by direction of the Master, but by the fury of unbridled violence;
so, in this extraordinary agitation, Reason, which is the Pilote, could bear
no Rule; but affection and affliction, as a storm, toss and drive him to
utter despair. Thus all the wicked, whose hearts the Lord does not pearse and
boar by his word, he enters by force to stir up that raging Sea, whose
waters foame nothing but mire and gravel. Isa. 57.20.

Q. What in the second place may be observed?

A. His incomprehensiblenesse, whereby he is without all limits of place, and
from this flows his omnipresence, or vbiquitie, whereby he is wholly without
and within all and every place, no where included, no where excluded; and that
without all local motion, or mutation of place. He fills al places without
compression, or straitning of another, or the contraction, extension,
condensation, or rarefaction of himself. A Candle may be contracted for his
light within the hand, or hatte, and extended to a whole room. A sponge may be
thrust into a narrow compass, and yet by swelling fill a larger space. But God
neither moves to come into any place as do the Angels, or standing still,
fills it by thrusting out another, as liquor into a vessel; or else in larging
and contracting himself like light; or by any thickning or thinning of pores,
and parts, as Ice and water, etc. but purely, and simply, by his essence and
presence is every where. 1. Ksng. 8.27. Psalm. 139.7. Isa. 66.1. Ier. 23.23.24.
Act. 17.27. By this it appears, that no place can hinder God from doing us
good. Distance, or difficulty may be impediments to all the creatures to stay
their help, but God at a blush fills all places, to comfort or confound, as it
pleases him. He moves, or changes all things, without either motion, or
change in himself; who is in every place present, in every place entire;
within all things, and contained in nothing; without all things, and sustained
by nothing; but contains, sustaineth, and maintains all things. O infinite
goodness, passing all humane both search and sight; thou both fillest and
includest all things; thou art in every place present, without either seat, or
motion. Give me therefore grace, that in all places I may both fear, and feel
thy power.

Q. What is Gods eternity?

A. That whereby he is before and after all, not beings: that is, not only the
world, but the very nothing of it. Reason will teach me that nothing was before
the world, and that nothing may be after it: but it cannot teach me any such
apprehension before or after God. For I cannot so much as conceive a nothing,
before an absolute being: the reason is because nothing is apprehended by way
of contrariety to something. Psalm. 90.2. Before the mountains were made, etc.
God is not only before the creature, but the making of it, and that from an
everlasting before it, to an everlasting after it. Psalm. 139.16. God sees the
creature in his non entitie, or nothing. Isa. 57.15. He inhabiteth eternity.
1. Tim. 1.17. The King of ages. Heb. 1.2. The maker of times. The Hebrew word
comes of a root, to he hid, because there is no knowledge where to begin or
end. Alas, how do we affect a thousand things that cannot be effected;
miserably afflicting the soul because they are wanting. And of all things we
do obtain, the pleasure does forth with either vanish, or cloy; they do no
more satisfy the appetite, then salt water quenches thirst. Only this
eternal God gives it all contentment. Eternity is either an admirable
blessing, or a miserable curse. If all the punishments of hell were no greater
then the stinging of Gnatts, perpetuity is enough to make them intolerable. Oh,
how grievous shall it be to the damned, to think, that after millions of
ages, the shall be so far either from end, or from ease, as they were the
first day of their beginning. In life there is some ease, and in death an end:
but here the wicked shall neither have end, nor ease. So long as God shall
live, so long shall the damned die; and when he shall cease to be happy, then
shall they also cease to be miserable.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That God is without all limits of time past, present, Rev. 1.8. 2. Pot.
3.8.
or to come. And yet he is at all times, but without respect of time. And
therefore cannot be subject to any mutation, or alteration of time, as to be
young, or old; but is an everlasting and immortal God before, and after all
times, and in all times, for ever and ever. Job 36.26. Psalm. 92.7.8. and
102.26.27 Isa. 41.4. and 43.10.11. Ier. 10.10.1. Tim. 1.17. Some things have no
beginning, and yet an end, as Gods decrees. Some-things a beginning, and no
ending, as Angels; some things both beginning and ending, as all sublunary
creatures: God alone has neither beginning nor ending. All creatures have a
lasting: Angels an out-lasting; God an ever-lasting. O that true love like a
strong stream, which the further it is from this head of eternity, would
run unto it with greater violence. Alas, that ever so many cold winds of
temptation, should blow betwixt God and our hearts, to make our affections
cooler unto him. What dull metal is this we are made of? We have the
fountain of felicity and eternity, and yet complain of want and weariness.
Do we freeze in the fire, and starve at a feast? Have we God to enjoy, and
yet pine and hang down the head? Let me die if ever I envy their happiness
that joy in red and why Crosses, a vain title, dainty dishes. Gold is that
which the basest elements yields, the most savage Indians get; servile
Apprentises work, Midianitish Camels carry, miserable worldlings admire,
covetous Jews swallow, unthrifty Ruffians spend. Let me have my God, and let
me never want him, till I envy them. So shall my joys be lasting, when this
transitory trash shall leave them. Go then thou miscreant, that can take more
pleasure in a kite, a dog, a boune and base companion, then in the living
God. An Hawk becomes thy fist better then a Bible, and every dung hill trifle,
then this during Deity. O the unsavory food of fools, to the taste of any
wise man: I can but wonder how any should be so idle, having so fair means to
purchase better things: but I must conclude them amongst Salomons fools, who
having a price in their hands, have no hearts to get wisdom.

CHAPTER VII. Of the divine Qualities.
Question.

What Attributes show us what manner of God he is?

Answer.

A. His most divine and excellent qualities, whereby he acts, or works.
Properly God has none; yet because we cannot see his working by his essence,
he gives qualities to himself, by which we may understand his marveilous
works. Psalm. 86.8. Among the gods there is none like thee (O God) and there is
none that can do like thy works. Psalm. 71.19. Thou have done great things (O
God) who is like thee. Exodus 34.6. O what an heaven may a Christian here seele
in himself! when (after many traverses of holy meditations) he may find in
his heart a feeling possession of his God. When he may walk and converse with
him, and that not without an opennesse of heart, and familiarity: so that when
his soul has caught fast and sensible hold of him in his gracious qualities,
he may either pull him down to himself, or rather lift up himself to him,
and can and dare secretly avouch, I know whom I have believed. O then how
should we detest our blockishnesse and dullness which would suffer a leaden and
earthy spirit, to thrust it self betwixt us and our active God; and by his
dark and indigested parts, eclipse that light which shines to our souls? Let
me (dear God) with fear to offend, and faith to obtain, always be humble
before thee, and never be high minded, but only in minding these things above.

Q. What observe you from hence?

A. That all the former properties of greatness may be attributed to these: as
his eternity and infiniteness may be given to all, or any of his qualities,
but not the contrary so properly, as Gods eternal wisdom, infinite justice,
etc. and not his wise eternity, or just infiniteness. Psalm. 145.7.8. Great
goodness, great mercy, and not good greatness, or merciful greatness. For
quantity is the measure of the quality that acts, and hereby we see an
Ocean of mercy and goodness in God. Here then may we keep what we have, and
get what we want, and a good soul will not more loath all other covetousness,
then affect this. Here alone must we never profess to have enough, and our
care must be, if we may increase, either by laboring, or begging, or usury, to
leave no means unattempted. Let others please themselves in the large extent
of their rich manors, or in the homage of those whom baschesse of mind has
made slaves to their greatness, or in the price and fashions of their full
wardrope, or in the wanton varieties of their delicate Gardens, or in their
full coffers of red and white earth; or if yet there be any other earthly thing
more alluring, more precious, let them enjoy it, possess it, and let it
possess them: let me only have this God, and let me never want him, till I
envy them. An idiot, or a child looks on the fairest Gally-pot in the
Apothecaries shop, which shall be sure to have his first hand, though never so
full of poyfonous drugs: where the judicious choose rather the wholsomest, led
not only by sense, but skill: so silly sotts and sottish worldlings, are more
tempted with wealth and honor (which when they come upon best terms, are but
vain) then with the beams of that infinite beauty, which deserves the best,
yea, all, and a thousand times more then all. O that any thing in the world
should be respected before him, equalled with him, or loved out of him, of
whom, for whom, and through whom are all things. It grieves me to think, that
so substantial and super excellent a good should have such hollow services:
fie on all Rimmonites, that plead an upright soul in a prostrate body; or that
pretend a Nathaniel in the skin of a Nicodemus. Dare we not speak out, and
without all secret halting, or halving say, God is God, and we will follow
him, for his excellency? O that ever Christian ground should bear any maples,
hollow and fruitless; or that we should lie so near the banks of the dead
sea, having fair apples, which under a red side contain nothing but dust. For
his sake that is super-essentiall, become more substantial. Remember what
great account you are to pass at the last Audite before him, when all
favorites, and fancy feeding-flatterers shall shrink from us, and nothing but
our own deeds and deserts accompany us.

Q. What secondly may we learn?

A. That the acts of these qualities differ nothing from the qualities
themselves, nor they from the essence, or among themselves, but only in
respect of our understanding, which does diversely apprehend them. Exodus 3.14.
I am, must ever be observed as a rule to keep us from gross conceits of God.
Ioh. 5.17. My father works hitherto, and I work. Every creature has his
being before his action, but in God essence, faculty, virtue, and action are
altogether, and the same. So that it is good resting upon him, in whom is so
great perfection as to be simply one, and vertually all things. I can wonder at
nothing more, then how a man can be idle; but of all other a Christian; in so
many improuements of reason, in such sweetness of knowledge, in such variety
of contemplations, and most happy opportunities of thoughts. Other Artizans
and Scholars do but practice, we still learn; others run still in the same
gyre, to weariness, to satietie, our choice is infinite: how many busy
tongues chase away good hours in pleasant chat, and complain of the have of
night? And shall an ingenuous mind, or religious heart be sooner weary of
talking with God, the sweetest of companions? Who would not wish himself an
Anachoret, secluded from the world, and pent up in the voluntary prison-walles
of his daily thoughts of God? Let us therefore in our meditations on his
back-parts, and these his most excellent qualities, take heed how we begin our
heavenly thoughts, and prosecute them not. He that kindles a fire under green
wood, and leaves it, so soon as it begins but to flame, must needs find it
clean out, when he would warm himself by it: so, if we begin to think
these thoughts, and give over, we cannot but loose by them, because they are
not seconded by suitable proceedings. Fire in embers unstirred, glowes not,
heats not the house. Sugar in the cup unstirred, sweetens not the wine. It is
not a Trade, but a Trade well followed that fills the purse. It is not the
having of land, but land well-looked too, that maintains the man. A lock
without a key, is of no use: so, there is no profit in setting our selves to
meditate on God, more then of a sleeping habit, if we give over before we
come to some issue.

Q. How many sorts of his qualities be there?

A. Two, faculties and virtues: the one makes able, and the other prompt to
every good work. God by way of eminency explaines himself by both Number.
11.23. Isa. 50.2. and 59.1. God is most able to help and deliver. Isa. 55.7.
He is ready to forgive. Ephesians. 2.4. Rich in mercy. 1. Ioh. 1.9. Just and
faithful to forgive. God is not only able to forgive, but ready and willing
to perform his act. O wick and wretched man, call to thy consideration
(unhappy creature) from whence thou runnest, where thou art, and whereto thou
hastenest; the favor which thou forsakest; the horror wherein thou abidest,
and the terror whereto thou tendest: shake of this sloth, this sleep, this
death of sin, wherein thou wallowest, and wherein thou wanderest: Raise up,
rowse up thy self from this dangerous dullness, and look up to this God, who
is able by his power, and willing for his mildness and mercy, to relieve and
release thee of thy misery. Live not still like the fly sucking at the botches
of carnal pleasures, when thou may bath thy self in this Ocean of
sweetness.

Q. What are Gods faculties?

A. Whereby he being most excellent life is able to work whatsoever he
pleases most eminently: the best faculty must be given to God; and therefore
the most perfect life, not arising from the union of two things, but the simple
perfection of his own nature, whereby he living in himself, does inliuen and
quicken other things. And hereby it must follow, that God is most active,
wanting no ability for the effecting of any thing. Deuteronomy. 32.40. God in power
lifts up his hand to heaven, and says, I live for ever. Josh. 3.10. The living
God is known to be among the Israelites, by his powerful driving out of the
Canaanites. Ier. 10.10.14. Because of his life and everlasting nesse, the earth
shall tremble, etc. Dan. 4.34. and 6.26. Ioh. 1.4. Act. 17.28. I. Pet. 1.23.
Rev. 15.7. If forty days rain, driven with the tempest of Gods wrath, was
sufficient to destroy the whole world; what shall we esteem of the full storm
and stream of his rage, wherein the fiery darts of his fury, shall never cease
to beat upon his enemies? He surely, that casts off this God, casts away
himself; and being the abject of God, must needs be the subject of the Devil.
But for his elect, and their salvation, he shall strive with no greater
strain in effecting their good, then we do in the motion of our eyes.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. Understanding and will: the best faculties in which life does most
eminently show it self, are given to GOD. 1. Chron. 28.9. God understands the
very inwards, and his will is to cast them off, that care not for him. Oh, thou
which art the best understanding, and the purest will, polish thou the two
tables of my soul, my understanding and my will; this of affections, the other
of cogitations, that I may both think and will as thou would have me. This
may assure me, that not only my actions, or words, but my secret cogitations
shall be rigorously examined; even in that manner whereof the Prophet has
spoken. Seph. 1.12. the Lord shall search Jerusalem with lights, and visit the
men that are frozen in their dregs, and say in their hearts, the Lord will
neither do good nor evil. Then shall all hypocrites cry out, Ah, who can
dwell in the burning fire? who can abide the everlasting flames?

Q. What is Gods understanding?

A. That whereby he understands all things at once and together. And
therefore his knowledge is most certain, and infallible, even in things most
contingent; neither needs he to bring any proposition to the tribunal of a
Syllogism, and there try the truth of it by discourse. Manifest things need no
other judgment, then the very sight and sound of them. Now to this intelligent
God all things are laid open and naked. Heb. 4.13. He is no ways to be
deceived by composition or division, or any manner of Sophistical discourse.
He sees all things at a blush by the infiniteness of his essence. 1. King.
8.39. Psalm. 139.1.2.16. Job 14.16.17. O thou that have pure eyes look upon us
in thy Son, and so we shall neither be dazeled, nor damned. Eye service is
a fault with men: but if we could but serve God while he sees us, it were
enough. He sees them that will be Saints in the Church, and Ruffians in the
Tavern, Tyrants in their houses, and Cheators in their shops. He sees those
dainty Dames that under a cloak of modesty and devotion, can hide their pride
and fiendishnesse. It will not be long, ere thou will judge all our secrecies
with severitie. The sun of my sinful life has passed the meridian, and I
am now in the afternoon of my age. The night of nature will come fast upon
me: when death (as Gods sergeant) will arrest my body upon debt due unto
nature, my soul upon trespass committed against my all-seeing Creator. The
one must be bound hand and foot, and committed close prisoner to the ground;
the other arraigned in the high Court of heaven, where he that has seen me
sin, shall be both party and judge; to answer to all objections, as well of
ignorance, as of contempt. Only this is my stay and staff, that he will both
forgive and forget, yea, put himself out of office, if I betimes judge my
self, and repent of my evil.

Q. What as his Will?

A. That whereby he wills most freely what is good. Exodus 33.19. Psalm. 5.4. and
115.3. and 135.6. And here might something be said of diverse affections
attributed to God. But they will appear better upon the occasions they
manifest themselves, and for which they are given to God. And here must we
learn our counsel, and comfort. Counsel to submit to whatsoever he
commands; and comfort to admit whatsoever he promises. Oh, vain studies of
men, how to walk through streets all day in the shade, how to square circles,
how to salve the celestial motions, how to correct misshapen copies, to fetch
up old words from forgetfulness, and a thousand other points of idle skill;
whiles the maine care of knowing Gods will is neglected. This makes the best of
all these inferior creatures, to live in more sorrow and coffeehouse then
the worst of them; yea, that very reason wherein he excells them, and by which
he might advantage his life, is abused to suspicious distrust of God and his
will. How many have we found of the fowls of the air lying dead in our way
for want of provision? they can eat, rest, sing, etc. only man toyleth,
cares, loatheth, and lamenteth his present; O the coldness of care in casting
it upon God, as if he wanted will to provide best for them, for whom he has
provided all things. I will so depend on my makers will, that my trust therein
may not exclude my labor, and so labor, upon my confidence thereon, as that
my endeavor may be void of vexation. Math. 10.

Q. What are Gods Virtues?

A. The qualities whereby he is absolutely good Math. 19.17. Why call thou
me good, there is none goad but God. Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is a rock, his work is
perfect, for all his works are judgment, a God of truth, and without
iniquity, just and right is he. 2. Sam. 22.31. God must needs have all
virtues, because he wants no perfection. As the Ocean receives all streams,
and yet has proper waters in far greater abundance: so, in God there is a
confluence of the perfections of all creatures, and yet his own perfections
do infinitely exceed them. What are the pleasures of this life, to our
drinking of his pleasures, as out of a ryver. Psalm. 36.8. At the best they are
but as beams of that sun, sparkles of that fire, which most purely and
perfectly are contained in him. Yet as we have made them, they are as a smoakie
fire in cold weather, whereof the smoke is more noisome, then the heat is
comfortable. O give me of that abundance which both in cause and continuance,
plenty and place, so far excells the other.

Q. What are the sorts of these Virtues?

A. Two, either his intellectual, or moral virtues. God must have the best
understanding, and the best will; and therefore must needs enjoy the virtues of
both. Romans 3.4. Let God be true and every man a liar. Psalm. 51.4. God is just
when he speaks, and pure when he judges; his will and understanding are
purely good. By this our hearts (being ravished with the love and admiration of
this light, which so brightly shines unto us, as men with the Sun, who are
newly drawn from dungeon, and bottom of baseness) should readily follow him,
who carries so fair a lamp before us. Shall the merchant refuse no adventure
for hope of gain? the hunter shrink at no weather, for love of game? the
Soldier decline no danger, for desire either of glory, or spoil? And shall we
frame to our selves either an ease in not understanding, or an idleness in not
using the means, whereby we attain both immeasurable and immortal glory,
pleasure, and gain? I know (as the proverb is) a dead woman will have four
to carry her forth; so we cannot easily be beaten out of our homes, to hasten
to this inheritance laid up for the Saints in light.

Q. What are his intellectual Virtues?

A. Whereby he is most prompt in understanding all his purposes most exactly,
and distinctly. Psalm. 139.4. There is not a word in my tongue but thou know
it wholly. Romans 11.33. and 16.27. Only wise, and a depth of wisdom and
knowledge is to be found in God. Job 21.1. Act. 15.8. 1 Ioh. 3.20. His deep
judgment has waded and weighed all considerations, and the way he takes is
ever best. The mind of man is weighed, as every wind of passion does puff.
Lust and pride desire to spend; avarice to spare; envy to detract; fear, or
favor to extol; ambition to adventure; suspicion to hold back; wrath
sweetneth revenge with delight; deceit cloaketh it with dissimulation. Only
God is exact and distinct in all his enterprises?

Q. What are his moral virtues?

A. Whereby most holily, readily, and purely he performs the act of his will.
Genesis 18.15. Shall not the Judge of all the world do justly? Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God
of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he in all his ways.
According to these two heads of virtues were all things created. The whole
world manifests the wisdom of God, and all his intellectual virtues. Men
and Angels, his justice and mercy, the top of all his moral virtues. But the
particular handling of these virtues, we leave to the places, where they do
most manifest themselves. O my Soul thou art pent within the clay-walles of my
body, and may often look through the grates in thy busy thoughts, when
this holy God will send for thee. Surely to be dissolved is best of all; only
he that gave our souls their mittimus into our bodies, must give them a
re-delivery, with return ye sons of Adam. If in the interim he cross us in
our bodies, yet have we no cause to complain, as long as we have him in
feeling, in faith, in earnest and pledges; yea, in possession. O the mad
insolence of nature, that dares control, where it were more fit to wonder.
Should presumptuous clay be bold to check the potter? Me thinks this should
engender a very curious and advantageous wariness in all our proceedings,
having learned by experience, the wisdom and holiness of our God. It is for
them to murmr and mutter, that either know not God, or know him displeased
with them. Alas, foolish worms, what do we turning again, when he ^eads
upon us? If we be his, why pine we at that which is good for us, yea, best? for
that must ever be best to us, which he sees best; and that he sees best which
he sends. His will is the rule of his actions, and his goodness of his will.
It is therefore our duty to submit unto him in all things. If he strike, the
rod must be kissed in silence, and glory given to the hand that rules it. It is
no small part of his rare virtues, to work our good by affliction; and
therefore we may be encouraged to rest upon him in all estates.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. Gods most absolute happiness both in action and contemplation. Whereby he
is freed from all evil, abounding with all good, sufficiently contenting
himself with himself, and no ways standing in need of any other. 1. Tim.
1.11. and 6.15.1. Ioh. 1.5. Psalm. 16.2. vnd 50.7. to 14. Hag. 2.8. Behold now
ye ambitious spirits, how ye may truly rise to more then ever the sons of
Zebedee desired to aspire unto. Waiting is the way to reigning, serve him which
is thus happy, though without apparent wages: he will pay sure, if slow. Live
well, and thou may live in expectation, as those which after some term of
their cottage expired, are assured they shall have a marble palace built for
them. O let us think that the days and months pass slowly away, till then,
ever looking up to him that is the finisher of our faith, and remembering that
for the new heavens, our hearts must be made new before hand. Let worldlings,
like a company of idle boys, scramble for the figs of this life; it is for
wise men to take them if they fall in their bosoms: whose maine care is to be
found acceptable in the day of the Lord. Worldly vanities (which are always
there own cutthroats, by their own crossing and contrariety) are to be
abandoned of Christians, who casting away all weak diffidences, know how to
trust God with his own. Wait thou on the Lord, and keep his way, and he
shall exalt thee. Psalm. 37.34. It is he that will fulfill all the good pleasure
of his goodness, and the work of faith with power. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. O that he
would purge out of our minds and memories that ambition and vanity, which so
bewitches them with the love of pompes and glories of this perishing and ending
world, which in the breathing of a breath, we may loath, loose, leave and
despise as nothing: and would graffe in them a pure and single eye, to behold
the eternal bliss, which seen, breeds love, and loved conducts us to
heaven. Here to as high a tide as we shall rise in our desires of wealth, and
welfare, to as low an ebb shall we fall in our hopes thereof. Seeing then we
look for better things in the heavens, let us be diligent that we may be found
of him in peace, without spot and blameless. 2. Pet. 3.14. Do we believe
that all things shall be made new, and our hearts only remain old? As if our
blessed God, intended nothing but our souls to be out of fashion. Be assured,
that as no man puts new wine into old vessels, no more will God put the new
wine of his glory, into the old veslels of our corruption. Look we therefore
to him, that has said he will give us new hearts. Ezekiel. 11.19. And remember
that all our glory begins in grace, and that God will have none to dwell with
him in happiness, that will not vouchsafe him to dwell with them in holiness.
Root out (dear God) all gall and acerbitie amongst brethren, and bend their
hearts to charity, that being reunited in the pilgrimage of this life, this
country of our terrestrial, bodies, we may after our service and course
therein accomplished, ascend under the conduct of our Savior, before ascended
to our everlasting rest, in the country of our celestial Souls, there in
society and unity of Saints and Angels, to enjoy the happy vision of the
all-glorious Deity, and to sing his praise for ever.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Subsistences, or three Persons.
Question.

HItherto of the essence, what are the Subsistences?

Answer.

That one most pure essence, with the relative properties. Relation adds
nothing to the divine essence, but respect, or mutual affection. God with the
relation of begetting is the Father, of begotten the Son, of proceeding the
Spirit. One and the same essence has all these respects: but peradventure we
have mis-taken our Cue; for there is not so much in the divine essence as any
inherent quality. I answer, I marvel so learned a disputer should moote no
better. Quality and relation are distinct predicaments. Wisdom and
father-hood in the same man, are not two qualities; for the one, because a
quality, is some thing in it self; but the other, because a relative, is
nothing without another. A father is nothing without a son, neither is the
son in being without a father. They are mutual beings. And yet one being may
be mutually many of them; as one and the self same man, may be a father, a
master, and a subject: so, one pure God may be a father, son, and holy Ghost.
1. Ioh. 5.7. We call them Subsistences, because by their singular,
individual, and personal properties, they subsist in one and the same
essence. Could we now but through a crevis, or lettice, see those things which
the eye of faith sees here with open face, how would we loath all Epicurisme
and Atheism, in comparison of our Baptism in the name of these three
worthies? Had we but tasted with the tip of our tongues these dainties, we
would pray with David even against the worlds delicates, Psalm. 141.4. Here
shall we not have our lives composed of ieiune and empty contemplations, but
so full of contentment, that we shall need to wish no other measure of
pleasure, then to be wholly taken up with this divine task. Here is the
exaltation of Isaacs delight in walking forth into the pleasant fields of
sacred meditations, on the blessed Trinity. O let our Souls have two or three
walks a day upon this mount Taber, and with holy Moses converse with one God
in three persons, on the Horeb of both Testaments, till we have found out unto
our selves the pure law of life. As these three exhibit it unto us. And if the
one breast let not down this nourishing liquor so freely, so easily, as our
strength will bear it, then may we refresh our selves with the other, and by
such a small variety we shall find them yield milk equally wholesome,
equally pleasant to us weak Infants and nurselings. If mount Sinai, covered
with darkness, tremble, the father being offended: the Gospel calmes and
lightens it presently, the son having satisfied. Ioh. 17.3.
This is eternal life, to know the father reconciled in his son. Retire thy
self daily into some secret place of meditation, and prayer, such as Cornelius
his leaddes, David's closet, etc. and thou shall find with Jacob the sweet
vision of Angels, climbing up and down this sacred ladder, which stands
betwixt heaven and earth, at the top of it is the father, the whole length of
it is in the son, and the spirit does firmly fasten us thereunto, that so we
may be transported unto bliss.

Q. What is here to be observed?

A. The names in Scripture that express this mystery, as Elohim, and Adonai.
Genesis 1.1. Mal. 1.6. Both which words being plural, are joined with words of
the singular number: to show the unity of the persons, both in essence, and
action. It is not for every proflygate professor that lives as he list, to be
dealing with this divinity. These pearls are not for swine, who will laugh at
such congruitie, as makes one of three, and three of one: but he that finds
and feels the conjoined working of the Trinity, will adore it in unity,
ascribing to father, son, and holy Ghost equal authority and power in all
their works. This (as well as the whole rule of well-liuing) belongs to the
sealed fountain, the spouse of Christ. A doctrine not fit to be preached in
Gath and Askelon, to uncircumcised and profane hearts, that will turn every
good thing to their own destruction. The Lord that has the teaching of all
hearts, make us ready for this transcendent learning.

Q. What secondly is to be observed?

A. That the subsistences, or persons, being the same essence, are God, and one
God. Ioh. 1.1. 1. Ioh. 5.7. Cut but the hair from the eye brow (says
Augustine) and how disfigured will the face look, there is but a small thing
taken from the body, but a greater matter from the beauty: so in these
honorable ways of wisdom, we may not derogate the least jot of Deity or
dignity from any person.

Q. What in the third place?

A. That whatsoever Attribute is given to the essence, may so far forth be
given to the subsistences: as every person is infinite, eternal,
incomprehensible, etc. Exodus 23.20. with 1. Cor. 10.9 Christ has the same name
and authority with his Father. Ioh. 1.1.2. and 14.1. and 21.17. Phil. 2.6.
Heb. 1.3.1. Ioh. 5.20. Rev. 1.11. In all these places, the essential
Attributes of the divine nature are given to Christ. So likewise to the Spirit.
Psalm. 139. Act. 5.3.4. 1. Cor. 3.16. Job 33.4. 2 Cor. 13.13. Mat. 18.19. O that
we had but in us the internal principles of faith, to rest upon these three
worthies, infinitely great and gracious. This I am sure, as a spring, or oil
to the wheels of our Souls, would make them go smoothly, and currantly. Make
all other yokes light and easy. Undoubtedly, the Pipe of Faith would here draw
in so much sweet air from the precious promises of life, that thereby we
should be able to renew our strength, and with cheerful spirits lift up the
wing as the Eagle, run and not be weary, walk and not faint. What, shall
idle Guls with a Pipe of Tobacco, or Cup of Sack, (silly smoakie helps) give
life again to their dull and deadly Spirits? And shall not the Saints and
servants of three so infinite, exhilerate and cheer their hearts, with the
feeling of their new life, so mercifully begun by the father, powerfully
dispensed by the son, and perfectly finished by the spirit? Where were all
this grace, if it were not stronger then any Ellebore, to evacuate the mind of
all fears and griefs? It is for nature to be subject to extremities, that is,
either too dull in want, or wanton in fruition; but grace like a good temper is
not sensible of alteration. O then that every easy occasion of pleasure,
profit, or preferment, should interrupt us in these religious intentions, and
draw us to gaze, like children, which if a bird do but fly in their way, cast
their eye from their Book. Nay, what a shame is it to think, how hardly we
are drawn to learn or listen to this lesson? As a bear to the stake, as a
slave to the mill, or a dullard to the School, are we brought to these
studies.

Q. What in the fourth place?

A. That all the three persons are God of themselves; for an absolute first
cannot, no not in order, be the second, or third of any other: but a first in
all. The Son because he has his person from the Father, is a second person,
but not a second God. Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1 Ioh. 5.7. All those places that
prove God to be one, exclude all derivation of essence, for one cannot be
multiplied without number. Heb. 1.3. The son is the image of the person, not
the essence; it were an absurdity to say, Christ is the image of himself: but
apt and proper the express image of his Father. For tho he be no other thing
from his Father, yet another person. Hence we learn how to expound that
speech, very God of very God, that is, the subsistence of the son is verily
and truly from the subsistence of the father. The person begetts, not the
essence; for, to beget, and be begotten, are relatiues, yet the essence is
absolute. But Ioh 5.26. It is given to Christ to have life in himself. If
life, then essence, etc. I answer, Christ speaks of life in the text by way
of dispensation, as he was the Messiah, and so it is explained, ver. 27. He
has given him authority to execute Judgment, because he is the son of man.
The very text makes this common to both persons, to have life in themselves,
which is the property of the Godhead: and yet Christ having life in himself
as God, has the same given him, as Mediator, and son of man: but you will
say, so he had power to give himself life, and therefore the fathers giving
respects his person as well as his office. I answer, it is true, for as the
son of man receives subsistence from the son of God, so the son of God
receives subsistence from his father: Now working is according to subsisting,
therefore the life of grace, spoken of verse 25. is wrought by the humane
nature of Christ, as it is sustained by his person, and his person being from
the father, works the same life from him: so then it is given to the son in
regard of his manner of subsisting, to be the dispenser and disposer of the
life of grace, whereof the father is the beginner, etc. But as God he
quickens whom he will, v. 21. and that as he has life in himself. Life,
will, and understanding are Attributes of the essence, and so simply one in
them all. Here may the sick find a Physician, the broken a balm of Gilead,
the fearful a shelter, the flyer a refuge, and the breath-lesse spirit a
blessed rest. The son of God has wedded to himself our humanity, without
all possibility of devorce; the body hangs on the Cross, the soul is
yielded, the Godhead is eviternally united to them both. And if Christ be God,
and by his subsisting and working, come so near us, what should dissolve the
eternal bonds of our heavenly conjunction with him, or the daily influences of
grace from him? Here are the apples and flagons of holy consolation, and it is
good for the Spouse to be walking into the Gardens, and eating of these fruits.
We cannot hope to be so near to our God, as Christ was, united personally:
yet need we not fear that God should seem more absent from us, then he did
from his own son. He was still one with both body and soul, when they were
divided from themselves; when he was absent to sense, he was present to faith;
when absent in vision, yet in union one and the same: so will he be to our
souls, when they are at worst. He is ours, and we are his: if our hold seem
loosened, his is not: when temptations will not let us see him, he sees us, and
possesses us; only believe him against sense, above hope; and though he kill
us, yet let us trust in him. Shiloach refreshes Jerusalem, Jordan Naaman,
better then Abanah, and Pharphar. Cherith dried up while Eliah drank of it.
Jacobs well was stopped up, but this well of living water no drought can
diminish, nor Philistimes stop up.

Q. What follows yet in the fifth place?

A. That the three persons are coessentiall, as having the same essence
together, and that not divided or by parts: but as (if I may so speak with
reverence) three partners in a Ship, have not each a piece of it, but wholly,
and together. Father and son are often two distinct men, and have a common
humanity divided by parts between them: but here the persons distinguished by
relation, are vndevided in essence. And the reason is, because the father
cannot beget one less then himself, and therefore he being infinite his son
must likewise be infinite. And that which is infinite admits of no division, or
distribution. Now the three persons being co essential, are likewise
co-equall, and co-eternall. Ioh. 5.18. Phil. 2.6. 1. Ioh. 5.7. He that walks
in the Sun for pleasure, may be tainted with the heat thereof before he
retire: so they that are drawn by delight into these cogitations, may thereby
take the touch of a more deep impression. Papists (as I have read) having
little knowledge of our Ladies countenance and favor, have assembled the
fairest Curtezans to draw the most modest beauty of a Virgin out of the
flagrancie of Harlots: so many whose skill is very slender in this mystery, out
of their own devotion, have broached many strange conceits of the Trinity,
and left them as Oracles for their followers. But we study to express these
things as near as we can with truth of matter, and sobriety of speech; for
truth finds more easy entrance, when it comes armed with his own force,
and adorned with the furniture of words that may best beseem it.

Q. What observe you in the last place from the definition?

A. That they are one in another, and with another, mutually delighting and
glorifying each other. Pro. 8.22.30. Ioh. 1.1.2. and 5.20. and 10.38. and
13.31.32. and 14.10. and 17.5. The Son is a delight to the Father in the
work of our Redemption, Math. 12.18. and the Spirit a joy to them both, in the
work of our sanctification. Pro. 8.30.31
If the son had not been the fathers daily delight, he had never rejoiced in
the habitable part of the earth, nor had his delights with the sons of men.
Behold, oh man, that stand in the ways, inquiring for life, here it is,
labor thou to delight in them, that are delighted in thee, and rejoice
together to work out thy salvation. Alas, how should it pity our hearts, to
see many silly Souls run up and down in the common labyrinth of error,
groaping for the strait and narrow gate of life, like the blind Sodomites after
Lots door, each man telling his dream to his neighbor, of an imagined
happiness. And though they draw and drink in iniquity, yet will they still
dream of drawing in the easy yoke of a Savior, when God wotes they were
never driven unto it. Is this the pastime of the blessed Trinity, to sport
themselves together in doing us good, and shall we be entreated (like mad
men) to be good unto our selves? O how many that never tasted of these
delights, yet think themselves in sky and highest sphere of happiness? Alas,
how many walking Ghosts in the shapes of living men, applaud themselves, like
swine in earthly pleasures? O the watery pleasures of Epicurean hoggs, that
satiate themselves with the husks of vanity, and cry out in their madness,
that they have lived the only ioviall and iocand life. These (like Moles in
the earth) are ever casting up, as restless in themselves. Surely, he goes
lightly that wants these loads; as loath to lagge in the foulest weather. The
Bustard by reason of his great body, and bulk of bones, when he is pursued,
can hardly get upon his wings; whereas the little Lark mounts presently aloft
with ease. Oh how should our right conceit of this delight of the Trinity,
carry our souls upon the wing, and make them ascend? Alas, ambitious minds of
ayery honor, are but ambitious of their own destruction, who climbing the
slippery hill of high preferment, measure more then their length in their
dangerous downe-falls; whereas he that stands on oven-ground is as soon up as
down. O then that the Christian soul would say to it self in a word or two,
how live thou? know and consider from whom thou drawest thy breath, and
remember that one day led with the blessed Trinity, is better then an
immortality of the worlds windy vanities.

CHAPTER IX. Of their Relation.
Question.

What mean you by the relative properties?

Answer.

Two things. First, that howbeit the Subsistences are the same essence, yet not
as essence: but as it is with the relative properties. A Scholar or a teacher
is a man: but not a Scholar or a teacher as a man; for, as he instructs he
is a teacher, and as he learneth a Scholar. Which are relative properties.
This mystery cloudeth the clearest of our thoughts: yet from so many rays, we
must study to light some little torch, to quicken our own feeble sights. It
shall be well if we tame our unbridled understandings, and learn with
Nazianzene. Orat. 40. in S. Baptism: I know not how (says he) to think of
one, but that upon the very instant, I shall see my self environed with the
brightness of three; neither can I discern these three, except at the very
moment I return unto one.

Q. But make you any distinction between them and the Essence?

A. Yes. As between a man, and a Scholar, who though he be a man, yet not as
a Scholar; for then should every man be a Scholar, because he is a man. But
indeed he is a Scholar, because he learneth, and a man as he is composed of a
body and reasonable soul: so, that he is a man in one respect, and a Scholar
in another. Romans 2.21. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self.
Where you see the same man is to be both master and Scholar. I am astonished
at so many wonders as I behold enstated and packeted up in this rich Cabinet of
the knowledge of GOD. They that go down into the deepes, they see the works
and wonders of the Lord. Psalm. 107.23.
But they that go down into this deep are not like to see any thing, except
they plow with his heyfer, that can read us the darkest riddles. Ioh.
14.9.10.11. Christ in this mystery, applies two rules of relation, the one,
concerning their mutual knowledge, the other, their mutual being. He that
has seen me, has seen my Father: that is, Philip, know one and know both;
if thou believe me to be the son, then must thou believe my father. For it
is impossible to conceive a son without a father. Again, I am in the father,
and the father is in me: that is, our being is mutual, if I were not his
son, he were not my father, and if he were not my father, I were not his
son. As I have the being of a son from my father, so has he the being of a
father from his son. And hereupon by the necessity of relation, I am in my
father, and my father is in me. Abraham as a father is in Isaac, and Isaac as
a son is in Abraham: but because they are also two distinct men, Isaac is
also out of Abraham, and Abraham out of Isaac. But the eternal father and the
son having the same singular essence, are personally the one with the other,
and essentially the one the other. Ioh. 1.1.

Q. How are they then distinct?

A. As the man and the Scholar: And here to avoid all doubts and dangers, and
that a godly appetite may find what to feed on, let reason ruled by Scriptures
supply with the defective, what he either reads not, or in reading knows not.
Job. 1.1. The word was with God, and the word was God. If God in both places be
taken in the same sense; then the second person is so a concrete with the
essence, as in reason the essence may be predicated of it; and therefore the
difference is rational, not real: or if you will have the argument, the
essence and subsistence are diverse not opposite. They turn sides not backs.
The essence dissents from the subsistence by reasons apprehension, not natures
opposition; for if they were opposite, he that is with God could not be said to
be God. So that the holy Ghost reaches us by that phrase, that the son for
manner of subsisting is with the essence, as if it were to be conceived close
by the side of it, as the manner of a thing is to the being of it. And again,
least we should there mis-take, by putting too great a difference, as if the
manner should differ really from the thing, he adds, and the same was God. So
then the difference is very little, a diversity, no real repugnancie. They
turn aside our apprehension without crossing, or contrariety. If God in the
first place be taken personally, and in the second essentially, then with God,
is with the father, and so they are not diverse but contraries, not (if I may
so speak with reverence) as back to back, but face to face. I am thy father,
thou art therefore my son: but when I say, I am thy father, therefore I am not
thy son, in this they are contrary, not in the other. And therefore we say
the properties are incommunicable. I am the begetter, therefore not the
begotten. Yet if I be the begetter, thou art my begotten. Psalm. 2.7. So then
the Subsistences are contraries with mutual affection: but essence and
subsistence are diverse by Logical apprehension. Ioh. 10.30. I and my father
are one. 1. Ioh. 5.7. These three are one: as relatiues or contraries they
cannot be one; but as subsistences in the same essence they are all one. I
should be thankful to my render, if he would not suffer idleness to devour
the sweet that others sweat for, or would but so much as count these labors
pleasant as they are prepared to his hand. But I fear, as the Iassians in
Strabo delighted with the music of an exquisite Harper, ran all away as soon
as they heard the Fish-market bell ring, save a deaf old man, etc. So they
that seem to be delighted with the knowledge of divine things, are easily
called off by worldly employments, and if any stay by it, they profit no more
by this Doctrine, then the deaf man did by the Harpers ditties. The Ministers
have something to do that break up the swarth, and sow it for us. I shall
desire no more but godly attention, and patience, to weigh all points
diligently, and with humility to yield up their own fancies to reason. The
hot and headdie are not to be employed in the contemplation and search of these
truths; for, as being sudden in their actions, they seize lightly on that
which comes first to hand: so being stiff in their resolution, they are
transported with every preiudicate conceit, from one error to another. Give me
therefore a constant and stable student, and he shall gain by this good.

Q. Do these relative properties add any thing to the essence?

A. Nothing but respect and manner of being: so that the essence remains
still pure, or mere essence. The relation of a father, master, servant, etc.
are no addition of a new essence. Romans 2.21. The learner and the teacher may
be the same man. He is a right Mauchen, or gazing stock, that thinks
himself a new man, because he is a new master. As Saul was changed to another
man presently upon his anointing, so are men upon their advancement; and
according to our ordinary Proverb, Their good and their blood rises together:
Now it may not be taken as it has been. Other fashions, fare, and furniture
fit them whom favor graceth. But alas, what is relation to Greatness, where
there is no alteration in goodness, the man is the same, though he have the
respect of a King.

Q. What is the second thing meant by relative properties?

A. That the Subsistences, or persons, are distinct by themselves as Relatiues.
From the essence (as we have said) they differ as diverse, only turning aside
a little: but amongst themselves they differ as contraries, having mutual
respect; for, though the son be the son of the father, and the father the
father of the son: yet the father is not the son, neither is the son the
father. So likewise the holy Ghost, proceeds from the father and the son,
yet is he neither the father, nor the son. A father and a son being
relatiues, are contraries: yet both of them may be no more then diverse to the
same man that is both. Mat. 1.2. Abrahambegate Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob,
etc. Isaac is both father and son. Son in regard of Abraham, and father in
regard of Jacob. Plato told the Musicians of his time, that Philosophers could
dine and sup without them; how much more casie ought it to be for Christians
to weane themselves from childish rattles, and may games of carnal delights,
and be merry without a Fiddler? It is for Saul to drive away his ill spirit, and
dumps of melancholy with David's Harp: and for Caine, to still his crying
conscience with building of Cities: so, for them that cannot lispe a word of a
better life, to feed themselves, not by sooping an handful with Gideons
Soldiers, but by swilling their bellies full of worldly pleasures, and other
such swill and swades, as they are wont to weary themselves withal. These cry,
the way of God is hard, and not for their meddling; especially, these maine
mysteries, and therefore they abhor once to think of the study of them.
Indeed, as in the most champion and plain grounds of Religion, there are some
hillockes higher then the rest of their fellows: so, in these the greatest and
steepest hills thereof, there is footing enough, whereby with labor and
travail, with much reading, and often prayer, we may come to the height of
them, wherein we may see and discover so far off the land of Canaan, and the
kingdom of heaven, as may be sufficient for ever to make us happy.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That the persons cannot be one the other. The essence and subsistence may
be one the other, as the father is God, and the son is God, and the holy
Ghost is God: but the father is not the son; neither is the holy Ghost,
either father or son. A master and a man may be the one the other: but a
master and a servant cannot be so predicated, the reason is, because they are
contraries, or really opposite: the other only diverse, and therefore may be
disposed affirmatively. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. God and the father are one the other, the father is God, and God
is the father: but as he is father of his son, we find no such disposition
in the Bible. Ioh. 10.30. They are said to be one: that is, in essence, will,
or action, not in person; for so they are two, really distinct. I know these
vocal sounds are but a complement; and as an outward case, wherein our
thoughts are sheathed. There is nothing wherein the want of words can wrong and
grieve us more, then in this point: here alone, as we can adore, and not
conceive, so we can conceive, and not utter; yea, utter our selves, and not be
conceived; yet, as we may, think here of one substance in three subsistences;
one essence in three relations; one Iehovab begetting, begotten, proceeding;
Father, Son, Spirit: yet so as they differ but rationally from the essence,
and really amongst themselves; and in regard thereof admit the predication of
the essence of each person, and not of the persons one of another.

Q. What may else be observed?

A. That they are together by nature, for so are all relatiues. They are
mutual causes and effects, a thing in reason only peculiar to this head of
argument: as the father is the cause of his sons relation, and so is the
son of his fathers. And on the contrary, they are effects of each others
relation; and by virtue of this, they must needs be together in nature. The
cause is before his effect; and so the father begetting his son, might seem
in nature to be before him: but this mutual causation, though it pervert not
order, yet makes it things to be together most naturally. The father is only
before the fonne, and spirit, in order of subsisting, and not in nature, either
of essence, or subsistence. Pro. 8.22.30. Christ was ever with the father. Ioh.
1.1. In the beginning, without beginning, was the word with God. Heb. 1.3. The
very express image of his person; and therefore a son by nature: for if he
were a creature, he should be a fonne by counsel, as the sons of men are
said to be. Iam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us. He that begets by nature
begets no less then himself; as a man begets no less then a man; and every
creature brings forth his ownekind. Genesis 1.24.25. But counsel and will beget
such images of themselves, as best please them: so man was by counfell made in
the image of God. Genesis 1.26. Ad here the error of the Arians can no more infect
the truth of the Scriptures, in the point of Christ's Divinity, then the truth
of the Scriptures can justify them in their wretched allegation of them. A bad
worke-man may use a good instrument: and oftentimes a clean napkin wipeth a
foul mouth. If there were no more Scripture against them, then that one text,
John. 1.18. nor no more words in the whole Bible, then that one (Monogenees)
only begotten, it were sufficient to confute and confound all they have said,
and to leave their cause desperate, and without all plea, though they were
never so hear tie patrons of their own affections. God the father has many
sons, and an only son: now this difference is made by the manner of
generation or begetting; and all the world can invent no other, but nature and
counsel; nay, why say I invent, when the Scripture has found it out to their
hands, and left it them to observe. By counsel the father may beget many
children, yea, and twice beget them, as his elect, by creation and
regeneration. But by nature he cannot beget more then one son, and because
he is begotten by nature, he is no less then his father, and because no less
then his father, therefore an only son. For if his whole image be in one, it
cannot be in two. But I see if we break our teeth with these hard shells, we
shall find small pleasure in the kernells; neither do I think that Gods
school is more of understanding then affection: both lessons are very
needful, very profitable; but for this age wherein there is coldness of care,
especially the latter. He that has much skill, and no affection, may do good
to others by information of judgment; but shall never have thank, either of
his own heart, or of God, who uses not to cast away his love on those, of
whom he is but known, not loved. O Lord (seeing therefore that men are but
men by their understandings, and Christians by their wills and affections) make
me to affect my relation to thee as a father, and thy son as a brother; and
because counsel in working, follows nature in being, let me find and feel
how sweet it is to be placed under thy son, who from thee, as thou of thy
self, makes me both son and brother, and fellow heir with himself.

Q. What follows from hence, that they are together by nature?

A. That they are only in order one before another, according to their manner
of subsisting. As the father before the son, and both of them before the holy
Ghost. Order requires, that the begetter subsist before the begotten, and the
Spirants before the Spirit. Ioh. 15.26. I will send from the father the
Comferter, even the spirit of truth. As there is an order in subsisting, so in
working. And here the well of life lies open before the godly, though their
eyes often (like Agars) are not open to see it: whiles miserable worldlings
have neither water, nor eyes. And because to Christians there can be no comfort
in their secret felicities; seeing to be happy and not to know it, is little
above miferable; let me here fell them some of that spiritual eyesalue, which
the Spirit commends to the Laodiceans; that they may clearly see how well they
are in the true apprehension of this order. I know it to be usual with all men
living, that they do not much more want that which they have not, then that
which they do not know they have. Assuredly, there is nothing, but a few
scales of ignorance and infidelity betwixt us and our happiness. It lies in a
narrow compass, but soundly trussed together; for it is from the Father, in
the Son, by the Spirit to Faith. 2. Cor. 13.14. Love from the Father, as the
beginner of our happiness. Grace from the Son, as the dispenser of it. And a
blessed and happy communion from the holy Ghost, as the accomplisher, or
finisher of it. Love, Grace, and Communion, are enough to pass the believer
from death to life. The father cannot manifest his love, without the grace of
his son, neither can the spirit therein communicate with us, but as he is
sent from both, after both to manifest the love of the one in beginning, and
the grace of the other, in dispensing all things needful for our salvation.
Think not much, that this glass of the word espies that in us, and for us,
what our selves see not: too much neerenesse oft-times hinders sight: and if
for the spots of our own faces we trust others eyes and glasses, why not this
truth for our perfections? we are in heaven, and know it not. What greater
happiness then this, to be made partakers of the purest Love, richest Grace, and
choicest Communion? Ephesians. 1.13.15. Our election is begun by the will,
counsel, and decree of the Father; dispensed by the complete, and full
redemption of the Son; finished by the powerful and effectual application
of the Spirit. It is not without due consideration, why in the beginning of the
Apostolical Epistles, Grace and peace are wished from the Father and the
Son, without mention of the Spirit. I may, and will, reine the question
shorter, then they do, that confound the persons in their works. The Spirit
is sent from the Father and the Son, to witness that grace and peace that
we have from, and with them both. He that is from them both by inspiration, is
to them both with us as lidger in execution. When good things are wished from
some persons, it is requisite that there be some to carry news of their will
and pleasure therein. The Church of God has the glorious Gospel of life and
salvation, and therein is contained all grace and peace with God: but how shall
every soul be certified, that he is interessed in those good things, except
the Father and the Son, send the Spirit, as a witness and seal thereof unto
him in particular? Therefore Paul in all his Epistles, wishing grace and peace
from Father and Son, not mentioning the Spirit, observes the true order of
personal subsisting, and personal working. And therefore peace purchased by
grace, whereby the Father is reconciled in his Son, is wished to the
Churches; the fruition whereof follows by the work of the blessed Spirit in
all that are ordained to be partakers thereof.

Q. What kind of properties are these?

A. Individual and incommunicable, and being given to the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, make three distinct persons, and therefore the Church of God has
done well so to name them, though the word be not in all the Scripture, for it
is a Latin word, and therefore cannot be found in the Originalls, which are
Greek and Hebrew. Thus far have we freely dipped in this stream, and not bin
drowned; pulled many fragrant roses, and not pricked our fingers; there is one
thing more that may sting us, if godly discretion serve not to sever the good
from the ill; yet the former lessons well remembered are sufficient, to them
that are capable of observation, and not careless of reposition, to keep them
from danger: but seeing remarkable consideration put into us by others, are as
some loofe pearls, which for want of filing upon a string, shake out of our
pockets; it shall be necessary both for the getting and keeping of the treasure
of our understanding, to express it.

Q. Are then these properties, qualities in the divine essence?

A. They are relative affections, no inherent qualities; for, they do no ways
change, or alter the essence, but leave it still simply one. I know natural
reason would here send forth distemper into our whole judgment. The stream
must needs run like the fountain, and speeds well, if at last, by many
changes of soil, it can leave an ill quality behind it: so, our judgment
shall be well purged, if by all these passages we can so far master reason,
that the fardle of foolish fancies may here be vnloden, and God may purely be
apprehended, as he is in himself. But what can be expected from this age,
fitter to look after Butter-flies, or Birds nests, or perhaps some gay coat of
a Courtier, then this sound and solid knowledge of Iehovah-Elohim? Or if any
travel this way, it is indeed like our young travelers, whose wealth is found
to be in their tongues, wherein they exceed and excel their parents parrats at
home, both for that they can speak more, and know that they speak: so our
Ethiopian Christians, white only in the teeth, every where else cole black,
can speak well of God and godliness, and that is all. But God is not so
learned; for, as among the three parts of the body, there is one, called
Impetuous, or impulsive, as the spirits, which sets all on work; or as
Physicians call the Arteries in the body, Venas audaces, or micantes, from
their continual beating and working; which running along with the other veins
beat and knock at every gate and entrance, for the members to take in
provision: saying (as it were) to every part and portion, here is meat and
nourishment for you: so, true religion, having put into us the royal and
celestial Spirit of Faith, calls upon all powers and parts, not to know and
speak good things, but to live and practice them. Papists teach, that a man
may, and must both make and eat his God to his breakfast: this hard meat we
leave for their stronger mawes: yet even here may we begin with the spoone,
and offer nothing to our weaker stomachs, but discourse of easy digestion.
Know God, and live by faith, and we shall have him for our ever-lasting food.

CHAPTER X. Of their Distinction.
Question.

HOw are these Subsistences, or persons to be distinguished?

Answer.

They are Father, Son, and holy Ghost: or because Relatiues are but two, into
the relation of Father and Son, to the spirit, which is breathing, or
sending, or of the Father to the Son, which is begetting. (Spirantes
spiritus, Gignens genitus) how easy were it to loose our selves in this
Discourse? How hard not to be overwhelmed with matter of wonder; and to find,
either beginning or end? Lo, with these words of relation, we are happily
waded out of those deepes, whereof our conceits can find no bottomes, and now
may we more safely, with Peter, gird our coat about us, and cast our selves a
little into this sea: only, we must remember, that as those which had wont to
swim only with bladders, sink when they come first to trust to their own
arms: so, we may soon plunge our selves, if we suffer our own thoughts to
carry us along in this mystery. If any wonder, whether this discourse can tend,
let him consider that of Tertullian, Ratio divina in medulla est, non in
superficie, Divinity is more in the marrow and root, then the rind and
surface of things. It cannot be doubted, but as God is the best being, so he is
the best life, and that the best life is reasonable; God therefore is the best
understanding. Suffer your selves with Abraham's Ram, to be perplexed a while
in these briars, that you may be prepared to present your selves for living
sacrifices, holy, and acceptable to this dreadful Trinity. Singula verba
plena sunt sensibus (as Hierome said of the Book of Job.) As being by nature,
so understanding by counsel, is able to conceive and beget the image of it
self, and from the one to the other to send a mutual love and liking: only
in the creatures both these are imperfect; for, nature does generate to
preserve it self, and understanding conceiues to perfect it self. No
understanding by nature conceiues it self, and no being by counsel begets it
self. It is therefore the perfection of understanding naturally to conceive it
self: God does both speak, and work in Parables, as a Father says well: but
here needs nothing be feigned to fasten this truth upon us. It shall be evinced
by plain demonstration. The best being, and best understanding, must needs
conceive the best image of it self; now in conceiving it begets it, and being
begotten by nature, is no less then the begetter. Man by nature begets no
less then himself: by counsel he can conceive that which is less or
greater then himself: so the father by nature can beget no less then
himself, though by counsel he conceived and brought forth a whole world,
nothing comparable to himself in greatness, or goodness. Well, then in one
simple essence there is necessarily a begetter and a begotten, and so we have
the subsistences of Father and Son. He is out of the danger of folly, whom a
speedy advertisement leaves wise. It is but an holy prevention, to be devout
unbidden, and to serve God upon our own conceits. Let us then see how the
second mystery will follow. The father in begetting his own image, cannot but
love it naturally, and the son in being begotten cannot but as naturally love
the begetter. And hence proceeds mutual love, and because it is natural, is
no less in being then the begetter and begotten from whom it proceeds; for the
begetter and begotten love themselves naturally, and therefore the Spirit is
God, and a third subsistence in the divine nature. If the persons were either
greater or less one then another, then would this absurdity ensue upon it,
that neither the father could directly conceive himself, or father and son
equally love themselves, and consequently never enjoy their own happiness,
which consists in the full fruition of themselves. Heb. 1.3. Christ is said to
be the express image of the fathers subsistence. Some translate it, substance,
or essence, which will all come to one pass, if substance be taken
subiectiuely, not causely; for the divine essence has eminently all the
excellencies of creatures; and therefore understanding, which is able to
conceive, and in conceiving to beget, which begetting is a relative property,
and hence the Subsistence of the Father, whereof the Son is the express
image. It were as we have formerly said, improper locution, to call him the
image of the essence, for that begets not, yet in that is the begetter, etc.
Romans 15.30. Gal. 5.22. Where love is given to the Spirit; not only as he
works it in us, but as he is the mutual love both of Father and Son, and
so is sent from both of them, to testify of their love to us, Romans 5.5. O that
these things in their true worth could affect us, but alas, as in a Tavern
where many Tables are seen replenished with guests, half soaked, and sowsed
in wine; all the house resoundeth with laughters, cries, whoopings, and strange
noise, wherein the sweetest music in the world, is both neglected and mocked:
so, our age, enchanted with rude and ridiculous pastimes, gibeth at this holy
and heavenly contemplation of the sacred and blessed Trinity. How many does
God suffer to live and breath, which make the Tavern their Temple,
Indian-smoake their incense, Sack their sacrifice, and blasphemous oaths
their daily prayers: for the love of this dreadful Trinity, and the dear
love of your own souls, remember S. Paul's advise. Romans 6.22. Being made free
from sin, have your fruit in holiness, and the end thereof shall be
ever-lasting life. But I must make my course more speedy, and hasten in the
long way I have to go. Hitherto we have had many Reaches to fetch in our way,
and been constrained to wind in by bourds, but we are gotten off the Maine;
only the shore is still buttrest with rocks on every hand, the Currents
swift, the Shallowes many, that we cannot make so fresh a way as we would.
Have but the patience a while, and we shall bring thee within the view of the
end of our toylesome voyage. The ship that has been long at Sea, discovered
many strange Continents, and ryvers, strugled through many hiddeous tempests,
escaped many rocks and quicksands, and at length made a rich return, cannot
but forget her irksome Travel, and think she is well apaid, when she
comes within the kenne of her own Country, and sees the Land lie fair
before her: So, he that coasts along these several banks and bounds of
godliness, and in the Ship of the Church, is brought into the mouth of the
haven of heaven, cannot but with joy remember all the troubles and afflictions
he has endured in this world. In a word, understand this but as a letter of
advertisement from the Coast, whereby thou may with the greater ease, reap
the profit of them that have traveled before thee.

Q. What is the relative property of the Father, and the Son?

A. To breath, or send forth the spirit. Ioh. 15.26. I will send from the
father the Comforter, even the spirit of truth. The same is said to proceed.
Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts. Ioh.
16.8. As the son comes from the father to take our nature upon him, so the
spirit comes from them both, to apply Christ effectually unto us, and us unto
Christ. But this coming, sending, proceeding is a work of counsel, not of
nature; for the Spirit by an imminent act as he comes from father and son, so
he has his residence in them both, and no creature is capable of him: but as
by a transient act he passes the work of Redemption to us by application,
he is said to come to us, and we receive him in graces and operations. By
nature he comes from the same persons, and rests in them: by counsel (not by
command) he comes to us, and is said to dwell with us, and that in spite of
Satan and all his temptations. As fierce Mastiues tied in a chain, which
although they both bark, and have perhaps a good will to bite, yet they can
make no nearer approach then the chain does permit: so, that Cerberus of hell
is chained up of God, and though his malice be great to labor to enter, where
he is expulsed, yet the spirit keeps him out by his presence, and safegards
our hearts in peace, against all his molestations.

Q. What is the Father?

A. The first person, who by nature begets his son, who must needs be an
only son, because the Father cannot have many images of himself. Christ is
the first begotten, Heb. 1.6. and the only begotten. Ioh. 3.16.18. 1 Ioh. 4.9.
Ioh. 1.14.18. And therefore the relation betwixt the Father and Christ, is a
special and peculiar respect. Heb. 1.5. I will be to him a father and he shall
be to me a son. Man was made in the image and likeness of God, and of the
three persons, by a divine consultation; but Christ is the image of his Father,
or first person, by an eternal and everlasting generation. Luke 3.38. Adam is
called the son of God, which is a most free and voluntary act of the Creator,
in producing man in his own image. This I insist upon the more, that we may
be wary in our conceits, in apprehending Gods act upon us, and the fathers act
upon his son. It is happiness enough for us to come so near God, that his
only son may stand betwixt us and him, and that we may be called his
brethren, by the Fathers choice of us in him.

Q. What is the Fathers relative property?

A. To beget, and not to be begotten, and therefore he is the first person in
order. Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Heb. 1.5.
The same words are repeated, to prove Christ above the Angels, who ( Job. 2.1.)
are called the sons of God, and therefore in another sense, that is, in
regard of Creation, and grace, both which they obtained by the will and
counsel of their Creator, who made them, and ordained them to stand in that
favor, from which the reprobate Angels fell: but Christ is a natural, and an
eternal son. Prove. 8.25. And therefore to day, is (as some Fathers expound
it) put for eternity, seeing all times are present to God, to whom a thousand
years are as one present day. Or rather this day (being the day of Christ's
resurrection, and exaltation, in which he was mightily declared to be the son
of God. Romans 1.4.) is the manifestation of that eternal generation, by which
he is preferred before all creatures. His conception and nativity, as he was
man belong to his humiliation, which (as S. Augustine speaks of his passion)
was the sleep of his divinity, as his death was the sleep of his humanity.
Yet as the fathers of Chalcedon say truly, ((...)) indivisibly, inseparably is
the Godhead of the second person with the whole humane nature, and every part
of it, still, and for ever, one and the same person. The soul in the agony,
and upon the Cross, feels not the presence of the Godhead; the body in the
grave feels not the presence of the soul: yet upon the third day both body
and soul did feel the power of his divine nature, death being too weak to
dissolve the eternal bonds of this heavenly conjunction. And therefore upon
the day of Christ's resurrection was there a manifest declaration of the
eternal generation of the second person.

Q. What is the Son?

A. The second person, begotten of his father. Ioh. 1.14. We beheld his glory,
the glory of the only begotten of the Father. Verse. 18. No man has seen God
at any time: the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of the father, he
has declared him.

Q. What is the relative property?

A. To be begotten, and not to beget; and because he is from the father alone,
therefore the second person in order. 1. Ioh. 4.9. God sent his only begotten
son into the world. Heb. 1.5. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to
me a son, therefore by the force of relation, he must be begotten, no
begetter: otherwise contrary things should be the same.

Q. What is the holy Ghost?

A. The third person, proceeding from the Father and the Son. Ioh. 14.26. The
comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name. Ioh.
15.26. When the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the father,
etc. Ioh. 20.22. Christ breathed on them, and says unto them, receive ye the
holy Ghost: he that has power to breath on his members the gifts of the holy
Ghost, according to his own will and counsel, has by nature, together with
his father an ineffable manner of breathing the spirit; for, as the three
persons work by counsel, so they subsist in the divine essence by nature.

Q. What is the spirits relative property?

A. To proceed; and because he is both from the Father and the Son,
therefore, the third person in order of subsistence. Ioh. 15.26. even the
spirit of truth, which proceeds from the father, etc. Ioh. 16.7. It is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the comforter will
not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you: till the second
person have fully dispensed the work of Redemption, the third person cannot so
fully apply it: no marvel then if the times before the death of Christ, had
more weak means of application then now we have, the spirit being more fully
given. Ioh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me. Peter, Act. 2.41. converted more at one Sermon, then Christ did all
his life; not because he was the better, or more powerful Preacher, but
because the spirit was then more fully sent, both from the father and the
son, to accomplish that which they had begun for the redemption, both of Jew
and Gentile.

Q. What is the belief of that which has been spoken?

A. I believe in God, who is one essence, most simple, pure, and absolute, and
being essentially indivisible, is personally distinguished into the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, and is therefore called, Unity in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity, or Vnitrinitie, and Trinunitie. How to conceive of this in
our prayers, and meditations, is both the deepest point of all Christianity,
and the most necessary: so deep, that if we wade into it, we may easily
drown, never find the bottom: so necessary, that without it, our selves, our
services are profane, irreligious: we are all borne Idolaters, naturally
prone to fashion God to some form of our own. Away then with all wicked
thoughts, and gross devotions; and with Jacob bury all strange gods under the
oak of Shechem, ere we offer to set up Gods Altar at Bethel: and without all
mental reservations, conceive of our God purely, simply, spiritually; as of an
absolute being, without form, without matter, without composition; yea, an
infinite, without all limits of thoughts. Think of him as not to be thought
of; as one whose wisdom is his justice, whose justice is his power, whose
power is his mercy, and all himself. Good without quality, great without
quantity, everlasting without time, present every where without place,
containing all things without extent. If this shall give our devotions any
light, it is well: the least glimpse of this knowledge, is worth all the full
gleames of humane and earthly skill. After this weak direction, let us still
study to conceive aright, that we may pray aright; and still pray, that we may
conceive: and meditate more and more, that we may do both. And the father,
son, and holy Ghost, direct us, enable us, that we may do all. Amen.

CHAPTER XI. Of the works of Iehovah-Elohim in general.
Question.

HItherto we have heard of Gods sufficiency, what is his efficiencie?

Answer.

That whereby he works all things, and all in all things. 1. Cor. 12.6. It is
the same God that works all in all. Romans 11.36. Of him, for him, and through
him are all things. Deuteronomy. 34.4. Act. 14.17.

Q. What is here generally to be considered of us?

A. Something concerning the essence, and something the subsistence. Genesis Chap.
1. to the end: the word Elohim is used above 30. times, and no other word for
God. Chap. 2. is used Elohim alone to verse 4. and from thence to the end
Jehovah Elohim constantly: a course, I take it, not to be paralleled, or
exemplified in any other portion of Scripture; and the reason is good: for, as
long as the works were in creating, the persons observed each their distinct
manner of working, and so the holy Ghost uses a phrase to express it: as
likewise after the work was done, and a seventh day sanctified for rest, all
the three persons rejoiced in the works of their hands. From the 4. verse of
Chap. 2. to the end, the whole work being done, and repeated again for the
better observation of it, and most especially of the true cause; Iehovah-Elohim
are ever coupled together, that we might take notice, that creation did
manifest one God, three persons, one God most plainly, three persons more
obscurely, yet not so darkely, but if Adam had stood, he might have gathered
the same by GODS workmanship, both in himself, and the creatures: and that
we that are fallen, being not able to read any such matter, in the great Book
of the world, might observe it by the little Book of his word, which draws
the Universe into two Chapters, as into a small map giving much good counsel
in a narrow room, and teaching that briefly which Philosophers have scarce
touched in great Volumes.

Q. What then concerning the essence?

A. Has omnipotency, which in nature is before all efficiency, yet because we
see first by resolution of Gods works, which is to go from the effects to the
cause, we see Gods omnipotency by his efficiencie. And therefore in the Creed,
we believe in the Almighty, as the maker of heaven and earth. From
efficiencie and omnipotency appears God decree, by that his counsel, and
thence his will, or good-pleasure. Now his Good-pleasure is the first, counsel
next, and from the one, as the cause, the other, as his manner of working,
proceeds his decree, which is executed by his omnipotency and efficiencie.
Ephesians. 1.11. Will, by counsel purposes, or decrees by omnipotency, to work
all things as he has set them down in himself. Job 9.4. and 12.13. Prove.
8.14. Where we read, how Gods almighty power is ordered by wisdom. Ier.
10.12. He has made the earth by his power, he has established the world by
his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his discretion. Ier. 51.15.

Q. What is Gods omnipotency?

A. Whereby he is able to effect all that he does, yea, and whatsoever he does
not, which is absolutely possible. Mat. 19.26. With God all things are
possible. Math. 3.9. Of very stones to raise up children to Abraham. Phil.
3.21. He is able to subdue all things unto himself. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever
the Lord pleased, that did he, both in heaven and in earth: in the Seas, and
all deep places. Mal. 2.15. Did not he make one? and yet had he the residue of
the spirit, to wit, to have created Adam more wives. And here may well appear
the names, El, and Helion. Deuteronomy. 9.10.17. Psalm. 9.2. Dan. 4.17. Christ in the
old Testament, and also in the new, is called, The Almighty, Isa. 9.6. Rev.
1.8. And so the Spirit is called the power of the Highest. Luke 1.35.

Q. Why say you absolutely possible, is there any thing impossible to God?

A. Yes. All such things as contradict either his own essence, or the nature
of things. As God cannot lie, because he is truth it self, neither can he
make a body to be in two places at once, as the body of Christ, to be in
heaven, and upon a Popish Altar at once. For that implies a contradiction, and
therefore a lie, whereof the Papists, and not God, are Authors. Romans 3.4. Let
God be true, and every man a liar. Act. 3.21. Heaven is said to receive the
body of Christ; now if it be wholly circumscribed for length, breadth, and
thickness, in the third heaven, it cannot at the same time be circumscribed
within the limits of the earth: for that which is finite in one place, cannot
be infinite in two. It is only Gods property to be in two places at once,
neither included nor excluded: and therefore if the body of Christ were in
heaven and earth at the same instant of time, neither included nor excluded, it
were no more a body, but a God: if they say the omnipotency of God may extend
the dimensions of Christ's body, that it may at the same time fill heaven and
earth: then is it not in two places at once, but in one by continuation, and if
the dimensions of Christ's body answer the dimensions of the place, it shall be
the greatest monster that ever the world dreamed of; no, not Mahomet himself
did dream he saw God in a vision so big as the Papists have made Christ.
Let them never flee to Gods omnipotency, to maintain their I doll upon the
Altar, for it contradicts the very nature of a created body to be in two, or
many places at once, or extended further then the nature of the creature will
bear; if Christ had in his body all the 4 elements wholly, it could not be
extended to fill the third heaven, and the earth at once; for, they are all
formally extended to their perfection by God, and can fill no greater a place
then is under the highest heaven; Christ therefore having but a little part of
all these in his body, it were beyond a miracle, to extend that little further
then the whole. Again, Christ having a glorified body, it must not loose
proportion: now the extension of any one member more then is fit, makes a
deformity. Theresore the body of Christ loosing none of the perfections of
nature, and receiving greater perfections of glory, must be contained in the
third heaven, in such a length, breadth, and thickness, as is fit for a body.
So that it neither stands with the power, or the wisdom of God, to work such
a miracle, as the Papists obtrude upon the world.

Q. But how can we attribute power to God, who is pure act?

A. It cannot be given to God in respect of himself, but only of the
creatures, which may feel his work, which they never felt before. The fire
always burns in it self, yet in regard of this or that combustible matter,
it is in power to burn, that is, the matter is in power to feel the act of
the fire. So God ever acts or works in himself. Ioh. 5.17. But the
creature does not ever feel it. Psalm. 139.16. All things are said to be done
of God, long before the creature feels his work. Hence creation, as an
action, is eternal, as a passion, in time. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth. In regard of heaven and earth, creation has
a beginning, but in regard of God it has none. Time is the companion of
creatures, not of the Creator.

Q. What further appears from his omnipotency and efficiencie together?

A. His decree, which is a definitive sentence, concerning the effecting of all
things by his mighty power, according to the counsel of his will. Whatsoever
God does in his efficiency, and can do by his omnipotency, that he decrees.
I do not simply say what he can do he decrees; for, the decree is only of
things to be done, his omnipotency of things to be done, or not to be done:
but thus I reason, What he does, that he can do; and what he can do and does,
that he decrees to be done. Ephe. 1.11. According to the purpose of him, that
works all things after the counsel of his will. Efficiencie and omnipotency
manifest the decree, but it is before them both, and a cause of them. So that
there is nothing, either in creation, or providence, whereof the decree of God
is not some ways a cause; yet must we not so much stand poring upon the decree
of God, as run presently to that place in Gods providence which will clear
and manifest unto us, that Gods decree is without all fault. The decree of
Adams fall went before that part of Gods providence, which did govern his
fall, and as providence works it, so God decreed to have it wrought.

Q. What attributes appear by the manifestation of his decree?

A. Constancy, truth, and fidelity, for the decree must be most constant,
true, and faithful. Isa. 14.24. As I have purposed, it shall come to pass,
and what I have consulted shall stand. Verse. 27. The Lord has determined, who
shall disanull it? his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it away. Romans
9.19.

Q. What is his constancy in decreeing?

A. Whereby his decree remains constant and unchangeable. Mal. 3.6. I am the
Lord which change not, and ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Isa. 46.10. My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Romans 11.29. Heb. 6.17.18.

Q. What is his truth?

A. Whereby he delivers nothing but that which he decrees. Truth is properly
to pronounce as the thing is, but the thing is ever as God pronounces it to
be. You stand before me therefore I see you, is a good consequence with man,
but the clean contrary is true with God; God sees you, therefore you stand
there. For truth is in God, before it be in the things, and in the things
before it can be in me. The truth therefore of Gods definitive sentence is
before the existence of any creature, or action. It is not true, that the
prescience of God, follows the thing done, or to be done, for then the truth of
a thing should be before God decreed it to be. As for example, God decreed this
truth, that Adam should fall, this thing follows the foreknowledge of God in
decreeing it to be: so that it follows more directly thus, God foresaw that
Adam would fall, therefore he fell, then on the contrary, Adam fell, therefore
God foresaw it. If truth should not more immediately follow the will and
counsel of God, then the nature of things, then should decreed truths be
mutable, and sometimes false: but coming immediately from God, they are ever
delivered, as he decrees them. Number. 23.19. Ier. 10.10. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm.
145.17. Dan. 4.34. Romans 3.4. Tit. 1.2. All which places free God from all
possibility of lying, and make him the Author of all truth.

Q. What is his fidelity?

A. Whereby he effects most faithfully whatsoever he has decreed. 1. Ioh.
1.9. He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: Confession is no cause
of the remission of sins, as being after it in nature. Yet God has so
decreed to link things together, that he will faithfully (as though justice
required it) perform remission of sin to true confession. 2. Tim. 2.13. He
abides faithful, and cannot deny himself.

Q. What appears by his decree beside these three Attributes.

A. His counsel, for no decree is made without counsel, and when Divines say,
that Gods decree is his eternal counsel, they speak improperly, for it is a
thing wrought by counsel, and as the effect shows the cause, so does the
decree of God his counsel. For now we go backward way to bring our selves to
the highest cause of all things, in which we are to rest, without any further
inquiry. Ephesians. 1.11. Gods purpose for the effecting of any thing is framed
according to the counsel of his will.

Q. What is his counsel?

A. It is his deliberation (as it were) for the best effecting of every thing
that seems good in his wisdom and will. Act. 4.24. Christ died by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God; but that is the same with the
decree; for counsel more properly determines then is determined, and therefore
the new Translation speaks more aptly, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
counsel determined before to be done, and that this was the best for the
effecting of our salvation, appears. Ephe. 1.9. A glorious mystery admired of
all that know it. Job 12.13. Counsel and understanding are put together, God
understands himself in all his counsels. Prove. 8.14. Counsel is mine and
sound wisdom, etc.

Q. God sees at first what is best, what needs he then to take counsel?

A. True it is, that God with one act of his understanding sees all things at
once and together: but while we behold the things how they are brought to
pass by a second cause, we ascribe counsel to him, and so attribute to his
majesty counsel. Psalm. 139.16. Gods book is one, yet the counsel therein
contained is diversely manifested, as if many things one after another should
come into it.

Q. What is the scope of Gods counsel?

A. His glory: every wise man has an end in his counfell, and therefore the
wisest cannot be without it. Romans 11.36. Of him and for him are all things.

Q. What is Gods wisdom?

A. That Idaea, or platform of working all things most wisely; A wise man does
first lay the plot in his head, and then frame the work out of himself; so,
Almighty God has first in himself the Idaea, or platform of all things, and
then accordingly frames his works out of himself, and the whole plot is so
laid, that his end and scope in all things may be obtained by it. Psalm. 104.24.
How manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all. When the
things are many, they are often a distraction unto man, but GOD in regard of
the excellency of his wisdom knows how to plot them all for the praise and
glory of his own majesty.

Q. How is the Idaea, or plot of all things in God to be considered of us?

A. Two ways; either in regard of himself, or the creatures; in respect of
himself, it is most direct, as being in himself and from himself, no ways
reflected, or brought back from the creatures to his mind: in respect of the
creatures it is most indirect, as being but the images and similitudes of that
thing which is first in himself. For this we are to hold as a truth, that God
first sees himself, and then out of himself all other things, either as they
are the images and impressions of himself, or as they dissent and disagree
from it. Now this last knowledge is by way of opposition as one contrary gives
light unto another, evil is known by that which is good and falsehood by that
which is true: so that God has no direct knowledge, either of evil or
falsehood, but that which is indirect, as they dissent from his truth and
goodness. So that there is no plot of evil first in God then in the creature,
but it is a thing only plotted by creatures subject to sin, and so is known
of God as opposite to his own goodness. Hence it follows that God does not
decree sin to be as sin, but as in his wisdom he sees it to have some
respect of good, which is accidental, and beside the nature of it. First then
God sees himself; secondly, by himself he sees all other things; thirdly, he
sees whatsoever may be opposite to himhimselfe, or that goodness he has left
in his creatures; Man sees in a clean contrary fashion, first the thing and by
that himself, as in a glass I first see the image of my face, and then by
that my natural face: so the creatures and works of God, being the glass of
my mind, I must first eye them, and then my self. Genesis 3.5.6. Adam and Eve
would know good and evil, as God himself does: that is, they would first be
wise out of themselves, and make their own wills the first rule of their
actions; and not Gods law, and so they came first to know evil by the loss of
good. Will in God is the first mouer, because he makes the thing before he can
see it, but in man understanding must go before, because he must see the
thing before he can will it. Man's first work is resolution of the action of
another; but Gods first work is composition of that which never existed
before; hence man is made for imitation of God, but God has nothing beside
himself to follow. Genesis 1.4.10.12.18.21.25.31. God first made the creature,
and then he saw it to be good. It is admirable, to see how God approues of the
goodness of his creatures, particularly and generally: particularly, he
passes by the earth made the first day; the firmament made the second; and man
the sixth day, and gives them no commendation, nor approbation: because these
did not as yet answer the full intention of the Creator: the earth was void
and without form, the firmament as yet divided not, because there were no
clouds above, and man, howsoever a perfect creature, had not as yet done any
thing well-pleasing unto God: for in the particular, God commends no creature,
till he see it moving toward his end, and perform that for which he was
created. But in the conclusion of all, he gives this general approbation of
all his works, that they were very good, because they fully answered to his
direct Idaea, or platform of them, so that though some creatures answered not
their own particular ends, yet God had his general end in them all, and the
plot was sufficient for the glory of his creation.

Q. What is then the direct plot of Gods wisdom?

A. Whereby he knows how to glorify himself out of himself: for God made
not the world to add any perfection to himself: he is all-sufficient for his
own happiness. Psalm. 16.2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art
my Lord: my goodness extends not to thee: he indeed is our happiness, we
can no ways be his: and therefore it must needs follow that God in creating a
world intended so to glorify himself in all his creatures, as he was before
glorified in himself, now glory is the consequent of virtue, and virtue is
either intellectual, or moral, and therefore God by creation intended the
glory of both: all the world shows forth his wisdom, and intellectual
virtues: only men and Angels his moral, the chief whereof are justice and
mercy.

Q. What is the indirect plot of Gods wisdom?

A. Whereby he knowing himself, knows all other things as far as they bear
any image of himself. The seal leaves his impression upon the wax, and so
does the wisdom of God plain charracters upon all the creatures. Romans 1.24.
His Godhead and power are seen by the creation Psalm. 139.2. God sees David's
thought a far off. ver. 4. A word in his tongue before it be spoken.

Q. What particulars are there?

A. As his wisdom respects the creature it is manifold. Ephesians. 3.10. For
there is nothing in the creature that his eye sees not. Heb. 4.13. All
invention, judgment, and skill are to be found in him, or as we say in
Schools, all the intellectual virtues.

Q. What is this manifold wisdom of God in respect of the virtues of the
understanding?

A. It is either the knowledge of all principles, or truths to befetched out
of them, or conclusions that may ensue upon on these truths, or of the method
and order of disposing every truth in his proper place, or the practice of them
so disposed according to the rules of any Art. Job 9.4. He is wise in heart
and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against him, and has
prospered? There is no wise workking against God. Exodus 1.10. come and let us
deal wisely with them: Pharaohs policies might have prevailed, if a wiser then
himself had not taken their parts against him.

Q. What are these intellectual virtues?

A. They are in number five, which are thus named; first, intelligence;
secondly- science; thirdly, sapience; fourthly, prudence; fifthly, art, or
skill. The first virtue knows all inventions; the two next, all judgments,
true, or false, together with all direct conclusions, or deceitful
sophistications: the fourth fits for the orderly practice of any thing; and the
last makes us skillful in whatsoever we do. The observation of these five
virtues makes a man proceed fully upon any theme. To preach by them is a most
full and effectual way: by intelligence we open the text, and bare the
several principles, or reasons contained in it. By science, we gather the
doctrines that those principles and reasons will yield. By sapience we deduct
or conclude further matter, which was obscure, till we did sift it out by
making one truth force another. By prudence, we make use and application, as
may be fit for time, place, and person, and so orderly urge the truths we have
found out by discourse. Lastly, by art we further the practice of all those
duties which we have formerly pressed. Some explain their Text well, yet
never aptly lay down doctrines: others do both these, but miss in the
conclusion: others hit the conclusion too, but wrong themselves, or their
auditors in application, either making none, or that which is amiss. And
lastly, others leave at the use, having warmed the affections, and pegge it no
further, by letting them see the way of practice, and so hammering not home the
nail which should be fastened by the masters of the assembly, let it slip
again, or leave a chinke, Solomon the preacher. Eccl. 12.10.11. observed all
these virtues. By intelligence of principles he sought to find out acceptable
words, by science he looked for an upright writing, and by sapience tried them
to be the words of truth, and then by prudence made his words as goads to
prick forward unto practice, and then by art, as a skillful master of the
assembly fastened the nail to the head.

Q. What is Gods intelligence?

A. That virtue of understanding, whereby he works every particular,
concerning every thing: there is no argument, or reason, but he can find it
out. Psalm. 139.16. All things in Gods book. ver. 2.3.4.5.7.11.12. Every
thought, word, deed, with their circumstances of time, place, person, etc. are
all together known to God. God needs no intelligencers, for his eyes are over
all his works.

Q. What is his science?

A. That virtue of understanding, whereby he knows all truths in the
things, which as they are to come, is called prescience, or foreknowledge, and
in regard of past, present, and to come, omniscience. Ioh. 21.17. Lord, thou
know all things, and therefore can judge whether I speak truly or not:
for foreknowledge there is none in God properly, for to him all things are
present, yet speaking of his indirect knowledge in reference to the creature,
we term that foreknowledge that goes before the existence, and being of the
creature.

Q. What is his sapience?

A. That virtue of understanding, whereby he understands whatsoever may
follow, or ensue of every thing. Job 12.13.16. Such wisdom with God that he
knows how to handle both deceiuer and deceived, their fallacies can no ways
prevail with him.

Q. What is his prudence?

A. Whereby he knows the fittest opportunity for the dispatch of all things.
Genesis 15.16. The wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full. 2. Pet. 2.9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly, and reserve the wicked to punishment. 2.
These. 1.6.7. It is a righteous thing with God, and most ag reeable with his
prudence, in applying of rewards to recompense tribuiation to them that trouble
you, and to you which are troubled, rest with us, etc.

Q. What is his art, or skill?

A. Whereby he knows how to effect every thing most skilfully. Psalm. 104.24.
In excellent wisdom have thou made all. Heb. 11.10. For he looked for a
city, which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God: the original
word is Technitees, an Artificer God has manifested great skill in the
creation of these lower parts of the world: but in the third heaven, his art
passes all excellency.

Q. Seeing his good-pleasure appears last, what is it?

A. The most free act of his will in every thing as it pleases him. Psalm.
115.3. Our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he pleases. Mat. 11.26. Even
so father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Math. 20.15. Is it not lawful
for me to do with mine own as I list. Ephesians. 1.5.9.11.

Q. How does it respect himself?

A. As the chief good. Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the fountain of life: and
in thy light shall we see light. Col. 3.11. Christ is all and in all. His
good-pleasure must needs first respect himself, then his creatures, because
from him as the fountain of goodness, they have all their goodness derived.
1. Cor. 15.28. God is said to be all in all.

Q. How the creatures?

A. As they bear his image, in which regard they are only good. Genesis 1.4.10.
etc. God saw it was good, that is, he so approved of his creatures, as they
answered his goodness in making of them. Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this
world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove
what is that good, and acceptable and perfect will of God. Conformity with the
world pleases not the Almighty, because it agrees not with his image, being
mightily deformed with sin. Then does he acknowledge us for his, when we are
changed by the spirit of sanctification into that image which we lost by the
fall of Adam.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That the good pleasure of God, being most freely set upon his creatures, is
the first and most absolute cause of all things: and therefore he must needs
do all that he does with the greatest liberty of will, having no higher
cause to check him. Dan. 4.35. He does according to his will in the army of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or
say unto him, what do thou? Ier. 18.6. Mat. 20.15. Romans 9.18.21. 2. Sam.
16.10. Isa. 45.9. In all which places as God works most freely, so he is bound
to render account to none of all his doings. Luke 10.21. Christ Jesus rejoiced
in the good pleasure of his Father, as the only cause of revealing, or hiding
the mysteries of man's salvation. Phil. 2.12.13. Work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling; now least we should follow the Popish dream of
free will, that man could merit life and happiness, if God would but bear
half the charges, we are reduced to a more full cause, It is God which works
in you both to will and to do; we bring not so much as a will disposed for our
own good: that is most slavish till grace free it, and it is freed by the most
free cause, which is the good-pleasure of our God.

Q. What do you observe concerning Elohim, or the persons?

A. Two things, their cooperation, and distinct manner of working, the one is
necessary in regard of this, that they have the same essence, and therefore
cannot but co-worke in every thing, the other is likewise as necessary, because
each person has his distinct manner of subsisting. All operation flows from
their essence, cooperation from their unity in it, and distinct manner, from
the distinct manner of their subsisting. One essence, one operation, and three
being one, must needs work inseparably, and one being three, must needs work
in a distinct manner. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning Elohim made. Genesis 2.26. Let us
make. Mat. 12.31. Blasphemy is aggrevated in regard of the three persons, and
against the last it is made unpardonable, because a sin against the Father is
remitted by the action of the Son, who redeemes from wrath: and so is a sin
against the Son by the work of the Spirit, who applies the merits of Christ
to every guilty soul: but if the sin be against the holy Ghost, all hope is
cut off; for there is no fourth person to help, and the work cannot go
backward; for, the Spirit works neither by the Father, nor the Son, and so
no means of remission is left for this sin.

Q. What is the divine cooperation?

A. Whereby the three persons work the same thing inseparably. Ioh.
5.17.19.21. My father works hitherto, and I work, whatsoever things he does,
the same do I, he raises and quickneth the dead, even so do I quicken whom I
will, etc. Ioh. 1.3. Nothing was made without the son. And here we are to
understand the same of the blessed Spirit.

Q. What is hence to be learned?

A. That all the persons work of themselves. 1. Ioh. 5.7. Three bear record,
and yet they are all one in essence, in respect whereof they work from
themselves. To be and to act is all one in God, therefore as each person is God
of himself, so does he work of himself.

Q. What will further follow from this?

A. That there is no pre-eminence, or dignity in this their co-working. For as
they are equal in essence, so are they equal in their actions. Ioh. 14.1. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. Ioh. 16.15. All things that the father
has are mine. Ioh. 5.18. It was no sin for Christ to make himself equal
with his father in every work. The same is as true of the Spirit.

Q. What is the distinct manner of working?

A. Whereby each person works according to the manner of his subsisting.
Hence it comes to pass, that the second person being mentioned with the first,
it is said, Not of him, but by him were things made: for as the son works
from the father, so the father works by the son. Ioh. 1.3. Col. 1.16.17.
Heb. 1.2. The like is to be understood of the Spirit, who being from both, has
both to work by him. Ioh. 16.13. and does nothing of himself, (I mean) as a
person.

Q. What is the Fathers manner of working?

A. To work all things by the Son, and the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 8.6. One God,
which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. So that the first person works
from himself, not only as God, but as a person, and continues his work by
his son. Math. 10.20. Ioh. 15.26. 1. Cor. 3.10. By the Spirit the Father
reveals, teaches, and testifies; and the reason is, because they are both
from him, who works of himself.

Q. What from hence?

A. That the original and beginning of all things is from the Father. For he
that is first in subsisting, must needs be first in working. Hence some
manifest notable ignorance in this point, who place the work of the Son and
the holy Ghost, before the action of the Father, and that in the greatest and
weightiest mystery of our salvation, I mean our eternal predestination: who
placing redemption and application before election, set the work of the second
and third person before the first; for, according to their wandering Doctrine,
they teach that man is redeemed, and by faith applied to Christ, before he be
elected of God the Father. This is clean contrary to S. Paul. Ephesians. 1.3. to 15.
Where election, being an original work, is given to the Father, who
dispenses the same by his son, and applies it by his spirit. So that the
Father does elect us, before the Son redeem us, or the Spirit sanctify us.
Read the Bible, and you shall find creation and election more frequently
attributed to the first person, then either the second or the third. And our
Creed teaches us to call the Father Creator, etc.

Q. What is the Sons manner of working?

A. He works from the Father, by the holy Ghost. Ioh. 5.19. The son can do
nothing of himself, save that which he sees the Father do, etc. Ioh. 16.15.
The Spirit shall take of mine, and show it unto you. And the reason is, the
Son is from the Father, but the holy Ghost is from them both.

Q. What learn we hence?

A. That the dispensaetion of all things is given to the Son: as there is an
entrance into every work, so must there be a proceeding in it; and the Father
in all things proceeds by his Son, as in the revelation and declaration of
his will. Ioh. 1.18. and the execution of all things in himself, which may
prepare for the work of the spirit in us. Ioh. 16.17. For till the Father have
done, the Son can do nothing, neither is it for the Spirit to work, until
he take it from them both.

Q. What is the holy Ghosts manner of working?

A. To work both from the Father and the Son. Ioh. 16.13. The Spirit shall
not speak, or do any thing of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear from
the Father and the Son, as the two next verses make it plain. And the reason
is that he subsisting from them both, must needs work accordingly.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That the consummation of all things is given to the holy Ghost, who ends
the work of the Father and the Son. Genesis 1.3. Let there be, is rather a word
of consummation, then commandment. The whole work is carried by word and
deed. God said, the Father had none to speak unto but his Son: let there be,
is that the word spoken might be done by the Spirit, who finisheth what is
spoken by both. And here we see by what kind of motion the world was made, by
the least stirring, for what is less then to effect all by a word. And yet
what greater, then to effect by such a word and spirit? Job 26.13. The Spirit
is said to garnish the work of creation. Ioh. 14.26. and 15.26. All that the
word has said, or Father promised, shall be taught, testified, and remembered
unto us by Gods spirit. Romans 8.10.11 13.14.15.16.26. etc. A Spirit of life
quickens those mortal bodies that are redeemed by Christ, by whom they live
again, and are led in prayer as children of adoption, etc. 1. Cor. 12.11. All
gifts and graces we have from the Spirit. Romans 8.9. 1. Cor. 3.16. the Spirit
is said to dwell; for, as the Father makes choice of his house, and the son
purchases it, so the holy Ghost takes possession, in casting out Satan and
sin, and in keeping and holding the same in spite of all Satan's assaults.
Act. 5.3. A lie against the truth, is a special sin against the holy Ghost,
whose proper work is to testify of the verity he has received from the
Father and the Son. And hence it comes to pass, that sinning after the
knowledge of the truth is most dangerous, because it is opposite to the last
act of God, further then which he will not go in the addition of any new
supply of grace and goodness.

Q. What may we learn for conclusion of all this?

A. That to him the work is especially given, in whom the manner of working
does most appear, as Creation to the Father, Redemption to the Son, and
Sanctification to the holy Ghost. This may a little be manifested unto us out
of man, who is said to do all things by his wit, will, and power. The first
mouer of man to action is will, then by wit and wisdom he proceeds, and by
his power concludes. The will works by wit and power: wit works from the will
by power, and the power works from them both. Will begins, wit dispenses, and
power does finish the action. Only here is the difference, that they are not
always able to work inseparably; for, sometimes a man has more wit then
will; Agrippa, (Act. 26.28.) had more wit to be persuaded to be a Christian,
then will to embrace so dangerous a profession. Sometimes he has more will
then wit, as Peter, Mat. 16.22. Master spare thy self; love made him blind, in
seeing what was fit for Christ to do. Sometimes again more will and wit then
power, as the Devil, Mat. 4. in the temptation of our Savior, he showed all
his wit and will to trap our Savior, but he had not power thereunto: sometimes
also there appears more power then either wit or will, as in the Legion of
unclean Spirits, Math. 8. who carried the whole Herd of Swine head long into
the Sea. By this we may see the inseparable cooperation of the three persons,
as through a crevis, or lettice, a little glimmering light of their distinct
manner of working. The Father wills the thing to be done, hence in Scripture
will is oftener given to the Father then any other person. Mat. 11.26. Ephesians.
1.11. Secondly, the Son being the wisdom of the Father, dispenses what the
Father has willed. And here we usually call the Son the wisdom of the
Father, and so indeed we find him to be in our redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.
Thirdly, the holy Ghost as the power of both, does finish and consummate their
works; and so the Scripture styles him the power of the Highest. Luke 1.35. For
as the Father did will that his Son should take upon him our flesh, and as it
was proper to the second person to assume: so the finishing of this work in
the last act of it was due to the Spirit: for as there is a natural spirit, to
unite the body and soul together; so is there a divine spirit, equal to the
work, to unite the divinity, and the humanity of Christ together. God wills
that his son assume, and his son will not assume, but by the work of the
Spirit. To conclude, nothing is done, no, not in their most distinct manner of
working, but they will all have an hand in it: what more proper to the son of
God then to take our flesh, and become our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption? And yet he can do none of this, but from the
will of his Father, and by the power of his Spirit.

CHAPTER XII. Of the Creation of things, immediately made perfect.
Question.

HItherto of Gods efficiencie in general, what are the kinds?

Answer.

A. Two, Creation and providence. In the one we see the orderly production of
the creatures; in the other, Gods careful administration, and preservation of
them. See for this, Psalm 104. Of creation to the tenth verse, of government
to the 27. verse, of preservation to the end. Nehe. 9.6. Thou have made the
heaven, with all their host, etc. Thou presoruest them all, and they worship
thee in regard of their Government.

Q. What is Creation?

A. It is the first part of Gods external efficiencie, whereby he made the
world of nothing originally good. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God made. Heb.
11.3. of things which did not appear. Genesis 1.3. and they were very good. Psalm.
33.6.7.8.9. and 146.6. Ier. 10.11.12. Act. 17.24. All which places testify of
a Creator, and his power, wisdom, and discretion in framing them so
excellently, and that minimo motu by his word and breath.

Q. What is here generally to be observed?

A. That because things here originally had their beginning, therefore the
Fathers manner of working does here pruicipally appear, to whom the original
of all things is given. 1. Cor. 8.6. All are said to be of the Father; so are
they of the Son as God, but as a person he is not the original, for in the
same place it is said, by the son. And so in the Creed we give all personally
to the Father, until we come to the work of redemption; and here we are to
learn, that the Apostasy of Adam was especially against the Father, and
therefore could not he by way of satisfaction be our Redeemer, for the person
properly offended, cannot satisfy himself by himself, but by some other that
must come betwixt the Father and us, and thus agrees it with the justice of
God, that we should be reconciled by a second person.

Q. Did God make the world all at one instant?

A. No, but in the space of six times 24. hours, that we might more
distinctly consider all his works. And Aquinas gives a good rule,
Successiverum non simul est esse and perfectio; God could have created all at
once, but in his wisdom he took days for it. Some glimps of reason hereof
we may aim at thus; as some creatures were to begin with the first instant of
time, so some others that they might not have their principles together, were
to have something go before them, hence the constancy and inconstancy of
Gods creatures. The third heaven, and the Angels were of necessity to be
created in the first instant, that they might have their perfection of matter
and form together, otherwise they should be corruptible, for whatsoever is of
a preexistent matter, is resoluble and subject to corruption. But that which is
immediately of nothing, is perfectly composed, has no other change, but by the
same hand to return into nothing again. It was therefore impossible for the
world to want a beginning, and improbable for the creatures to be all at once,
and yet some to remain incorruptible, and others corruptible. That the work
was of six days continuance, is plain by Genesis 2.1. Exodus 20.11.

Q. How is the work distributed?

A. Either into the adjuncts of time, as a work of six days, or into the
essential and integrall parts: as into nature constant, or inconstant; or
respecting the agent that gave all, as well matter as form, into Creation
immediately perfect, or perfect by degrees. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning, or very
first moment of time, God created heaven and earth. Now by the opposite member
in the distribution, largely discribed in the whole Chapter, we shall be able
to understand that which is in silence passed over. Earth upon which we now
tread was made the third day, and therefore cannot be this which was made in
the very beginning of the first day: neither can this heaven be that which was
made the second day, ver. 8. It then remains by just consequent to be the
highest heaven, which at the very first was made most absolute and perfect.
Secondly, the earth that was made at the very same instant, as a matter of all
that was afterward to be created, being all things in power, nothing in act,
did from his own center touch the third heaven in every point and part of his
outside: and that of necessity, least any vacuitie, or emptiness should have
interposed it self within the compass of so great a continent; nature
abhorring to yield nothing a place within the circle of something. Therefore
were these two as companions and friends, immediately made of God in the very
beginning of the first day. Further, it is said of the earth, ver. 2. that it
was without form and void; that is, as yet it had neither any essential, or
accidental perfection. The Lord afterward did form it into the light, the
expanse, (improperly called the firmament) the water and the earth. These four
were mediately created of the earth, and yet for their forms immediately from
God of nothing. Thus was the earth first formed, the highest part of it most
apt to receive light, the next air, the third, the form of water, and the
lowest the form of earth. After the earth had received this perfection, it was
filled in every part of it with inhabitants, as above with stars, and fowls,
below with trees, beasts, and fishes, etc. But of these anon. I insist here to
prove by reason that which is a truth, not as yet clearly delivered, and by
many contradicted; I leave all to censure, according to the evidence I shall
give. My meaning is not to bind any man unto my opinion, I only present
things, and lay them out, as it were, upon a stall; neither is it meet I grow
into choler with any man that gives me no credit, or dis-likes my ware, that
were to play the Pedant. Passion witnesses, that it is not reason so to do,
and he that does any thing out of passion, cannot well do it out of reason.
Why should any be angry with me, that I am not altogether of his opinion,
seeing I am not angry with him, because he is not of mine? I have propounded
for my example, S. Jerome and S. Augustine in their disputations, to whom it
was no matter, who gained the day, they would both win by understanding their
errors. But why do I thus draw my self from my task? Let truth uphold her
self by mildness, and be promoted by patience. You have heard that heaven and
earth were made in the very instant and beginning of the first day. That they
are two opposite members in the work of God; and therefore what is properly
given to the one, must not be given to the other. The earth (says the Text)
was without form, and void; Heaven then had at the very first his form, and
inhabitant, and therefore had the glorious Angels at the same instant created
with it; other places were in time before their in-dwellers: only the third
heaven, and the Angels were concreated; and the reason is, for that their
perfections were equally of nothing. It could not stand with order, after the
finishing of the third heaven, and entrance made to create of matter, afterward
to fall off again, and begin to create substances of no matter. I mean,
integrally, for their whole essence, otherwise, the four forms of the
elements, and soul of man were of nothing.

Q. What is the creation of things immediately made perfect?

A. Whereby he made them of nothing with their principles together, that is,
their matter and form were put together of Almighty God, not suffering the
one to enter the composition before the other. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning he
made, not giving the one a beginning before the other. The same individual
time was the measure of both. Our bodies and souls may part asunder, because
in creation time did separate them, etc.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That they are obnoxious and subject to the motion of their own nature
only by the power of God. No other force is able to work upon them, or
destroy their beings. Luke 12.31. Math. 6.19.20. 1. Tim. 6.19. The place and
the life therein are both incorruptible, subject to no alteration, change or
mutation. Angels are too quick and ready in their motion to suffer of any but
God, he only is nimble enough, to meet them, and master them.

Q. What else?

A. That they are only subject, in regard of their essence to creation and
annihilation, that is, by the same hand they may be made nothing, as they were
of nothing made something. Isa. 40.15. God can takeaway his creature as easily
as the wind does a little dust.

Q. What yet further may be observed?

A. That they are in themselves no ways liable to generation, or corruption.
They can neither receive new forms, or loose their old; for that matter cannot
admit of diverse forms, which it self was never deprived of his own. So
complete is the union, that the matter has not so much as the least
inclination to any other perfection, then it receives at the first instant, by
the hand of the Creator, and excellency of his form. Math. 22.30. The idle
question of the Sadduces, concerning marriage in heaven, and procreation of
children, is fully answered by our Savior, both in regard of the nature of the
place, and his first inhabitants. In the resurrection of the dead, they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in beauen.

Q. When were these things created?

A. In the first moment of time: for as they had no succession of time, for the
receiving of their essential parts: so God took the very first beginning for
their creation. The succession of time being left to other creatures, of a
clean contrary nature. Angels are not simply eternal, because they have a
beginning, and yet they are immortal, because nature can never sever their
parts, or divide them asunder. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning he made the heaven,
etc. Perfect for form, and that it might not be void, like the earth, filled
it with most excellent inhabitants.

Q. What are the things so made?

A. The third heaven, and the Angels, Colos. 1.16. Heaven and all things
therein, as thrones, dominions, principalities, powers, etc. were created of
the Father by his Son. Angels no sooner opened the eyes of their reason, then
they saw themselves in sky and highest sphere of happiness.

Q. What is the creation of the third heaven?

A. Whereby it was made perfect immediately of nothing, to be a most excellent
place, replenished with all pleasures that belong to eternal happiness, where
his Majesty is seen face to face, and therefore above all other places, is
called the Habitacle of holiness, 2 Chronicles. 30.27.1. King. 8.30. Deuteronomy. 26.15.
Gods house full of excellent Mansions. Ioh. 14.2. Abraham's bosom. Luke 16.22.
The third and highest heaven. 2. Cor. 12.2. Psalm. 113.5. The habitation of
Jehovah, where are fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
and 33.14. This only has the immovable foundation. Heb. 11.10. And is as
folide as stone, but clear as Cristall. Rev. 21.11. Job says it is strong and
firm, as being stretched and spread out to the utmost extension, and as
transparent in brightness, as a molten looking glass. Job 37.18. This only
is to be called Firmament, as not penetrable by any creature, whereas the other
two heavens under it are to be passed through by the grossest bodies. This
heaven is without all pores, and cannot possibly extend, or contract it self
into a larger or straiter compass: it opens to the very Angels. Genesis 28.12.
Ioh. 1.51. who though they be able to penetrate all things under it, yet are
they no more able to enter that body, then they are to pass into one another
natures. Hence it comes to pass, that the third heaven gives way to Angels,
the souls and bodies of men to enter by miracle: God making way by his power,
where nature yields no passage. This heaven is more firm and solid then the
earth, more bright and glorious then the Sun in his strength, etc.

Q. What is the Creation of the Angels?

A. Whereby he created them at once and together in the third heaven,
immediately of nothing, with the greatest perfections of nature, to the end
they might praise him together, and become his ministering Spirits, and
Messengers, as he should have occasion to send them. Heb. 1.7. He made them for
perfection of nature Spirits, and for office, his most immediate Ministers, and
for execution, more ready then any flame of fire, ver. 14. Yea, and so prompt
to minister to the heirs of salvation, that they are all ready to be
commanded. Job 38.7. They are called morning Stars, by reason of their
admirable brightness of nature, such as the eye of flesh cannot behold, Colos.
1.16.

Q. With what properties has he enriched them?

A. With the greatest perspicuitie of reason, and acuteness of wit, liberty
of will, strength and speed of motion, that is possible, or incident to created
nature. Mat. 18.10. They are said always to behold the face of God: so clear
understandings that they quickly perceive what God would have done: yet of some
things are they ignorant. Mar: 13.32. And whatsoever they know is by
reflection, either of Gods face upon the glass of their minds, or the beams
of it, as they shine in the creatures; the one is by immediate revelation, the
other, by inquisition and discourse. Ephesians. 3.10. 1. Pet. 1.12. It is true, that
Angels see both the face of God, and the face of things, and then the face of
themselves; and hence it is, that they know nothing in themselves, but either
God reveals it, or themselves do find it in the creatures; and by means
hereof they learn much in beholding God, and his works; and having so near a
presence with his Majesty, must needs outstrip others that are further off, I
mean, in respect of divine Revelation. As for freedom of will, it was most
excellent by nature, and is now grown better by grace, and has confirmed them
for ever in glory; as for strength and a gilitie of motion, read these Texts,
Genesis 32.2. 2 Samuel 24.16. 2 King. 19.35. Act. 1.10. and 5.19. and 12.7.8.9.10.

Q. What are their offices?

A. To celebrate the praises of God, and to execute his commands. Dan. 7.10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood before
him. Luke 1.19. I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to
speak unto thee, etc. Psalm. 103.20. and 148. 2. Ready are the Angels, both in
their attendance upon God, and performance of his will, to his creatures. Psalm.
91.11. Isa. 6.3. Rev. 7.11.12. They are as a guard to the Church.

Q. Where is their special abode?

A. In the third heaven, Math. 18 10. Their Angels in heaven, Mar. 12.25. When
we arisefrom the dead we shall be as the Angels in heaven, Psalm. 68.17. The
Chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand thousand Angels, and the Lord is
among them as in the Sanctuary of Sinai. They are the proper inhabitants of
heaven, and there is of them an innumerable company. Heb. 12.22. Yet their
number is not infinite, though to us it be indefinite.

Q. Are there any degrees of Angels?

A. Yes, but to determine what, and how many is without warrant from Gods word,
for ought I can find.

Q. Does not Scripture favor their opinion that make nine several orders of
Angels?

A. Col. 1.16. Ephe. ^ 21. and 3.10. S. Paul here gives distinct titles to the
inhabitants of heavenly places. But whether hereby are signified distinct
orders, offices, or gifts, it does not appear. And whenas it is supposed that
those nine orders are set down by a disciple of S. Paul, it is well proved,
that the alleged Dionysius is of a far newer stamp, and baser metal. Nor can
I see how it can agree with Scripture, that the Seraphim, Cherubim, and th^ones
have never any other employment then immediate attending upon the presence of
God, whereas Heb. 1.14. the Angels are said to be all ministering Spirits for
the good of the elect. Isa. 6.6.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the first matter, and four Elements.
Question.

HItherto of things immediately perfected, what is the creation of those things
that were perfected by degrees?

An. It is whereby he made them of a preexistent matter, or forgoing
principles. They are not immediately composed, but first they have a matter,
and then a form, and then their own being, or existing. And as time
dis-ioynes these things, so they are subject to change with time. Genesis 1.2. Out
of the void and unformed earth came all inconstant and mutable creatures. 2.
Pet. 3.5. The earth that now is, is said to stand out of that Chaos, which Genesis
1.2. is called earth, water, etc. This by conversion is as well the ground of
confusion, as of composition. Out of a confusion are they compounded, and may
by conversion be confounded again into it.

Q. What follows hereupon?

A. That they are by nature returnable into their former principles, and so of
a corruptible nature. 2 Pet. 3.6. The world that then was perished, being
over-flowed with the waters, that is, all that breathed. Genesis 7.22. Every thing
under the Sun passes away. Eccl. 1.4. And at the last day, the elements,
with all their inhabitants shall be destroyed. 2. Pet. 3.10. As it were, a
resolution being made into the first Chaos again, as may seem, what a hell
were it for a man to be an inhabitant of that first earth? The holy Ghost
testifies, 2. Pet. 3.7. that the heavens and the earth, which are now, are
kept in store, and reserved for fire and perdition of ungodly men at the last
day. Good reason they should be punished where they sinned, and with those
creatures they have abused. A fearful hell to have all turned into the first
Chaos, with an addition of the fire of Gods vengeance. As if that first matter
were then to be formed and filled with nothing but the extremities of Gods
curses. At the first it was formed, and adorned as a Palace and Paradise for
man, then shall it be left as a dungeon and noisome prison, for the torture and
torment of all wretched and wicked persons. Only the third heaven, with the
inhabitants thereof, shall then be in bliss and blessed felicity.

Q. How manifold is this creation?

A. It is either of the elements, or the elementaries. Genesis 2.1. Heaven and
earth were finished with the host of them. All that are placed above in the
fire, and the air, or below in the waters and the earth, are elementaries,
being composed out of those four elements, and are as the host of this
inferior world.

Q. What is the creation of the elements?

A. Whereby he made them of a precedent matter, with their forms, immediately
of nothing. That is, the matter, or earth without form, received into every
part and portion of it a simple formation, without all mixture, yet so, that it
was formed into four bodies, essentially distinguished, which are most simple,
as having nothing in them but one common matter, with four distinct forms,
immediately created of nothing: hence they are in themselves the greatest
opposits, as fire to water, and air to earth. The maine opposites are fire and
water, which stickle and strive together, and are moderated and compounded by
the two other. When water would quench the fire, earth steps in and helps to
abate his moisture. And when fire would dry up his moisture, air secondeth the
water, and prepares a radical moisture to feed the fire a little longer. When
the coldness of water takes off the edge of heat, then air with his mild heat
helps his fellow. And when fire over-masters the coldness of water, then
earth checks him, and abates his fury, whence arises all elementaries,
receiving the common matter, and forms of the elements, much abated and
moderated, after their striving and struggling together, and therefore are not
so vehemently opposite and contrary in themselves. Genesis 1.3. Let there be
light, which was the first simple form that was put into the common matter,
ver. 6. Let there be an expanse, or spreading, which was next added to light,
as his fittest neighbor, ver. 9. Let there be gatherings, or waters, which
contained the third simple form, and came as next fellow to the air; for so
God had appointed, that by placing it between two great adversaries, it might
be a friend to both. ver. 9. Let the dry appear, which comes lowest in rank,
and gave the matter the fourth simple form. Thus heat and cold, moisture and
dryness, did run through the first common matter, which intertaines them
all, and gives them leave to diffuse themselves one into another, for further
mixture and composition.

Q. But may these things be handled in Divinity?

A. Yes, because, we so far speak of them as they concern creation, which
is proper to this Art. And our rule is this, that where Creation ends, nature
begins; and generation succeeds it, as in imitation of Gods first
composition. God by his omnipotent hand gives to every thing his being, and
then sets it a work, by his own nature and virtue. Aristotle knew a first
matter, but he confesses, he had it from Plato, and he from the Egyptians,
and they from Moses. Yet he erred in many things, for want of Divinity,
beginning only with nature, where creation had ended his work. First, he was
ignorant that the first matter was of nothing. Secondly, that it stood certain
hours without a form. Thirdly, that all the forms it received were
immediately of nothing. Fourthly, that all this was done in time, and that
there was nothing in the world eternal, but the maker of it. Genesis 1.1.2. The
earth was a subject of contrary forms, and therefore preexistent.

Q. What is that first matter of all inconstant things?

A. It was a thing which God made of nothing in the beginning of the first day,
without form and void, and so by his spirit miraculously sustained it for a
certain space. Genesis 1.1.2.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That of it self it is permanent, for being immediately of nothing, it has
no power to work upon it, but the same that made it, therefore God alone can
turn it into nothing, from whence he brought it, and this is the reason why
the first matter, and four first forms are not resolved, though all things
may be resolved into them. For in generation and corruption, as they begin here
to take new forms, so here they leave them again. And death, though a
privation of life, yet it has no power to annihilate his contrary, and
therefore, as nature begins where creation ends, so creation at the last day
will begin again where nature has ended. I mean, in our resurrection, every
man receiving again those very pieces of the elements whereof he was made.
Job. 19.27. 2. Cor. 15.35.36.37.38. etc. the very seed that is sown, dies and
rises again, out of those very elements into which nature resolves it,
springs it again.

Q. When was it made?

A. In the first beginning of time, or the evening of the first day, hence it
is co-etaneall, and of the same time and age with the third heaven, and the
Angels. Genesis 1.1. And the reason was, to hinder a vacuitie in the large space
and compass of that highest heaven. The parts whereof would sooner have fallen
together, then have admitted nothing to stand within their circle. For nothing,
and evil, are cousin germans, and equally opposed to the being of any thing,
rather would perfection have imperfection his next neighbor, if so be, it have
a being from God, then to permit nothing to lodge in his bosom. And therefore
what a degenerate thing is man, to admit evil for his best companion?

Q. How long was this matter void, and without form?

A. All the time that darkness was upon the face of it: Now the vicissitude of
light and darkness makes the day and night, which as it is most probable, were
then Equinoctial, of an equal length and size; that is, twelve hours a
piece. So then the earth, or first matter stood in that imperfection, a whole
night, or twelve hours. Genesis 1.1.2.5. involved in nothing but palpable
darkness.

Q. How was it preserved all that time?

A. By the Spirit that moved upon it, and which in stead of a form, did
cherish and foster it all that time. Genesis 1.2.

Q. What kind of creature may we term it to be?

A. Something potentially, nothing actually. It was all things, and nothing. A
matter for all, yet nothing in form. It is called earth, and water. Genesis
1.1.2. And so it was fire and air, etc.

Q. What be the kinds of elements?

A. The higher and hotter which make one globe, or the lower and colder which
make another. So that all the world is folded up in three several globes, one
comprehending another. The divine globe of the third heaven, in which God is
said to sit. Psalm. 2.4. as a place of blessed rest. The second is the
etheriall, or sky globe, containing those glorious lamps, and burning
torches, by whose light and brightness all this inferior world is comforted;
and upon this heaven the Lord is said to ride. Psalm. 68.4. in regard of his
swift motion and expedite manner of working. The third and inferior globe,
which is but as a point to the rest, is the earthie and watery sphere, and the
Lord is said to sit upon the very circle of it. Isa. 40.22. And to shake the
wicked out of it, as it were, by a canvase, or as a man tumbles a thing out of
his lap. Job 38.13. Thus is God in all the globes of the world, no where
included, no where excluded, he is in their circles, and upon their circles,
dis-posing all things as he pleases.

Q. What are the higher and hotter elements?

A. Whereby they were made with forms, more active and stirring; and therefore
hotter and higher then the rest. Hence in regard of levitie and gravitie,
heaven is said to be above, and earth below. Exodus 20.4. Much matter and little
form makes creatures weighty; whereupon we see in our selves, that manhood
consists not in the bulk of the bones, but in the metal, and spirits. So
that we may truly say, that the elements above, are formal, and they below
material.

Q. What are the kinds of the more formal elements?

A. The fire, and the air, styled by the holy Ghost, light and expanse, or (as
it is called) Firmament. Genesis 1.3.6. God naming them by that which is most
sensible to us, and in them most proper, as light is to fire, extension and
expansion to the air. For air by reason of his moisture does more dilate, and
diffuse it self, then fire, though that be the thinner, and more subtle
substance.

Q. What is the Creation of the Fire?

A. Whereby God made it in the top and highest part of the first matter, with
the most active and working form, so that it is most hot and light; therefore
in the highest room, and because of his shining, is called, Photisticos. With
such violence is the fire dejected, that it strikes into the bowels of the
earth, and bottom of the Sea; as may well appear by the generation of stones
and fishes. Metalls, which are ingendered in the earth, show that fire has
been there, otherwise should we never have gold so purely purified, and
concocted. Hence Philosophers attribute the engendring of gold to the Sun; of
silver, to Jupiter, lead, to the Moon, copper to Mars, etc. Likewise precious
stones could not be so resplendent and glorious, if it were not for the work
of the light, or fire, that penetrates into their several places and veins.
Genesis 1.3. Let there be light. Genesis 11.31. Abraham is called from Vr, of the
Chaldees. The city has fires name, because they worshipped it. Hence we read
[ Suidas in Canopo. Ruffin. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 26.] that the Chaldaeans
challenged all other gods of the god-lesse Heathen, to fight with their God: an
Egyptian encountered, and overcame them thus: He caused his Canopus to be made
full of holes, stopped with wax, and filled with water being hollow in the
middle. The Chaldaeans put under their God Vr, or fire, and the wax melting,
opened a full quiver of watery arrows, that cooled and quenched their
devouring God, etc. 2 Cor. 4.6. God is said to make the light shine out of
darkness; that is, after the first night he made it of that matter which was
covered with darkness.

Q. How did the light descend from above?

A. For three days, by the power of God alone, afterward by the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, which were set of God in the element of fire. Genesis 1.4. God
divided the light from the darkness, ver. 14. Let there be lights in the
firmament of heaven, to devide the day from the night, etc.

Q. What is the day?

A. If we speak truly and properly, it is the time of the Suns remaining
above the Horizon, or visible part of the world. Some, whom I have cause much
to respect and reverence, have held opinion, that light naturally ascends,
and violently descends by a kind of repercussion made by the Suns body and
motion, then accordingly have defined the day to be the time wherein the light
is turned downward, or reflected upon the lower parts of the world, and so by
condensation shines. But others upon more mature consideration, judge that a
new devised way. For, first, Light in its own nature cannot be said to ascend
or descend only, but transfuseth it self equally and spherically in all
dimensions from its own center. Secondly, if the shining of the Sun be
nothing else but the beating backward of the ascending beams of the whole
sky, or element of fire, surely the Moon would always seem full, as the
Sun does, being that this ascending light must needs in like manner mere with
the thick body of the Moon, and suffer repercussion from it. Thirdly, though
light were made visible in the manner imagined, yet the day cannot properly be
defined the time, wherein the light is reflected by the Sun upon the lower
parts of the world for this is done perpetually and so we should have no night.

Q. Who gave the name thereunto?

A. God himself called it Iom, which signifies Stirring, because be made the
day for man to travail in. Psalm. 104.23. When the Sun rises man goes forth
to his work. Genesis 1.5. He called the light day by a Trope, putting it for the
time wherein it is the cause of the day.

Q. What is night?

A. If we give way to evident reason, and experience, we must needs acknowledge
the night to be nothing else, but the shadow of the earth, that is, the
privation of light made by the earths thick body, intercepting and cutting off
the Suns beams. They that are of the foresaid opinion, define night to be
the time wherein the light returns upward, ascending back again to the
place where God first created it: which is as a paradoxe, so an vndefensible
Tenent both for the reasons abouesaid, as also for that in this description,
there is no efficient, or material cause employed, which should make the light
return upward, and ascend back again. Lastly, there is no respective
difference made of the diverse parts of the Globe of the earth. Whereupon, it
may be supposed, that he that made this definition, did not consider the earth
and heavens to be sphericall, and so to make vicissitude of day and night in
the moiety of the earth.

How called God the Night?

A. He called it Lailah, which signifies resting, because he made the night
for man to rest in.

Q. How did God order these things?

A. He appointed them to keep their course, making a separation between them,
setting them, as it were, their limits, which they might not pass. Genesis 1.4.

Q. What is this separation?

A. The separation between the day and the night is the evening, between the
night and the day, the morning. Genesis 1.5 Evening separates by darkness,
morning by light. So that the one dis-ioynes the day from the night, and the
other the night from the day. Only the first evening separated not, because
the light was then uncreated: yet was it of God appointed even then as apt to
stand betwixt light and darkness. And thus from the evening and the morning
was the first day finished, consisting of 24. hours. In the first evening were
heaven and earth created: and in the first morning, the light, or element of
fire. The observation of time will keep us from that foul confusion about
heaven and earth: which are so frequently expounded of the works that followed
upon other days.

Q. What is the Creation of the air.

A. Whereby God made it in the next part of the first matter, most moist, and
of a diffusiue, or diffluent nature, spreading abroad, both for impletion and
separation. Psalm. 104.2. He spreads the heavens like a curtain: that is, the
air, (for he had spoken of the light before) which is further called a
superior chamber, very spacious, and contains (as it were) a beam for the
hanging of the clouds. For water is naturally cold, and therefore gathers it
self together in the middle region, and by help of the air is held up, which
makes a partition betwixt those waters that are congeled above, and that are
fluide and floating below. Genesis 1.7. for the clouds hang by virtue of cold,
both in the place, and of that which is in vapors, being watery, and ascending
by the violence of the Sun beams redoubled, which when they return single,
leave their vapors behind them, which are held by the place, till the fire and
light returning dissolve the bands, and send them down again in rain, or
some such like moist Meteor. Job 38.31. Can thou bind the sweet influences
of Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion. This is nothing but the neat and cold
that rules in the air, and earth, when these brumall, or aestivall stars are
most to be seen in our haemisphere. Orion is seen all night in the month of
December, and so on, till the Spring, less, or more. The Pleiades begin with
the Spring, and last till Autumn, when Acturus takes place. Job. 9.9. So then
as cold binds up all in Winter, because of the Suns absence: so heat loses
again, when the Sun returns in the Spring. And as below, so above, cold
knits the clouds, and heat breaks their knots.

Q. How called he it being made?

A. By the name in Hebrew, Shamaijm, which signifies, there be waters, sealing
thereby the office in deviding betwixt the two waters. Genesis 1.7.8. Hence it
comes to pass that rain water is far more fruitful to the earth then any
other, because it is not dissolved by the light, but it brings down with it
much ayery moisture, which is fatter then lean water; and we see by
experience, that one shower is better then much watering.

Q. When was it made?

A. In the second 24. hours, God taking (as it were) a whole day for that
which was equally capable of light and darkness. Genesis 1.8. So the evening and
the morning were the second day, by an equal succession of light and
darkness. 2. Cor. 4.6. God in the first day made light to shine out of
darkness, when there was no capable subject for the receiving of it; now he
stays a whole day of 24. hours, for light and darkness to come and go in a
proper subject. Oh then how should we trust this God to shine in our hearts,
even when we are most incapable?

Q. What is the creation of the colder elements?

A. Whereby he created them with forms less active, and therefore colder;
these elements are clogged with more matter then form, and therefore the
action of them is much hindered. Isa. 1.2. Hear, O earth, the dullest of Gods
creatures is brought to convince man of disobedience, which should be the most
forward.

Q. What are they?

A. Water and earth. Genesis 1.9. Let the waters be gathered, and let the dry
appear.

Q. What is the Creation of the water?

A. Whereby it was made in the lower part of the first matter most cold, and
moist. His cold appears to be greatest by his gathering, and his moisture in
this, that it is fluide, and of a spreading nature, yet much inferior to the
air, as may appear by putting our hands into oil and water, as likewise by
pictures, which hold their colors the longer, for that they are laid in oil.
Now because water sooner dries up then oil, it is plain, that air which is
predominant in oil is moyster then water. Genesis 1.9. Let the waters under the
heaven be gathered together, this is done by the cold of them and therefore no
wonder to see the Seas tumble together.

Q. How is this water divided?

A. Into the waters above, and the waters beneath. Genesis 1.6. And it is
probable, that both these waters met together in Noah's flood. Genesis 7.20. with
11.

Q. What mean you by the waters above?

A. The clouds, and whatsoever water is above in the air. Genesis 1.6. Psalm.
104.3. and 148.4. For as cold gathers them below, so above, etc. and may very
well be called Gods botels, as containing all those gatherings. Job 38.37.

Q. What mean you by the waters beneath?

A. The Sea, and all the waters here below. Psalm. 33.7. He gathers the
waters of the Sea together, as upon an heap, and lays up the depths in his
treasure. Psalm. 104.6.7.8.9. Job 26.12. and 38.8.9.10.

Q. What is the proper place of the water?

A. To be next under the air, and next above the earth: yet their proper place
by Gods appointment is to keep within the earth, as in a cesterne, and that
not by a miracle, but by a law of nature; for the word gather, comes of Kavah,
and passiuely signfies a confluxe of waters. God therefore bidding the waters
cave, did first make them a Cesterne in the bowels of the earth, and that was
by the ascent of the mountains, and descent of the valleys. Psalm. 104.8.9.
Hither at Gods rebuke they cave and gather themselves, by their coldness,
which is of a congregating nature. Hence it comes to pass, that we have the
purest fountains at footes of hills; and that often out of their sides great
store of waters have broken forth, to the destruction of the inhabitants. Genesis
7.11. At Noah's flood all the fountains of the great deep were broken up:
which may very well be understood of the bursting of the mountains, to let in
the waters. Again, from the Seas come all the sweet Springs that run between
the mountains, and water the valleys. Psalm. 104.10.11.12. which as it were,
sweating through the bodies of the huge mountains, are purged of their
saltness, and leave behind them what they had contracted by the continual
working of the Sun beams, and their own agitation in tossing too and fro.
Again, for the flux and refluxe of the sea, which is nothing but the rising
and falling of it, the one being violent, and the other natural, is easily
understood by the cause of both. The flux, or tide is violent, caused by the
Stars, more especially the Moon, whose heat being weaker then the Sun,
has her beams returned with greater opposition, yet prevailing, as being more
active then water, gets up her fumes and vapors, and with them lifts up the
water, and carrying them after her, makes the water follow her, and so they
thrust forward the water that is before them, until they be clean gotten out
of the Sea, and then the water falls again of it own accord, and the refluxe,
or the ebb is natural, moisture and coldness making it run downward. Thus
the Lord keeps the Seas in a perpetual motion, least by standing they should
corrupt, to the destruction of the whole earth. It is not altogether to be
neglected, which is said of Stars, in affecting our bodies, which is not in
regard of their own influences, but their exhalations. For all the Stars
work by the heat they cast down, which being nothing else but the element of
fire, cannot of themselves otherwise hurt, or heal, but according to their
temper and degree of heat. As for example, Saturn sends down a weak heat,
and raises fumes from pooles of water, and dunghills, and carries them up into
the cold region of the air, being able to bring them no higher; and so they
affect the air first, and then our bodies by it with cold and dryness, two
enemies to life, consisting in heat, and moisture; Ergo, they say, it is fatal
to be borne under his regiment; and to suck, as it were, our first breath from
him. Hence fabulous Poets feign him eating a child, only a better Star,
which they call Jupiter, by his heat and breath, as with a stone chokes him.
This Star is brighter then the other, and more solid to cast down his
beams; hence from him comes a greater heat, and raises up more vapors from
Meeres, which are more sweet and pleasant, etc. Ergo, to draw our first breath
under such a planet they count wholesome, and a prognosticke of good fortune.
Mars, another planet, of a reddish and fiery nature, turns down more solid
heat and fire, and inflames the fumes and vapors it raises, and therefore
they deem such as draw in the first air, under such a constellation, shall
afterward prove men of a word and a blow, etc. The Sun being of the greatest
strength, is able to fetch up vapors from the bottom of the Sea, and lowest
bowels of the earth, and turn them into the nature of air, making them,
according to their matter, pleasant, or pernicious. As fumes of gold and
precious stones may be cordial; of other Mineralls, like deadly damps that
Metallists often meet withal. Venus like Jupiter raises up vapors, which
falling in the night, cherish, and nourish plants, and so is said to be
fruitful, and the mother of offspring. This I thought good to admonish all
concerning the conceit of Stars, of I know not what influences; when the
truth is, they are all but instruments of sending down light and fire, and
according to their several compositions and placing in this element, send
down a greater, or lesser quantity of heat, the quality being all one.
Christ says his locks are full of the dew of the night, showing that the Moon
has not the same regiment over the night in regard of heat, that the Sun
has over the day. And Physicians teach, that it is dangerous to sleep with
our heads in the Moone-shine, for fear of the moist distempers of the brain.
And we see in the lunacie, that the frantic and mad mood follows the
seasons of the Moon. So that something is to be given to the Stars, and yet
no more then is to be wrought by the natural quality of heat.

Q. What is the Creation of the earth?

A. Whereby he made it in the lowest part of the first matter, most dry and
cold. It is not the coldest element, though it be most remote from the fire;
for, in the reflection of the Sunne-beames it is the strongest of all other,
and therefore it is never the colder for the place of it. The Sun and Stars
warm not naturally in descent, for heat properly ascends: now in the reflexe
of the heat, the earth is most capable, and to be made the hottest. It is
therefore most dry, and less cold then the water; as may appear by the
property of gathering. Genesis 1.9. Let the dry appear.

Q. How called God the earth?

A. Erets; which signifies, hardness, or to be trampled upon, sealing thereby
the office thereof, which was to sustain the creatures that should go
thereon. Genesis 1.10. As to be a fit habitation for man, and other creatures.
Psalm. 115 16. It is said to have the Sea for his foundation. Psalm. 24.2. and
136.6. Yea, to be made out of the water, and to consist in it. 2. Pet. 3.5. God
would have Job admire at the laying of this foundation. Job 38.3.4.5.6. Else
where it is said to have no foundation. Job 26.7. Only to hang in the midst of
the world by the power of God immoueably. Psalm. 93.1. and 104.5. Isa. 40.12.
and 42.5. and 44.19. and 48.13. The truth is, the earth is made of God to rest
in his proper place, and hangs not by any miracle, but poyseth it self by his
own weight; yet the ascending of the earth, to make way for the Sea, seems to
lie upon the very waters, and to be vpholden by them, and so appeared by Gods
commandment from under them, and now to stand in them.

Q. How called God the waters beneath?

A. Iammim, Seas. Genesis 1.10. because there was the collection of many waters,
all rivers running into it. Eccl. 1.7. We see many great rivers, which at the
first rising out of some hills-side, might be covered with a Bushel; which,
after many miles, fill a very broad channel, and drawing near to the Sea, do
even make a little Sea in their own banks. Iam signifies the west, because
the Seas flow from that way, etc.

CHAPTER XIIII. Of the Elementaries.
Question.

WE have heard of the elements, what are the elementaries?

Answer.

Whereby God made them of these four elements, by a mixture. Genesis 1.11. Let
the earth bring forth, etc. This was impossible without heat and moisture,
therefore other elements were in the composition, as may appear by the
resolution of plants, out of which water and spirit is to be distilled, etc.
The mystery of this mixture may thus be conceived. First, water being of a
running nature, is stayed by earths dryness. Secondly, earth being dry in the
highest degree would destroy waters moisture, being not answerable to his
quality in the same degree, therefore air comes in and takes part with water,
to moderate his excessive dryness. Thirdly, the coldness of water and earth
together would easily extinguish the heat of the air, except fire, the
greatest champion should step in and help the air against them both. And
those all four being closed together, fight it out, until the quarrel be
taken up by every one yielding a little to another, and remitting their forces,
until they all meet lovingly together in the same elementary composition,
which is as a compound of them all. But you will say, this is rather Generation
then Creation, and therefore a foul confusion to bring it amongst divine
precepts. I answer; The action of every creature is but an imitable genesis,
or correspondent work-manship to Gods: and therefore in every thing, the first
course is extraordinary, God showing the creature his way of imitation.
Therefore all the elementaries were made of God, though he gave commandment
to the elements to bring them forth.

Q. How devide you these clementaries?

A. They are either animate, or inanimate, things with life, or without life:
God showing himself by his work, to be both life and being. Now because God
proceeds to perfection, let us first see the more imperfect elementaries.

Q. What are the inanimate elementaries?

A. Whereby they were made out of the elements without parts, that is, a body
and a soul. I confess, some dispute is about Mineralls, which contain in
them excellent spirits, and are found very vivificall in cordialls: but yet
this is no proper life, neither will it follow, that they have a vegetative
life, because they seem to grow; for, that is only by addition of matter, and
not a lively extension of the same matter by a springing life, increasing to
his full perfection, etc.

Q. How are they divided?

A. They are either Meteors, or Mineralls: for so it comes to pass, that these
things which have only a body and no soul, are either of elements well joined
together, or else of such as hang very loosely together, and are casily shaken
asunder: these things are passed over in silence by Moses, and might well be
left out of this Art, save only that God does wonderfully set forth his glory,
even by the weakest works, and those that are worst tied together in their
composition. We will therefore stay a little in the handling of them; for their
knowledge shall be both pleasant and profitable.

Q. What are the Meteors?

A. All luch things as are mixed of the four elements imperfectly. Genesis 1.6.
Of this kind are the waters above. Genesis 2.5. and the rain that descends from
them. Psalm. 148. Clouds, fire, hail, snow, wind, and vapors are called upon
to praise the Lord, because he created them. What marvells do we meet withal
in this head of creatures? the clouds, the bottles of rain, vessels as thin as
the liquor which is contained in them: there they hang and move, though
weighty with their burden. These the Lord makes one while as some ayery Seas
to hold water: another while as some ayery Furnaces, whence he scatters his
sudden fires unto all the parts of the earth, astonishing the world with the
fearful noyies of the thunders eruption: out of the midst of the waters above
he fetches fire, and hard stones. Another while he makes the clouds as
steele-glasses, wherein the Sun looks and shows his face in the variety of
colors which he has not; there are the streams of light, blazing and falling
Stars, fires darted up and down in many forms, hollow openings, and (as it
were) gulfes in the sky; bright circles about the Moon, and other Planets,
Snowes, Hail, etc. Here might I discourse of a world of wonders, to the
astonishment of the readers: but I must remember my Art, which is to speak of
Creation, and not the generation of things; for as the one belongs to
Divinity, so the other to natural Philosophy. And I take it that Meteors were
rather generated of the four elements, then created: though in all we are to
admire Gods hand, though we cannot search out his action. But if God lend life,
as I desire first to acquaint men more fully with the knowledge of
Iehovah-Elohim; so after with their works. And Creation, according to Moses
description, will yield the exactest and divinest Phylosophie.

Q. What is the perfect mixture?

A. Whereby the bodies of things are more closely united, and produced
according to the predominant element, not hanging by violence out of their
proper elements, but duly placed of God in their proper places, whereby the
first matter is filled and adorned. God himself supplying that void and
unformed mass, with four forms, and infinite varieties of creatures out of
their composition and mixture. They which lie the lowest, and do adorn the
bowels of the earth, we call Mineralls; and they are either Metalls, or
Stones, the one has water predominant in it, the other earth; and they are
both precious, and base, purer, or impurer. And it is to be wondered at, that
man treading upon these Mineralls, should not learn to contemn them. They lie
furthest from heaven, and the best of them are in India, furthest from the
Church. It is (as we have said) that which Midianitish Camels carry, that
Indian slaves get, that servile Apprentises work, that greedy Jews swallow,
worldlings admire, and Ruffians spend: and yet we cannot esteem of it as the
meanest of Gods creatures, far inferior to a spire of grass. Adam had them in
the first Paradise. Genesis 2.11.12. In the second we shall not need them. Job
28.1.2.3.5.6. etc. There may you see how God has placed them, and how we come
by them. And so subject to sin, as God made a law to have them purified,
before he would have them used. Number. 31.22.23. etc. Hence it is abominable of
these things to make Idol gods. Ezekiel. 16.17. Joel. 3.5.

Q. What are the elementaries with life?

A. Whereby they were created of a body and soul; for life is nothing but the
act of the soul upon the body: and the soul, save only the reasonable, is
compounded of the four elements, and is nothing but the Spirits of them, or
that which is most formal and active in them. Hence fire and air are most
predominant in these spirits; for, as by extraction we have the spirits of
things taken from the mass and body, by resolution of the composition: so, in
the composition, those spirits were as the soul of that living thing. Wine is
pressed from the grape, which is the fruit of a vegetable plant: and because it
carries away with it the more formal elements, and leaves the grosser and more
material behind, we say it is generous and full of Spirits: yea, and out of
this again by Art are taken the Spirits of wine, which are very lively, and of
a quickening nature. In all plants, Air is most formal; and therefore the
vegetative life consists most in moisture, and the spirit of it: but in the
Sensatiue and Motive life, fire, and the spirit thereof is most predominant.
These Spirits which are the souls of Plants, and Beasts, are but the band, or
tie of the reasonable soul and body: hence death in man is nothing but the
extinguishing, or consuming of these Spirits: for as this claspe vnlooseth, or
knot vntieth: so body and soul separate asunder. Agues they consume and back
these Spirits within our bodies, and so consequently kill us: colds and watery
distempers do not so much wast as weary and tire them, and at last extinguish
them as a brand in a puddle of water. Genesis 1.20.21.24.28. etc. we read of life;
and Genesis 7.22. we hear how God extinguished the same again.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. Either such as live a single life, or a compound life. Some creatures have
their Spirits, or Souls from some one element formally, others from more. As
for example, all Plants live most by the Spirit and moisture of the air:
Stars of the fire, men and beasts by both. They grow by the one, have sense
and motion by the other.

Q. What is this single life?

A. Whereby he made some creatures to line by the formal and act it^e Spirits
of some one element.

Q. What are their kinds?

A. Plants and lights, the one with a growing and springing life, the other
with a stirring, or moving life. Genesis 1.11. with 14. The first being more
imperfect (as air is less formal then fire) is first handled.

Q. What is the Creation of the Plants?

A. Whereby the earth brought them forth with aspringing life only. Genesis
1.11.12.13. They were compounded of the four elements, but the earth does
predominate, or bear rule in the body; as air does in the Soul: and every
thing is placed in that element which bears greatest sway in the body, or
material substance of it.

Q. How were they created?

A. According to their kinds, yielding seed; both the lesser and greater: the
lesser, as grass, herbs flowers, and shrubbes: the greater, fruitful trees,
and the rest without fruit. All which the earth brought forth by the
commandment of God; and as it is the mother and breeder of them: so is it the
Nurse and foster-mother of them ever after. Genesis 1.14. The act of the soul in
plants, is vegitation: and they have as it were, a mouth to draw nourishment,
and prepare it for the stomach, and a kind of liver and heart for concoction.
Now this faculty to nourish, has four companions to wait on it. First,
Attraction, the Spirits drawing a portion to every part. Secondly, Retention,
whereby the part keeps and holds what it has gotten. Thirdly, Concoction, to
digest and convert what it has gotten into it self. Fourthly, Expulsion,
whereby it rejects and electeth whatsoever is superfluous. Now the seed is an
excrement of the last concoction, and therefore is from the assimulation of the
nourishment, which makes it like every part. Hence from simular parts, it
begets simular parts; and out of so little a part being full of Spirits, are
begotten all other creatures. In seed and food consists all vegitable life, and
a hurt in either is dangerous, and often deadly. From nutrition proceed
augmentation and generation; the one for extension of the same thing, the
other, for preservation of it in others. Extention is by heat, hence females
are less then males, because their heat is less, though often they have more
moisture. Generation, is by seed, which receives from plants, and all other
things, the soul and substance of every part. Hence is it able to give the
kind that yields it. And therefore the Lord says every Plant yielding seed
after his kind. Genesis 1.12. Teaching us thereby, that the seed vertually, and
potentially, answers the creature in every part and member of it?

Q. When were these made?

A. The same day wherein the waters and earth were created. Genesis 1.13. And so
by succession of an evening and morning, was there a third day, or 24. hours.
In creation of the elements, God began in the top of the matter: but in the
elementaries he began in the bottom, first creating the Mineralls, and then
the Plants. For God is a God of order and so passes on in his work from
imperfection to perfection, I mean, where there is a succession of parts,
otherwise God begins with the best first. For the Lord did not in the universe,
as men do in building, rake first in the earth to lay the foundation, and add
the roof last: but he first laid on the roof, and last of all came to the
foundation. First heaven, then fire, next air, and last of all water and
earth. Yet being the God of Art, followed an exact method in all; for being
come to the earth, he first makes things spring, then move, after spring move
and walk by sense. Lastly, as an Epitome of all the rest he comes to man,
which grows, moves, walks, and above all the rest, lives by reason.

Q. What is the Creation of the lights?

A. Whereby he made them in the element of fire, with a motive life to run
round, carrying the same side still forward, that they may bring light upon the
earth, and separate between day and night, and be for fignes and seasons,
days and years. Genesis 1.14.15. Job 38.31.32.33. Psalm. 8.2.4. Psalm.
19.2.3.4.5.6.7. and 136.7.8.9. Ier. 31.35. Amos. 5.8. etc. False and fabulous
Phylosophie makes this doctrine a wonder, and they that bring Moses to
Aristotle, laugh at this lesson. Stars to live is against reason, for they
are not nourished, neither do they increase or generate, etc. I may reply
again upon Divines from Moses, by a probable argument they were created after
living things, therefore they have life, etc. Aristotle's objection is easily
answered. Life consisting in the moisture of air is to be nourished; not in
the spirit of fire. Animal spirits if they were not generated of the vital,
and daily restored by them, they might live by their fiery nature, as well as
stars. Let this then be granted, that all elementarie souls, are either the
formal spirits of the air, or fire: and then stars having the one and not
the other, may live without nourishment. The influences of the Stars are as
vital as the animal spirits in man, and both comfort and beget life, etc.
Again, their motion shows they live, for nothing is moved from place to place
without it. If God and Moses may be heard, Philosophers shall easily have their
mouths stopped. Scripture every where testifies of the motion of the Stars.
Which must either be by counsel, or nature, or violence, or fortune. Not by
counsel, for their motion is regular, and always the same, and this were
sufficient to prove the cause next under God to be natural. But the opinion
is, they are moved by the external force of Angels, as a wheel by a dog, or a
Crane by walking men. I read indeed, that the Angels are ministering spirits
for the good of the elect; but no where in Gods book, that they turn the
wheels of heaven. And again, the light being common to good and bad, the good
Angels should minister daily, as well for reprobates as Gods elect. But to
still all cackling in this cause, let the Text clear it self. Genesis
1.14.15.16.17.18. That which God saw to be good, answers Gods intention in his
motion to his end. Therefore the Stars had so much by their creation, that
they were able to devide, give light, rule days and nights, the which they
were unable to do without motion; God therefore gave them a power to move,
that they might obtain these ends; which if they should assume from any other
then God, would argue the imperfection of his own work. It may well be
thought they receive this life in their centers, as other things do in the
circumference. For being round, heat and spirit will most unite themselves
within, as in a silver spoone, turn the hollow side to the fire, and it will
be very hot. But in plain bodies heat is received in a clean contrary
fashion, as in Andyrons, where they be round, are very cold, but where they be
plain, they be very hot, and will burn soon. Stars therefore are round
like globes, that heat may the better center in them, and make them the more
active and lively in their motion. Why they should neither ascend, nor descend,
is their equal temper with the place where they stay, Why they move round, is
the active spirit and soul that will not suffer them to rest. It is said of
the Sun. Psalm. 19.4.5.6. that God has set him a tabernacle, or proper place,
out of which he cannot go, and yet he comes out of the chambers thereof, and
in the strength of his motive spirit, rejoices to run his race; not tumble
it as some dream: for running a breast in the fire, he pusheth and shoueth it
from him, that nothing can be hid from his heat and light. His circuit is from
one end of heaven to another, and by his quick dispatch, every day either
draws a little nearer, or goes a little farther off: not that at any time he
comes nearer the earth: but by fleeting a little his chambers, he comes
sometime in the year to dwell more directly over our heads then other. He
devids night and day every 24. hours with us, and by running from one point to
another the whole year. And it is as natural to the Sun to run a circuit
every day, as another in a whole year: not that he is pulled contrary ways by
two diverse orbs: but that which he does every day in part, that he does
wholly and completely in a year. Now the part and the whole may agree in the
same motion; and every days race is but a part of the whole years course,
which the Sun may as truly keep in the whole, as in the parts, and that
without all contrary motions. But seeing every man will fancy his own
fiction, I leave this without all further prosecution.

Q. How many sort of Stars have we?

A. Two; The greater and the lesser: not for quantity of body, but quality
of light: for the original word Meoroth, is Makers of light, Luminaries,
shiners. And so the Sun and Moon are greatest, as giving to the earth the
greatest quantity of light. How great the Stars are is a conjecture and
guess at the just proportion of any one: yet they are very big, and it is
evident that the Sun is bigger then the earth, by the Eclipses, and because
it enlightneth more then half the earth at once. Genesis 1.16.

Q. What are the greater?

A. The Sun and the Moon. These two cast down the greatest light upon the
face of the earth. Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 104.19.

Q. What is the Creation of the Sun?

A. Whereby he made it to rule the day, etc. And it is called the greater
light, because it darkens all Stars by his shining: yea, and casts light in
the face of them all: hence the Moon which has such a changeable light,
receives her splendour from the Sun, according to that face which is opposite
to the body of the Sun, for the one half of it is ever illuminated and
illustrated by the same, and in receiving and casting down that light seems
to have spots in her face. Genesis 1.16. Psalm. 19.5.6.

Q What is the creation of the Moon?

A. Whereby it was made to rule the night. Genesis 1.16. Yet she has the
assistence of the Stars; for her self is often absent in the night.

Q. What are the lesser lights?

A. The Stars. Genesis 1.16. These carry down a lesser quantity of light: yet
if it were not for them, our nights would be palpable darkness, which is the
greatest enemy to the eye; for, it is a comfortable thing to see the light.
Eccl. 11.7.

Q. When were all these made?

A. In the fourth day, evening and morning succeeding as before in the compass
of 24. hours. Genesis 1.19.

Q. What is the creation of things with a compound life?

A. Whereby they were made not only with a growing and moving life; but also
with sense, external and internal, the one serving as glass windows for the
other. The first sense which is most necessary, is our feeling, and is
dispersed through the whole body, excepting the bones and sinews. Bones are
the sustentacles of our bodies, and therefore would be painful to us, if they
were tender of feeling. The sinews they are the organs and instruments, and
carry in them the sensitive spirits; and man is most ticklish where his skin is
thinnest. With the tips of the fingers, Physicians feel their patients, as
being most sensible of the pulses motion. The tangible objects are heat, cold,
drought and moisture principally: secondarily, the qualities that hence arise.
Taste is next, which is a kind of feeling, for both must have their objects
present. Now it is made by the passing down of the sensitive spirit from the
brain to the tongue, etc. Sight is made by conveiance of sensitive spirits to
the eyes, where they are met with the light without that first comes to the
watery humor, which is as lead to a looking glass, that stays the light, then
it comes to the glassie humor, and there is gathered together, then it comes to
the crystaline, or clearest humor, and is carried up unto the brain, by the
sensitive spirit that meets it. Hence Hippocrates says, that these sensitive
Spirits are a dry brightness, and that is, because fire is here predominant,
as we may see by a blow upon the eye, the Spirits redoubled, are made visible
as fire. Those that have the brightest eyes, as Catts, etc. see better in
darkness then other creatures, and worse in the light; because the greater
light darkens the lesser. Hearing is a fourth sense, and meets with the noise
in the ears, there it centers: for noise is made by a circle in the air, not
much unlike unto that which we see in the water when we cast a stone into it.
Hence it comes to pass as many as stand within the circle or circumference of
the sound made in the air, hear it; and the reason is, because any point or
center within the circle of the sound, is potentially in every part of it, and
one point is enough to bring it to our ears: yet we cannot see so; for, when
we but look at a thing that is round, we cannot see it all at once. But I
must not play the Philosopher too much; it is my desire, that God for his
works may have the due glory. Smelling is the last sense, and serves
wonderfully to refresh the brain. The inward senses that look through these
outward, are fancy, cogitation, and memory: and they are a little resemblance
of reason, which comes in the last place. For fancy has in it a kind of
invention, cogitation of judgment, and memory of method. And this is the
sensatiue life, wherein God shows his own act more eminently.

Q. How many sorts of creatures live by sense?

A. Two; either such as live by it only, or have beside all these a reasonable
life. This only passes Elements both formal and material, yet the finest
Spirits serve to knit it with the rest, and so we handle that life amongst
Elementaries, otherwise it is angelical, and purely of nothing by the power of
the Creator.

Q. How many kinds have we of the first life?

A. Either fishes and fowls, or beasts. All which were made according to their
kinds, and were mightily to increase, through Gods blessing, and to fill their
places with daily offspring.

Q. What is the creation of the fishes?

A. Whereby the Lord caused the waters to bring them forth in abundance,
wherein also they increase and multiply, and replenish the waters. Genesis
1.20.21.22. Job 40.20. and 41.1.

Q. What is the creation of the fowls?

A. Whereby he made them to fly in the air, and to multiply upon the earth.
Genesis 1.20.

Q. When were the fish and foul made?

A. In the sift day, or 24. hours. Gen, 1.23. These were more imperfect then
the beasts of the field, and therefore conclude a days work by themselves,
God willing us to take notice, how exact he was in ascending up to man's
perfection.

Q. What is the creation of the beasts?

A. Whereby he caused the earth to bring them forth after their kinds; and they
are either walkers, or creepers: walkers, cattle and beasts, that is, wild and
tame creatures. Genesis 1.24.25. Thus God formed and filled that first matter, and
prepared it as an habitation for man: who though he came naked out of the
womb of the earth, was even then so rich, that all things were his, heaven was
his roof, earth his floare, the Sea his pond, the Sun and Moon his torches,
all creatures his vassalls. They that look into some great Pond, may see the
banks full, though they see not the several springs whence the water rises:
so we may eye the world, but can never come to see the excellency of it, much
more of the maker himself. Kings erect not cottages, but set forth their
magnificence in sumptuous buildings: so God has made a world, to show his
admirable glory. And if the lowest pauement of that third heaven be so
glorious, what shall we find within? Who would think, that all these should
be made for one, and that one, well-neere the least of all? Sure I am, the
last: with him therefore, let us conclude this work of Creation.

CHAPTER XV. Of Man's Creation.
Question.

What is the creation of things with a reasonable life?

Answer.

Whereby he made them of a body and soul immortal. Genesis 1.26. Other creatures
were made by a simple command; Man not without a divine consultation: Others at
once; Man he did first form, then inspire: others in several shapes, like to
none but themselves; Man after his own image: others with qualities fit for
service; Man for dominion. His body and soul are both immortal; for, death
is an enemy. 1. Cor. 15.26. And therefore no consequent of nature, but a
companion of sin: yet this is true, that every elementary is corruptible, and
resoluble; and so is the body of man, being taken out of the dust: but as it
was made a companion of an immortal soul, immediately made of nothing, so is
it fit, that it should be above its own nature elevated, to be one, though not
per vim contactus, yet per vnionem personae, immortal and eternal. Almighty
God after he had drawn the large, and real map of the world, abridged it into
this little table of Man, as Dioptron Microcosmicum, which alone consists of
heaven and earth, soul and body. In his soul is the nature of Angels, though
not so extensiue and active, as we may see in a little and great man, etc. In
his body are the four elements, the Meteors and Mineralls, as may appear
both by vapors and fumes, and spirits. He lives the life of a Plant, he has
the senses of beasts; and above all, the addition of reason. His body is more
exquisitely made then any other, as may appear by the nakedness of it. For
others that are clothed with feathers, and hairs, etc. show that they are
fuller of excrements. The Lord brought him upon the stage fully prepared, that
he might be both an actor and a spectator. He had a body, with hands for
action, and an head for contemplation.

Q. How did God create him?

A. In his own likeness and image. Genesis 1.26. Colos. 3.10. And it is so
called, because man was furnished in every point, to resemble the wisdom,
holiness, and righteousness of God, not only in this frame and perfection of
body and soul, but also by his actions, and government of the creatures: and
this was natural unto man. The Papists think, that this image was
supernatural; but untruly, seeing it was of his created perfection, having
the greatest excellencies of all things here below. For an image is a special
kind of similitude, and so man after a more special sort, then all other
creatures, resembles the majesty of his Creator, even (as it were) a stature,
or image of him: yet must we take heed of the error of the Authropomorphoi and
Papists, who metamorphize God into the shape of a Man, old and ancient. For
the likeness stands not in having a body and soul, but in the hability of
both to work answerably to the righteousness and holiness of God. And image,
beside similitude, which is the general, contains two things more,
expression, and representation. First it must either be expressed by another
thing, or else exemplarily formed to such a pattern and pattent, and as it
were, the very copy and countenance of it. Hence one egg though it be the
similitude of another, yet is it not the image: and so one man is like another
in shape, but not his image: yet is the son the image of his father; and my
face in a glass, the image of my natural face: so is the stamp in brass,
wax, etc. the image of the seal, and the picture of Caesar, the image of
Caesar. Secondly, It must represent specifically, either the substance, or
accidents of the thing whereof it is an image. Hence the son is the image of
his father essentially, and a picture man's image accidentally: and by this it
appears, that an egg is not the image of an Hen, though it be expressed by
her, or a worm of a man, though it be engendered in, or out of his body. The
image of God, by natural expression and representation, is the only son of
God. Heb. 1.3. He alone is of the father by nature, and essentially, as it
were, his very form and figure, etc. But man is an image by counsel. Iam.
1.18. And more specially from God then other creatures. Genesis 1.26. Let us make,
It was enough for other creatures to be, but man is not without special
counsel, and in special manner, is made a fit subject for the three persons
to declare their works in him. No doubt, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost did
even now consult, according to their eternal act, to produce man, as he might
be fittest to declare severally the righteousness and holiness of each
person. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. The new man is Christ's the putting on of him is
the Spirits, and the creation of him the Fathers. Surely, he that did love his
own image without an object, did also love it when he had created it, and was
so careful of it, that when man had destroyed it, he would have it repaired
again by his Son; and his elect invested into it by his spirit. He that can
love without an object, can hate without an object, and yet hate nothing but
the opposite of his own image. His love begins at himself, as an affection of
union, and so does his hatred, as an affection of separation. And God does
never separate where he once loves. He condemns every sinner: but the hatred
of condemnation is not always the hatred of separation. It pleases God to
love himself, and his own image, and to love it constantly in his own Son:
and who shall complain, that he is separated from this love? Sin makes a
separation in all, in regard of condemnation. Far be it from the just Judge,
to favor either sin or sinner: yet notwithstanding the union of love
remains still; for either he loves his own image in the elect, or the elect
in the image of his son.

Q. Wherein consists this image?

A. Either in conformation, or domination: first he is to express Gods image
in his conformity with the holiness and righteousness of his Creator.
Secondly, in his dominion and rule over the creatures. As God is holy in his
nature, righteous in his actions, and Lord in his commands: so man was made
most pure, and holy, filled with original righteousness, for all righteous
actions, and made a petty Lord, or Lord deputy over all the creatures. Ephesians.
4.24. Genesis 1.26.

Q. Wherein consists his conformity with God?

A. Both in his body and soul; for that which executes is to be holy, as well
as that which acts. 1. These. 5.23. Romans 6.12.13. and 12.1. These places show
plainly, that the body and members, being instruments of the soul are to be
so tuned and touched, that there may be an excellent harmony betwixt the will
of God, and the whole man. For we are made of God both in body and soul, to
glorify God, in using all faculties and members, parts and powers, as
instruments of righteousness, and true holiness. 1. Corinthians 6.20.

Q. Whereof, and how was the body made?

A. Of the finer dust of the earth, with the rest of the elements; hence it was
possible for man to die: yet that it might enjoy health, and never sicken the
Lord made it of a most excellent temper, and by the use of wholesome food, and
his blessing therein to continue, and hold out; and thereupon it was possible
for man not to die. Besides, the Lord furnished it with most excellent
instruments, absolutely composed both for beauty and duty in all the works
of holiness and righteousness. Genesis 2.7.25. Psalm. 8.5. and 139.14. Romans 6.13.
The matter of man's body, though basest, as earth, yet finest and purest, as the
dust. For as Moates in the Sun are nearest pure air; so is dust nearest
their nature, being (as it were) the sifting of the earth, and being laid by
water was red earth. Man's body then had the purest portion of earth. For the
form it was erect and straight, and this was done, because he was to speak to
others, as likewise to God, and therefore was not to look upon the ground, as
if that should have been his object, etc. The body all over is uncovered, that
it might be a fitter habitation for the reasonable soul, which is much
hindered by abundance of excrements. In every part, beauty, strength,
convenience meet together. His head is round, and fuller of brains then any
other creature, that it might be the throne and seat of reason: and because his
attendants are there, I mean the senses, it can turn any ways for reason to
over-looke them. Within the brain are many cells, or cellars, for the Spirits
to go in, and as messengers to be dispatched up and down for reasons use,
which are not in other creatures. As he has a head for contemplation, so hands
for execution, differing from beasts. Again, all the internal parts are of
more excellent matter and form, then those in beasts. Hence man's brain makes
finer spirits then theirs; his liner and heart finer blood, and better
concocted, and all for the exercise of the reasonable soul. His head is
nearest heaven for place, figure, and ghests, there dwell the maiesticall
powers of reason, which make him a man and not a beast. The senses here take
their original, and most their instruments. There are the living glasses
placed in the midst of his visage, which bring objects a far off to the
mind, and because they are too tender opticke pieces, sly of the most soft
and lawny touches, they are mightily defended and fenced with hollow bones, and
with prominent brows, and lips. And least they should be too much bent on what
they ought not, they have peculiar nerves to pull them upward to God, as also
to the seat of their rest. What a tongue has God given him, the instrument,
not of taste only, but of speech also? How sweet and excellent voices are
formed by that loose filme of flesh? What an incredible strength is given to
the weak bones of the jaws? What a wonder of so few letters, to make infinite
words, and give them several sounds, with a distinct articulation, and ready
signification to the hearers? The causes whereof in nature are these. The lungs
or lights breath to cool the heart, and like a pair of bellows, thrust out
that air which they have received, and it goes and comes by the windpipe,
which is made rough, as it were, with ringes to stay the breath it go not out
altogether, at the top thereof is a piece of flesh to cover the mouth of it.
Now in the pipe this noise comes up, and lies in the almands, and makes a
resound, and is turned upon the tongue, which strikes it against the pallet and
teeth, and makes an articulate sound, cutting in pieces the whole sound, either
into a letter, or clapping diverse together, makes syllables, and so words, and
then sentences. This articulation is natural, but the appellation of things by
names is artificial, and belonging to the Art of Grammar. In Babels bablers to
stop their proud attempt, God meddles neither with hands, nor feet, but their
tongues, not pulling them out, or loosing their strings, or making them
speechless, but by teaching them to say too much. A sound of letters befooles
the workmen, and spoils the work. I believe this confusion was made in
turning of letters; when they intended to put such letters together, God taught
them to dispose them contrary, as ab, ba, etc. And now poor creatures, how
long do we stay upon the shell of tongues, before we come to chew the sweet
kernel of knowledge? Division of tongues hinders any work, and is often a
cause why our Sion rises no faster: and though it over-threw old Babel, yet
does it build the new. Only I except the cloven and fiery tongues of the
Apostles. Act. 2.3. The Spirit teaching the Art of Grammar without means, etc.
Again, that goodly proportion God set in the face, how is it altered with
passion, as with joy and sorrow. Laughter arises from the extension of the
heart, which sends spirits apace from it self, and because they are hot, fly
upwards, and so come to the face that is very full of muscles, cold by nature
and so contracted, yet by the heat coming thither, are extended, which is the
laughter in the face. Only this must further be added, that the heat of the
head and brain does sympathize with other parts of the body. And therefore the
apprehension of a ridiculous object sends down to the heart from the head, and
then back again to the face. Tears arise clean contrary, for the head being
stricken with the apprehension of some sorrowful object, the heart is smitten
too, and contracts it self, and so sends up those chrystaline humors that are
to cool it, and are squesed out by contraction of parts, and so run out at
the eyes. The head stands upon a comely, and tower-like neck, most sinewie,
because smallest. I might carry you down to his feet, but my purpose is not
to play the Anatomist any further, then to give a little taste of a wonderful
work. All the inward vessels for all offices of life, nourishment, egestion,
generation, etc. no vein, sinew, artery, etc. are idle. Yet this body compared
to the soul, what is it, but as a clay-wall that encompasseth a treasure; as
the wooden box of a Ieweller; or, as a course case to a rich instrument; or, as
a mask to a beautiful face? let us therefore come to his Soul.

Q. How was the soul created?

A. Immediately of nothing: hence it dies not. Man was made last, because he
was worthiest. And the soul was last inspired, because more noble then all the
rest. And the inspiration of it, is by creating to infuse, and by infusing to
create. Genesis 2.7. Zech. 12.1. The breath of life was formed within, and not
without man. And though it be little, yet is it of great value. A little piece
of gold contains many pieces of silver; one Diamond is of more worth then many
Quarries of Stone; and one Lodestone has more virtue then mountains of earth.

Q. How then was the soul endued?

A. With most excellent faculties, which either work upon the body by Spirits,
or themselves by reason. As the soul works upon the body by elementary
spirits, it is possible for man to die, but as these by the blessing of God,
are cherished by wholesome food, man again might not die. These spirits are
either natural, as having air predominant in them, and they serve for
generation, and augmentation, and nutrition, or animal, having fire
predominant in them, and they serve for sense, or motion; now the motive
faculties are either for local motion, whereby the body is carried up and
down; or epithumeticall and internal motion, whereby the soul is moved with
desires, or affections, especially love and hatred, which are the primatiues of
all others, whether they be in the concupiscible, or irascible faculty: as joy
and sorrow, in respect of present objects, hope and fear, in regard of absent,
etc. Beside these separable faculties, and not practiced without the body, the
soul has more eminent and excellent powers and abilities, which it is able to
use being separated from the body, and they are reasonable, whereby he might be
the free beginner of his own action, that is a cause by counsel. Genesis 2.10.
and these faculties are understanding, and will. And thus you see how God has
given us a Soul to inform our bodies, senses to inform our soul, faculties
to furnish that soul, understanding, the great surveyer of the secrets of
nature, and grace; by this man sees what God has done, by this he can admire
his works, and adore him in what he sees. Here is fancy and invention, the
master of great works; Memory, the great keeper, or master of the Rolls of
the Soul, a power that can make amends for the speed of time, and make him
leave his Monuments and Chronicles behind him. There is will, the
Lord-paramount, keeping state in the Soul, commander of all actions; and the
elector of all our resolutions. Judgment sits by as the great counselor of
the will: affections follow as good servants of both. And for the good thereof,
has God given a body fit to execute his charge, so wonderfully disposed, as
that every part has best opportunity to his own functions; so qualified with
health, arising from proportion of humors that like a watch kept in good tune
it goes right, and is set to serve the soul, and maintain it self. But alas,
they are not now like the first copy from which they were drawn, more like
the ingrauings of Tombs, walked on with foul shoes, the very Characters of
nature blotted out with original sin, and trodden out with daily sins. The
Books of our consciences are clasped and sealed up, and the woeful contents
are not read by the law, they remain as letters written with the juice of
Orenges, which are only to be made legible by the fire of Gods wrath, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Behold, we were not more like God in
our knowledge, holiness, and righteousness, then we are now unlike our selves
in their loss. O God how may we praise our selves to our shame, for the better
we were, we are the worse. What is it for the sons of prodigal and tainted
Ancestors, to tell of the Lands, and Lordships which were once theirs, and
their fathers? Lord whet our desires, that we may redeem our loss in thy
Son. The fault shall be ours, if this our very damage prove not beneficial.

Q. How did God further deal with man?

A. He gave him dominion over all his creatures. Psalm. 8.6. Thou have made him
to have dominion in the works of thy hands; thou have put all things under his
feet. Genesis 1.26.28. A shame for him that was to subdue all things, to suffer
himself to be subdued by them, and become a very lacquey to his vile
affections, in doing homage to the three great Idols of the world, Profit,
preferment, and pleasure. Nay, should labor to subdue the Lord of his life to
become his vassal. The Glutton makes God his Cator, his belly his God, and
himself the Guest. The lascivious wanton, makes God his Pandar, and himself
the lover. The covetous worldling, would have God his broker, and himself the
usurer. The angry sinner would have God his hangman, or executioner, and
himself the Judge. The Ambitious inquisitor can sometimes make God and
Religion his stale, but honor shall be his God. If times serve, the credit of
the Gospel shall be subordinate unto his credit: and Christ shall be a stirrup
to climb to promotion, the word as a trumpet to blazon our own commendation,
and the Pulpit a stage, or shop to set to view and sale, our own good parts.
Fie on such service, or Lordship as shall make God to serve with sin. Isa.
43.24. Amos. 2.13. And the meanest servants thus ride on Horseback. Its
fitter for the Savages of Calecut, to place Satan in the throne, and God on the
footstool, then for a Christian to abase himself to the creatures, and the
Creator to himself. Oh that the Sun of peace, should look upon these
unclean heaps, or give light to this brood of darkness. They are rare hands
and hearts, that are free either from aspersions of blood, or spots of
filthiness. What base rule keeps man here below? Oh the want on excess,
excessive pride, close Atheism, impudent profaneness, unmerciful
oppression, over merciful connivence to sin, greedy covetousness, loose
prodigality, symoniacall sacrilege, unbridled luxury, beastly drunkenness,
bloody treachery, cunning fraud, slanderous detraction, envious underminings,
secret Idolatries, hypocritical fashionablenesse, etc. All drencht in
profaneness, and profuseness, and the very earth diepred with our villainies.
But I forget my felfe, seeing my task is to lay down a rule, and not inveigh
against the breach of it.

Q. Wherein consists man's dominion over the creatures?

A. In a most free use of all things for the glory of God, his own necessity,
and lawful pleasure: and that without all let, or hinderance of any of his
actions; and therefore if he offended in them, it was his own fault. Genesis
1.29. with Chap. 3.11. Man could not content himself in knowing God and all
his creatures, his curiosity is to know more then ever God made, evil of
sin, and evil of death. How dear this lesson cost us, we know well enough,
and smart with knowing. We the sons of Eve inherit her saucie appetite, and
miscarry daily with the presumptuous affectation of forbidden knowledge. Oh
Lord teach me a sober knowledge, and a contented ignorance: thou have revealed
more then I can know, enough to make me happy, Give me again the tenure of
grace, that I may hold what I have as well in the consistory of conscience, as
at the commonpleas, least whiles I be a civil owner, I prove but a spiritual
usurper: make me once again a spiritual owner, and then I shall not care if I
die a civil beggar.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. First, Gods commandment for the procuration of meat from the Plants to
himself, and the beasts, as likewise the dressing of them. Genesis 1.29.30. and
2.15. That which was man's storehouse, was also his work house; his pleasure
was his task. Earth served not only to feed his senses, but to exercise his
hands: happiness never consisted in doing nothing. Idleness neither gets, nor
saues; for, we do ill whiles we do nothing, and loose whiles we gain not.
Hours have ever had wings, to fly up to heaven, to the author of time, to
carry news of our usage. Eve could not long keep chat with the Serpent, but
God had notice of it, and for such idleness turns her out of Paradise. God
esteems much of our times (what ever our price be) and plagues the loss of a
short time, with revenge beyond all times. God give me grace, to take it by the
fore-top, that I may make that which is wild and fugitive, tame and pliable to
my purposes for heaven.

Q. What secondly may be gathered?

A. The bringing of all creatures, which could conveniently be brought unto
him, as their Lord, to see how he would name them. Genesis 2.19. All Arts were
engraven upon the creatures; yet none but man could see them; for he received
them both actiuely and passiuely; and therefore by Logic understood their
natures, and by Grammar gave them names. And so even in this showed his
dominion over them, in that he knew how to govern and order them all.

Q. What in the third place may be observed?

A. That he was like a Lord placed in the Garden of Eden, as in a stately
Palace, planted of God Eastward, with excellent trees, and other plants, as
well for pleasure as for profit; and watered with a pleasant river, divided
into four heads, which was to wash the Garden, not like Nilus that makes
Egypt fertile with inundation. For that is the rain water that falls a good
way off, and comes tumbling from the hills, and carries with it the soyles of
other grounds, by the fatness and mud whereof that land is made fruitful: but
this was to wash away filthiness, and superfluous fatness in so excellent a
soil, least all should turn blade, and nothing corn. This Garden was known
in Moses days, and by the description may be known in ours. Pliny speaks of
a city, called Ctesiphon, which lies between the river Tigris and Euphrates,
mentioned by Moses. Genesis 2.14. which is wonderful fruitful, and it lies as an
Island environed by both. Also it is well known, that in Babylon, near Tigris
is a most fertile place for feeding of Cattle, and the people are feign to
keep them up in the night for fear of suffocation. Their corn they mow
thrice, and then receive a twofold increase. The Garden of Adonis was in this
country. And Scripture mentions. 2. King. 19.12. The children of Eden, which
were in Thel-asare. That is, the Garrison Soldiers that were in a tower against
the King of Assyria, for the defense of this fruitful country. The
Topographie shows plainly, that here-abouts the Garden stood. Perath, or
Euphrates is a known river, that devideth Syria from Chaldea, and Mesopotamia,
etc. And may be taken for the whole river, though it have but the name of the
fourth river, which is, as it were, the middle stream of Euphrates, running
betwixt the second and third river, of which nothing is said more then the
name, because it was best known to the Jews, when Moses did write. Pison the
first river may very well be that which Pliny calls Pasi-tigris, or
Piso-tigris. And in Pliny, Diglath, or Diglito, another arm, is the same with
Hiddekel, both signifying the same thing, viz. an arrow for the swiftness of
the water; and this is the same with Tigris, now called Tegil. So that by all
this, it is most probable, that the Garden did lie betwixt Euphrates and
Tigris. Furthermore, Pliny writes, that (as it were) a fish pond, or Marsh, in
compass about an Acre of ground, burns continually, which may not without
probability be thought to besome remembrance of that flaming sword, which
turned every way to keep man from the tree of life. Genesis 3.24. God in just
judgment, turning the place into ashes, and a burning poole, as he afterward
did Sodom, another Eden of the world. By this appears the folly of Papists,
that thought this Garden was not drowned in the flood, and that Enoch and Elias
live in it, etc. Oh happy man, if he had but known his own happiness, when
he first opened his eyes, he saw haven above him, and a flourishing earth under
him, and himself placed in the very Paradise and Palace of the world. But this
is clean washed away, and over turned in the just judgment of God. Yet read
the excellent description of it and let the loss of it provoke us to seek
after a better. Genesis 2.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.

Q. Why did God thus place man in a Garden?

A. That man being appointed of God, as Lord deputy under him, might there
serve him more freely, keep his Court, have necessary employment, both in
dressing and keeping the Garden. Genesis 2.15. It was one of Adams faults, to
suffer the serpent to come into it. Another, to forget his duty to God; for,
the very trees did not only afford him work for his hands, but instruction
for his heart. There he saw two Sacraments in the very midst of the rest of the
trees, grow before him as most eminent teachers of him. Genesis 2.9. The greater
shame to offend God, who had so hedged him in on all sides, that by a word of
his mouth he might have rebuked the Serpent, and by the least cast of his eye
been confirmed in duty and diligence. But blessed be God that we have a
better tree of life before our eyes; not a tree for trial, but for
confirmation of being happy, in despite of Satan, of which we may eat and
live.

Q. Of what kinds was man created?

A. Male, and female. Genesis 1.27. The Male immediately for his body of the four
Elements. Genesis 2.7. The female for her body of one of his ribs, man being cast
into a deep sleep. Genesis 2.21. Man had better loose a piece of himself, then
miss a good wife. Yet the Lord would not pain him in sending him a meet
helper; as for their Souls they were equally inspired, that they might both be
partakers of the same happiness. Genesis 1.27. For the image they were both
equal.

Q. Why did God make her?

A. God saw that it was not good for man to be alone, and among the rest of the
creatures, there was none fit to be his companion. Genesis 2.18.20. That there
might therefore be wanting to him no comfortable thing, God thought it
needful, that he should have such an helper as might satisfy his desires, and
give him by his divine benediction, a fruitful offspring. Genesis 1.28. Mal. 2.15.
All that man saw immediately after his creation, were fit to be his servants,
none his companions; and the same God that found the want supplies it. Rather
then man shall want a comfort, God will begin a new creation, not out of the
earth, man's first matter, or out of other creatures, his servants: but out of
himself for dearnesse, for equality, and that neither of the head nor foot,
but the side, showing her place, which is to stand next to her husband, neither
as his drudge in being basely governed, nor as his wanton in crowing over him.
Furthermore, God consults not with man to make him happy. As he was ignorant
while himself was made, so shall he not know while a second self is made out
of him. Both that the comfort might be greater then was expected, as also, that
he might not vpbraid his wife with any great dependence, or obligation, he
neither willing the work, nor suffering any pain to have it done. The rib can
challenge no more of her, then the earth can of him. They are both made equal
debtors to God, who alone took care, that they might both be happy in him,
and by him.

Q. What did God with her being made?

A. He brought her to man, and joined her in marriage with him, who
acknowledges her to be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; This shows
how exquisite knowledge he had from God. If God had given him her name, or the
names of other creatures, it had not been so great a praise of Adams memory to
recall them, as it was now of his judgment (at first sight) to impose them.
Genesis 2.23. She shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. So
piercing was the eye of his reason, that he saw the inside of all the creatures
at first blush, and by his perfect knowledge, he fitted their names to their
dispositions; whereas we silly solves, his ignorant posterity, see but their
skins ever since, and forget their very names, when we are told them.
Furthermore, he received her thankefully to be his wife, and established that
law of matrimony concerning co-habitation, Therefore shall man leave his father
and mother, and clean to his wife, and they shall be one flesh. Genesis
2.22.23.24.

Q. How were man and woman perfect, whiles they were both naked?

A. They then needed no clothing, for yet there was nothing whereof they needed
to be ashamed, nor any external thing whereby they might be anoyed, which are
the proper ends of apparel. viz. to hide our shame, and defend us from
external danger of weather, and weakness. Genesis 2.25.

Q. When were they created?

A. Together with the beasts on the sixth day. Genesis 1.31. Thus God leaves them
to their conscionable obedience, the only way to entaile a comfortable
prosperity upon themselves, and their seed after them, if their sins strip
them not of all their hopes.

CHAPTER XVI. Of Gods Providence.
Question.

HItherto of the Creation; What is Gods Providence?

Answer.

It is that part of Gods efficiencie, whereby he provideth for all his
creatures, even to the least circumstance, that have his being. Psalm. 104.24.
with 27. As he has made them in excellent wisdom, so in the same wisdom he
provides for them. Providence is not to over-see, or ouer-looke his works, but
to work, and have an efficiencie in all things. Permission, to the creature,
is not a cessation to the Creator: but the Lord works his own will by every
permission. Providence is to mind the creature, God never forgetting the
works of his own hands. Hence God may be said to be the soul of the world,
not informing it essentially as a piece of any creature, but by his efficiencie
in every thing. Math. 10.29.30. Luke. 12.6.7. That which Matthew speaks of the
falling of a Sparrow, Luke interprets by not forgetting. In regard of
Providence all things are done by reason, not of the creatures, for thereof
they are ignorant, therefore by God. The falling of a Sparrow is a proposition,
and that is made of arguments, which are cause and effect, all which is reason,
not of the Sparrow, nor of men and Angels, for they only analyze it, by seeing
it done; therefore of God alone who makes that reason to hang together, in the
very fall of a Sparrow, or hair of our heads. And here come many errors to be
touched. First, the error of necessity, which is, that all things fall out by
a fatal destiny. There is a certainty in all things; for, the counsel of
God is infallible, but no necessary cause; seeing these two in reason are
opposed. Secondly, some go as wide on the other side, that would have all
things governed by fortune and chance: as if ignorance in us, were to be
preferred before knowledge and counsel in God A flock of sheep stands not in
more need of a Shep-herd, then the work does of God. Thirdly, others hold a
Providence in the great and weighty affairs of the world, but none in the
lesser, and baser works. As if it were not as honorable for God to rule the
least, as to make them. A spire of grass was his creature, and it grows not
but by his Providence. Fourthly, the Providence in Lots is not rightly
understood, It is as casual for a lot to fall, as an hair from the head: and
yet the Providence is not equal; for, beside the reason it has from God in
the cause and effect, so disposed by him, It has another in the conclusion,
that by such a fall, such a thing shall be determined, which is sometimes
miraculous, sometimes ordinary, but always the conclusion of God. Seeing then
both the reason in the proposition and event is Gods, and not man's, it is
soberly to be used, and not upon every slight occasion. Chance may bevsed in
recreation, for casualty is to us in all things inevitable: but not determining
chance, for that is at our liberty, and may follow our consultation. A lot and
fortune, differ as the general, and special; the general is incident to all
our actions, and passing our reason, is ordered by God: the special is
incident to those things which are warranted us of God, when we take a casual
thing and apply it by Gods providence to determine some event. The first is
natural, and ordered by that providence, which guides nature to his end, and
sometimes in wisdom lets it miss his end, which is chance, falling beside
the scope of the second mouer, though it hit with the first. The other is
divine, as being a testimony given by God, in the resolution of lome doubt. And
here it may well be demanded, whether the Lot being a divine testimony, would
like a divine Oracle, ever conclude the same truth? I answer, the Lot is ever
infallible in the conclusion, because the reason is Gods, and ought not to be
iterated, for that makes God a lier; calling into question, whether the Lot
conclude by the Providence of God or no. Yet I say, in sinful iterations,
where the Lot is ordinary, and not extraordinary, that in the next fall of the
Lot, fortune may change, and differ from the first, and yet the conclusion in
both be Gods, and that as his divine testimony. But you will say then Gods
Oracle is uncertain, and he may contradict himself. I answer. No. For they
are both truths, so determined by the Providence of God, and the latter may
be a punishment of man's infidelity, for distrusting God in the former. A lot
is a cause by fortune, and therefore must be referred to some cause by
counsel; not to men, for then might they make by the Lot what conclusions they
pleased; therefore to God, who by his own counsel makes such a conclusion in
so casual an accident. Furthermore, it follows not because the matter of Lots
is indifferent, that therefore it may indifferently be used in recreation; for,
it is the form and the matter that gives the especial essence. Things that
are simply good, or simply evil, are not to be determined by Lots, for so may
we embrace good for evil, and evil for good. It must be of a middle nature to
both. Hence it is unlawful to choose two Magistrates by Lot, if both be not
equally capable of the place; for so shall the Commonwealth be wronged by
insufficiency. Fifthly, this reproues them that exclude active providence from
the works of darkness; I know no providence which acts not, the Sun can
work in a stinking puddle, or filthy dunghill, and yet still be pure. True it
is, God permits things, when he does not withstand their actions: but to say he
permits, not having any hand in the work, is to deny his providence, etc. And
here is excellent comfort to all Gods children, that their afflictions are not
let loose at randum; but come from an Almighty power, guided by a most wise
providence, and tempered with a fatherly love. This cannot but blunt the edge
of all evils, to consider that a divine hand is in them all. Savage creatures
will be smitten by their keepers, when they are ready to tear strangers in
pieces: and shall I struggle with him that made and moderates the world, when
he strikes me? Either must I blame the first mouer, or discharge the means,
though the men may be justly blamed. I know the agent, whatsoever may be the
fault of the instrument. The dying thief pardons the executioner, and
exclaimes on his unjust judge, or malicious accusers. But I will neither be a
fool, nor a rebel, either ignorant whence my crosses come, or impatient,
knowing them to be from my God. He has stinted all my miseries, and weighed
out every dram of my sorrows, and the very powers of hell shall not be able to
cast in one scruple more then he has allotted for me.

Q. How is Providence confidered in regard of the Agent?

A. It is ordinary, or extraordinary. God provides for his creatures, either by
means, or by miracles. We plow, we sow, reap, thresh, grind, bake, etc. God
can skip over all these means, and multiply a few loaves to feed many
thousands. Math. 14.17. and make Corn grow without tillage. Isa. 37.30. God
has leave to leap the means, and whereas one bushel of Corn by sowing may
multiply ten, ten, twenty; twenty, an hundred, and an hundred, a thousand,
God can send all this at once, and multiply one loaf to as great a quantity
of bread, as may be made of a thousand bushels. Sheep, Wool, Wool-men,
Spinners, Weavers, etc. for the making of cloth, and cloth for garments. God
can do all this at a leap, and give cloth and shoes, and make them last
forty years without all change. Deuteronomy. 29.5. And give them bread that did
never come from the earth. ver. 6. He can make Sun and Moon stand still,
clear the eyes with clay, save and help with many, few, or none. Josh.
10.12.13. Ioh. 9.6. 1. Sam. 14.6. 2. Chron. 14.11. Hence we learn that our
extremities, are Gods best opportunities.

Q. What is Gods ordinary Providence?

A. Whereby he provideth by ordinary means. Psalm. 147.8.9. He covers the
heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to
grow upon the mountains: which gives to beasts their food, and to the young
Ravens that cry. Psalm. 104. verse. 10. to the end. Math. 6.26. Genesis 45.7. Act.
14.17. Lev. 26.26. Math. 4.4. And here comes to be detected the Devils
sophistry, cast thy self headlong upon God, and use no means. And the
Divinity of the vulgar sort, is to be learned in the beginning, and end of
their salvation, negligent of the middle. Gods decree, and their final estate,
must hang together without means; men would be saved by sitting still, and
think it is enough, that they are either elected, or rejected. What is this
but to eat the Corn out of the ear, nay, to famish, because we will not
abide the labor to grind, or to knead it; Sure I am, God is come to us in a
most wonderful manner; his Son is become as low as our selves, and though
now returned whence he came, yet his word and spirit are ever present, and
there is nothing wanting, but a will to learn. Yet this shall be my
conclusion, that if means were wanting, I might look for miracles. And faith
can rest upon God, as all sufficient in both.

Q. What is Gods extraordinary Providence?

A. Whereby he provideth extraordinarily, and by miracles: and that either
against nature, or beside nature, or above nature. As to cause the light
descend without Stars. Genesis 1.4. To devide the red Sea. Exodus 14.21. To save
the three men in the hot fiery furnace. Dan. 3. To devide Jordan. Josh. 3.15.
To inspire the Apostles. Act. 2.11. Yea, the very making of lice, was Gods
extraordinary finger. Exodus 8.19. What else should have guided that untamed and
untaught teame, 1. Sam. 6.12. in as right a path toward Israel, as their
teachers could have gone, save an hand above nature? What else should overruled
brute creatures, to prefer a forced carriage unto a natural burden at home,
save a divine conduct? Little can we, by the beginning of any action, guess a
Gods intention in the conclusion: yet by this may we be premonished to depend
upon him in all our affairs, and that with hope of good successes. Set faith a
work in any difficulty to make the motion, and we shall be sure to speed,
either the one way or the other.

Q. What is a Miracle?

A. It is a work above nature, and all ordinary means; as the raising of
Lazarus. Ioh. 11.43.44. It is for the most part a visible sign, to manifest
the power of God. Mat. 11.4.5. and 15.31. Ioh. 20.30. And this is proper to
God. Ioh. 9.16. If this man were not of God, he could not do such Miracles.

Q. Wherein is the Providence of God seen?

A. In the conservation, and gubernation of all things. God made nothing
presently to destroy it, but reserues every thing for further use of his glory
and service. Mat. 10.25. Two sparrows, scarce worth a farthing, are preserved,
and governed according to Gods will; yea, the very hayres of our heads are
ordered by his providence. This mind, or forminding of the creatures, is, that
their beings be preserved, and their actions governed. We stand not upon our
own feet, for when God permits us to go alone, like children, we get many
knocks, and fall fowlly, because we trust too much to the broken reed of our
own freewill.

Q. What is the conservation of the Creatures?

A. Whereby he keeps and continues the creatures in their being and kinds.
Job 12.14. Psalm. 36.8.9. and 44.3. Psalm. 104. and 105. and 106. and 147.10.11.
If God destroy, none can deliver, and if he preserve, none can kill. It differs
from government thus; that is, to guide to the end, this to keep it for that
end. Romans 9.17. with Exodus 9.16. God kept Pharaoh for his end.

Q. Wherein stands it?

A. In the preservation of their essence, and forces, or faculties: and that
both universal and singular. Psalm. 65.2. Psalm. 104.27.28.29. and 136.25. and
147.9. Math. 6.26.30. It is God that keeps that causes and qualities in good
temper, or changes them from a bad condition to a good, and from a good to a
better; or preserues them by succession, one generation succeeding another; or
keeps them in state, as all the Stars which this day stand firm, as upon
the day of their Creation. Psalm. 65.6. Isa. 49.5. Ier. 1.5. Eccl. 1.4.5.6.7.
Preservation is as the perpetuation of Gods creation, and as the continuation
of it by succession, or a permanent station. Job 10.8.9.10.11. and 31.15. The
change and alteration of the creatures condition, is from God, whether it be
good, or evil. Psalm. 76. verse. 5.6.7.9.12. and 104.29.30. and 107.34.35. and
113.7.8.9. Also their permanent standing in their ancient estate, as Stars,
Mountains, Waters, and Earth, Psalm. 65.6.7. Eccl. 1.4. And all this extends it
self, even to the least of Gods creatures, sparrowes, hayres, tears, and
every sickness. Math. 6.30. and 10.29.30. Psalm. 56.8. and 68.20. and 113.6.
and 146.8. Exodus 23.25. Isa. 19.22. Now God preserues vniversalls by generation
and propagation, singulars by food and nourishment, etc. As also by keeping
them from violence.

What is government?

A. Whereby he governs all things to their end. Psalm. 104.19. Pro. 16.4. Romans
11.36. God made all things for an end, he preserues them to it, and by
government guides them in the way. All things are composed, betwixt a beginning
and an ending, and God is both. Rev. 1.8. As they are of him, so likewise
without him would they return again to nothing, he therefore preserues them,
and because they are for him, he guides and governes them all to the ends he
has appointed them. And yet this is done by several rules he gives them all.
A man makes a Pen, and then writes with it, it may well be said, that the Pen
writes, and the maker writes: so, God made all, and framed them by his
wisdom, and the very Art of God still remaining in his creatures, teaches
them all obedience to the hand that goes with them.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. Two common, and special: the one is as the Common Law in a kingdom, the
other, as the municipall, or privileged laws of Corporations. The one is the
law of Nature, whereby all creatures are governed, the other, of Divinity,
whereby men and Angels are ordered to an eternal estate. Psalm. 8.1.3.4.5.6.
etc. Excellent in all, but passing excellency in men and Angels. Psalm.
19.1.2.3. etc. The line and language of the heavens, teaches Gods government,
but verse. 7. the law of life exceeds all other perfection. Psalm. 139.14.
Marveilous are Gods works, but above all, fearful and wonderful is man,
both in his making and moderating.

Q. What is the common government?

A. Whereby he governs all things by a common course, or universal law.
Psalm. 10.1.19. The Sun knows his going down. And here come in those
excellent instincts of nature, wherein creatures show the reason of their
government, to be more in God then themselves. The Ant, or Pismire prepares her
meat in the Summer. Prove. 30.25. And yet she knows nothing but the present:
furthermore, she bites the little grains she gathers at both ends, least it
should grow in her storehouse. What reason in the world of this, and many more
in the brute creatures can be given, but that the great lawgiver is the agent
of these things? etc.

Q. What it Gods special government?

A. Whereby he governs some special creatures unto an eternal estate, as
Angels and men. Prove. 16.4. Almighty God has two sorts of virtues, to
manifest in his creation and providence. First, intellectual; Secondly,
moral. No creatures but men and Angels are capable of the latter. The manifold
works of God show his excellent wisdom, or the virtues of understanding.
Psalm. 104.24. Only men and Angels can show forth his Justice and Mercy, the
virtues of his will. For this end he created them, and by a special law
governes them thereunto, and that which is done by law will justify it self
against all exceptions. Prove. 15.3.

Q. How manifold was that eternal estate?

A. Twofold; either of happiness, or misery. Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom
he will, and whom he will he hardneth. Be assured, the Lord will be as
unblameable in the one, as in the other.

Q. Whence does this felicity, or infelicitie acrew to the reasonable
creatures?

A. By the good pleasure, or displeasure of Almighty God. It was possible for
men and Angels to please God, and be happy; and also possible to displease him,
and be miserable. And both these were to be acted by the law; for, it is the
law that makes us blessed, or cursed; and man might so handle the matter, that
he might act whether part he pleased, and yet his destruction come from
himself, though in life the law should have been a principal agent. A chest
is made for linen, or other clothes, and it is combustible: but the burning of
it comes not from the Carpenters Art, etc. So man is mutable, and subject to
fall; yet his falling no ways arises from his Creator. Genesis 2.17. and 3.7.

Q. What is here to be considered?

A. Man's fearful apostasy, and happy Anastasie: his fall, and return to
God. Providence first governes man in his aversion from God, and this is of
all; secondly, in his conversion again, and this is of some. Gal. 3.22. The
Scripture concludes all under sin, that the promise of Christ might be to
believers. Romans 11.32. Luke 1.78.79.

CHAPTER XVII. Of Man's Apostasy.
Question.

What is the Apostasy?

Answer.

That fall of the Creature from the government of God, or his obedience
thereunto, in so much that as now he stands, he cannot please God, but
displease him continually. Genesis 3.6. and 6.5. Isa. 59.2. Gal. 3.10. Mark where
man fell, not in his conservation, for his being and action are continued: but
government, his action swarving from the line of Gods law, and it was nothing,
but (as it were) the turning of the wheel the contrary way, so that now the
whole man is exorbitant in his courses, and altogether opposite to his
government: like Jobs wild Ass in the desert, or as Amos his Horse that will
run upon the rocks. Amos 6.12.

Q. Of whom was this Apostasy?

A. Of some Angels, and of all men in the first man. Iud: ver. 6. Genesis 3.6.
Romans 3.10. Ioh. 8.44. angels and men were governed in their first fall, God
sending the one to try the other. Man was to try the Angels, whether they would
at Gods command minister for his good; and they again man, whether he would
listen more to Gods law, or their rebellion.

Q. What are the things to be observed in this Apostasy?

A. The transgression and the propagation of it. Romans 5.12. By one man sin
entered into the world. Here is the head or spring, one man, the stream or
flood, sin, the channel, entered, the sea or Ocean into which it fell, the
world. Romans 5.18.19.

Q. What is the transgression?

A. The eating of the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge, of good and
evil. Genesis 2.17. which was a great offense, both in regard of God, his law,
and Sacrament. He was bound to love God above all; who gave him the use of all
trees, only he forbids him this, even as he loved him not to eat thereof.
Again, the rule of good and evil was the whole law of man's life. And
therefore here was not a partial, but an universal breach of all the branches
of obedience. And lastly, he in contempt of God, and his goodness, plucked off
the seal of the covenant, for God placed that tree with the other in the very
midst of the Garden, as a visible sign and Sacrament of his obedience. Man was
changeably good, and therefore as he was to have a Sacrament, to seal his
constant estate in goodness, if he persisted and continued in the love of God,
which was the tree of life: so, on the contrary, if he should leave off to
serve God, then should he have sealed unto him the assurance of his change from
good to evil; and this was by the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Thus it pleased God to deal with man, either in regard of obedience, or
disobedience. Blessed be God, we have a better tree of life, to seal our
perfect obedience in another: and two Sacraments to put us out of all danger of
death: God sealing our salvation for his own names sake.

Q. What things are to be observed therein?

A. Two; The causes thereof, and the effects. Genesis 2.17. Ezekiel. 18.2. Romans 6.23.
Sin and death are as in separable in the cause, as fire and burning; death is
a necessary consequent of such a cause.

Q. How many sorts of causes be there?

A. Two, the one, blameable and guilty, the other, blameless and guiltless.
The law and sin, as well s the law and obedience work together, though in a
distinct manner; for, of obedience the law is the principal cause, but of
sin an accidental, as working beside his own scope and maine drift, which
is to savor nothing but life, and also as a contrary to sin; hence a sinner
stands in violent opposition to the law, and they strive the more, because the
one is ready to hinder the others act; as banks, or floodgates staying the
stream, make it either burst them down, or else swell over them: and do we
not see how all such as are bent upon any villainy, are more exasperated by
disswasion, then if they were let alone? Pharaoh is better to Israel, whiles
they willingly obey, then when Moses and Aaron come to preach their
deliverance; then as a beast he turns mad with baiting. And so all the
Martyrs should have had the Heathen Emperors better tutors then tyrants, if
they had not provoked them by opposition of their wickedness. Nay, do we not
see how the best minds, when they are troubled, yield inconsiderate motions;
as water that is violently stirred, sends up bubbles? Romans 7.11.11.13.

Q. How many be the causes blameable?

A. Two; The principal, and ministerial: the Devil a chief agent in man's
apostasy, abused the Serpent, and the woman, as his instruments, to seduce
man. Genesis 3.2. Cor. 11.3. Satan's policy was to take the subtle Serpent, and
simple Woman, to defeat man of his happiness, as now he does the Jesuits, and
females, to draw men to Antichrist.

Q. What are the principal causes?

A. The Devil, and Man: though Eve was first in the motion, yet was Adam
principal in the action; for he is first called to the bar, to answer the
transgression. Genesis 3.9. 1. Tim. 2.13.14. First, he was the head of his wife,
and therefore it was his sin, that he gave her no better instruction.
Secondly, the Covenant of life was made principally with him, and therefore it
is said, that when he had eaten, both their eyes were open. Genesis 3.7. She did
eat before her husband, and sinned personally: but when he did eat with her,
then they both saw, that they, and all their posterity were accursed. Thirdly,
It is probable, that Adam stood by all the time of the disputation, and
therefore his sin was the greater, that he rebuked not the Serpent, and
rescued his wife from all such suggestions: or if he was absent, (whereof the
Text makes no mention) then should he show himself a weaker vessel then his
wife, who had all the bad Angels (in one crafty beast) to set upon her:
whereas he had only one weak woman in his purest integrity to overthrow him.
Neither could his affection then to his wife be so preposterous, as are now of
corrupt naturalists, who are blinded in love. His love to his wife was created
pure, and therefore except his judgment had been first perverted, as it was
in his wife, he could not so easily have consented, of mere affection to his
wife. I cannot believe, but that the Devils in the Serpent, did as well tempt
Adam as Eve, though first they began with her, as a further means of enticing
him. The text says not, that Eve went to seek her husband; but that she
took, and gave to her husband with her, etc. Genesis 3.6.

Q. How were the Devils the cause of it?

A. They were by creation good, and appointed of God to be man's keepers, yet of
their own accord, and free will they disdained and contemned their standing
with God. Iud. ver. 6. and became proud, rebellious, and abominable liars, and
blasphemers of God, and of malice and hatred of man, became seducers and
murderers of him. Ioh. 4.44. It may well be disputed, whether the Angels were
Apostataes in heaven, or Paradise. If I may show my judgment, and leave it as
a probable opinion, it is this. The third heaven is a place of purity, and
absolute felicity, and therefore cannot for a moment, or instant of time, be
the subject of any pollution, or misery. If sin had ever been in heaven, the
place should have been polluted by it. The very earth was stained with the
sin of his proper inhabitant: and so should heaven, if the proper and
peculiar inhabitants had there sinned: but such was the wise providence of
Almighty God, that at once he would give a just occasion of trial, of the
Angels in their obedience, and save heaven from all polution, which he then,
and now, and ever preserues most pure for his elect, both Angels and men. The
occasion was given in their ministration to man, not the celebration of Gods
glory in heaven, that they might see more fitting their place then the other:
but shall we the most excellent of Gods creatures, stoop so low as to become
man's servants, and subject our selves to ourinferiours, etc? Let us think of a
course to subvert his estate, and bring him out of grace and favor with his
creator; so shall we according to our excellency, Lord it over him. So that
here might very well be a conjoined Apostasy in the ruin of them both. O
blessed God, how far is thy decree from all stain of sin, and yet how full
of Mercy and Justice? Thou would not try all thy Angels, some thou keptst at
home, whiles others fell in ministering abroad. And all this, that thy son
might be exalted, neither Angel or man ever prevailing without him. Rev.
12.6.7. They that fight under this head; are all saved; if they war under
their own power they cannot but perish. The good angels were but lookers on
till a Messiah was promised, and then are they all ministering spirits for the
good of their fellow heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.14. Who can say black is the
eye of Gods providence, intending to glorify his Justice in the condemnation
of some Angels, and some men, when he might have executed all? Let us all sing
with the sweet Singer of Israel. Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and
upright are thy judgment.

Q. How was man a cause thereof?

A. By the abuse of Gods law, and his own free will, being seduced by Satan,
and induced into sin by the strength of his temptation, subtlety of his
suggestion, and is own free reception of both, voluntarily harkning thereunto,
contrary to Gods commandment, when being assisted thereby, he might easily
have resisted the same. Genesis 3.6. Man was made a most free beginner of his own
action, neither did God withdraw, or withold any necessary grace from him; he
gave him sufficient not to sin, neither was he bound to give him so much as
he might prevent, and prevail over every violent temptation god might have
kept Satan from him, or in the combat have given him the conquest: but it was
Gods meaning to try him with the grace of his Creation: that now he may see the
greater love of his Creator, in putting him under a second Adam, who prevailed
against Satan, and in whom all the elect shall be sure of victory. Hence
learn, that since the fall, in the hardening of Reprobates, as in Pharaoh, God
neither withdrawes grace, for he had none; nor withholds it, for he is not
bound to give it: Christ is only a head and fountain of saving grace, for his
elect Angels and men.

Q. What were the isntrumental causes?

A. The Serpent, and the Woman. Genesis 3.1. The Devil to further his temptation,
used visible instruments, and plotted by the subtlety of the one, and
simplicity of the other, the woeful down fall of Adam, and all his
posterity. All the Legions of the reprobate Devils entered into one beast, to
confer with the woman, and by the Poitho and Suada of that viperous tongue,
crept into the bosom of Eve, as it were, by all the topicke places in Logic,
figures of Rethoricke, and other engines of guile and deceit, till they had
brought her into a fools Paradise, with the loss of the earthly, and hazard
of the heavenly.

Q. What is the unblameable cause?

A. The commandment of God, for had there been no law there had been no
transgression. Romans 7.7. Gal. 3.22. And here comes in the act of Gods
providence in the apostasy of Angels and men. A law is given, by which God
will have them both ruled, but of this they make no account; for it is the very
first thing they begin to contest withal, and at length by plain denial
opposeit. The law was given to move man to his duty, even as that Spirit in
Ezekiel moved the wheels. Ezekiel. 1.21. The law was spiritual. Romans 7.14. And
placed in the very heart of man, and was of a divine nature, to have drawn man
to good; but the spirit of Satan enters to graple with the law, and turn the
wheel of the mind in a clean contrary course to Gods will: the law resists,
but man forsakes his mouer, and is turned of Satan the bie way; and so the good
law of God becomes the savor of death unto death. 2. Cor. 2.16. And that by an
opposite motion to his own nature. The tree was a seal, both of good and
e^^^, and the fruit tasted could leave a tang of death behind it. The law was
as able to guide to death, as life; to life by his free motion, to death by his
opposition. He that runs against a wall, or a tree, is thrown back again
by violence, and bruised in pieces by his ownefall and folly: or by this
comparison may you see the work of the law, by casting Angels and men into
hell. An earthen pitcher is dashed by a foolish and furious hand against an
hard stone wall: that the wall breaks it, is not the fault of the wall, but
rather a commendation; all the evil is in the hasty hand that rashly hurles
it against so apparent a death and danger: so wilful and witless man by the
suggestion of Satan in the serpent and woman, takes himself, and of his own
free accord flings, or rather flies in the very face of the law, and by it is
miserably stricken in pieces Do we not now see how the law makes him shiver
and shake, even as a vanquished enemy under the hands of his Conqueror, and
how he seeks to ease himself of such a governor? He might as well have
knocked his head against the stone-walles, as his wits to frustrate the power
of the law within him. A silly shift to stop a little torrent with sodds and
turfs, will it not break over with roaring? A foolish fancy to stanch
bleeding, by stopping our nosthrils, will it not break out at the mouth, or
run down the throat into the stomach? A man may with many piles of green
wood smoother and suffocate the fire for a season, but when the moisture is
mastered, the fury of the burning will be more fearful, and the flames and
flashes, more dreadful to behold. Alas, alas, how does every sinner pile up
the fagots of his future fire, and warm the worm in his own bosom, that
shall gnaw for ever? Conscience shall read him a lecture every day, because he
would not hear the lecture of the law for his eternal good. Romans 7.10.11.12.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That as the law was the cause of sin by accident, so was God, and no
otherwise. Here was no omnipotency to constrain man to fulfill the will of
his creator; here was a law to restrain him from sin, and distress him in
committing it, yea, and thrust him headlong into all outrage, being once
opposed by man. Let men rot in their sins, and they will die quietly: but
stir them by the lively word, and sin will reviue. Romans 7.9. and either
kill worse by impenitencie, or be more happily killed by repentance. Mud in a
glass, when it is shaken, runs all over that which before seemed pure and
crystal. The poison of the snake, whiles he is benumbed with cold bears no
danger, but warm him, and he will hiss and sting. The Sea in calm weather is
as still and quiet as any river; but let the winds once blow and bluster, and
you shall see nothing but raging, storming, and foaming out mire and dirt. Hos.
2.1. When I would have healed Israel; namely by admonitions and rebukes of the
word, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, etc. The law had an intent
to save man; but man would not hearken thereunto, so that his perdition was of
himself.

Q. What secondly may be learned?

A. That God was no bare permitting, or forsaking cause, but a working cause,
even in the fall of man. Genesis 3.1. It is Satan's first onset, has God said ye
shall not eat, etc. Like an earewig did he wrigle in by sophisticating the
holy law of God; for he knew well enough he could not get in except he did
drive that out, which was not done, but by a mighty wrestling, and wreathing
on both sides. And Gods work was first to hold out Satan, then in contempt to
thrust man upon his adversary, when he left him to cleave unto a liar. 1. Sam.
2.30. They that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. God in an holy
indignation might well reject them that had so shamefully rejected him; and (as
it were) even push man upon the pikes of his own punishment. It was no joy to
God, to see his beloved creature, so vilely to cast away himself; and yet God
intended, and wrought it without all blame, not as an author, or fautour of
man's finne, but as a judge, casting him in his own act, and taking revenge
upon him for his sin.

Q. What will follow in the third place?

A. How God wrought in man's fall, yea, and from all eternity, for Gods act
began before man's. And this is safely to be done by our anatomy, or resolution
of Gods composition in this work. First, God did it by his law, and special
government of man. Secondly, as he did it, so had he power to do it, and such
a power, as neither Devils nor men are able to resist. Man might resist the
law. Math. 23.37. but not the power, by which the law works; for man, not the
law, shall suffer for the irruption, and breach of it. The law will be sure,
one way, or another, to make his part good, with the most masterlesse monsters.
Thirdly, as God did it, and could do it, so he decreed it to be done, and
omnipotency and efficiencie, are but two executours, no composors of Gods
decree, and therefore it shall stand infallible in the greatest contingencie.
It was possible for man to fall, or not to fall, and his act was contingent, so
true that it might have been false, yet the decree was as certain before as
after the event, seeing all things are present to God, when they are absent to
us. Fourthly, as he decreed it, so it was done by counsel. Ephe. 1.11. both in
the scope, and plot. God had an end in man's fall, neitheir was it otherwise
executed then himself had plotted it. The Devils, and our first parents,
together with the Serpent, time, and place, could never have so met together,
except God had set it down, so will I have it acted, even to every
circumstance. Fifthly, It seemed good to his wisdom so to have it done, and no
otherwise. Pharaoh deals wisely by sinning. Exodus 1.10. but God is wise in
decreeing how Pharaoh shall sin. Sixthly, that which is done by the wisdom
of God, is good and just. Hence sin, opposite to all good, and the enemy of
justice, was both good and just, not in it self, but as God decreed it to be a
means of his glory, which it is not by his own nature, for God is
clishonoured by it: but by accident, as God can bring light out of darkness,
good out of evil, and life out of death. Therefore as God did it, it was no
sin, every cause is to be examined by his manner of working. Man sins by
counsel, and God by counsel orders it so to be done, and in doing works as
much as he willed. Lastly, as it was good and just, so God willed it, but as
simply evil, he willed it not, but did hate the being of it. Psalm. 5.4. Will
is the highest step we must stand upon, and thus may we go downward, by the
same stairs we came up. God did will nothing but that which was good and just,
and so it seemed good to his wisdom, by counsel to decree it, and by his
power to effect it.

CHAPTER XVIII. The effects of the first Sin.
Question.

What are the effects of Adams transgression?

Answer.

Blame, and then guilt and punishment. Man was blameworthy, for eating against
the express commandment of his God, then was he made guilty of all the debt
and danger that the law contained, and by punishment to suffer, or satisfy
whatsoever the law could challenge at our hands. Romans 5.12. One man sins,
there is the blame, by it entrance is given to death, there is our guilt, that
we have so entangled our selves in the snares of sin and death, and it runs
over all, there is the punishment.

Q. What is blame?

A. Gods just censure of finne. Genesis 1.14. Because thou have done this, thou
and all thine are accursed. The blame is laid upon our selves, and it was a
piece of Adams wretchedness to cast it upon his good God. Genesis 3.12. We have
brought upon our selves the scorn and scourge of all our sins.

Q. What is the guilt?

A. Whereby they are tied to under go the punishment. Genesis 2.17. In the day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. Blame respects vice, as praise
virtue; and guilt justice, as liberty mercy. By the first, sin is evil,
and naught, by the second, a debt. We properly owe nothing to God but love and
duty: yet by forfaiture for non payment of the principal, we run into
further arrerages with God; and so are bound to a double discharge: first, of
the principal, secondly, of the forfaiture. It is a strange opinion to think,
if we satisfy for the forfaiture, we are freed from the principal. The law
is still in force, and except Christ pay both for us, we shall never come by a
full discharge. He suffered to satisfy the forfaiture, and obeyed to pay for
the principal. Our debts are now grown infinite, and only he that is
infinite can discharge them. We might of our selves have paid the principal:
but now like Bank-rupts, we have for ever dis enabled our selves, and are not
able to pay a penie in the pound, for our release. God has a bill, a bond, or
a book, wherein all our debts stand to be seen, and must remain uncancelled,
and vncrost, till all be paid. O good God, draw the red lines of thy
Christs-Crosse, yea, and the white lines too of his most holy life, over the
black lines, yea, the best lines of thine own debt book. Thou see better
then our own consciences, every peccant act of ours, in thought, word, or
deed, oh let all our bills, and Items in thy book be cleared, crossed, and
cancelled, by the precious blood of thine own son, and our Savior and
surety. He alone is able to expunge, cover, nullify, abolish, and wholly to
take away the guilt of our defilement, and the gall of our punishment. In him
we know that thou our Creator wilt pardon all our sins, and debts, bearing
action against us, or obliging us to any penalty. Yet not every hypocrite, or
profligate professor that lives as he list, must look for this love. Faith is
no Pandar to sin, it will make us both see the ulcer, and the washing of it.
Neither will it leave upon us the slander of Solifidians, but will tell the
cleansed, that he is to go away and sin no more. It will never bid him
drink, and take Tobacco; sin, and believe; get a pardon of the old, and a
license for the new. It will teach him to turn over a new leaf, and learn a
better lesson. First, to see his own misery; secondly, the mercy of God;
thirdly, how both will restrain him from all licentious liberty.

Q. What then is the punishment?

A. The just anger of God upon all that sin. Romans 2.5.8.9. Heb. 10.31. with
Chap. 11.29. Isa. 33.14.

Q. What Attributes do here put forth themselves?

A. His holiness, and that both in his Justice and Mercy. Romans 2.4.5. It
shall well appear, that God will not wink at sin, or give unto it the least
allowance. 1. King. 20.42. Ahabs life is to go for Benadabs; this is but a
shadow of Gods holiness. If men must wash away blood with blood; then
assuredly, God will wash his hands in innocence, and by punishing of sin,
free himself from the slain of it.

Q. What is Gods holiness?

A. Whereby being pure from sin in himself, he cannot away with it in his
creatures. Psalm. 5.4. Isa. 6.3.

Q. What is his Justice?

A. Whereby being most just in himself, he cannot but execute justice, as in
well doing to them that do well: so in afflicting punishment on them that do
evil. As praise and price to the one, so all woe and want to the other. Romans
2.6.7.8.9.10. Exodus 20.5.6. The justice of God, as it seems to burn more
remissely against sin is called anger, as more sharply, wrath; furthermore,
as it sentenceth, judgment, and as it executes the same, revenge. This
holiness and justice were in God from all eternity, yet till now no matter of
manifesting them. They inquire after iniquity, and take hold of sin, and
burn against it: yet with wonderful moderation; first, God seems but to be
angry, and (as it were) chids with the sinner: then he grows into just rage
and strikes the sinner. Rev. 3.19. After rebuke, follows correction, and whom
words will not reclaim, wounds must weary, and if gentler chastisements will
not work then by severitie and extremity, he breaks in pieces the sinner. He
can chastise them with Scorpions, that will not be moved with whips. 1. Kin.
12.11.

Q. What is his mercy?

A. Whereby he uses compassion also toward his creatures offending. Genesis 6.3.
and 8.21. Psalm. 78.38.39. Mercy is more common then grace, for he pitties all,
though he but receive some again into favor. He feeds the filthy as well as
the faithful with his hid treasures; and makes his sun to shine, and his
rain to fall upon the just and unjust. He vouchsafes them (ill deserving)
common mercies, that they might seek to him for more special graces. Thus
mercy is offered before the sentence be executed, and then justice, which was
all this time burning, flames out upon sinners that would not come at his call.

Q. How manifold is this mercy?

A. His clemency and bounty: God is both gentle and kind to all sinners, mild
in mercy, and bountiful in his benefits. Romans 2.9.2 Chron. 36.15. Isa.
55.7.8.9.

Q. What is his gentleness, or clemency?

A. Whereby in justice he remembers mercy, kindly inviting sinners to
repentance. Ezekiel. 18.23. and 33.11. Psalm. 103.8.9. The Lord will hear the cry
of the poor, because he is gracious, or kind. Exodus 22.27.

Q. Wherein does it appear?

A. In his patience, and long sufferance. He bears the reproaches of sinners,
and a while stays and waits for their repentance. Erech appajim in Hebrew is
one that has a long nose; and it is frequently given to God, for his patience
and longanimitie. The nose is the seat of anger, and a long one is not easily
contracted. God is slow in frowning upon sinners, and he is hardly provoked.
Number. 14.18. Psalm. 86.13. and 103.8. and 145.8. ^oel 2.13. Nah. 1.3. Ion. 4.2.
Romans 2.4. and 3.25. and 9.22. 1 Pet. 3.20. 2 Pet. 3.15. These places say not
that God is without anger, or wrath, but that he is not easily, quickly, or
rashly moved thereunto.

Q. What is his patience?

A. Whereby he bears the reproaches of sinners, and deferres their punishments:
he does not presently step forth, as a mighty enemy to be revenged of such as
provoke him. Psalm. 50.21. God is silent when he is patient. Act. 17.30. and
dissembles the time, when he forgets not the sin. Romans 3.25. A forbearance,
till the appearance of justice. Romans 9.22. Lenity to prevent all extremity of
just anger.

Q. What is his long sufferance?

A. Whereby in bearing he expects a long time for repentance. Isa. 55.7. and
65.2. Law. 3.22. Eccl. 8.11. Joel 2.12.13. 1 Pet. 3.9.15. God does wait, and
put out the hand for to receive sinners: yet let us beware, for he that does
always give pardon to repenters, will not ever give repentance to the sinner,
at what time soever a sinner repents, he shall find mercy; but if once the long
sufferance of God be over, we cry too late. Ere vengeance begin, repentance is
seasonable; but if judgment be once gone out, there is no hope of pardon.
While the Gospel sollicites us, the doors of the Arc are open; if we
neglect the time of grace, in vain shall we seek it with tears; God holds it
no mercy to pity the obstinate. He gave an hundredth and twenty years
respite of repenting before the deluge, and if the old world had not been
wilful, it should never have been so wasted with waves and waters. How loath
is he to strike, that threats so long? Surely, he that gives so long warnings,
desires to be prevented. Swine foreseeing a storm, run home crying for
shelter. Lions, Tygres, and Bears, by an instinct from God, came to seek the
Arc: only men refuse to be saved; thus reason once debauched, is worse then
brutishness, 1 Pet. 3.20.

Q. What is Gods bountifulness?

A. Whereby he being rich in mercy powers forth his good gifts upon his
sinful creatures, notwithstanding they offend him. Math. 5.45. Adam after he
was fallen, had diverse hours to bethink himself of his misery, for God came
late unto him. Genesis 3.8. God gave him life, and time to repent, yet he sought
not for grace, till God came to call upon him. It may probably be coniectured,
that Eve was created in the afternoon of the sixth day, all the fore-noone
being employed, in the creation of the beasts, and man himself, the placing of
him in Paradise, the bringing of the creatures unto him as their Lord, the
appellation of them, and the not finding of a companion for Adam amongst them
all. Adam therefore having been thus busied, as was Abraham. Genesis 15.10.11.12.
even at the height of the Sun, as he at the fall, fell into a dead and deep
sleep, and after his awaking had the woman brought unto him, and she was
given unto him for his wife. And it was the cool of the day when God came
again to them both, which the Hebrews interpret of the even-tide, and the
Greek version follows it, and S. Ambrose gives the reason, for that man came
late to his repentance, God as before, so now trying him, whether he would come
to a sight of his sin, which he should before have prevented. It is also
probable, that when God had ended his works, and left man some preparation for
the Sabbath, he sent his Angels to be their companions, and to try them both
together in the sanctification of his name, for all his works and benefits now
bestowed upon them. They being met together, are so far from hollowing the
name of God, that presently they fall to the profanation of it, and before the
day of confirmation was come, had lost all; yea, and were so destitute of all
understanding, as they had not so much grace left them, as to call to God for
mercy. O the bounty of our Creator, that would come himself, after he had
waited a time, and call them all to an account, and enter with man into a
further covenant of grace and mercy, etc.

Q. Upon whom was the punishment inflicted?

A. Upon the Devils the authors, with their instruments, and Adam. Genesis
3.14.15.16.17. The examination begins where the sin ended, and the punishment
is first inflicted where it began. God did analyze and anatomise the sin
backward ways, anst so finds out the principal agent, and begins with him.
God could first have begun with Satan: but he shows us the way of the
invention of every crime, and craft, yea, and of every work done: and that is
to ascend upward from the lowest and last agent, or his act. By man he found
out the woman, and by the woman, the Serpent; and there he begins to curse, and
punish. And under the Serpent are the Devils punished. The Serpent was cursed
above all Cattle, and the Devil above all creatures. God put enmity between
the Serpent, and the Woman, and it is the greatest; for, as a woman is more
afraid of a Serpent then a man, so is a Serpent more afraid of a woman then a
man: Physosophers say, from the breath, or sent of a woman, which is poisonous
to a Serpent: but Divines say, it arises from this ancient enmity, which is
greater, then with any other creature. So the Devils, which were so familiar
with a woman at the first, shall by a woman receive the greatest overthrow. And
we see the woman is more afraid of a Devil then a man; and the Devil is more
afraid of a devout and godly woman, then a man; who recompense their sin, with
loving most, and over-goe men in holy affections. And here I cannot but wonder,
that women being naught, are most familiar with the Devil, as we see by
Witches, yea, and often under the shape of a Serpent, or Worm: but this stays
me, that though the Antipathie be great, yet in sins they come nearest
together, as in obstinacy and wilful pertinacy of opinion.

Q. What is the punishment inflicted upon the Devils?

A. We are to learn it from their Instrument; Moses elegantly contriuing them
under one head. First, then we have the contusion, or crushing of their heads,
that is, the frustration of all their counsels and devices, they being able no
more to plot any thing against God, or his Church. Hitherto they prevailed in
ruinating mankind: but they shall from henceforth want brains to bring to
pass such another work, against any of Gods darlings. The beating out of
their brains, and bruising in pieces of all their policies, shall be by the
seed of a woman, that is, by Christ, and that by the heel, to wit, the
humiliation of him in our flesh, and upon the cross. In which he shall so
eagerly pursue the Devils, and strike so mightily at their heads, that in
breaking of them he shall bruise himself. He shall tread so hard upon the
enemy, as if his very heel should ache with it. Shuph, the original word, as
it were, by an onomatopaeia, or fained found, signifies the shuffling of feet
together, and it is given both to Christ, and the Devil, who should (as it
were) wrestle together, and that Christ should overthrow his enemy, and crush
him in pieces, especially his head, the seat of wit and will, which by a
Metonymie of the cause for the effect, signifies Satan's devices, etc. and his
heel, a metaphor from the lowest part in man, to signify, the debasement and
humiliation of Christ, wherein he should suffer, the Devil being a principal
agent of all his sorrows: but Satan should rue his intermedling, when he
should feel the knock given by Christ, yea, and grieve that he had ever so
much to do with a woman, whose enmity he should now find as bitter, as ever
he felt sweetness in her friendship. Eve thought she was the woman, when she
brought forth Cain, as if she had now possessed a man of Jehovah, to do all
this; but by the name of her next son Abel, she saw the vanity of her own
opinion; yet Adam after he had received the promise, rightly called her Eve,
not only because we should be the mother of all the living, but that in her
might remain a memorial, that a woman should come to be an instrument of
life, etc. Genesis 3.14.15. Furthermore, here is all our comfort, that Satan is
stinted to the heel of the true Christian seed, and therefore shall never
break their heads by Apostasy, though he may bruise their heels by manifold
slips and slidings. Ioh. 16.33. Romans 16.20. Other punishments, as consequents
of this, are to be gathered, though no more be expressed. Observe then, in the
second place, the obduration, and hardening of them in their sins, that they
cannot repent, and find mercy. And the reason is, because they were beginners
of this sin, neither compelled, nor seduced; for, first their understandings
were clear, they knew the truth, and that distinctly; secondly, their wills
were good by creation, and they had power to have obeyed GODS command: but
against all this goodness of God they oppose themselves, and devise which way
they may cross God, and so sin against the holy Ghost. The Pharisees knew
Christ to be of God, and were convinced in conscience of the truth he taught,
yet sought they by all means to disgrace him, and so sinned like the Devils.
Conscience in both, may sometimes check them; yet as an unruly dog, that
sees the cudgel, and would be gone, flies in the face of his master, if he
see no ways to escape; so they may tremble. Iam. 2.19. and yet triumph in
their wickedness; for they cannot repent, they rather laugh at their sin,
and dance in their wicked courses, then are any ways moved, to cry for mercy;
and so ipsofacto are deprived of all hope of happiness. Again, they are not
able to satisfy, neither can Christ do it for them, for they are not
multiplied by generation, and so Christ cannot take upon him their nature. As
for the good Angels, Christ has merited for them collaterally, that is, they
in him by their own free will, have chosen the good part, that shall never be
taken from them. Thirdly, they are banished from heaven, into the elements, and
reserved, or confined in them unto the day of judgment, and hell fire, 2 Pet.
2.4. Iud: ver. 5. We may see the fiery Devils in Job, at Gods permission
abusing that element, Job 1.16. Also an ayery spirit in raising the winds. Job
1.19. Earthy Devils, possessing men, Math. 8.28. Watery Devils, carrying
unclean Swine with them into the Sea. ver. 32. And as good Angels carry the
souls of holy men into heaven; so do Devils carry the souls of unclean and
ungodly wretches into hell, which must be into some of those places that they
possess; now they are called the Princes of the air, because by the fire and
air they do the greatest mischief, and there may they torment the souls of
men. Every sinful creature is stubble, and so is not able to stand in the
presence of God, which is a consuming fire: It is for Christ and Christians,
that Devils and wicked men feel not the full extent of Gods wrath. God will
have them to exercise the graces and virtues of his servants: and so by
accident they are preserved, and reserved to the general assize, and fire of
hell; Christ shall come in fire and that fire shall be the melting of the
elements, which shall be confounded as in one mass. The air is oily, and the
earth is full of combustible matter, as coals, and brimstone. Many pits are
full of slime; and as the Country where Sodom and Gomorrah stood, was very
bituminous, clammie clay, and glewish ground, with store of slime pits, and so
very fit for the exhaling of that matter, which was afterward rained down
upon them: so the place that God is now a preparing for the damned, may very
well be in the confusion of all the elements together, where fire shall
fearfully seize upon all things, and God even prepare all as matter, or fuel
for his rage. I hear not that the fire shall be quenched again in which
Christ shall come. And the fire of hell is unquenchable; and may even in this
become utter darkness, because the Stars shall fall, and melt away, and the
powers of heaven shall be shaken, and (as it were) driven to the earth, and
therefore the subject of light being destroyed, upon the earth, and within the
earth may be this horrible darkness, and woeful fire. Ier. 17.13. Some shall
have their names written in the earth, and be as the Parables of the dust as
others in heaven, opposite shall be the places of the elect and damned, and (as
it were) a gulf betwixt them. Luke 16.26. The reprobate shall then be more
narrowly confined, and more fearfully tormented. To conclude, learn further
by this punishment of the Devils, that their first sin was in tempting of
man: for we see that the punishment of them, is only inflicted for this their
rebellion, and their continuing in it: yea, mark further, how God has
punished the rebels in their envy, they envied man's estate by creation, and
scorned to serve him; they shall now see him advanced into their rooms, and
themselves imprisoned upon that miserable earth, which they converted from a
Paradise into a prison, from a delicate palace into a most damnable dungeon.
Thus whiles envy feeds on others evils, and has no disease but his neighbors
well fare, it has all those favors fall beside it self, which it grudged to
see in others. It is nothing but a pale and lean carcass, quickened with a
Fiend; and it keeps the worst diet, for it consumes it self, and delights in
pining. A thorn hedge covered with netles, that cannot be dealt withal either
tenderly, or roughly. What peevish interpreters of good things were the Devils,
that had rather step into hell, then stoop a little to their Creator, in
serving of an inferior creature, which now they see more honored then ever
before.

Q. What punishment was inflicted on the Instruments, and first upon the
Serpent?

A. A curse above all the beasts of the field, enmity between him and the
woman, and a sensible feeling of pain in his going upon his belly, and eating
of dust. Genesis 3.14.15. All things were for man and his comfort, therefore it
was an odious thing to be his over-thrower, and God lays a reasonable
punishment, on the unreasonable Instrument. These worms were worthy creatures
of God, but now most wretched, and ashamed to appear abroad, and therefore
live in the earth, and are seldom to be seen. Their skins pain them if they
live long, and always it is painful unto them to crawle, or creep, because
the belly is their softest part, and oppressed with the guts and body lying
upon it. In winter they stir not, being almost dead with cold. Their meat is
the earth, a grievous diet, and the greatest enemy to life, consisting of heat
and moisture. We may see by the worms that feed on the earth, how in dry
weather they are withered and pined to nothing, and what ado they have to
thrust out their earthy food in a raynie morning. Lastly, this beast was cursed
in this, that now woman should take heed how she came near him, and he
likewise stricken with a fear of her, etc.

Q. What was inflicted upon the woman?

A. Besides that which she has common with man, her inforred subjection to her
husband, and her manifold grief in conception, bearing and bringing forth.
Genesis 3.16. She should not now be so bold with her husband, her limits were to
be shortened, and her yoke made more grievous. She was an instrument of his
hurt, and is now to feel it, by her living with him, conceiving by him,
bearing and bringing forth of his of spring. The blessing of God before was
great, and should have taken away all pain, which now is justly inflicted for
her dissobedience. The pain of the belly is to both instruments a memorandum
of meddling with forbidden fruit.

Q. What is inflicted upon Adam, and consequently upon all his posterity?

A. Sin and death. One sin begets another; and the second is an effect of
the former, both properly and accidentally; properly as a branch of so bitter a
root: accidentally, as inflicted by divine Justice. One and the self same
effect may have diverse causes: as for example, Job 1.21. with 15. verse. etc.
Satan, Sabeans, Chaldeans, etc. as well as God afflict Job. Act 2.23. wicked
hands, as well as Gods crucified Christ. Exodus 7.13.14.22. and 8.15.32. and
9.7.12.14.34.35. and 10.20.27. etc. Pharaoh and God both harden, the one in
punishing, the other in sinning: and God wills to punish one sin with
another: the sin he wills by accident, the punishment by counsel. It enters
not into the mind of God to commit sin. Ier. 32.35. and yet it is his mind
to punish the abomin^^^, with their own abominations. They that are ambitious
of their own destructions, never want the plagues of God to seize upon them.
He that sets and sells himself to sin, shall find God as ready to
offend him with lustice, as he can be to offend God with iniustic. As man
sowes, so shall he reap, and if there be a brewing of death, tunn'd up in
vessels of sinue, it is good reason that the sinner should drink it.

CHAPTER XIX. Of original and actual Sin.
Question.

WHat sins are inflicted?

Answer.

Both original, and actual. Adams transgression turned the Chariot of the
soul clean out of the tract of good, so that now it is impossible he should
ever get into his way again. Small sins are like to slips, and slidings,
whereby men fall and hurt themselves, but great sins are like downefalls,
which wound, lame, dis-ioynt, or break some member, etc. Man's first sin was
a miserable downe-fall, for it did wound and wast the whole man, and made him
every way unable to stir hand or foot, to please God. Gal. 6.1. Catartizein,
is to let a joint, and man is restored again when God of his goodness does
bring every faculty of soul, and member of the body into his due course. See
how the first sin put all out of joint, and displaced the whole image of God.
First, man neglected his ordinary calling, when carelessly he suffered the
Serpent to enter. Secondly, heabused his ear, standing betwixt God and the
Devil, when he left God and listened unto his enemy. Ever since which time he
has been dull of hearing Gods word. They are not made more deaf of hearing,
that dwell by the fall of Nilus, then Adam, and all his posterity, of harkning
what God says. Thirdly, his eye wandered, when he saw that to be desired,
which was so plainly forbidden. Fourthly, his feeling was perverted, touching
where it was sure to be tainted. Fifthly, he tasted with delight, that which he
should have spit out, as bitter, and poysonfull. Sixthly, his smelling, which is
set over the mouth to give intelligence to it, whether our meat be sweet or no,
was here treacherous to the palate, in suffering it to swallow down so
stinking a morsel. Thus the five senses were as Cinqueports for temptations,
where sin began first to traffic, and at length, Satan became Lieutenant of
them all, and by them not long after gained custome-tribute of Souls. From all
these wheels running wrong, Satan creepes nearer the Soul, and gots
possession of all the interior senses. While the Crocodile sleeps with open
mouth, the Indian Ratt shoots himself into his belly, and gnawes his gutts in
sunder; so entered mischief at the open gates of this security. A watchful
providence would have prevented this eminent danger. Now the fancy begins
plausible inventions, here is a tree for wisdom, the cogitation takes it for
a truth, and the memory has forgotten both the love, and law of God.
Understanding thus blinded with sense, never calls this sophistry to her
tribunal, but taking one argument for another, teaches the will to conclude
amiss, and so the Devil is embraced for God, and man being thus subverted,
sinned, being condemned of himself. Tit. 3.11. And by this disobedience are we
all made sinners, both actually and originally. Romans 5.19.

Q. What is original sin?

A. An exorbitation, or swarning of the whole man, both inwardly in himself,
and outwardly in the government of the creatures. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 3.10. and
5.12.18.19. and 7.24. and 8.5. Ephesians. 4.17.18. 1 Cor. 2.14. Col. 3.9. Tit. 1.15.
Heb. 12.1. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Isa. 57.20. First, original sin is not the
wheel, or man himself, but the exorbitation or swaruing of it. Secondly, it
is come in the place of original righteousness, and so is a privation of
that, and an evil habit in the Soul. Thirdly, It is not a sleeping habit,
but an inward act, ever stirring in man, as does the first act of the soul,
which is never quiet, Fourthly, in this inward motion, it has always an
inclination to evil. Fifthly, It most especially possesses the will; and
therefore by the ancients, is called concupiscence, which is the wills motion,
where now all sin begins, and by a kind of imperious command, draws all
other wheels about with it. By this sin, the whole man is in evil, and
whole evil is in man, as the Chaos had the seeds of all creatures, only
wanted the spirits motion, to bring forth: so this wants nothing but Satan's
heat to hatch even Cockatrices, and such like poisoned monsters.

Q. What note we from hence?

A. That man's wit and will are exorbitant, and therefore he has no freedom of
will to any good, that is, that may be pleasing unto God, but wholly is carried
unto evil. Ioh. 8.34.35. Romans 3.11. 2 Pet. 3.5. Heb. 11.6. Genesis 6.5. Ier.
8.21. and 13.10.23. and 17.9. Psalm. 14.1.3. Math. 7.18. and 12.34. Job. 3.3.
and 6.44. and 12.39. Romans 7.18. Without the principle of life, it is impossible
to live, therefore original sin being in the place of original
righteousness, and now no new principle of faith as yet infused, man is every
ways dis-inabled to live well; live he may, and that freely; but it must be in
sinning. The Chariot of the soul is clean carried out of the way of
holiness, and man runs quite beside the line of the law. It is left to God
to work, both that which is first, to will; and that which is last, to work.
Phil. 2.13. To will and to run is mine: but without God I can do neither
well. Without me (says Christ) you can do nothing; no, not think any thing,
says Paul. Alas, what can they do that are not lame, but dead in sins? Ephesians.
2.1. The first bond is broken, and therefore God and man are parted, as really
and truly, in regard of spiritual life, as when the natural spirits are
extinguished, body and soul fly asunder. By the influence of Gods Spirit
alone, must a new life be created in us, that was not, and not some former life
excited: yea, further, we are not pre-disposed, and prepared of our selves,
for the receiving of it. As there is no vacuitie in nature, no more is there
spiritually. Every vessel is full; if not of liquor, yet of air: and so is
the heart of man; though (by nature) it is empty of grace, yet it is full of
hypocrisy, and iniquity: neither can it be filled with grace, except it be
emptied of these evil qualities: and as in a vessel, so much water as goes
in, so much air goes out: so in the narrow mouthed vessel of the heart, so
much grace as comes in by drops, so much sin is expelled, and the first
expulsion is violent, man not co-working at all; for he is imformed (as it
were) with sin, and is contrary to the work of grace, the very wisdom of
his flesh is enmity, not secret, but public, in resistance: neither does,
nor can subject it self. Romans 8.7. One hupotassetai, ou dunatai, two words
that cut the very throat of our free will, It subjects not, there is
resistance, and where there is resistance, there is contrariety; and
contraries suffer violence of one another. And the corrupt will is turned
again to God by violence; I say not the will, for that is a subject of both,
and passive in conversion, suffering grace by violence to cast out sin. As
far as it opposes by corruption, so far is it constrained to yield by
grace; and in the first motion will not-subiect, nay, because of sin cannot:
but the wheel once turned again by grace, is as ready to do well, as ever it
was to do evil. Only Lord, I know, that by reason of this opposition, my
soul will take a long time to empty and fill, and that the best vessel
cannot be quite full, while it is in the body; because there will be still
these remainders of corruption. Though I must not be impatient of Gods delay,
yet will I never rest content with any measure of grace in this world: but will
every day endeavor to have one drop or another added to my small quantity: so
shall my last day fill up my vessel to the brim.

Q. What is actual sin?

A. The continual iarring of man upon outward objects, by reason of this
natural exorbitation. An instrument put out of tune, is dissonant in all
harmonies. Romans 3.13.14.15.16.17.18. Throat, tongue, mouth, feet, actions,
etc. are all without Gods fear. Romans 1.29.30. Psalm. 50.16.17.18.19.20. Psalm.
10.4. and 14.1. Heinous crimes, neither sparing God nor man. Psalm. 10.6.11.13.
and 40.13. and 74.8. Isa. 28.15. Math. 12.24. Luke 12.19.45. and 18.11.12. 1
Cor. 2.14. Gal. 5.17. These and many more declare plainly, how man in all his
outward actions, swarues from the prescript rule of righteousness. And here
the Lord, beside the order of consequence, and contrariety, in punishing one
sin with another, and making both bitter, and stinging to the conscience,
has a double act: First, he limits the sin, what way, and how far it
shall go. He has a bit and bridle to curb any sinner. Psalm. 32.9. and when
he is gone to the utmost of his teather, he can pull him back again to his
task with shame. The very Devils can be no more malicious in their mischief,
then God will have them. 1 King. 22.21.22. Job 1.12. Secondly, God directs
sinners evermore to his glory, they shall honor him when they think least of
it. They that never learned to lispe a word of a better life, shall live for
God, when they die to damn themselves. If good thoughts by restraining grace,
look into a wicked heart, they stay not there; as those that like not their
lodging, and therefore are soon gone. They scarce find an Inn to bait in,
before they be baited out again with mis-rule: only that light of Gods love,
and countenance, that shines into an holy heart is constant, like that of the
Sun, which keeps due times, and varies not his course, for any of these
sublunary occasions: yet blessed be God, who restraines the plots and practices
of the wicked for the good of his elect.

Q. What are the degrees of this sin?

A. It may be greater, or lesser, in respect of whom, or against whom it is
committed, likewise in respect of the matter, manner, or measure of working it,
as whether it be done of knowledge, or ignorance, of infirmity, or
stubbornness, or with an high hand. Iam. 1.14. A wicked object brings in
suggestion, suggestion delight, delight consent, consent practice, practice
custom, custom obstinacy, obstinacy hardness of heart, and that a reprobate
mind. 1 Timothy 1.13. Romans 2.5. and 1.28. Ier. 5.3. Lust is less then adultery,
hasty anger is less then Racha, and that then fool. Math. 5.22. The sin of
a Jew, is greater then of a Pagan, of a teacher then a scholar, Romans
2.18.20.21. He that knows Gods will and does it not, is to be beaten with more
stripes then one that is merely ignorant. Luke 12.47. A professors sin is
greater then the sin of a profane man. Again, it is a less sin to strike
a common man then a Constable, a Constable then a Justice of peace, a Justice
of peace then a Judge, a Judge then a Prince, a Prince then to put out the hand
against God. It is a greater unkindness for a son to offend his father, then
another man, etc. Habitual sins are worse then actual, and a railing habit
is worse then a slip, or error of the tongue. Here may a question be demanded,
whether the sins of the first Table, or the second are greater? Answer;
compare person with person, and then every sin against God is more vile then
against my neighbor: but other circumstances may aggravate, and make a sin
greater in the second Table then the first. Idle taking of Gods name in vain,
As O Lord, O Jesus, are not so ill as Murder and Adultery. Negligence on the
Sabbath, and stealing a nap by chance at a Sermon, is not so vile and villainous
as to rob and kill by the high ways side: but let circumstance go with
circumstance, as person with person, degree with degree, etc. and then every
sin against the first Table is worse then against the second.

Q. How many sorts be there of actual sins?

A. Two; the sins of commission, and the sins of omission. Ier. 2.13. And
man does usually omit good, before he commit any evil. The want of doing
worthlly, makes a man wanton in doing wickedly.

Q. What is the sin of omission?

A. The not doing of that good which should be done. Mat. 25.43.44. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. Negatiues in goodness are positiues in evil; at the last day shall men
be judged for not doing good. It is not what harm, or hurt have you done, but
what health and help have you been to the needy? God made nothing to be
idle, but every thing to work unto his end, that the great worke-master of
all, might be glorified in his handy work. This sin is not properly an act,
but not acting, and for want of a term we call it actual. It springs from
original sin, which makes us unapt to good.

Q. What is the sin of commission?

A. The doing of that evil we should not do. Romans 1.28. These two branches,
or streams of original sin, show us the nature of the fountain it self,
that as it is dry and barren of good, so it sends forth an Ocean of evil. As
it is a privation of good, so it makes us omit all duty; as an inclination to
evil, it makes us commit all villainies. Ier. 4.22. Wise to do evil, but to
do good no understanding. Prompt to vice, unapt to virtue. Ex peccato originis
sumus ad omne bonum inepti, and ad omne malum procliues. To conclude this
punishment of sin, and justify God in his act; Sin runs with the act,
and is more in the agent then the action: yet it glewes them both together; and
by means of this concretion, it self is both cause and effect. For as arts
are concreted, and concreated with things, that is, God did (as it were) clap
the art, and the thing together: so the Devil has conglutinated and compacted
the sin and the substance together. A Logician does reason, It is not so much
the man as his Logic that performs the art: so it is not so much the man
that makes a Garment, as the Tailor, etc. Hence we learn in the black Art of
the Devil, that it is not so much the substance as the sin that does evil;
and that subject only sins, which is glewed together with the sin, God
therefore running along with the substance as well as the sin, and being in
the action of the sinner, as well as the sin, may do that by his own art,
which neither the sin, nor the sinner can be said to do, and so very well
may punish the sinner with his sin, and yet be no cause of it. Romans 1.24.
Gods contact will ever be free from sins contagion, even as the Sunnebeames
raise a stink, and ill savor out of a dunghill, without any infection at
all. The fire can soulder two pieces of iron together, and yet go in and come
out again, without being made irony, or hard at all: so God by stirring in the
rotten ulcer of the heart, and by the heat of his word, hardening and styling
the crabbed nature of man, can get in, and go out at pleasure, without all
ferrumination, or soldring with man, as sin and Satan do.

CHAPTER XX. Of Death.
Question.

What is Death?

Answer.

A deprivation and loss of life, with a fearful subjection to the misery of
this life, and the life to come. Genesis 2.17. Romans 6.23. Man by sin is made
unable to please God, he must therefore be dissolved and new made, or changed,
that he may do it. Death should be far more welcome unto us the sin: for
that may prepare us for heaven, when this will be sure to cast us into hell.
Alas, is it not pity to see our fear misplaced? All men fear to suffer
evil, but few they are that fear to do evil. Of two deaths we fear the
less, and never dread the last and worst. There are but two stages of the
first, the bed, and the grave. The former, if it have pain, yet it is speedy,
and the latter as it is senseless, so it gives rest. Against this there are
many Antidotes, and comforts, and we know that an evil that is ever in motion,
cannot be fearful: that only which both time and tempest, nay, eternity it
self finds standing, is worthy of terror. And let them tremble at it that
delight to live in the former punishment. As for the first, there are no
bypaths of a fairer, or neeerer way, all that travel to the holy land, must be
content to offer this tribute at the Pison Castle, or gates of death, crowns
and scepters lie piled at this entrance, and seeing God cannot re-edifie
without taking down of this old house, I will welcome death. We receive any
homely messenger from great personages, with due respect to their masters: and
what matters it what death it be, so it bring me good news? And what news can
be better then this, that God sends for me, to make me more happy, then my
crasie carcass will suffer me to be, till it be mended, and cast in a better
mould. Let them fear death, which know him to be as a pursuivant sent from
hell to fetch them: as for us, we can pass chearefully through the black
gates, or dark entry of a corporal death, unto our glorious mansions above:
but let us proceed, to see both deaths, that by them we may learn our
misery, and see Gods greater mercy.

Q. What things are to be confidered in death?

A. The inchoation and beginning, or the perfection and end. The beginning of
any act is part of it, and when man sets his hand to any thing, he is doing it.
If there had been any act of spiritual life, man had lived, and God had been
well pleased, and his life had been immutable: so on the contrary, when man
begins to die, he is a dying, and God says in the very day that thou eatest,
or sinnest, thou shall die. Genesis 2.17. Adam was left a dead man, as soon as
he had tasted of the tree, and every man is crasie from his cradle. The pace
of death is soft and sure, and every man (live he never so long) is a dying man
till he be dead. Deuteronomy. 28.22.61.65.

Q. How many deaths be there?

A. Two; The first and the second. The soul dies the first death, by sympathy
with the body, and the body dies the second death, by sympathy with the
soul. Math. 10.28. Rev. 2.11. Rev. 20.6.14. Yet in nature the second death is
the first; for, the soul dies first in sin, the punishment being inflicted
according to the fault. Nevertheless, that is called the second death, because
the extremity of it is to begin after the end and perfection of the first.

Q. What is the first death?

A. Subjection to the miseries of this world. Job 5.7. and 14.1. Earth was made
man's Paradise, and Palace of pleasures: but now it is his true Bochim, as the
Israelites called their mourning place: We begin our life with tears, and
therefore Lawyers define life by weeping; If a child be heard cry, it is a
lawful proof of his living, to possess the miseries of this world: else if
he be dead, we say he is stillborne; and at our parting with this world, God is
said to wipe off our tears. Labor and pains go now together, and one word
[ponos] is sufficient to express both: whence we say, he that labors, takes
pains, and a woman is said to be in labor, when she is in the travel, and
pain of child-births yet by creation God made both to labor without pain;
only with sin pain seized upon the bones, and the mind was possessed with
a weariness, and irksome loathing of what it must do. Look into our fields,
and there shall we find toyling and moyling, and tyring of our selves at
plough and sith: look into the waters, and there is tugging and tuing at the
oars and cables. Look into Cities, and there is plodding up and down, and
sweating in shops, till men complain of weariness. Look into Scholars
studies, and there is tossing of brains and books, scratching the head, even
to palenesse, and infirmity. Look into the most pleasurable place upon earth,
the Courts of Princes, and there how are men wearied with tedious attendance,
emulatory officiousness, etc. Are not all things full of labor, and labor
full of sorrow? Nay, If we turn our selves to idleness, it is as wearisome
as work. Oh then, what wretches are we to be so much in love with this life?
What Gally-slaue likes and loves his chain? Prisoner his Dungeon? He is a mad
Mariner that salutes the Sea with songs, and the haven with tears. It is a
foolish bird, that when the cage is open, had rather sit singing within the
grates, then be at liberty in the woods. Children cry to go to bed, when the
more discreet call it their rest. Our God says of the blessed, that die in his
son, they rest from their labors. Who can love bolts, and fetters, when he
may have them stricken off, and an Angel of God to shine in his layle, as he
did once to Peter and open him, both the wooden and iron gate, and bid him be
gone? What? a little more sleep and slumber in the hands of his keepers,
rather then follow the Angel of God into liberty? We are wonderfully
besotted, if we do not long after the better life, as often as we think of
the miseries of this.

Q. What is the beginning hereof?

A. The loss of the good things of the body, as the sense of nakedness, of
majesty, (whence comes shame) of comeliness and beauty, as also of health,
whence man is exposed to weariness, dangers, sickness, and a daily dying.
Genesis 3.7.10. Deuteronomy. 28.21.22. Of all the creatures man was most comely without a
covering. Beasts would be nastie without hair, and birds without feathers: God
apparels them in their excrements, because their temper was not so exquisite as
man's, whose beauty was to be bare: and I cannot but wonder, that pride should
be crept into clouts, which are the ensigns of shame. Our finenesse is our
filthiness, and our neatness our nastinesse, if we grow proud of what should
humble us. Again, such a majesty was in man, that the very bruit beasts should
have revere^ced it, which now being covered, they contemn and despise. Only
some relics of it remain, to testify what was once in man, the very Lions
will wink to look man in the face, and the Crocodile with a kind of remorse,
will wash the face of man with his tears, whom he has apprehended. And now we
cover not our faces and hands, because they are as yet the greatest seats of
man's majesty. Furthermore, for comeliness, what deformities are in the
fairest? Absolons ill qualities showed his temper was not absolute. In
beautiful faces all hold not proportion, and it were no sinful mixture, if
there were an absolute symetrie of all parts. And for sanitie, it is well seen
by the infinite diseases of the body, what a dyscrasie is in the whole. A horse
has not so many infirmities as a man. Aristotle thought it came from the work
of nature, being more curious in man, then any other creature. Hence an error
more dangerous, and by consent of parts enlarged: but Aristotle was a pegge too
low, seeing the whole distemper came from sin, etc.

Q. What else?

A. Subjection to the miseries which come by the loss of external good
things, as first of such things, wherewith the life of man was honored, as the
loss of friendship, honor, rule over the creatures, eiection, or casting out
of paradise, with an interdiction, or forbidding of us to enter by the
Cherubius. Secondly, of things necessary for the maintenance of this life, as
of food, which though he labored until he sweat again, yet should the earth
bring forth briers, thorns and thistles. Also of raiment, and clothing, without
which he should suffer extreme cold and nakedness. And lastly, in all his
possessions and goods, continual calamity and loss. Genesis 3.17.18.19.23.24.
Deuteronomy. 28.29.30. etc. Sorrow for loss of friends, disgrace in the creatures,
turning out of Paradise, like some base borne brood, unworthy of such a
princely palace: if he might have left it like a tenant, or sold it like an
owner, it had bin some credit unto him: but to be cast out for a wrangler, and
have the good Angels turn against him, which were created as his guard, must
needs much perplex his mind, and could be no les then foeru^ners of his end.
Add to this, his food with famine and faintnes, his corn with cockle, his
sweat to dryness of body, and drines of grain (the very earth being now
become a mother of weeds, and step mother of wheat) his clothing either
clogging nature, in keeping it too hot; or over-little, leaving it to the
annoyance of the air, and to starve as well with cleanliness of apparel, as
cleanenesse of teeth: and lastly, every calling subject to calamity, and goods
least good when most need; and we cannot but conclude, that all these together
were great hastners of his death: but above all, seeing now in stead of a
blessing, Gods curse was carried withal, and could be no less then a
devouring canker, or wartwort in all his actions and possessions. Sin locks
up a thief in our counting house, which will carry away all, and if we look
not unto it the sooner, our souls with it.

Q. What is the perfection and end thereof?

A. The going out of the Spirits, whereby the Soul departs from the body,
and the body afterward is returned and resolved into the earth, and other
elements, whence it was taken. Genesis 3.19. Eccl. 12.7. Observe, that neither
soul nor body die, but only the Spirits that hold them together: they fall
asunder by the extinction, consumption, or congelation of the Spirits that
run along in the blood, etc. Here then is nothing but improvidence, that
adds terror unto this death. Let us but think of it, and we shall not fear
it. Do we not see, that even Bears and Tigres seem not terrible to those
that live with them? how may we see their keepers sport with them, when the
beholders dare scarce trust their chain? Let us then be acquainted with this
death, and we shall be the better able to look upon his grimme countenance. I
am ashamed of this weak resolution, that we should extol death in his
absence, and be so fearful in his presence. Often in our speculations have
we freely discoursed of such a friend, and now, that he is come to our beds
side, and has drawn the Curtains, and takes us by the hand, and offers us
his service, we shrink inward, and by the palenesse of our faces, and
wildness of our eyes, we bewray an amazement at the presence of such a guest.
Do we not see that there is no help to heal us, but by pulling all asunder?
Lord, teach me while I live, to die unto sin, and live unto righteousness,
that so when I shall die unto nature, I may live unto glory. Our sin has
made it bitter, and thy mercy has made it better then life Good Physicians
when they apply their Leeches, scour them with salt and nettles, and when
their corrupt blood is voyded, employ them to the health of their Patients.
This Esau in stead of frowns, shall meet us with kisses, and although we
receive a blow from his rough hand, yet the very stripe and stroke shall be
healing. I will therefore never grieve to tread in the steps of my Savior to
glory. I know, my last enemy, by his goodness, shall be my first friend in my
passage to another world.

Q. What is the second death?

A. The subjection of man to the miseries of the world to come. Romans 2.5. An
heaping of wrath against the day of wrath. The little spark of immortality,
and beam of Gods eternity, through sin, of an inualuable blessing, becomes
an intolerable curse, subiecting of us to the miseries of another life: Oh,
that we could feel this as well as the other, and upon the first groans seek
for ease. What mad man will purchase this crackling of thorns (such is the
worldlings joy) with eternal shrieking, and torment? But it is no marvel,
seeing only wise men seek for remedies before their disease: sensible
patients, when they begin to complain: as for fools they will do it, too
late. Oh that we could weep on earth, that we might laugh in heaven. Who
would not be content to defer his joy a little, that it may be perpetual,
and infinite? Better that we should weep with men, and laugh with Angels,
then fleering with worldlings, and jolly ones, to gnash and howl with Devils.

Q. What are the beginnings thereof?

A. In this life as forerunners, emptiness of good things, and fullness of
evil, as ignorance of mind, terror of conscience, and hence a flying from
God, and hiding of our selves, rebellion of will, inordinate affections,
finding the reins loose in their necks, and like wild horses, carrying us
over hills and rocks, and never leaving us, till we be dismembered, and they
breathless; or on the contrary, if God restrain them by pulling them in with
the sudden violence of the strait hand of his Justice, they fall to plunging,
and careering, and never leave till the saddle be empty, and even then
dangerously strike at their prostrate rider: for after terror of conscience,
filthy lusts get the dominion, and bring men into a deep security and
senselessness of their misery, and like blind Sodomites, they are groaping
after evil, when God smites them. It is just with God, that those which want
grace, should want wit too: It is the power of sin, to turn men into stocks
and stones. Easy warnings neglected, end ever in destruction. His a mercy of
God to warn us by our consciences: yet as some children grow careless with
often whipping; so some sinners grow more senseless, and stupid by the often
and frequent lashes of their consciences. But alas, security and presumption
attend, even at the threshold of ruin, and bring a man to be without all sense
and feeling of his misery: only God who knows by an unwonted blow to fetch
blood out of the sturdiest heart, can so strike, that conscience after all this
deadness, shall look wonderfully agasht upon the sinner, and drive him to
horrible despair. Gods judgments are the rack of godless men; if one
strain make them not confess, let them be stretched one wrench hyer, and they
cannot be silent; and therefore security is ever accompanied with despair in
the end, and a fearful expectation of judgment. Nay, whiles they live here,
God does often bring upon them some extraordinary judgment. Thus then you see
the symptoms of the second death, horror of conscience, from whence flight and
occultation arise; then security breeding in men the senselessness of sin,
and despair for it, and lastly, some extraordinary judgment of God. Ephesians.
4.18. Deuteronomy. 28.28. Genesis 3.10. The things of this life when they come upon the
best terms, are but vain; but when upon ill conditions, burdensome; when
they are at best, they are scarce friends: but when at worst, tormentors. Alas,
poor worldlings. how ill agrees a gay coat, and a festred heart? What availes
an high title, with an hell in the Soul? Lord heal these evil symptoms of
the second sorrow, least I sleep in the most miserable death.

Q. What is the perfection of it?

A. An eiection, or eternal separation from the face of God, and an iniection,
or casting of the Soul immediately after the first death into hell, where
there is an increasing of sin, but more truly of torment, their sins being
turned into sorrows, and they then finding no pleasure in evil; for sin
being the greatest misery, and most opposite to good, cannot but be the
principal part of their torment. Furthermore, a reservation of the body in the
grave, as in a dungeon, against the dissolution of the world by fire, and day
of judgment, when after the resurrection, both body and soul, meeting
together again, shall be cast into hell fire, where there is both an increase
of sin, of the gnawing worm of conscience, and torment, and from hence
weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth. Weeping is the expression of sorrow,
and sorrow cooles the heart, and cold makes the teeth to chatter, so that their
torment and misery shall be intolerable. Sin shall increase the worm of
conscience and conscience shall make all to sympathize with it in sorrow, and
sorrow shall be angmented by fire and cold, such pains shall the damned endure
in hell, as never eye saw, nor ear heard, nor can possibly enter into the
heart of man. Isa. 30.33. Math. 13.40.42. and 25.41. 2 These. 1.9. Rev. 20.14.
The Papists near adjoining to hell make three places more, as Limbus, of the
Fathers before Christ, of Infants before Baptism, and of Purgatory for
satisfaction. As a Caldron has brimmes, and a bottom; so hell is the bottom
of the Caldron, Purgatory is the middle, and the Fathers, and Infants were in
the brimme. We say in all scalding and fiery instruments, the greatest heat is
in the top: but this seething Caldron, though it did hemme in the Fathers, like
the guard of a gown, yet was it full of pleasure unto them, only infants being
in the next border, had neither pain nor pleasure. Here is a rale of Limbus,
without either welt or guard yet so plain and palpable an error, that it
confutes and confounds it self. God, his law, man's life, his recompense,
society, and Savior, do all exclaim against such dreams of Limbus, and
Purgatory. First, God deals with all mankind, either in justice, or mercy.
Secondly, his law is either broken, or kept; and of sacrifices for all sins
and sinners, there are none appointed for the dead. The law then whom it casts
in this world, it condemns in the world to come without redemption; and God is
just in the highest degree, and therefore takes no expiation out of his son,
and if he once admit it in his son, he is like wise merciful in the highest
degree, and therefore sends none to Purgatory or Limbus, whom he ever means to
recall back again. Thirdly, man's life either pleases, or displeases God,
and all men walk but in two paths; and so come accordingly to their ends.
Fourthly, the recompense is either hell or heaven, the one prepared for the
reprobate, the other, for the elect, and of a third place, Scripture makes no
mention. A gain, the blessed rest from their labors, especially, sin, and
punishment: therefore the cursed live in both: and as sin is the most grievous
labor to the godly. Romans 7.24. so shall it be the greatest torment to the
wicked. Either after the first death we rest from this painful labor, which
is a piece, yea, the greatest part of our heaven: or else we live in it, which
is no less then hell it self. Fifthly, after the first death we meet with no
other society, but either of Angels, or Devils. Lastly, our Savior was a
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and so from that time raised
again. Ioh. 11.24.25. Lazarus shall rise again, why? because Christ is the
resurrection, and he was not then actually dead, or raised. In the progress of
a King, he himself is the first mouer, though many go before him, all are
attendants upon his person, whether they go before, or follow after. There is
then no need to shut heaven against the Fathers, because Christ was not then
actually risen an a ascended, for they all wait upon Christ, though they go
before him unto heaven. As for children they are either of faithful parents, or
of infidels, and therefore are they not excluded from grace and mercy. But I
must abbreviate, or else I shall grow infinite in laying down of the precepts
of this Art.

CHAPTER XXI. Of the propagation of Sin.
Question.

HItherto of the transgression; What is the propagation of it?

Answer.

All that posterity that was to proceed from Adam by ordinary propagation, as
it should have had happiness, if he had stood, so is it made obnoxious to all
his miseries, he falling. By a rule in nature he begets children, and by a rule
in divinity he begets them sinful, and yet both natural. It was in man's
nature to do well for himself, and others: and so by consequent, to do
evil, and convey the same to all his heirs; for as natural spirits run
along in the blood, and are apt for generation: so original righteousness, as
a more divine spirit, runs along with the whole frame, to frame it in others:
now that being lost, a worse spirit of evil having taken up the room of the
first, forms men according to a sinful image. Genesis 5.3. Adam is said to beget
in his own likeness and image. Romans 5.12.14.

Q. By what right is sin propagated?

A. By all kinds of right; first by the law of Nations; for Adam was a Prince
of all his posterity, who covenanted with God for us, and for himself, for
the performance of obedience, and therefore he breaking, we brake. He was also
as our Legate, and did lie as our Lidger, or deputy with God; and therefore
we may be said to do whatsoever he did. He went as a common surety for us
all, and on him was all our credit reposed, and he was betrusted of God with
the estate of us all. It is therefore a national equity, that we coming all
into one bond and obligation, should all fare alike. Secondly, we have it by
the law of inheritance, he was our father, and we were his sons, he the
root, and we the branches, and therefore were to participate with him in all
his estate. Do we not see how children are left in good, or bad case by their
parents, and of mere relation they become their lawful heirs and successors?
Thirdly, by the law of divine Justice, the perfection whereof cannot pardon the
least sin without satisfaction to every farthing, as also by the
infiniteness of it that extends it self to every guilty person, and by
reason of the violation of the law, and dishonor of the lawgiver, deals most
strictly and precisely with every sinner. One man may kindle such a fire, as
all the world cannot quench. One plague sore may infect a whole kingdom; and
here we see, how the infection of Adams evil, is grown much worse then a
personal act. Satan's subtlety has ever bin to begin withan head of evil,
knowing that the multitude (as we say of Bees) will follow their master. Corah
kindled a fire of rebellion, two hundredth and fifty Captains readily bring
sticks to it, and all Israel are content to warm their hands by it: only
here the Incendiaries perish: God distinguishing betwixt the heads of a
faction, and the train: but in this all are alike, though we were all a sleep
in Adams loins; because the law was equally given for all our benefits, and
our prosperity stood in the first well husbanding of the happy estate God
yielded us in Paradise. If any object. Ezekiel. 18.20. the son shall not die for
the fathers sin. The answer is, when he is not guilty of it, either by
propagation, or transgression, he himself according to his birth living and
dying in it. Heb. 7.9.10. It is said Leui paid tithes in Abraham's loins: so
we in Adam were bound by law to stand to his reconing.

Q. After what manner is sin propagated?

A. Neither from the body to the soul, as coming from our unclean parents;
As if the soul being purely created, should fall into the body, as a man in
pure white raiment does fall into a puddle of dirt and mire; for the body is
not the first subject of sin, but the soul, and therefore cannot be the head
and fountain of propagation. Neither is it from the soul to the body, as
begotten of our unclean parents; for then should it be as mortal as the body
and spirits of it, as also cross God in his special relation of the father of
spirits. Heb. 12.9. He is a father of both. Psalm. 139.14. Job 10.10.11.12. But
of the one by the parents, of the other, immediately by himself. It therefore
follows by just consequent, that it proceeds from the union of both into one
man; for, though our parents, as bruit beasts beget not souls, yet they beget
a more perfect creature, in that they are the procreant causes of man, united
of his essential causes. Genesis 4.1. I have gotten a man from the Lord. Jehovah,
Adam, and Eve were all about the composition of Cain, his Soul was inspired
pure and holy: yet as soon as the vital spirits laid hold of it, It was in
the compound a son of Adam. The thing may well be explained by this
similitude. A skillful Artificer makes a clock, of all his essential parts
most accurately; only he leaves the putting of all parts together, to his
unskillful Apprentise, who so iumbles together the several joints, that all
fall a iarring, and can keep no time at all, every wheel running backward
way: so God most artificially still perfects both body and soul: but our
accursed parents put all out of frame, and set every part in a contrary course
to Gods will. Psalm. 51.5. Warmed in sin, is understood of the preparation of
the body, as an instrument of evil, which is not so actually, till the soul
come.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. A just imputation of the first transgression, as also of the fault, guilt,
and punishment, and that both in sin and death. Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.21.

Q. How is original sin propagated?

A. By our next parents, and so ascending to Adam himself. It is impossible to
bring a clean thing out of filthiness. Genesis 5.3. Job 14.4.

Q. How is actual sin conveyed?

A. In the mass and lump; other wise in kind every man's actual sin is his
own. Ezekiel 18.20.

Q. How death?

A. Seed and food are the principles of our life, in procreation and
preservation: the first we have from our parents, which is deadly, as poisoned
with sin: the other comes from our selves, being ignorant of what should be
good for our bodies; but beside the first death, there is a conveyance of the
second, we being borne the children of wrath; for Gods displeasure was kindled
as well against Adams posterity, as Adam himself. Ephesians. 2.3.

Q. How is Eve made partaker of Adams punishment?

A. Besides her proper punishments, as an instrument of evil, she
participates with Adam in all we have said; for God made them both equally, for
an happy estate, only the wife was to enjoy it by means of her husband;
first, as she was taken out of him. Secondly, as they were to hold together
for better and worse, in regard of their marriage. Thirdly, as she was a
companion with him in the same sin: they did both eat, sin, and see it at
the same time. Genesis 3.6.7.

Q. Was propagation then from them both?

A. Yes, immediately from them both, as their children were begotten by the
mutual knowledge of the one the other. Genesis 4.1. and 5.3. Hence Christ was not
borne sinful, because of the holy Ghosts separation, not only of the seed
of Mary, but likewise of Mary from Joseph. Mary her self could not be without
sin, because propagated; this is only the privilege of her son, who of
unholy seed by the secret operation of the Spirit, and separation of a part
from the whole, took that which was most pure and holy.

CHAPTER XXII. Of Redemption.
Question.

HItherto of man's Apostasy, what is man's Anastasie, or return to God again?

Answ. It is the joyful reduction, or bringing of man again into favor with
God. Romans 5.8.9.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. Here we need not doubt under Christ, without
fear of praemunire, or offense to the crown and dignity of the justice of
God, to affirm of faith in the merits of our Savior, that its Gods strong
arm and power, to the enliuing and saving of every soul. So that now with a
Non obstante, we may look up to God in Christ, and without the law of works,
receive a better estate by the Gospel then ever we inioyed.

Q. What are the parts of our rising again?

A. Two; Redemption, and application. Ioh. 3.14. There is a lifting up of
Christ on his Cross, and a believing in him for life. ver. 16. Gods love in
giving his son for us, and then application of him by the Spirit.

Q. What is Redemption?

A. A satisfaction made unto the instice of God for man by a Redeemer. Romans
3.24.25.26. And here comes in the special work of the second person: thus
far we have gone with the Fathers work, both in Creation and Providence;
and now in a special manner the Son does manifest himself; for the Father
can go no further without him.

How is it wrought?

A. By a Mediator, who does intercede betwixt God and man: the Father is
offended, and cannot be reconciled without some mediation. All was made unholy
when the first Adam sinned; It is the second Adam that must rectify all; Moses
the servant built the house with a partition wall in the midst. Ephesians. 2.24.
Christ the son pulled down that Screene, and cast all into one, bringing
both Jew and Gentile into favor with God. The work therefore is more properly
a mediation then a redemption; or, a redemption by mediation. 1 Timothy 2.5.

Q. Who is the Mediator?

A. Jesus Christ, both God and man, who yesterday, to day, and for ever, is the
Savior of mankind. They that were yesterday, yea, from the worlds beginning,
were saved by him alone, so they that live to day, or shall come afterward
into the world, do all expect for salvation by him. Heb. 13.8. He redeemes,
because we are captives; he mediates, because there is a controversy betwixt
God and us, and that continually, because Gods wrath would ever be breaking
forth, except our Mediator stood in the gap for us.

Q. Why is Christ called Jesus?

A. Because the end of his mediation was to bring us to salvation. Moses brings
the people into the wilderness: but Ioshna, a type of Christ, into Canaan.
Moses dies in the desert, and sees not the promised land: showing plainly,
that the law can lead us into desolation, but Christ, and the Gospel must
bring us out of it. Zerubbabel, a Captain of Gods people, and a type of the
law, carries them out of captivity: so the law, when it says, Do and live,
shows plainly, how man may be saved: but Joshua a priest, or sacrificer, must
be joined with him, or else in Canaan it self, the people were to be cast out
again. These were lively types of Christ, by whom alone we are brought to
heaven, and confirmed in the happiness of it. Math. 1.21. 1 Timothy 2.5.6.

Q. Why Christ?

A. As Jesus is the proper name; so this is the name of his office, and it
signifies, his anointing. Kings, Priests, and Prophets were all anointed, as
types of Christ to come. Henee the name Messiah; in whom the material
anointing cease, he received the thing signified by it above all his
fellows. Psalm. 45.7. Luke 4.18. Act. 4.27. and 10.38. Heb. 1.9. 1 King. 19.1.
Lev. 8.12. 1 King. 19.16. Both the Testaments tell us of Christ bequeathed, and
teach us, that he was that Christ, that is described in both: hence in the old
Testament, we have Priestly, Princely, and Prophetical Books: so in the new,
the Gospels are regal, showing that Christ was that King of the Jews. The
Epistles are more sacerdoticall, beginning for the most part with prayers and
supplications. And the Revelation of Saint John, is merely Prophetical. And
all these are necessary in Christ, to make him a complete Savior: we stand in
need of them all, and of their daily exercise.

Q. Why should Christ be a Prophet?

A. That he might reveal unto man the will of his Father, and be the only
Doctor of the Church. Luke 4.18. Christ was anointed to preach the Gospel.
Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. Math. 21.11. Luke 7.16.

Q. Why a Priest?

A. That he might make a full ationement with the Father for man, and reconcile
us daily unto him, both by his expiation and intercession. Math. 20.28. Luke
4.18. 1 Ioh. 2.2. and 4.10. Psalm. 110.4. Zech. 6.13. Heb. 5.6. and 7.3.

Q. Why a King?

A. That he might rule and govern them, whom as a Prophet he had taught, and
as a Priest he had reconciled to his Father, subduing his and their enemies,
and procuring them peace and prosperity continually. Psalm. 2.6. Math. 21.5.
Rev. 17.14. and 19.16.

Q. Why God and man?

A. That he might redeem us by paying a price sufficient: as likewise being
Mediator, he might communicate with both natures, which were by him to be
reconciled; that being inferior to his Father as touching his manhood, and
superior to man as touching his Godhead, he might the better bring both
together again. Gal. 3.20. Phil. 2.6.7. 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 8.6. and 9.15. and
12.24. Hence in Hebrew, the name Immanuel, and in Greek, Theanthroopos. Isa.
7.14. God-man, or God with us, and in our flesh.

Q. What is here to be observed?

A. Two things; The distinction of these two natures, and their personal
union. Io. 1.1. The word was God. v. 14 The word was made flesh. Truly God,
truly man, and yet but one Mediator.

Q. What is the distinction?

A. Whereby the two natures remain distinct in him, both in themselves, and
their properties. Math. 28.20. Vbiquitie is proper to the divinity of Christ,
and not his humanity. Ioh. 16.7. Absence proper to the humane nature. 1 Timothy
3.16. God manifested in the flesh, not confounded with it. 1 Pet. 1.18. Dying
and quickening are proper to the distinct natures of Christ. Yet this we are to
understand, that there is a tropicall communion of properties, in regard of the
whole, wherein these parts are united, as God dies, that is, he that is both
God and man. The people thought, Christ did contradict himself, and the
Scriptures. Ioh. 12.35. Messiah abides for ever, and thou say, he dies,
etc. Both these are true, Messiah lives when he dies, and dies when he
lives. There was never a separation of his two natures, though body and soul
parted for a while. We must therefore hold, that neither the Godhead is at
any time changed into the manhood, nor yet the manhood into the Godhead. Luke
24.39. 1 Pet. 4.1. Furthermore, we are to learn, that Christ's humane nature is
like unto ours in all things, but in sin, and manner of subsisting. Phil.
1.7.8. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.

Q. What is the personal union of these two natures?

A. Whereby the nature assuming, and nature assumed make one Messiah, or
Mediator betwixt God and man: the nature assuming, is infinite, and his action
is incomprehensible; yet this we may safely affirm, that the second person in
Trinity immediately assumes, and then the Godhead: so that our flesh is first
taken by a person, and hence our nature assumed, is without all personal
subsistence in it self, and is inseparably conjoined with the divine nature,
and does wholly subsist, that is, the whole manhood subsists in the whole
Godhead; for whole God is in heaven, and whole God is on earth, because the
divine nature has no parts, and so our flesh is not in a part of the Godhead,
but wholly in the whole. And yet not every where with the whole. For the
assumption is not by way of extension, as a form extends his matter: but of
ineffable union, humane nature having no standing of it self, but by the
divine nature. It is locally circumscribed, as having quantity, and consists
as a finite thing within the limits of essence, being truly compounded of
matter, and form. And yet it has neither parts, nor passions, essence, or
accidents, which are not assumed unto the divine nature: when body and soul
were asunder, and locally in diverse places, then were both of them inseparably
knit unto the Godhead. Ioh. 1.14. Colos. 2.9. The Papists say, Christ was
Mediator according to his humane nature, which is contrary to this personal
union; for, as the person assuming, gives the nature assumed subsistence, so
action, and it is not able to do any thing without it. Therefore according to
both natures, Christ redeemes, and the work is not to be divided. Furthermore,
we say the second person assumes, not the first, for he is principally
offended; not the third, for he is to testify of the reconciliation: yet such
is the union that we come by it, both to the Father, and the Spirit. For
immediately the second person assumes, then the Deity, and having fellowship
with that, we have it also with the Father and Spirit. Now if the divine
nature should first assume, then would the action be the Fathers; or if the
Spirit, then should the Father have two Sons, etc.

CHAPTER XXIII. Of Christ's humiliation.
Question.

What are the parts of Redemption?

Answer.

Two; His humiliation, and his exaltation. Psalm. 110.7. Isa. 53.12. Romans 8.34.
Ephesians. 4.9.10. Phil. 2.8.9. And the reason is given by S. Luke, chap. 24.26.
Christ must of necessity, both suffer, and be glorified, etc.

Q. What is his humiliation?

A. Whereby he was made subject to the justice of God, to perform whatsoever
the same might require for the redemption of man. Romans 10.4. Gal. 4.4. Heb.
7.22. Christ became our Surety, and so bound himself to pay all our debts.
Papists say, Christ is a Mediator between himself, and us; but they are
ignorant, how a sin may more peculiarly be against one person, then another;
as the manhood it self is more properly united to the second person, then any
other. Christ does principally mediate betwixt the Father and man; and yet the
justice of the whole Deity, and consequently of every person is satisfied.

Q. What did the justice of God require?

A. Two things; Satisfaction for the trespass, or payment of the forfaiture,
and righteousness answerable to the law, for the payment of the principal.
The one frees us from death; the other, brings us to life. By the first we are
made no sinners, by the second we are made just. The law stands still in force
for death, and life, sin and die, is by Christ's death satisfied, do and
live, is by his life fulfilled. Dan. 9.24. Christ reconciles to God by
suffering, and of enemies makes us friends: but we neither deserve, nor can
justly desire any thing, until he bring his own righteousness for us. Romans
4.25.

Q. Wherein consists all this?

A. In the conformity of himself, both for himself, and us, to he image of
God, and the law, its performing perfect obedience thereunto, as also in under
going for his such death and dolors as were requisite. As Adam was made in the
image of God, and bound to keep the law for himself, and us: so Christ must
be conformed in nature to Gods image, and in all his actions to his Pathers
will. He is holy and just, both for us, and himself; but his sufferings are
only for us, and not himself. And here two questions arise; first, whether
his original righteousness, and active obedience, were only for himself,
his passive only for us, and sufficient for our salvation; It may be objected,
by his blood we are saved, etc. Ans: Here a part is put for the whole; for, we
are saved as well by his life, as by his death, and they are both of them, both
active and passive. Christ suffered in being concelued, and he was no looner
made man, and made under the law, but he began to pay for us; for, as Adam dyed
as soon as he had sinned so Christ suffered as soon as he became our surety;
therefore his whole life and death are for us, and our payment. He that dies by
the law is not acquitted, or justified, but condemned. He that makes false
Lature may be pardoned, or punished, but not justified. Every law acquits, when
men are found to have done nothing against it: but it moreover rewards, when
subjects are found to perform the utmost required by it. Christ therefore is
to suffer and satisfy; but that will not justify us, except further be found
in him, that he has done nothing against the law, nay, also that he has to
the height and full measure fulfilled it. We have need both of original and
actual righteousness to bring us to heaven, and out of him it is not to
befound. The second controversy is about the second death, which is the
punishment of the damned, and therefore not fit for Christ to suffer.
Concerning this we acknowledge that Christ did not, neither could truly, and
properly suffer the second death, which is a casting out and banishment from
blessedness, and the favor of God. God forbid that any Christian should have
such a thought of our Lord Christ, who ever since his conception was (...), and
could not be other for any moment of time. He and his Father were never
separated in love and affection; because Christ, even in under going of this,
obeyed his Father: yet were they for a time separated in apprehension, and
representation, God punishing his Son justly for us, in as much as he stood
in our stead. Whiles Christ suffered bodily dolors he never complained. Isa.
53.7. No thorns, no nails, fetched blood from him with so much pain, as his
own thoughts, My soul is heavy, etc. My God why have thou forsaken me? Oh,
what man, or Angel can conceive the taking of that heart, that without all
outward violence, merely, out of extremity of his own passion, bled, through
the flesh and skin, not some faint dew, but solid drops of blood. If I be
asked, how the son of God (very God) whose humane soul was ever
hypostatically and inseparably united to the Godhead, could be cast upon so
fearful an object, and bereft of the fruition of heavenly joy? I answer,
that the cause of this was (...), the resting of the Deity from actual and
comfortable influence, into the humanity, or the holding in for a time the
beams of that glorious divine light, a kind of veyle being drawn between
them, not of real separation, for that is impossible, but of actual
interposition, or imputation of the cursed estate of those, whom he was first
to represent, and then to redeem by such performance for them. Hereto we must
add how his sufferings were aggravated by his fullness of knowledge, and want
of comfort. He did not shut his eyes, when he drunk the bitter and dreggish
cup of his Cross. We read of Theodorus, a Martyr, that when he had hanged
ten hours upon theracke for Religion, his joints distended, and distorted,
etc. felt no pain at all, because be was comforted by an Angel, who in the
form of a young man wiped off his sweat with a clean to well, and powered cool
water upon his racked limbs, etc. But Christ when he suffered found none to
comfort him, no, none to pity him. Not an Angel dare be seen to look out
of the windows of heaven to relieve him, whiles the Father will smite him. And
surely, if Christ had not here wrestled for us, his other death upon the Cross
had never saved us from the wrath of God torments of Devils, and fire of hell.
His conformity with God in holiness, is expressed. Luke 1.35. in obedience.
Ioh. 5.30. Romans 5.19. and 10.4. In suffering. Phil. 2.8. Heb. 5.8. Math. 26.37.
Mark. 14.34. Luke 22.44. Math. 27.46. And that it was both active and passive,
is plain, by the eating of the paschall Lamb. Exodus 12. with sweet bread, and
sour herbs.

Q. How many parts are there of his humiliation?

A. Two; His life and death: there is nothing in the whole history of Christ's
life and death, but it makes for us, all our living and dying, serving for no
better use, but to make us miserable. Phil. 2.7.8. Ioh. 10.11. and 18.37. He
did live to bear witness to the truth of salvation, and died to seal it with
his blood. Heb. 9.16.17.18.

Q. What was his life?

A. His willing vnder-going of the miseries of this life for us, and the full
sanctification of ours in all points; from the separation of the seed, to the
separation of his Soul, he lived for us, and our good. He begins to live where
we begin to die, that is, in the mothers womb, and to sanctify us, where we
begin to be unclean. Heb. 2.14.15.16.17.18.

Q. What are the parts of his life?

A. His being in the mothers womb, and his being out of it. Our original is
polluted by propagation, and our whole life by an evil conversation, he must
therefore begin to cleanse and clear the fountain, and make all the
streams sweet by his passage through them. Luke 2.6.7.

Q. What are the parts of his life, being yet in his mothers womb?

A. His conception, and nativitie. We are polluted in both, our very warming
is a disposing of us to a sinful conception and birth. Psalm. 51.1. Christ
therefore must be both conceived and borne for us. Isa. 7.14. Luke 1.31.32.33.
Math. 1.18.

Q. What is his conception?

A. Whereby he was made of the seed of the Virgin, taken out of the rest of the
mass, and sanctified by the holy Ghost, after that she was betrothed unto
Ieseph, and before they came together. The conception is without generation,
that there might be no conveyance of original sin unto Christ, and by
separation in the Virgin, that Christ might be borne of holy seed. Ier. 31.22.
Luke 27.34.35.

Q. How was his soul created and adorned?

A. Immediately of nothing, and infused with great perfection, but not so
absolute, as that it received no after increase of knowledge, and wisdom.
Luke 2.40.52. He increased as well with God as man; and therefore he received
not all at once, to manifest afterward, as need required. He by his actions
did merit unto himself a further augmentation of gifts.

Q. What is his nativitie, or birth?

A. Whereby he was borne of the Virgin Mary, who was of the house of David.
Hence Christ is the Son of the ten Fathers of all the world, more especially,
of Abraham and David, being peculiar types of Christ. Abraham had the promise
renewed unto him, by calling him out of Chaldea into Canaan, a type of heaven,
where Circumcision, a badge of separation was instituted, and the Church
brought more particularly into one Nation, that the line and lineage of the
Messiah might the better be known; afterward it comes to David, whose
kingdom was made a more peculiar type of Christ. Furthermore, Mary was heir
of the kingdom of the Jews, hence Christ was borne King of the jews. Mat.
2.2. the Wise men ask for a borne King, not for Herod the usurper. Again,
she was to marry with one of the kindred, to preserve the seed of David, and
therefore she was betrothed to Joseph by name, and one of the same family,
but not as yet married unto him: so that Christ was both by nature, and law,
lawful heir of the kingdom, though he never came the ordinary way. Math. 1.
ver. 1. to the end. The Genealogy is divided into three several fourteen
generations; because of a threefold change of government. First, in the
Patriarchs. Secondly, in the Kings. Thirdly, in the Dukes. The Regal began
with David, and ended in Ieconias. Ier. 22.30. And so from Salomons posterity
was translated to the posterity of Nathan. Ezekiel. 21.26. And the Crown changed
into a Diadem, which had a threefold over-turne before it came to the right
heir. Ezekiel. 21.27. First, in the Maccabees. Secondly, in the Priests. Thirdly,
in Herod. In all this time David's posterity lived in private, and Christ found
the Scepter clean gone. Whiles the foolish jews gloried in their Temple, the
Lord destroyed it, to show them, that it was not an earthly but a spiritual
Temple, that he regarded; and removed the government from David, and from Judah
to Leui, and then to a very stranger, an Edomite, checking them very often,
before his birth, for their vain conceit, both of Church and Commonwealth.
And yet it seems Christ had some consanguinitie, both with the Princely and
Priestly progeny. Luke 1.36. he came to save of all sorts of men, and
therefore spread far in his race. That law Number. 36.7. did not limit the Tribe
of Levi. Exodus 6.23. 1 Chronicles. 22.11.

Q. What is the history of his life, being out of his mothers womb?

A. It is either his private, or public life. This was shadowed out in the
Levites, who might not minister at the Altar, till they were thirty years
old. Number. 4.3. At twenty years, the Israelites might go to war: but
greater maturitie is required in Gods ministers, who serve publicly at his
Altar. And our blessed Savior, who would fulfill every type, ministered not till
he was thirty year old. Luke 3.23. yet all the time of his private life, he
lived for us, even to sanctify unto us, as well our days spent in private as
public.

Q. What are the parts of his private life?

A. His infancy, and time of subjection to his parents, both needful for us,
seeing we offend God being Children, as well as in the years of discretion.
Infants are no innocents before God, but even then provokers of GODS wrath,
though they have not wit to sin with so high an hand against God as others.
Luke 2.7.51.

Q. What is revealed concerning his infancy?

A. His Circumcision, oblation, and flight into Egypt. As a Jew he was to
undergo the Ceremonies that belonged unto them, yea, and to put an end unto
them. He was circumcised in his private life, living then as a Jew; baptized at
his entrance into his public, because he did then put forth himself more
openly to be the Messiah of the whole world. Luke 2.21.22.23.24.

Q. What is meant by his Circumcision?

A. He was circumcised, not because he needed that himself, as if corruption
had been in him, which must be cut off by mortification: but for that he was
to fulfill the righteousness thereof, and put an end to all ceremonies, and to
show that the force of that Sacrament, which did scale unto the Fathers their
reconciliation with God depended on him, and that in him was found, that which
ought to be in every circumcised person, a pure and an undefiled heart. Luke
2.21. It was not only a seal, or sign of righteousness, but also a bond, or
obligation of fulfilling the law. Romans 4.11. with Romans 2.25. Gal. 5.3. Christ
therefore being circumcised, bound himself to keep the law, both for us and
himself. This importable yoke was laid upon his neck. Act. 15.10. 2 Cor.
5.21. Hence, at his circumcision he had his name Jesus, for by binding himself
to the law, he saved us. Act. 4.12. There were two that had this name in the
old Testament, the one, a Magistrate, the other, a minister. And the first had
his name changed when he was sent as a spy into Canaan. Number. 15.16 from Oshea
to Iehoshua. From let God save, to God shall save. Under the law (which brings
us, as it were, into a wilderness) we may desire, wish, and pray, that there
were a Savior; but under the Gospel, we are sure of salvation, and that our
Iehoshua has bound himself to fulfill all righteousness for us.

Q. What is meant by his offering?

A. It was to show, that he indeed was the first borne that was to be dedicated
to the Lord, whereof all others were but types. Luke 2.22.23.24. Lev.
21.1.2.3.4.5. etc. is set down both the separation and purification of women.
The one, in regard of original sin, the other, in regard of actual. The
Mass separates from God, and yet when the forgiveness of that is sealed by
circumcision, yet still remains a daily purification. After the Leper was
washed, he was to shave off his hair, showing how the superfluities of sin
were daily to be purged away. Furthermore, because the female was more moist
then the male, there was a longer time prescribed for the one, then the other.
The separation for a male was seven days, for a female fourteen. The
purification for a man child, thirty three days for the woman, sixty six.
Now Mary needed neither of these, for Christ was borne free from all sin,
both original and actual, he was the holy of holies. Dan. 9.24. yet because
he was our Surety, his mother was separated seven days, and he was
circumcised the eighth, and when she had accomplished thirtie-three days of
purification, he was presented unto God, all this was to show that her seed
took upon him all our debt, and was content that his Father should impute unto
him, both our original and actual sin, and that by him we should be
purified from both. Romans 7.18. That which dwells in us is laid upon him: his
offering was a pair of turtles, to show that innocence that was in him, and
ought to be in his Church. He offered not the Lamb, because the substance
being there, the shadow was to vanish; as also that he became poor for our
sakes. Again, he was presented, as the first borne, to sanctify all others,
and preserve them alive. Exodus 12.29. Aegypts first borne was smitten, because
they wanted the blood of the Lamb. And as types of Christ ever after, the
first borne were either consecrated, or redeemed. Exodus 13.15. Number. 3.12. Of
beasts, only the unclean were redeemed, the rest sacrificed. Number. 18.15. And
of men, God would have all redeemed. Christ therefore in all consecrations was
typified, as the price of every man's redemption, being before God unclean;
yea, the very strength of man. Gen 49 3. could not stand out with the wrath of
God; but for this that Christ has ransomed it. Math. 20.28. Ioh. 17.19.
Furthermore, the first borne had a right above all the rest. Deuteronomy. 21.17. And
they were to depend upon their elder brother. Genesis 25.31. and 27.36. and 49.3.
Hence Christ Math. 1.15. Luke 2.7. is called that first borne, and Romans 8.29.
amongst many brethren. Yea, sets him above Kings, Psalm. 89.27. Nay, the very
Angels. Heb. 1.6. Psalm. 97.7. And he alone by right may ask for the ends of
the earth to possess them. Psalm. 2.8. he is heir of all. Heb. 1.2. and has
power to make us sons. Ioh. 1.12. and fellow-heires with himself. Romans 8.17.

Q. What is meant by his flight into Egypt?

A. That he might therein also fulfill the type and prophecy of God, in
calling his son out of Egypt; and that therein we might learn, how he was
to descend into spiritual Egypt, to bear our labors and stripes, and bring
us out of thraldom and bondage into spiritual Canaan. Math. 2.13.14. Israel
was borne in Canaan, went down into Egypt, and came back again
triumphantly. They went down voluntarily and freely, but returned by force of
Arms: so we that were the sons of God by Creation, and placed in Paradise,
left our standing with God freely, and went down into the kingdom of
darkness, and are brought back again by the infinite power of God in
Christ. Exodus 4.22. Israel was not Gods son by nature but grace; therefore
must the natural son of God enter into the Egypt of this world, to reduce
poor Captives to their ancient liberties. Israel was in Egypt in the time of
her infancy; Adam went down too upon the day of his Creation, or not long
after, and therefore Christ to answer both, went down being an Infant.
Again, Christ after many admirable testimonies of his royal birth, will fall
back again into wonderful obscurity, to show plainly, how our pride was to
be expiated. And here Moses is a lively type of Christ. Moses by flight escaped
Pharaohs rage, and returned again when they were dead that sought his life,
and became a deliverer: So, Christ escaped the butchery of Herod, came back
again when his enemies were dead, and became Isreal's happy deliverer. His
infancy was most spent in Egypt, as being our most unprofitable time; but his
education must be in Canaan: but not as a King in Jerusalem, Psalm. 110.2. or
Bethlehem, David's city. Mic. 5.2. but in greater obscurity, befitting his
humiliation, in Nazaret, a place both base and wicked. Ioh. 7.52. with 1.46.
Hence he was called a Nazarite, by which name the Devils disgraced him. Mar.
1.24. Scribes and Pharisees rejected him. Ioh. 7.52. Act. 6.14. and the Jews
scorned him. Math. 26.71. Ioh. 18.5.7. and 19.19. And yet holy Angels, that
better knew the mystery, did adore him in it. Mar. 16.6. And under it was he
preached. Act. 2.22. and 4.10. And the godly believed in him. Mar. 10.47.
Neither is our Savior ashamed of it in his glory. Act. 22.8. The reason of the
name is abundantly testified of by the Prophets. Nazer, or Nezer, is an
ornament given to the Nazarites, hie Priest, and Princes, whereby they are
distinguished from the vulgar. Nazarites that gave themselves to God by vow,
had the bush of their hair called Nezer, Number. 6.7.8. The high Priest had Nezer
upon his head. Exodus 29.6. And as the former were holy to the Lord as long as
they kept on their lock, so was holiness written upon this, Exodus 39.30. And
the very oil that did conseerate it, is called Nezer, Lev. 21.12. So the
Crown upon the Kings head is called by the same name. 2 Samuel 1.10. 2 King.
11.12. Psalm. 89.39. Christ therefore being called a Nazarite, is separate from
all others, as most holy, and is our true Prince and Priest, Psalm. 2.2.6. and
110.4. Furthermore, he is called a Nazarite, as was Joseph, Genesis 49.26. Deuteronomy.
33.16. that is, one separate to be a preserver of his brethren. Joseph was a
long time obscured, before he was brought forth to feed the famished: so,
Christ did lie hid a long time in this city, before he steps forth to his
public function. On Christ shall Nezer flourish. Psalm. 132.18. Sampson, whose
hair was fair and strong, Judge. 13.25. and who living, and dying, devoured
his enemies, is a royal type of Christ. Luke 11.22. But Nezer thus taken, is
with Zam; it is also written with Zade, which signifies a branch, and so indeed
Christ is called, Isa. 11.1. Also Zemach, which signifies the same, Ier. 23.5.
and 33.14. Zech. 6.12. and 3.8. Isa. 4.2. In the tribe of Nephtali, was there a
City called Hazar, or Enhazar, Josh. 19.37. And by contraction Nazar, from
whence Nazareth might be derived, a City of sprigs and branches: that place in
Joshua called Cinereth, afterward was called Genezar, or Ge-nezareth, the
valley of branches: so Christ being the true branch of David, would grow in
this City, and afterward put forth himself as our Messiah. By all this we
see, that either place, or persons gives us an apt reason of this derivation,
as suffices to fulfill the Prophecy.

Q. What is written of the time of his life, wherein he lived subject to his
Parents?

A. Two things; first, his dispute with the Doctors at Jerusalem, when he was
twelve years old: secondly, his laboring with his hands. Luke 2.42.49.51.

Q. What is meant by his dispute with the Doctors?

A. It was (as it were) the giving notice before hand of his public calling,
and that he was the true Rabbi, or Doctor that come from God. Luke 2.46.47. The
children of the Jews had a double education, first, at home, Exodus 12.26.
Deuteronomy. 4.10. and 6.7. second, in the Schools, 1 Samuel 10.5.10. 2 King. 2.3. and
4.38. Act. 22.3. 2 Timothy 3.15. Christ at home did both teach, and was taught.
Luke 2.49. to sanctify our private education, and instruction; but for the
more exact teaching, Christ had none. Ioh. 7.15. Mar. 6.2. to show, that he
needed not to learn of man, and yet he entered into the School at twelve
years, both to sanctify that profession, as likewise to show himself to be
the great Doctor that was shortly to come into the world; and had no need to
learn of any other. John 1 18, and 7.16.

Q. What meant his laboring with his hands?

A. That he might also bear our curse, who were with the sweat of our brows
to eat our bread. Genesis 3.19. The word, subject to his parents, Luke 2.51.
signifies, to be ordered, and governed by another in outward Arts, and
Sciences. Math. 13.55. with Mar. 6.3. He was not only the Carpenters son,
but the Carpenter, and therefore verse 2. they were offended at him. He was
neither brought up in the Temple, as was Samuel; nor among the Pharisees, as
was Paul at the feet of Gamaliel; neither in the wilderness amongst the
Essees, etc. All which might have gained him some authority amongst his own;
but with Joseph a Carpenter, in a most obscure village. All this might well
show his humility for our good, as likewise show us that the builder of the
world, Heb. 1.2. and 11.10. was now come to repair the decays of it, and even
to sanctify unto us the meanest trade and calling in the world. Furthermore,
beside bodily labor for the space of eight-teene years, Christ did
wonderfully increase, Luke 2.52. with 40. Ioh. 1.14. and by reason of the
Hypostaticall union, had all fullness dwelling in him. Cel. 2.9. yet this hid
it self for a time, 2 Cor. 8.9. Phil. 2.7.8. So that question is justly moved,
whether there was a real increase of wisdom, stature, and grace, or only an
apparent and visible declaration of that which was in Christ from his very
first subsisting, and being in our flesh? The ancient Divines least they
should derogate from the hypostaticall union, thought the increase to be in
outward effects, no inward habites. Yet body and soul, being finite received
according to measure, and manner: and as the one increased in quantity, so the
other in quality; the wisdom of the Soul, as the stature of the body,
receiving a daily augmentation. He is said to grow inwardly as well as
outwardly, and to learn by his own actions, Heb. 5.8. And we know that
frequent actions require habites, or at least, a further perfection of infused
gifts and graces; and questionless, all this time of eight-teene years
labor, he according to the increase of grace, became gracious in his calling;
for the Text says, both with God and men he manifested a wonderful thriuing
in goodness.

Q. What is his public life?

A. Wherein he more publicly declared himself to be that Messiah, which was
so long before expected and looked for. He had hither to been hid in the
chips; but now being polished and perfitted, he comes forth and provokes the
adversary to set upon him. Mar. 1.9. Math. 3.13. Luke 3.21.30.

Q. What the parts thereof?

A. His initiation, course, and conclusion; his ingresse, progress, and
egresse. Christ does not abruptly set upon the course of his calling, but makes
an excellent preparation unto it. Act. 1.22.

Q. What is to be considered in his very entrance?

A. His Baptism, with his temptation and fasting. Math. 3.13. and 4.1. Mar.
1.12. Luke 4.1.

What is meant by his Baptism?

A. He was baptized as he was circumcised, not for any need he had thereof in
himself, who needed no washing, but to sanctify our Baptism, and to show
both by his circumcision and baptism, that he was the band and knot of both
Covenants, the end of the old and beginning of the new. Luke 3.21. When all the
people were baptized, Christ also was baptized, so he had many witnesses; he
was baptized in Jorden, for there the people passed over into Canaan. Josh.
3.17. And now was he come that gave passage into heaven, etc.

Q. What is meant by his fasting?

A. His holy preparation to his after temptation; we by eating surfeited of
sin, and he will begin to cure us with abstinence; our super fluitie, by
his forty days emptines, according to the old rule; Hunger cures the diseases
of gluttony. His course of cure was wonderful, not by giving us receipts, but
by taking our receipts for us, etc. Math. 4.2.

Q What is the meaning of his temptation?

That whereas the first Adam encountering with the Devil was overcome: so the
second opposing himself to the conflict, might overcome him for us, and we
through him in our fights, Mat. 4.1. to 13. All the while Christ lay still in
his Fathers shop, and meddled only with the Carpenters chips, the Devil
troubled him not; but now that he is declared the Son of God, and solemnly
invested into the office of Mediatorship, and goes about to dis-throne him, and
to cast him out of his kingdom, now he bends all his forces against him. The
two Purgatories of a Christian, are Repentance and Temptation, and we are no
sooner come out of the one, but we must look to enter into the other. If we
have passed the waters of Repentance, we must look to be cast into the fire
of Temptation. No sooner is Israel out of Egypt, then Pharaoh pursues them,
and if he be drowned, yet will the Amalekites vex them: yet here is our
comfort, that Christ has borne the heat of the day, and that we in him shall
be able to hold out the rest of the conflict.

Q. What is meant by his public course?

A. A diligent teaching by his forerunner John Baptist, himself, and his
Disciples, as also a continual working of miracles, that he might bring the
Jews to an acknowledgement of God, and himself, being sent from God. Ioh.
1.6.7. Luke 4.15. Ioh. 2.23. Math. 10.7.8. Luke 10.9. Act. 2.22.

What is the finishing thereof?

A. His passion, and crucifying, so the Creed concludes his life by a general
and particular; Passion is general to both, yet as the case stood, Passion is
limited to Pilate, Crucifying is left indifferent, as well to express Gods
hand upon him, and power of darkness, as of his other persecutors: but the
truth is, passion and action run along from the one end to the other of his
humiliation. Passion is, as the case stands betwixt God and Christ, and Christ
and his persecutors: action, as between God and us, and us and Christ. Christ
is a patient as he suffers for us at the hands of his Father, devils, and men;
and an agent as he becomes our Surety, and reconciles us to God. Psalm. 69.4.
He restored that which he took not away. Act. 2.23. and 4.27.

Q. Keeping then the general and particular term, what is his passion?

A. His suffering under Pontius Pilate, with the rest of his persecuters, who
brought him upon the stage, that God might punish him for our sakes. Act.
4.27.28.

Q. What is hereto be considered?

A. His preparation unto death, and exposing of him into the hands of the
wicked. Math. 26.2.17.36.47.

Q. What is the preparation?

A. Whereby Christ being to give his last farewell unto nature, prepares and
makes ready himself for death. Luke 22.15.

Wherein consists it?

A. In the eating of the Passover, and his agony in the Garden, he begins his
Passion with the Passover; for the Paschall Lamb was a more particular type
of his suffering, and from that time the Devil began to work in Judas, and
the Jews, and it was the fittest, because at such public times, malefactors
were executed, that all might the better know the sin and be instructed, etc.
This the high Priest and his followers, thought to be a very convenient time to
let the people know Christ's blasphemy, as also to suppress his Doctrine, so
much by them detested. Math. 26.20.36.

Q. What is meant by Christ's keeping of the Passover?

A. That he was the Lamb signified in the Passover, and that now was the time
wherein he was also to put an end to the same by himself, and therefore in
place thereof he instituted the Sacrament of his last Supper. Luke
22.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.

Q. What is meant by his Agony?

A. His grievous conflict with himself about the vnder-going of his Passion,
when in the Garden he sweating drops of blood, cried unto his Father once and
again, that if it were possible, the cup might pass from him, and in the end
he was heard and comforted, Math. 26.36. Luke 24.42.43.44. Heb. 5.7.

Q. What is his exposing unto judgment?

A. The last act of his humiliation, wherein he was to undergo the greatest
penalty for our sin, at the hands of sinners themselves; and therefore is
put in Scripture for the whole work of our Redemption. The Jews choose a time
wherein they might put our blessed Savior to the greatest shame; a time of the
greatest frequence, and concourse of all Jews and Proselytes: an holy time,
when they should receive the figure, they reject the substance: when they
should kill and eat the Sacramental Lamb, in faith, in thankfulness, they
hill the Lamb of God, our true Passover, in cruelty and contempt, etc. Isa.
53.3.

Q. What are the degrees of this his exposing unto judgment?

A. The first is his apprehension in the Garden, by Judas, and a company of
armed men, sent from the chief Priests and Elders of the people, Math. 26.47.
Luke 22.47. Ioh. 18.3. Adam began our misery in a Garden, and there will Christ
begin to suffer for us. It is probable, that it was one of Salomons Gardens,
the pleasures whereof he sanctified by pains, and fulfilled the type of
coming to his Garden. Can. 5.1.

Q. Why was Christ thus apprehended?

A. That he being in our stead, might under go the greater contumely and
reproach, deserved by us; for they came with bills and staves to take him, as
if he had been the greatest Malefactor that ever was. Math. 26.55.

Q. What is the second degree?

A. His arraignment before the Ecclesiastical and politic Magistrate, as if
he had broken all laws, and deserved punishment at every judgment seat. And
all this was done to show us what wretches we were in Gods sight, and how he
should have proceeded against us, who by means of his Son are pardoned, that
we might never see our just condemnation, otherwise then we see it acted in
our Surety, he was posted from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, and
back again from Herod to Pilate, by whom he was both justified and condemned.
God running along with the whole Tragedy, and showing plainly by Judge
Pilate, that Christ was not to die for himself, but for us, the just suffering
for the unjust, Mat. 26.57. and 27. 2. Luke 23.7.8. Math. 27.4.19.24.

Q. What was the third degree?

A. The most miserable derision and whipping of him that ever was heard tell
off; he was to encounter both pain and scorn for us. An ingenuous and noble
nature, can worse brook this then the other; any thing rather then
disdainfulnesse, and imperious in sultation: especially, from so base enemies.
The Jews, the Soldiers, yea, the very thieves flouted and taunted him, and
triumph over his misery; his blood cannot satisfy them, without his reproach.
Math. 26.67.68. and 27.28.29.30.31. Oh, that we could imitate the Jews in
their custom concerning evil doers; they had ever some malefactor brought
forth to them in their great Feast, which they dismissed with disgrace; so it
should be the happiest piece of our triumph and solemnity, if we could bring
forth that wicked profaneness, wherewith we have dishonored God, and
blemished his Gospel, to be scourged, and sent away with all holy indignity.
See thy Savior scourged and beaten for thee, and see if thou can find in
thy heart to favor, or cheerish the least sin.

Q. What is his crucifying?

A. After all these abuses he is put to the most accursed death of the Cross,
a kind of punishment jointly with the other, inflicted upon none but such as
were offenders in the highest degree, and every one was held most accursed that
so died, to show, that he suffered for offenders of the greatest stain and
strain, and so to bear our curse upon him. Phil. 2.8. Gal. 3.12.13. Deuteronomy.
21.23.

Q. Did he suffer only these outward afflictions?

A. He suffered these as judgments for sin; therefore were they so much the
more bitter; and whiles he was on the cross those three hours of darkness,
he was assailed with all the powers of darkness, so that he felt in his soul
and body unutterable anguishes, even the effects or apprehension of the most
fearful wrath of God, so that it made him cry out, My God, my God, etc. and
when that was over, as having felt therein the most bitter pains of all his
sufferings, he said it was finished. Math. 27.45.46. Ioh. 19.30.

Q. What might this mean?

A. That he was for the time reputed as one separated from God, which is the
second death; for as the first death is the reparation of the soul from the
body, the beginning of our natural life: so the second death is the separation
of both body and soul from God, the beginning of that spiritual life. Isa.
53.4.5.6.10. Christ was never a stranger to the life of God. Ephesians. 4.18. and yet
his Father did for a space seem to estrange himself to his Son. Oh, beloved
Saints of God, let us, with that Disciple, follow him a far off; and passing
over all his contemptuous usage in the way, see him thus brought to his Cross,
and still the further we look, the more wonders shall we behold. Every thing
adds to his ignominy of suffering, and triumph of over-comming. It was not
done in a corner, as Paul says to Festus, but in Jerusalem, the eye, the heart
of the world; and that without the gates; in Calvary, among the stinking bones
of execrable Malefactors. Before, the glory of the place bred shame; now, the
vileness of it. Not a circumstance, but argues the wonderful humiliation of
our Savior, and still his pain and scorn increased till all was finished.

Q. Hitherto of his life; what is his death?

A. The expiration, and delivering up of his soul into the hands of his
Father. Math. 27.50. Luke 23.46. Ioh. 19.30. When he had finished all, and
endured most exquisite torments, he himself without all violence gave up the
Ghost. For he both cried with a loud voice, and bowed the head immediately
before he yielded his last breath; whereas in man's death the spirits first
faint and tire, and the head falls down when they are expired: but Christ being
full of spirit, able to hold up his head, bends the same downe-ward of his own
accord, and then dies. Oh, ye sinners, behold, Christ's head thus humbly bowed
down in a gracious respect to you; his arms are stretched out lovingly to
embrace you; yea, his precious side is open to receive you, there is no more
accusation, judgment, death, hell for you: all these are no more to you, then
if they were not, if ye can believe, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is
dead. Romans 8.34. I know every man is ready to reach forth his hand to this dole
of grace, and would be angry to be beaten from this door of mercy; surely,
there is no want in this Mossias, look that the want be not in thy self: he
has finished, but thou beleeuest not, thou repentest not, all is in vain to
thee; for all these, thou may be condemned. What ever Christ is, what art
thou? Here is the doubt: Christ is a good shepherd, and gives his life for his
sheep: But what is this to thee, that art secure, profane, impenitent, thou
art a wolf, or a goat. Christ's sheep hear his voice, but thou art a rebel
to his law, and therefore can not hearken to his Gospel for mercy, etc.

Q. What is his death to us?

A. Christ was willingly content to endure the separation of his body and soul
for a time, which is the first death, that he might take away whatsoever is
judgment therein, and sanctify the same unto us. 1. Cor. 15.55.56.57. We
were the authors of this death, and our Savior did alter it, our disobedience
made it bitter, his mercy has made it not to be evil unto us. Oh, my Savior,
how halt thou perfumed and softened this bed of my grave by dying? How can it
grieve me to tread in thy steps to glory? The worst piece of the horror of
this death is the grave, and that part which is corrupted feels it not; the
other, which is free from corruption, feels an abundant recompense, and
forefees a joyful reparation. We carry heaven and earth wrapped up in one
compound; it is but restitution, when each part returns homeward.

Q. What followed his death?

A. His burial, and abiding in the grave, to the end, that he might sweeten
the same for us; and whereas it was by reason of sin, a dungeon, to reserve
the guilty body against the day of judgment, it is through him become (as it
were) a perfumed bed for the elect, against the day of Resurrection. Math
27.59.60. Luke 23.53. Isa. 57.2. Burial comes of burning, an ancient custom
of burning bodies, and then preserving their ashes in a pitcher in the earth.
Hence it may be that the Ancients to prevent an absurd conceit of this kind of
Funeral concerning Christ's body, whereof not a bone was to be broken, or
wasted, added descending into hell, to show, that Christ was not burned, but
buried, by going down into Sheol: but it is not for me to determine the
doubt, I leave it to riper judgments. One thing more I add, that burial is
sometimes taken for preparation of a body for the grave. Math. 26.12. This she
did to bury me, etc. Christ died, was embalmed, and then interred.

CHAPTER XXIIII. Of Christ's Exaltation.
Question.

HItherto of his humiliation; What is his Exaltation?

Answer.

It is his victory and triumph over his and our enemies, the Devil, sin, and
death, with the world, and whatsoever else might cross the felicity of the
Saints. Ephesians. 4.8.9.10. Phil. 2.9.10. It was the strangest and strongest receipt
of all the rest, by dying to vanquish death. 1 Thessalonians. 5.10. We need no more,
we can go no further; there can be no more Physic of the former kind:
there are cordials after this purgation of death, of his resurrection and
ascension; no more penal receipts. By his blood we have Redemption. Ephesians. 1.7.
Justification, Romans 3.24. Reconciliation, Colos. 1.20. Sanctification, 1 Pet.
1.2. Entrance into glory, Heb. 10.19. Woe were to us if Christ had left but one
mite of satisfaction upon our score, to be discharged by our selves: and woe
be to them that derogate from him to arrogate to themselves, and would feign
botch up his sufferings, with their own superfluities: he would not off the
Cross till all was done, and then having finished, he went on with a second
work, to build up a perfect way to heaven upon this foundation, and from the
grave to his throne in heaven, he chalked out for us the everlasting way.

Q. Wherein does the glory of his victory and triumph consist?

A. First, in the deposition and laying aside of all infirmities. Secondly, in
his assumption and taking up of all perfections, both of body and soul. His
body was now no more to die but to receive celestial perfection. His soul had
nothing withheld from it, no truth from his understanding, no goodness from
his will: upon earth he was ignorant of something, which now is perfectly
revealed unto him, he now knows the day of judgment, and by his Godhead has
every thing revealed unto his manhood that is fit for the government of his
Church, though he be absent from us both in body and soul, that which neither
Saint nor Angel can hear, he hears, and puts up all petitions to his Father.
His mind is ignorant of nothing for the manner and measure of a most perfect
created understanding, and his will is perfected with the greatest perfections
of virtues that are incident to any creature; so that he is both in soul and
body far more glorious then any other creature is, or can be, and made Lord of
all. Heb. 12.4. The manhood of Christ is not the son of God by adoption, or
creation, but personal union, and so has no other relation to the Father of
sonne-ship, but the same with the Godhead; this exalts him highly in glory,
and there is as much difference betwixt the son of God and other creatures,
as between a King and his meanest subject, and as one Star differs from
another in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41. and the Sun far exceeds all the rest: so in
heaven shall Christ appear more glorious then any other Saint or Angel. Rev.
21.23. Isa. 60.19. and shall be as easily known from the rest, as the Sun is
from all other Stars, etc.

Q. Hitherto of his glory in general; what are the particular degrees thereof?

A. The first is his resurrection the third day, when as his soul and body, by
the power of his Godhead (never separated from either) were brought together
again, and so rose again, and appeared to his Disciples for the space of
forty days. And this is the earnest of our Resurrection, so that we shall
also rise by the power and virtue of his Resurrection, not unto judgment, but
life everlasting. This is first confirmed by the Angels to men, Math. 28.5.6.7.
Mar. 16 6.7. Luke 24.4.5.6. Secondly, by his own apparitions unto them. Math.
28.9.17. Mar. 16.9 12.14. Luke 24.15.36, Ioh. 20.14.19.26. and 21.1. Act.
1.2.3. 1 Cor. 15.4.5.6.7.8.9. Thirdly, by the keepers of the Sepulcher, Math.
28.11. Fourthly, by his Apostles, Act. 2.24.32. Lastly, by the inward testimony
of the Spirit, in the hearts of the elect, Ioh. 15.26. The power by which he
rose is expressed, 2 Cor. 13.4. 1 Pet. 3.18. His immortality, Romans 6.9.10.
dominion. Romans 14.9. Godhead, Romans 1.4. The fruit of it to us, first, in our
justification, Romans 4.25. Secondly, our sanctification, and glorification, Romans
6.4.5.8.9.10.11.12.13. 2 Cor. 5.15. Ephesians. 2.4.5. Colos 2.12.13. and 3.1.2.3.4.5.
1 Pet. 1.3.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. etc.

Q. What is the second degree thereof?

A. His ascension into Heaven, by the virtue of his Godhead from Mount Olivet,
in the sight of his Disciples. Where he began his passion, there he begins
his ascension, to teach us how from deiection, we shall be brought to our
exaltation; as also to teach us, that because he is our head, and is already
advanced into heaven, thither also must the body follow him. And therefore he
is gone before to prepare a place for us. Mar. 16.19. Luke 24.50. Act. 1.9.12.
Heb. 10.9.20 Ioh. 14.2.

Q. What is the third degree?

A. His sitting at the right hand of God the Father, where we have his
advocation, and intercession for us, and need to acknowledge no other Master of
requests in heaven, but one, Jesus Christ our Mediator. Here good prayers never
come weeping home: In him I am sure I shall receive, either what I ask, or
what I should ask. I cannot be so happy, as not to need him, and I know I
shall never be so miserable, that he will contemn me, if I come as a poor
suter, with my petition unto him. Romans 8.34. Heb. 9.24. 1 Ioh. 2.1. 1 Pet.
3.22. Rev. 3.7. Furthermore, by Christ's sitting at his Fathers right hand, we
are to understand two things: first, the return of the divine nature, as it
were (the work of humiliation being finished) to his former glory. Christ for
a time obscured the excellency of his Godhead, Phil. 2.6.7.8.9. under the
veil of our flesh, but now the Curtain is drawn again, and the divine
nature, which seemed to sleep in the humane, is awaked, to work wonders
openly, for the good of the elect, and even breaks forth as the Sun does
from under a cloud, having expelied all the mists of his humiliation, Secondly,
as there is but a reversion of the divine nature, so this is an exaltation of
the humane, to possess that glory and excellency which before it had not,
Psalm. 2.6. and 110.1. Dan. 7.13.14. Act. 5.30.31. Heb. 2.9. and 8.1.2. and
9.24. Thus might Steven see Christ in a most glorious manner, above all other
in heaven. Act. 7.55.56.

Q. What benefit redoundeth thereby to us?

A. Unspeakable, for while our head is so highly magnified, and made Lord of
all, we know that he will rule all for the best, and that no good thing shall
be wanting to them that are his, yea, that our sins which we cannot but
commit, whiles the old man dwells in us, shall not prejudice our happiness,
seeing he sits at the right hand of our Father, to be our intercessour and
governor.

Q. What is the fourth and last degree?

A. His glorious return from heaven to judgment, both of the quick and dead,
which is his second coming into the world with great glory and majesty, to
the confusion of them that would not have him rule over them, and the
unspeakable good of his own; for it is he that judges, and who shall
condemn them? and hereupon is the full work of Redemption given to the Son.
Math. 24.30. Ioh. 14.3. Act. 1.11. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and 2. Epist: chap. 1. ver.
7.8. Iud. ver. 14.15. Phil. 3.20.

CHAPTER XXV. Of the Spirits application to the Church.
Question.

HItherto of Redemption; what is the application thereof?

Answer.

The making of that ours, which the Lord of life has done for us. The purchase
of our peace was paid at once, yet must it be severally reckoned to every soul
whom it shall benefit. If we have not an hand to take what Christ's hand does
either hold, or offer, what is sufficient in him, cannot be effectual to us.
We have no peace without reconciliation; no reconciliation, without remission;
no remission, without satisfaction; no satisfaction without infinite merit; no
infinite merit without Christ, no Christ without faith. By this we are
interessed in all that either God the Father has promised, or Christ his son
has performed. Conscience must play the honest servant, and take his masters
part, not daring to be so kind to the sinner, as to be unfaithful to his
maker. It must not look straight upon him, till he by the eye of faith be able
to look straight upon God. Hence it will suffer no man to be friends with
himself, till he be a friend with God: now by faith in Christ Jesus, of
enemies we become friends, yea, sons, and as sons may expect, and
challenge, not only in this life careful provision, and safe protection; but
in the life to come salvation, and fruition of an everlasting patrimony, Mark.
16.16. Luke 24.45.46. Ioh. 3.3.14.15.16.18.19. Ephesians. 3.17.

Q. To which of the three persons is this work most properly ascribed?

A. To the holy Ghost: the Father most properly carries the work to
Redemption, and then the Son goes on with it so begun to Application, and
then the Spirit finisheth the work so dispensed by the second person. Ioh.
14.17.18.26. and 15.26.27. and 16.7.8.9.10.11. Christ left not his Church
comfortless, but even increased her joys by the presence of his Spirit. When
he let fall the showers of spiritual operation (after his departure) upon the
Jews, Act. 2.41. there were at one Sermon three thousand souls added to the
Church; a great increase, none such in Christ's time. Why? Was Peter the better
Preacher? Nay, never man spoke as he spoke, for God gave him the Spirit not by
measure. Ioh. 3.34. and 7.46. But now the spirit was given plentifully to the
hearers, which before was either restrained, or sparingly imparted. Ephesians. 1.13.
The word, faith, and the Spirit, work all together, for the applying of Christ
unto salvation.

Q. To whom is Christ applied?

A. To the Church, which is the proper subject of Redemption. They that make
Christ an universal Mediator, and the Spirit a general agent in applying to
all, and yet the Father but a special elector of some, show themselves
ignorant of the manner of the cooperation of the sacred Trinity. For as the
Father begins by election, so the Son goes on by Redemption, and the Spirit
finisheth the work by application: so that application is as special as
election, Ioh. 17.9.10.11. As the Father redeemes his own by Christ: so he
keeps them by the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.25. He gave himself only for his Church,
verse. 26.27. and the same he does present holy to his Father, by the work of
his Spirit.

Q. What is the Church?

A. The number of all those that are applied to Christ by the A brief Map of
Gods Election.
Election From the Father The inchoation and beginning whereof is Who for the
first manner of working has by the counsel of his will decreed by his
omnipote^^ie and efficie^^ie originally to effect all In the salvation of all
the Elect. The dispensation, or progress In the Son Who for the second
manner of working ha^^ by the price of redemption obtained, and still by ^is
intercession does obtain to repair all The consummation, or ending By the
holy Ghost Who for the third manner of working has and does apply by testimony
seal and government the ^^^athers election and ^^s redemption to finish all
And for conclusion, all 3 apply the same to faith. Which receives all, as most
freely graced of God. And by which we are both ingrafted into Christ, and made
to grow up with him until we have our perfect fruition

(...) or the admirable goodness of his will, consisting in justice and mercy,
is only to be seen in the reasonable creatures, Exodus 33.19. and 34.6.7. Romans
9.18.

Q. What are the kinds as they concern man?

A. Election, which is Gods gracious decree in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. to set free
some men from the misery of the general lapse, and to bring them infallibly to
salvation, for the setting forth of his abundant mercy, Romans 9.11.16.23. And
Reprobation, which is his preterition, or passing by some men, and leaving them
in the general corruption of the fall, without effectual means of recovery
and salvation, for the manifestation of his uncontrollable justice. Romans
9.18.21.22.

Question.

What mean you by this delineation and description of Election.

Answer.

That we should not fix our eyes upon the odious and offensive name of
Reprobation, but delight our selves the more with the sweet and comfortable
inspection of our Election, wherein were shall find the sacred Trinity to
have been more deeply then in the other, and not to be so much pleased in
plaguing men for finne as to save them out of it. Reprobation, being an
internal effect, and ever sleeping in the bosom of him that never sleeps (I
mean an imminent, no transient effect) must needs be from God and in God yet
the execution of it is no ways so large in God, as that decree of life and
salvation. Showing plainly, that God is far more affected with the life and
happiness of his creatures, then their death and misery. Election is from the
Father, in the Son, by the Spirit to faith, which works not any life in us,
or for us, but only receives it at the bountiful hands of Almighty God. Oh,
let us not so much wrangle and wrestle concerning Reprobation, but with
delectation, recreate our selves with this divine work of our Election. This
casts it self into a large compass, whereas in the other, God contracts his
hand, and gives man leave to mischief himself. And although our Reprobation
be from God, yet our condemnation is from our selves. The strait and straight
line to heaven lies in this compass, that it is from the Father by the
inchoation of decree, in the Son by the dispensation of means, by the holy
Ghost for consummation of those means, and to faith for the instrument of
application.

Q. How is the Church divided?

A. It is either militant upon earth, or triumphant in heaven.

This distribution is of the Church, either in respect of the members, or of
their condition. Members, as some are on earth, others in heaven. Condition, as
our fighting overcomming. In this world our application is but inchoatiue, in
the world to come it shall be plenary. Here with strife against sin and
Satan, hereafter shall be our glory and triumph. We can see no more palms
then crosses, if there were no resistance, our Christian virtue would not
appear. There is but one passage, and that a strait one, and if with much
pressure we can get through, and leave our superfluous rags as torn from us
in the crowd, we are happy. God would have heaven narrow and hard in the
entrance, that after our pain, our glory might be the sweeter. One piece of
iron cannot be souldred and fastened to another, unless both be made red hot,
and beaten together: so, Christ and his Church, the whole body, and the members
cannot so soundly be affected each to other, unless both have experience of
the like misery, Romans 8.17. this frayes many from being the Lords, who though
they would be glad of the crown, yet stand trembling at the Cross. It is
Satan's policy to drive us from our military profession, by the difficulty of
our Christian ware fare; like as some in hospital Savages, make fearful
delusions by Sorcery, upon the shore, to fright Strangers from landing, etc.
But we are not to be dismayed, seeing God has made the militant estate of
the Church a degree unto the triumphant. It is a graduall, no specificall
distinction, to say the church is militant or triumphant. Ephesians. 6.11.12.13. Heb.
12.22.23.

Q. What is the militant Church?

A. It is the number of all those that are applied unto Christ by faith. Here
were must live by faith, after we shall come to the fruition of Christ by
sight. Ephesians. 6.16. Heb. 11.1. 2 Cor. 3.18. and 4.17.18. 1 Cor. 13.12.13. This
Church consists only of men, not as yet freed from the burden of the flesh;
and that is the reason, why the work of the Lord goes so slowly forward, and
makes many sit still with their hands foulded in their bosoms, and wish they
knew how to be rid of time, and so become miserable loosers of good hours, and
good parts, and the very hope of future reward, because they will not strive
with themselves. Happy are those persecutions that drive us to this hold, and
like an old beaten Hare, weary of long chasing, return us to this home, to die
in this borrough.

Q. Is the number of these always alike?

A. No, but sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser, and its invisible in
regard of faith, yet every faithful man may know himself, and so may a man
that has the spirit of discerning, judge of another to his comfort; for faith
in both is to be known by his fruits, etc. 1. Tim. 1.12. Heb. 6.9.

Q. How shall a man do in this case?

A. By his care to walk according to the rule of godliness, he shall procure
a comfortable testimony to his owns Soul, and confirm others in the way of
Religion. Act. 24.16. 2 Cor. 1.12. Heb. 13.18. Tit. 3.8.

Q. Is the Church militant by it self in the world?

A. No; it is mingled with tares and chafe: and as God left the accursed
Cananites to be as pricks and thorns to his ancient people: so still will he
have his dear ones to be exercised with the wicked of this world, that their
graces may more fully be known, and themselves wained from the wearisome
world. Hence it must needs be great folly to leave visible Congregations,
because they are pestered with the profane of the world; there is no man that
will cast away the gold, or corn, because it is mingled with his offall: but
will bestow some labor on the fan, fire, or furnace. God has left means to
purge his Church of profane persons, though he will have some tares to try his
Children, and keep them in awe of his majesty, nay, make them labor the more
to prove their election. If all were good, who would fear to go to hell? But
seeing we may be Christians, and not elect, it will make us more diligent to
study for true holiness. And knowing that many shall be damned with the water
of Baptism in their faces, and Church in their mouths, It will teach Gods
Saints in spite of all hypocrisy, to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling. Phil. 2.12. Our blessed Savior out of the very fears of damnation,
has fetched the safest security of salvation; oh that we could out of this
security, as easily fetch the fear of his majesty. Math. 13.24.25.47. 1 Cor.
5.10.11.12.13.

Q. What are these tares and chafe?

A. Such in the Church as have but the name of Christians, and yet are together
with the Church in this world; and so are called improperly by the name of the
Church. Visibilitie, Profession, congregation, etc. do as well belong to the
tares as the wheat, the Reprobate as the elect, and therefore are but
accidents of the Church, yea, such adherents as are separable from the Church:
and therefore Papists and Separatists do ill in teaching them to belong so
essentially to it. Math. 13.49.50. Romans 9.6.7. 1 Ioh. 2.19. Ioh. 6.70.71.

Q. How is the Church militant with the tares distributed?

A. Into Congregations, as great Armies into lesser bands. It is impossible for
all to hear one Pastor, and therefore must the governed be ranked under
diverse teachers, that all may hear and learn. 1 These. 2.14. Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.

Q. What is here to be considered?

A. The government of the Congregations, which is an order of ruling and
obeying in the outward communion of the Saints. Our sanctification is not
wrought all at once, but by degrees, and the Churches must beget children unto
God; and therefore there must be an holy ordering of the people to bring this
work to pass. Again, a law is necessary to keep corruption under, and if
there were no power to restrain evils, this field of God would run all into
thistles. This work must be continual, or else grace speedeth not. Like as
the body from a settled and habitual distemper, must be recovered by long
dyets; and so much the rather, for that none can intermit this care without
relapses: so in regard of our old Apostasy, to keep the heart in ure with
God, is the highest task of a Christian. Good motions are not frequent: but
above all the constancy of a good disposition is most rare and hard. God
knowing this leaves his Church an order of policy to keep under corruption,
and advance grace. And it were an happy thing, if Gods Ministers could be as
happy as Tradesmen; for a Carpenter in the morning shall find his work as he
left it the evening before: but Gods Ministers are often to begin again, and
like Wyer-drawers are feign to go forward, by going backward. Hence they have
power to bind and loose, loose and bind; God by them assaying all means to
save some. Paul rejoiced to see the good order of the Church, Colos. 2.5. And
commended this point to Timothy, who was to succeed him in the government of
Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.15.

Q. What are the parts and members of Congregations?

A. They are either the Governors, or Governed: In the militant Church, God
has set Captains to teach, and Soldiers to learn, and both faithfully to
wage wary against the enemy. Ephesians. 4.11.12. and 6.10.11.

Q. What are the Governors?

A. They are those that are appointed of God for the looking to the
Congregations, over which they are set, for the edification thereof. Act.
20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3.4. These are called Gods right foot, Rev. 10.2. and are
to lead the way. Hence it is the error of the Separation, in the constitution
and reformation of Churches, to set the left leg before the right. God has
ever constituted and planted Churches by his Ministers, and reformed them both
by Magistrates and Ministers. It is usurpation in the people to adventure upon
either, they are to reform themselves; but Churches, and their government is
referred of God to the Pastor, and the Prince.

Q. Wherein stands the power of the Pastors over the people?

A. In the power of the Keys; whereby they are able to open, or shut heaven,
bind, or loose sinners, Math. 16.19. and 18.17.18. 1 Cor. 5.4.5. Yet we are to
understand, that the principal authority is in Christ, the ministry in men,
2 Cor. 5.18.19.20. Rev. 3.7.

Q. What is binding?

A. That authority whereby they might correct a brother that should walk
inordinately, 1 Cor. 5.5.

Q. What degrees were to be used therein?

A. First, Admonition, and that was done privately by a brother which should
find him walking inordinately, whom if he did hear, it was to go no further:
but if he would not hear him, then the party admonishing, was to take two or
three more for witnesses, and to admonish him before them, and if he would not
hearken to all these, they were to tell the Governors, who also did admonish
him. Math. 18.15.16.17.18.19.20.

Q. What was the second degree?

A. If Admonition would not prevail with the offender, then proceeded the
Governors to suspension, and so did bind the delinquent from coming to the
holy Communion; and if this suspension prevailed not, then followed the
excommunication of him, and it was also either the greater, or the lesser; the
Church still using moderation; first, therefore the lesser was used, whiles
there was any hope of reclaiming the party offending, then the greater, when
his case was desperate. 1 Cor. 5.4. 1 Timothy 1.20. Tit. 3.10. Gal. 1.8. Romans 9.3.
1 Cor. 16.22.

Q. What is absolution?

A. A receiving again of the offender into the Church upon his true
repentance, 2 Cor. 2.6.10. God would not have them to perish that repent of
their former evils, but to be comforted of their brethren, least over much
sorrow should swallow them up. 2 Cor. 2.7.11. In schools it is necessary, not
only that precepts be taught, but that the practice of them be urged, and the
diligent encouraged: so in the Church it is needful that men be not only
instructed, but pressed and strained to a holy life; for, not the hearers of
the law, but the doors shall be saved.

Q. How many sort of Governors are in the Church?

A. Two; The principal, and the ministerial. This government is spiritual,
and concerns the Soul, and therefore there must be a teaching of the heart as
well as the ear; here is need of inspiration with instruction. 1 Cor. 3.6.
Psalm. 63.1. and 143.10.11. Cant. 4.15.

Q. Who are the principal Governors?

A. The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The father is the chief agent
in the Church; for, no man comes to the Son, except the Father draw him.
Ioh. 6.44. And none can come unto the Father, but by the Son Ioh. 14.16.
Neither can any say that Jesus is his Lord, but by the Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.3. or
that he is Gods child by free adoption. Romans 8.16. The Church is one with
Christ, as he is one with his Father. Ioh. 17.21.22.23. not in nature, but in
the work of our Redemption.

Q. What are the Ministers?

A. Such as are appointed of the principal to be laborers together with them
in this work, 1 Cor. 3.9. They are called vnder-rowers. Luke 1.2. because
under Christ the Master Pilote, they help forward the ship of the Church,
toward the haven of heaven. Men that are subject to the same passions with us,
are fittest to deal for us. Exodus 20.19. Iam. 5.17. Thus we see how God is
alone in the principal work, and principal in the ministerial. And though
he parts labor with his servants, yet not possession. It is enough for the
labourer, if he have his hire, his penny: men do not use to devide their
ground with the plow man, or their house with the Mason. He that has the
Bride, is the Bridegroom. Ioh. 3.29. so is not he that prepares, and
presents her. 2 Cor. 11.2. so is not he that stands by, and rejoices to
hear the Bridegroomes voice. All the Apostles call themselves servants, not
Lords of Gods inheritance. Romans 1.1. 1 Pet. 5.3. Moses as a servant in his
Lords house, Christ as the son over his own house, Heb. 3.5.6. Churchmen
are the Churches, and not the Church theirs, that the Church with them, may be
Christ's, and he Gods.

Q. How are the Ministers divided?

A. They are either ordinary, or extraordinary. Such were the times wherein the
Church had need of extraordinary teaching, that the truth of Religion might
depend upon God, and not the devices of men; and here the Lord had respect unto
his Majesty and excellency; and therefore did immediately communicate
himself with a few, least overmuch familiarity should breed contempt, both
of himself, and his ordinances. No Prince will speak to every man, but keep
state with his subjects, that they may reverence him the more. Ephesians. 4.11.

Q. What were the extraordinary?

A. Such as were immediately called of God. All arts are the wisdom of God,
and by creation might be read in the creatures; but this art of Divinity by
sin is blotted out, and therefore is to be learned by immediate revelation.
Hence God extraordinarily calls some, and reveals his will to them, that
they may reveal it to others. Exodus 4.15.16. And this God has done many
ways, generally, either externally, or internally. Externally by voice,
without vision. Act. 9.4. or by both together, Christ for a time assuming the
shape of men and Angels. Genesis 18.9.13.17.33. and 19.2. Internally, either
awaking by inspiration, or sleeping by inward dreams and visions. Genesis
15.12.13. etc. Math. 2.12.13. Act. 2.4.17. Sleep reaches not to the
reasonable Soul, and God may confer with man, when both his internal and
external senses are locked up. He is able to inform the Soul immediately,
without all use of the body, and by a divine vision let man see his will,
though his reason was never informed thereof by his ear, or any outward word.
So God can inform the inward senses without the outward, and by a dream let a
man see that which was never within the supposition of any sense. So God can
show unto the outward senses, objects without natural light, or color. Rev.
1.10.12. He saw and heard in an ecstasy. His eye and his ear were spiritually
taken up with revelations; not as the Prophets of the wicked Spirit, when they
are said to be Deo pleni, full of God, behauing themselves like madmen: but
quiet and calm, understanding well what they did, God first certifying their
understandings, after their wills, and so inclining them to speak and live
accordingly; the other knew not what they said, as being possessed by the
Spirit of darkness. And this extraordinary revelation, shows the immortality
of the soul, being able to confer with God even without the body. 2 Cor.
12.2. We receive all our knowledge by our outward senses, Romans 10.17. which
convey things to the inward, and they inform our reason: but God can invert
the order, and begin first with our reason, and by that inform our inward
senses in dreams, and then by them our outward, etc.

Q. What are the ordinary Governors?

A. Such as are called by the Church, where there is try all of their gifts,
election of their persons, and consecration of them in office. The two first
were supplied by the third in all those whom the Apostles ordained; for they by
imposition of hands gave gifts, and therefore such were not tried by the
learned, seeing they had no gifts for such callings, before hands were imposed
by the Apostles. Hence it follows, that the new Testament speaking of no other
consecration of Ministers, but by the Apostles, speaks nothing of
examinations, or elections. Men then had not ordinary gifts; for they received
them together with other ornaments, by the hands of the Apostles: that place
Act. 14.22. is abused, even against Grammatical construction, by those that
would draw it to election before ordination, and that by the suffragies of the
people; for the Nominative case to the Verb, must needs be Paul and Barnabas,
they therefore and not the people were agents in that business, and made
Ministers of such as they found fit for gifts, whom God with an ordinary
calling, extraordinarily gifted. We read Act. 19.6.7. of 12. made Ministers,
which before had not heard, whether there was an holy Ghost, yea, or no: whose
power immediately they felt, after Paul had imposed his hands. So that we may
safely conclude, that ordination is more essential to ministry, then popular
election: and yet in aftertimes the people were not rejected, for the liking,
or disliking of their Pastors, until they became factious, and patrons of
schisms, or at leastwise abetters of the worse, and so made themselves
unworthy of their voices. I would feign know of any strict defender of the
peoples choice, whether it were better in point of schism, or heresy, to
leave them to their own liberty, or to have them restrained? If they be left
in such eases to themselves, then shall the Church of God be destroyed. As for
example, in the times of Arianisme, whiles the people had liberty, they would
choose no Pastors but Arians. It shall ever be observed, that in siding and
factious divisions, the worst are for the most part strongest, etc. So that
election is to be moderated by the discretion of the civil Magistrate, or
faithful Pastors. But ordination and consecration has still gone in his
course, and Ministers are to make Ministers, and not the people. Gal. 1.1. Some
are called immediately of God, and by God, as Apostles, some of God by man, as,
Timothy, Titus, etc. Some of men, and by men, as the Prophets of Brownists,
and therefore none of Gods. This is the Tenent of truth, that the first course
of Ministry has ever bin extraordinary, the second has ever gone on in an
order, as from one government to another, and never has Ministry begun at the
people. We deny not that we are Ministers by Rome, but we affirm, we are not
the Ministers of Rome. We are of God by them; and they may as truly be
instruments of our Ministry, as of our Baptism. For as Ezekiel. 16.20. the Jews
did beget children unto God, but consecrate them to Molech: so Papists may
beget both a people, and Pastor for God; but till they separate, they are both
consecrated unto Antichrist. And here let all take notice, how Separatists gnaw
upon this bone, and suck in nothing but the blood of their own jaws.

Q. What were the Governed?

A. All those in the Congregations, which were subjected to their lawful
Pasters, Act. 20.28. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Heb. 13.7.17. It is for Korah, and his
confederates to rise up against Moses and Aaron, because they are lift up above
the Congregation. Number. 16.3.

Q. Of how many ought a Congregation to consist?

A. Of so many as may conveniently meet together in one place, for the
public exercises of Religion. The several portions are left to the
discretion of our Governors, and so far forth a Parish is humane: yet the
Congregation it self is Gods ordinance, who would have it governed, according
to his own laws. 1 Cor. 5.4. The flock is Christ's, the fold is lesser or
greater, as the Governors judge it fit and convenient.

Q. What if some members of more Congregations meet together, to consult of
some matters?

A. Then it is called a Council; for single Congregations are the weakest
parts of the Church, and therefore have need of neighbor help, Act. 15. The
Separation teach, that every Congregation is absolute in it self, and that
assembling of Councels is voluntary, etc. which if it be true, then the
guilty, or infected Congregation cannot be cited to appear. Iudicium redditur
in invitum, for pars rea, is in law pars fugiens, the party presumed to come
thither against his will. etc. If then councels be lawful, there must needs be
a subordination of Churches. In the time of Constantine, Pastors were called a
great way from their charge, and many dyed in their travel; and many in their
absence found much hurt done at their return to their flock, whereupon order
was taken for a more convenient calling of councels. They had four Patriarchs,
then under every Patriarch diverse Provinces, which had an Archbishop set over
several Diocesses, every of which had a Bishop over it, and these under the
Emperor might call councels. If the error, or schism fell out within the
Diocese, then might the Diocessan call a council, and if the error could be
there ended and healed, it went no further; if not, then the Province was
assembled by the Archbishop: If yet the error had so spread it self that the
Province was too weak to conclude, the greater number being infected, then did
the Patriarch call diverse Provinces; and if there it could not be ended, then
came it to an universal Council, etc. And by these means was the Church
wonderfully eased of hard and long travels. This was holy and good; But this
excellent order was disturbed by the Patriarch in the West, whose invasions and
tyranny long have, and still do tend to the destruction, both of the Church
and State. We are free from this Western Patriarch, not only by reason of
his intolerable tyranny, but also because the dissolution of the Empire, is the
dissolution of the Patriarchs. And every Christian Prince is absolute in
himself to call by his own Archbishops, or Bishops councels as he pleases.
And it is rebellion to the Prince, not to come when he summons the guilty to
appear. A gain, if this authority were dissolved, then would the power
reside in the order of the spiritual Governors, as they were left by the
Apostles. And so councels could not be called universal, national,
provincial Diocessan; for, as tyrants prohibit the public exercises of
Religion, so the public congregating of Councels. And here let me sling this
stone into the brazen foreheads of our adversaries, which in their shameless
challenges, dare tell the world, we are an Antichristian Church. What one jot
of authority do we borrow from the Pope? Is not all jurisdiction and power in
the Prince, and for exercise in the Bishops?

Q. What further distinction is there of the Church?

A. Besides the visibilitie, or invisibilitie. Purity, or impuritie of
Congregations and Churches. It is distinguished by the times thereof, as it was
yet in a family, or people. The Church was an Embryo in the hatching, till
Abraham's time; In swathing bands till Moses; In childhood till Christ; a man
in Christ, and shall be a man full grown in glory. It did long stick between
the knees, and want power to come into the light; but at length by succession
of times, comes to perfection of parts and degrees. As man is an epitome of the
world, so is every Christian an abridgement of the Church; best at his last.
Like the feast of Cana, where the best wine was reserved to the end. We must
ever be growing from strength to strength, for it is a fearful condition to
go backward, how can he be rich that grows every day poorer? Can he ever
reach the goal, that goes every day a step back from it? Alas then, how shall
he ever reach the goal of glory, that runs every day a step backward in
grace? He that is worse every day, can never be at his best. True grace is
contrary to nature, for it will be strongest at last. Sure I am, in regard of
time, that the Catholic Church increases in number and grace, yet visible
Congregations are soyled with age, and grow worse by the tracts of time.
Families, a nation, and now the world grows decrepit, in respect of their
lively beginnings. Primitive times were not pestered with those diseases that
are now grown upon the Church, and under which it groaneth. Like Ezekias Sun
we are gone back many degrees in the dial of perfection, and yet the
Catholic Church like the Sun till noone, will ever be rising. Fie on those
Apostates, whose beginnings, like Neroes first five years, are full of hope
and peace, and then decline into villainy. Hypocrites, like the first month of
a new servant, out-goe all, but like Horse-coursers Iades soon give in and
tire. Whose age is like unto the four ages of the world; first gold, at last
iron. Pictures of zeal, like Nebuchadnezzars image, from a precious head, they
fall to base feet. These be the true hot-spurs, that will soon run
themselves out of breath. But we may well say such were never right bred; for
Gods Church gains perfection with time. Therefore all such as prove falling
Stars, never were ought but Meteors. True Saints never loose light, or
motion: Spiritual motion may be violent in respect of nature, and perpetual
in respect of grace. Psalm. 110.3. Isa. 60.8. Zech. 14.20.

Q. How long was the Church in families?

A. Until the time of Moses; so long God had the first borne for his Priests,
and every head of the family was not only Master, but Minister, etc. Number.
3.12. Dainty mothers send their daughters a frosting betimes in a cold morning,
who seeking beauty, endanger health: but our heavenly Father kept his Church
within doors, till he saw it was safe to suffer it to go abroad.

Q. Who were the Governors?

A. The extraordinary were the Patriarchs. Which were Prophets; for the rule
of Religion was always to be the same in the Church, though God did diversely
administer it. We deny not but that the word of God may be divided into
Tradition, and Scriptures; but our difference is about the kind of the
distinction and distribution; whether the word be so divided into his
essential parts, or into two distinct manners of deliverance? We say the word
is essentially the same, whether it be spoken or written, and that writing and
speaking are but two accidents of the same substance. Furthermore, we say that
the word delivered by tradition, was as well inspired, as when afterward it
pleased God to reveal his will by Scriptures. Tradition was fitter for a
family, then a Bible; because dead letters had been of no validity to a weak
Church. We feed the child with the spoone, and dare not trust him with the
knife. Spoone-meat was fit for families, though afterward God would have all
his people use the knife, and learn to cut their own meat; and therefore he
gave the nation of the Jews some Scriptures to feed on. And here appears the
wrong, Papists offer to the Churches of the Gospel, who restrain them from
Bibles, as if they were still in the infancy, etc. To conclude, God never
taught by tradition, but the deliverers were extraordinarily inspired;
otherwise the rest were no further to be trusted or believed, then they had
received their doctrines from the Patriarchs, and extraordinary Prophets. And
if the Pope could make us believe, he had these inspirations, we should no
more doubt of his Oracles, then we do of the Scriptures themselves. The
ordinary Governors were the heads, and eldest sons of the families, etc.
Genesis 4.26. and 18.19.

Q. What were the Governed?

A. The residue of the family; And here we may learn, what was the most
ancient kind of teaching, to wit, Catechizing, or family teaching; and it is
a shame to the master, when he suffers his family to live in ignorance and
blindness. If such weak Governors had charge of instruction, Masters must
not think that they are exempted by the translation of the Ministry to
others. We indeed have the charge of the Souls of diverse families, but every
Master has still the charge of his own. Genesis 18.19. 2 Timothy 3.15. There is
national, domestical, and personal mourning enjoined, Zach. 2.10.13.14. So
teaching, etc.

Q. How was the Church in a People?

A. As it did consist of many families, and had the bounds thereof exceedingly
enlarged from the days of Moses. Until his time God had but a family or two
to worship him. At the great Deluge, but eight persons saved in the Arc. Genesis
7. The world was grown so foul with sin, that God saw it was time to wash
it with an universal flood, and saw it meet to let it soke long under the
waters, so close did wickedness cleave to the authors of evil.

Q. What is here to be considered?

A. The writing of the rule of Religion, which was done by such extraordinary
Governors, as God had fitted and inspired by his holy Spirit thereunto, for
the edification of his Church. For even then God had both extraordinary and
ordinary teachers: now we have the rule completely delivered in writing, and
therefore need not any extraordinary Governors in the Church. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2
Pet. 1.20.21. And this is that that makes us receive a more sure word of
Prophecy, etc. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Q. How was it written?

A. According to the necessity of the Church, diversely, and at sundry times,
Heb. 1.1. God increased the diet of his Church, as he saw it was fit to bear
it.

Q. What are the Books called?

A. For the matter contained, The word of God; for the manner of Record, The
Scriptures, by an excellency of phrase, as the most worthy writings that ever
saw the light, and being compiled into one volume, are called Bibles, or many
little Books, united in one body: so that both work and writing, carry away
the names of all other Scriptures, and Books, as most, admirable for use, Ioh.
1.8. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17. Oh, the shame of Christians, that these works should
be counted as a strange thing unto them. Hos. 8.12. whiles other books, as
baits for fools shall be followed and applauded.

Q. How are these to be considered?

A. As they are either in the original tongues, or in the Translations; in the
purest fountains, or the derived streams and conduits. In the Originalls, not
only the matter (which is the Divinity, Dogmaticall, Historical, etc.) but
also the means of inferring, (which is the Logic) the manner of expressing,
and enforcing (which is the Grammar and Rhetorique) are all immediately
inspired. 2 Timothy 3.16. All scripture is inspired from God. 2. Pet. 1.21. The
holy mon of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. In the
translations, the subject matter, or substance of Theology, is equally
inspired, though mediately. The Logical coherence also and consequence of
argument, retains the same necessity of illation, because it depends not
upon diversity of Languages, but community of notions. But as for the
propriety of Grammar, and vigor of Rhetorique, there must needs be some
abatement and embatement. First, and principally, because the skill and
diligence herein used by Translators, is not divine or inspired, but merely
humane at the best, and in trial proves to be liable to much latitude,
sometime more, sometime less. Secondly, for that many emphaticall words, and
rigorous figures, both of Grammar and Rhetorique, proper to the original
Tongues (such as are especially deriuatiues, agnominations, proverbes, etc.)
cannot to the life be expressed in other Languages. Thirdly, and lastly,
because in vulgar Languages, there is such mutabilitie and change of fashions
(almost as much as in apparel) that after a few years, we scarce understand
what our forefathers meant in some passages of the Scripture in our
mother tongue, much less in the Latin, which in the Vulgar is so pestered
with Barbarismes in style (beside defects in notion) that not only S. Hierome
would write invectiues, if he should see such a brat laid at his door, but
Priscian himself would call for the ferula. It was therefore a very pious and
laudable intention in our learned and judicious Sovereign, to appoint all our
English Translations of the Scripture to be received, and the best of them
corrected by nearest reduction to the originals, and to the proprieties of our
Language.

Q. How in the original Tongues?

A. As they are in the tongue, wherein the Spirit did indite them, and they are
of themselves to be received without all exception, as being Canonical, and
having their authority, primarily, from the spirit, and by themselves,
secundarily, from the Church. 1 Timothy 3.15. and 2 Ephist. 3. chap. ver. 16. The
Church is the pillar, on which the truth must hang to be showed to others, or
the ground on which it rests it self, finding little stay elsewhere. Next
to the testimony of the Spirit, and word it self, we are to admit the
Churches testimony.

Q. Does the Scripture contain the whole body of Religion?

A. It does most fully and plainly and therefore there is no need of unwritten
verities, or Popish Traditions. It is the rule of all faith, and controversies
of faith. It is the standard, or the Kings beam, by which we are to try all
doctrine that is tendered to us. We are not to go by the common beam of
custom and opinion, but by these balances of Gods sanctuary, not suffering a
drams weight to be iniected, that may incline these golden scoales as we
please. Isa. 8.20. When the law was written, Moses recalls both himself and
the people to it for trial, when he had written his five books, the Prophets
that followed were content to have their sayings brought to Moses law for
trial: Christ himself never refused any trial by the law and Prophets, yea,
ever and anon is he appealing unto them for proof of his own doctrine; and
so all the A postles did tread in their masters steps, only the man of sin
will not endure any such tribunal, he will judge all, and be judged by none.

Q. But they seem not to be so plain and perspicuous?

A. Yes, in themselves they are evident enough, concerning things necessary to
salvation, and if at any time they seem hard, it is by reason of the
weakness of our understandings. Pro. 14.6. Psalm. 25.14. 2 Pet. 3.16. We must
therefore in the obscure passages, pray to God, and confer one place with
another, and consider duly the cirumstances of the places, and we shall find
the true meaning; if not, God will pardon our ignorance, and require no more of
us, then himself gives, we using his means aright. Iam. 1.5.

Q. What sense is to be given of Scriptures, and whence must it be taken?

A. The Scriptures have ever one literal sense and meaning, and that which
must be fetched from themselves. 2 Pet. 1.20. It is of no private
interpretation, or as man will have it, but it must be expounded as it was
spoken. And the same mouth must be both the maker and interpreter, that is, the
holy Ghost. No man knows Grammar but by Grammar, neither can we see the Sun
without the Sun; so, no man can expound Scripture, but by Scripture. There is
the same Art, both in the composition and resolution; as there is the same way
in going backward and forward. Scriptures rightly understood in our actions,
are as the heart in the body, for conveying life to all the parts, or as a dram
of Musk, perfuming the whole box of ointment. This is that godliness which
breeds an heedfulnesse in all our ways and actions. (...) quae parit (...).

Q. How are they to be considered as translated?

A. Howbeit the Scriptures as they be translated be not so authentical, and
canonical, as the originalls, yet ought they to be read publickely and
privately of all, and to be received as the word of God. Only this must be
the care of the learned, that as much as lies in them they labor, that the
apographicall translations, or transscriptions answer the autographicall, and
primary originals. And if there be any mis-taking, they must ever be reformed
by the fountains themselves. The Hebrews and Greeks drink both of the
wellhead, pure translations of the Streams, the Latins in their
authentical, Jerome of the very puddles. Well may I say of Trent fathers, as
that Chian servant, of his Master (which sold his wine, and drank the lees)
whiles they had good, they sought for that which was naught, etc.

Q. But how shall the ignorant in the originals do in this case?

A. They must refer themselves to their faithful and learned Pastors, whom
God shall stir up for the faithful teaching of his people. And the Spirit of
God which dwells in those that are his, will enable them to discern even in
translations, between truth and falsehood: so that if any error should be; if
they attend the means ordained of God, they shall not want information. Luke
1.4. if they confider how things are written from point to point, they shall
come to a certainty of Scripture. Psalm. 102.18.

Q. Had the Church beside these extraordinary teachers, no other?

A. Yes, there were also ordinary teachers, that every congregation might be
supplied with able men to instruct them, and these were to depend upon the
extraordinary, and so far to be heard, as they agreed with their words, or
writings. Exodus 4.15.16. Moses receives from God, and Aaron from Moses, etc. In
all points of Religion, we must depend upon God, in prayers, if he power not
upon us, we cannot power out unto him. Zach. 12.10.

Q. How was the Church in a people?

A. First, in the peculiar people of Israel; secondly, among all people. The
Church did grow from a domestical society, to a national, and from a nation,
to all nations. I have seen great Ryvers, which at their first rising out of
some hills side, might be covered with a Bushel; which after many miles, fill
a very broad channel, and drawing near to the Sea, do even make a little Sea
in their own banks: so the Church had but a small beginning, which is now
grown Catholic over all the world. Grace is compared to the wind, Ioh. 3.8.
which at the first rising, is as a little vapor from the cranies of the earth,
and passing forward about the earth, the further it goes, the more blustering
and violent it waxes. So ought the Church, and every member of it to be daily
increasing, and thriuing in grace. It was the Devils devise, to bring that
slander upon carely holiness; A young Saint, an old Devil. I believe that
sometimes young Devils may turn old Saints; never the contrary; for true Saints
in youth, will prove Angels in age. Let us therefore strive to be ever good,
and think with our selves, surely, if we be not best at last, we may justly
fear, we were never good at all. Psalm. 1.3. Ezekiel. 47.3.4.5.

Q. What was this people of Israel?

A. A peculiar people, whom the Lord chose to himself, of whom Christ was to
come, according to the flesh: and because he was yet to come, they had both the
Mossias promised them, and by many types and ceremonies shadowed out unto them.
Deuteronomy. 7.6.7.8. Romans 3.1.2. and 9.4.5. O if God in these things set his love
upon them, how loves he us, to whom the very graces themselves have appeared?
Tit. 2.11.

Q. What were the Congregations called?

A. Synagogues. Although God would have all his people sacrifice in one place;
yet would he have praying and preaching in every Town and City; and mother
towns had many Synagogues. Abel is called a mother City, 2 Samuel 20.19. And so
the Church of the Gentiles had many mother churches, out of which did spring
many daughters. Religion propagating from the greater Cities, to the lesser
towns and villages. Act. 13.15. And here might we trace the Separatists to
Jordan, by their babes and bottles, in running away from their mother.

Q. Who were the extraordinary Governors?

A. Prophets; of whom some did write the books of the old Testament in the
Hebrew tongue, which are in number, thirty nine, all which by our Savior
Christ, are divided into the law and the Prophets, Math. 11.13. and 22.40. or
may be divided into Priestly, Princely, and Prophetical books, in regard of
Christ, which is the subject of them all: or according to the most usual
distribution; first, the books of the law, written by Moses, and they are
five, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomie. Secondly, the
four first Prophets, as Joshua, Judges, and Ruth, two books of Samuel and two
books of the Kings; and the four latter Prophets, to wit, the three great
Prophets, Isa: Ier: Ezekiel: and the twelve lesser, which for brevitie, they
comprehend all in one book, Hos: Joel, Amos, Obed: Ion: Mic: Nah: Hab: Zeph:
Hag: Zech: Mal: Thirdly, the nine others, they call Cetubhim, or writings, by
an excellency, and they are, Job, Psalms, Prove: Eccl: Can: Dan: Chron: 2.
Ezra 2. Hester. Our Savior Christ, Luke 24.44. makes a tripartite division of
the old Testament into Law, Prophets, and Psalms, and makes himself the
subject of them all. The law was Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial. And all
were types of Christ. The Moral, which is for instruction, did prefigure
Christ as our Prophet; the Ceremonial, which was for expiation, did shadow him
as our Priest; the Judicial, which was for Government, as King. The Prophets
that foretold Christ, were some of them Kings and Governors, some Priests, and
some purely Prophets. The Psalms are mixed of all three, full of prayers,
prophecies, and scepters, etc. There is a latter distribution observed by
Interpreters, and that is quadripartite, as into books Legal, Historical,
Poetical, and Prophetical. The Legal, are the five books of Moses.
Historical, the twelve following to Job. Poetical, the six following from the
beginning of Job to Esaias. Prophetical, the three great Prophets, with the
twelve lesser, and Daniel. The Apocrypha is shut out of the distribution, both
by the Jews, and our Savior, and therefore is not of equal authority with
the books we have mentioned. God made the Jews faithful registers of the old
Testament; and they were so curious, least a letter should be lost, that they
kept them by count: and therefore would never have been so negligent in the
Apocrypha writing if ever they had been committed of God unto them, by their
extraordinary governors. As in notorious Burglaries, a hat, glove, or fword is
often left behind, for discovery: so, in these (though more honest) some errors
have escaped, to discover the Authors.

Q. Who were their ordinary Governors?

A. The supreme was the high Priest, the inferior were the Priests, Levites,
and Rulers of their Synogogues. Lev. 8. Number. 3. Act. 13.15. Order has ever
been for the custody of divine things, and confusion for their ruin.

Q. What is the Church among all people?

A. The Catholic Church, gathered out of all people, where we have the
Messiah exhibited in the flesh, in whom the law and the Prophets are yea, and
Amen. Moses branded some creatures with uncleanness; he that has redeemed his
children from moral impuritie, redeemes his creatures from legal: what should
S. Peter's great sheet, let down by four corners, teach us, but that all
creatures through the four corners of the world, are clean and holy? And that
God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation, he that fears him, and
works righteousness, is accepted with him. Act. 10.34.35. Gal. 4.27.

Q. How are the Congregations thereof called?

A. They are called Churches; the name of the whole being put for the part; and
Christ does it to distinguish his Churches of the Gospel, from the profane
and wicked Synagogues of the Jews. Math. 18.17. He says not, tell it the
Synagogue, but the Church, etc. They therefore level amiss, that lay the line
of their government by this deceitful square.

Q. Who were the extraordinary Governors of this Church?

A. John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, Christ himself, his Apostles,
seventie Disciples, Evangelists, and Prophets; whereof some did write the
books of the new Testament in the Greek tongue; which are either Historical,
as the Gospells of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; or diverse excellent
Epistles, as of Paul to the Romans, Corinthians 2. Galathians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians 2. Timothy 2. Titus, Philomon, Hebrews,
Epistle of James, of Peter 2. John 3. Jude; or lastly, the Prophetical book
of the Revelation.

Q. Who were the ordinary Governors?

A. The Doctors and Pastors. Ephesians. 4.11. which may be distributed into Bishops,
Elders, and Deacons. As for the first, if time and place be accidents of a
calling, and the very essence lie in relation betwixt the caller and the
called. Timothy and Titus were ordinary teachers; for to an extraordinary
Governor, an extraordinary caller is required. It cannot be denied, but that
both Timothy and Titus did a long time wait upon the Apostles, and were sent
from place to place, though settled at the last. If going from place to place
make an Evangelist, then they were both of them Evangelists: but I believe all
the Pastors and Doctors of the Church were at the Apostles command, and sent
too and fro as there was need. 2 Timothy 3.10.12.20. etc. we hear of Crescens,
Titus, Tychicus, Trophimus, etc. sent diverse ways by the Apostle Paul, etc.
And therefore it is not enough from the place, to say, such a one was an
Evangelist, except it be further proved, that he had an extraordinary calling.
That Timothy is bidden to do the work of an Evangelist, it is a dubious
term, for an Evangelist, is either put for a writer of the Gospels, and so
some Apostles are Evangelists; or for an officer, and so such as were
extraordinarily called to plant Churches, Act. 8. but had no power to ordain
them Pastors, are called Evangelists, Act. 21.8. And of this sort might be
many of the seventie Disciples: or lastly, for Preachers; for the Gospel (with
which the name is coniugated) is the object of all three. The first write it
for the edification of the Church, the second preach it, and work miracles, to
confirm it for the plantation of the Church; and the third preach it too, for
the further watering of that seed which others have sown before them, and in
this sense is Timothy bidden to do the work of an Evangelist, as the next
words expound it, make thy ministry fully known. And it is out of doubt, that
Timothy was called of God by man, which to me is an ordinary calling. And that
Timothy and Titus (as Bishops properly so called) had a superintendencie, and
coerciue power of jurisdiction over Elders, Ministers, or Preachers it is
evident to me out of these places, 1 Timothy 1.3.5.19. 2 Timothy 2.14. Tit.
1.5.11.13. The Elders are from the original, called Presbyteri, which turned
into English, is called Priests, the most current and passable title, had not
Masse-mongers made it infamous, in the ears of such people, as are not acute
enough to devide between a fit title, and a corrupting abuse. Thus much for
the name. As for the office of Elders (taken for Ecclesiastical Governors) I
find none described, but by seeding of the flock, which makes me conclude,
they were all Pastors. As for that place. 1 Timothy 5.17. all the question is
about the comparison, whether gifts, or offices be compared together. The
original has it thus, Elders ruling well are worthy of double honor,
especially, laboring in the word and doctrine: now it is a rule in the Greek
tongue, that participles are to be turned into reasons of the things they
explain; as ruling because they rule, and laboring because they labor, etc.
The sense then may be thus rendered, without all rending of the comparison.
Elders are to be reompenced with honor and maintenance; first, because they
rule; secondly, because they preach. First, they go before their flock in
holy practice of discipline, upon themselves and others; secondly, they
continually press them by precepts in painful preaching. Now that the people
may especially see wherein they are to be honored, it is in this, that they
are labourious dispensers and disposers of heavenly doctrine. Therefore with
the Scriptures, I say that the ordinary teachers, and Governors of the
Christian Churches, were Pastors and Doctors, and that copulatiuely, and not
segregatiuely, as in Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists.

Q. What is the Church triumphant?

A. The number of all those that are applied unto Christ by sight. After faith
and sight, follows freedom and fruition. This Church consists of holy
Spirits, both Angels and men, the souls of the Saints departed, are received
up into glory, and after the resurrection, the militant Church both in body and
soul shall be of the Triumphant, in the full fruition of all bliss and
happiness. Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22.23.24. Job. 14.2.3. Heb. 11.10.16.26. etc. As
those therefore that have tasted of some delicate dish, find other plain
dishes but unpleasant; so it fares with all those which have once tasted of
heavenly things, they cannot but contemn the best worldly pleasures. As
therefore some dainty guest, knowing there is some pleasant fare to come, will
reserve his appetite for it: so must not we suffer our selves to be cloyed with
the course diet of the world, but keep our desires for the joys to come. And
if worldlings find so much pleasure on earth, as to think it worth the account
of their heaven; because they see such a Sun to enlighten it, such an heaven
to wall it about, such sweet fruits and flowers to adorn it, such variety of
creatures, for the commodious use of it, and yet only provided for mortality,
and chiefly possessed by the makers enemies: what then must heaven needs be,
that is provided for God himself, and his best friends? If the out side be so
glorious, what shall be within? How can it be less in worth, seeing God is
above his creatures, and Gods friends better then his enemies? I will therefore
not only be content, but desirous to be dissolved.

CHAPTER XXVI. Of the Spirits application by Faith.
Question.

HItherto of the subject of Application; what are the parts?

Answer.

Preparation, and the infusion of faith. Such is the nature of man, that before
he can receive a true justifying faith, he must (as it were) be broken in
pieces by the law. Ier. 23.9. The word of God is both the hammer to break our
hard hearts, and a fire to heat, melt, mollify, and dissolve them into the
tears of godly sorrow. A rock may tremble, and an iron vessel by violent
strokes may be broken in pieces, and yet still retain their hardness, only
the sweet and pleasant fire of grace must soften them again. It is the blood
of the Lamb that must melt the Adamant, and the Sunshine of Gods love in
Christ, that must thaw the ice of our hearts. Romans 8.15. we are to be led from
the fear of slaves, through the fear of penitents, to the fear of sons:
and indeed one of these makes way for another; and though perfect love thrust
out fear, yet must fear bring in that perfect love; as a Needle, or Bristle
draws in the thread after it, or as the potion brings health. The compunction
of fear (says Gregory) fits the mind for the compunction of love. Psalm.
2.11. We are bidden to rejoice in God with trembling. If Samuel had not made
the people to quake at Gods thunder and rain, he should never have brought
them so to have ioyed in the following Sunshine. 1 Samuel 12.18.19. etc.
Hostile fear through the power of God, may be initiall to the filial. And
whereas that casts both the eyes upon the punishment, God can make it cast the
one eye off the judgment, and fix the other on the party offended: so Samuel
teaches Israel. 1 Samuel 20.20. with 24. Fear not the thunder, but fear him
that sent it. If ever we will stoop, the judgments of God will bring us on
our knees.

Q. What is the preparation?

A. A fitting us for our being in Christ; for we being branches of the wild
Olive, must be made ready for our being in the true Olive, before we can be
grafted into it. Romans 11.17.24. Ioh. 15.5.6.7. The convexe, or outbowed side of
a vessel will hold nothing; it must be the hollow and depressed part, that is
capable of any liquor. The broken and contrite spirit makes way for Gods grace.
Psalm. 51.17. Sweetly Bernard, God poures not the oil of his mercy, save into a
broken vessel; for indeed whole vessels, are full vessels: and so this
precious oil would run over, and be spilt on the ground. Oh, if we were so
humbled with the varieties of Gods judgments as we ought, how savory would
his counsels be? How precious and welcome would his fear be to our trembling
hearts? Whereas now our stubborn senselessness frustrates all the threatenings
and executions of God.

Q. When is this done?

A. In the acceptable time, and day of salvation, in the which the Lord
pleases to bring into act his purpose of salvation, in gathering his own out
of the world, and that sooner, or later, as it pleases him We may not mend
the pace of God, or spur on his decree; yet must we be diligent in the
means, until God bless them for this end. Every man has power to go to
Church, hear the word, and be present at all outward services, and the neglect
of this hinders many, in respect of better success, though not of Gods decree.
We therefore are guilty of our own time ill husbanded, though God will not
work before his own day. Luke 19.42. Romans 13.11. 2 Cor. 6.2.

Q. What are the parts of this preparation?

A. First, the cutting of us, as it were, from the wild Olive tree. Secondly, a
paring, and fitting of us to be put into the true Olive tree. Romans 11.24. The
Gentiles were cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and contrary
to nature grafted into a good Olive tree, etc. We that grow wild in
wickedness, want grace to seek Christ, and being contrary to his virtues, are
unapt to join with him, without a great preparation. Tell the profane person
in the midst of all his iollitie and revels, of devotion, piety, or
judgments, and he will turn you off with the Athenian question, What does
this babbler say? Tell the woman of Samaria Ioh. 4. of the water of life, and
she will mock at it, till Christ sit as judge in her conscience, and pinch
her with that close imputation of adultery: there is no sowing, Ier. 4. till
the hard and clottie fallow ground be subdued by the Plough: the vnhumbled
sinner is as unfit for Gods instruction, as an unbroken Colt for the saddle.
Our Gallants cannot be stayed from their Gallop, till God touch their Souls
with some terror, cast their bodies on their beds of sickness, turn their
fools feathers into kerchiefes, then when they see their faces grow pale,
their eyes sunk in their heads, their hands shaking, their breath short, their
flesh consumed, you shall have them easy to be talked withal, now, or else
never will they learn with old Eli, to say, speak Lord, for thy servants
hear. Thus we see it is good striking when the iron is hot; there is no
fishing so good, as in these troubled waters. Now it is good striking, whom God
has stricken; for conscience is a nice and sullen thing, and if it be not
taken at fit times and moodes, there will be no meddling with it.

Q. What mean you by this cutting of us from the wild Olive?

A. Two things; first, a violent pulling of us out of the corruption of nature,
or a cutting (as it were) by the knife of the law of an unregenerate man from
his security, wherein he sleeps, he not so much as dreaming of any such thing.
Psalm. 119.70. Their heart is as fat as grease: but I delight in thy law.
Showing by the opposition, that it is only the lean heart, pined and pinched
with spiritual famine, that can feel any delight in God: nothing more
unsavory to a senseless, brawny heart, then Christ's blood; no more relish
feels, or finds he in it, then in a dry chip. Nay, he never complains of his
misery; a man being dead never bemoanes the intolerable pains of the Stone,
who if he were alive, would testify his grief by groans, for the grating
pain, and gripes he continually feels. Secondly, as there is a violent
evulsion; so as violent attraction to Christ for ease, man at the first
plainly refusing it: the hunted beast flies to his den; the pursued malefactor
to the horns of the Altar, or City of Refuge. Paul's misery Romans 7.24. drives
him to Gods mercy; The Israelites are driven into their Chambers by the
destroying Angel; Balaam is made to lean back by the naked sword; Agur to
run to Ithiel and Vcal, that is, Christ. Pro. 30.1.2.3. When he is confounded
with his own bruitishnesse. God must let loose his law, sin, conscience, and
Satan to bait us, and kindle hell fires in our Souls, before we will be
driven to seek to Christ. Paul and Silas came not out of prison, without a
greater earthquake, then poor sinners from Satan's hold, with an heart-quake.
How violently did Satan drive Saul to persecute; and did not Christ as
violently send him back again by a contrary wind, that blew him off his
horse, and smote him down, as dead, to the ground? As Lot was driven out of
Sodom, with fire and brimstone about his ears; or as the venturous child is
terrified from fire and water, the careful Father holding him by the heels
over both: so God by the sour sauce of a guilty conscience, lets the sinner
see what it is to fall to the sweet meat of sin, and eat thereof unto
surfeit. David's broken bones, and bruised conscience, will tell him of his
pleasure in murder and adultery, and what he gains by his silence. Psalm. 32.3.

Q. How are we pared and trimmed for our putting into Christ?

A. By our humiliation for sin; God takes advantage of our fears; for having
stopped the way of sin with fear, he labors to tire and weary the sinner
with sorrow, and according to that golden sentence of that Samian wise man,
that bids us lay weight upon the laden, lades the offender with his burden,
until he be weary of it, and could wish with all his heart, he were rid of it.
Oh, how acceptable is the fountain of living waters to the chased Heart,
panting, and braying? So how welcome is redemption to the thirsty Conscience,
scorched with the sense of Gods wrath? The traitor laid on the block will be
sensible enough of his Sovereigns mercy in pardoning, and far more
apprehensiue of it, then when he was first attached. And yet for all this,
sinners do but wilder themselves in humiliation, except God still draw them on
until they be ingrafted into Christ. Humane helps here prevail nothing;
merriments have no more power to quiet conscience, then holy water and charms
to conjure the Devil; Popish pardons, pilgrimages, shrifts, whips, are silly
shifts to ease the bleeding wounds of sorrowful souls. He that drinks water,
or leapes into a poole, to cool his fever, fires himself the more, though he
feel some ease for the present: his torment will never cease till he both find
Christ, and be found of him. Heb. 9.14. Iam. 4.9.10.

Q. How is this wrought?

A. God gives the sinner to see by the law his sin, and the punishment of
it, and that by the detection happily of some one sin and that many times
none of the greatest, least he should be presently swallowed up of despair;
yet by that one makes him suspect the rest. 1 Samuel 12.19. That one sin in
asking of a King, brought them to confess all. Furthermore, the detection of
one sin, and suspicion of all the rest, with their just desert, drives them
to compunction, and a pricking of heart, which is greater or lesser, and
carries with it diverse Symptoms, and sensible passions of grief. All are not
handled alike, some have greater fits then others, and are but (as it were)
sprinkled in this Baptism, wherein others have been doused over head and
ears. Some sip of this cup, others drink the very dregs. Those converts,
Act. 2. had some grudgings and pricks of conscience, but yet they had none of
Jobs and David's fits. Matthew at his first conversion, seems to entertain
Christ with a feast, and so did Lydia the Apostles. It is here as in a Woman's
travel; none travel without pain, yet some like those Hebrew women, Exodus 1.
prevent the Midwife, and are quicker in dispatch then many others. Some sores
we see are let out with the prick of a pin, others are searched to the bottom
with the Surgeons lance. Viscous and gluttonous humors must have a stronger
purge, then such as flow of themselves. A hard knot must have a hard wedge,
when the Axe alone is able to polish other pieces of timber. Neither is it
always sin that brings the greatness of this agony upon penitents; but
sometimes further employment of such persons in more worthy services. The
higher the building, the deeper the foundation, which is not so requisite in
the ruder pyles, etc. This detection of sin, works a sequestration from
their former courses, and makes them loath themselves; for God stops the way of
sinners by fears, tyres and wearies them by sorrow, and turns them by hatred;
and when they begin to see how the controversy is betwixt God and themselves,
they fall from the very sense of their misery, to despair of help in
themselves, or any other worldly thing, and submit themselves to be disposed of
as God shall please. Thus by the law are they brought to see, they want Christ,
but without faith they cannot look up to him, and therefore faith is infused,
by which the soul may be comforted. The law is common in this work, both to
the elect and reprobate: yet this preparation is peculiar and proper to such as
God has chosen. No birth without travel, and yet some children are killed
with the pains of the labor: so God has none borne his but they come forth
at this strait passage, only the reprobate want strength to bring forth, and
therefore perish in despair. The law brings them both to this conclusion, and
ends ever in despair, only the chosen of God find mercy, Hos. 14.4. With
thee the fatherless shall find mercy; God will have us brought into the
straits of poor desolate shiftlesse Orphans, before he thinks us fit for his
mercy. And the deeper we go in the sense of our misery, the sweeter shall
we find the sense of Gods mercy. Job 33.19. to 25. Math. 5.4. and 11.28.
Christ ( Ioh. 16.) promises the Comforter, and the first ground that he shall
lay of our comfort, shall be to convince our consciences; conviction of sin,
goes before our conviction of righteousness, Hab. 3.16. The Prophet shows,
how his peace was wrought out of trouble. Psalm. 126.5. We must sow in tears
before we can reap in joy. And we care not if we may have a dry harvest,
after a wet seed time. And thus far have we showed the preparation; now let
us see the composition of grace.

Q. What is the infusion of faith?

A. It is a work of the Spirit, who infuseth faith into Infants, immediately
by his sole operation; into men of riper years, also by the external
ministry of the Word, by which it receives further increase, and
augmentation; for the word 1 Pet. 1.23. and 2.2. is both seed and food, that as
it serves to beget faith, so it nourishes the same. Luke 1.44. The babe leaped
in the womb of Elizabeth for joy. This motion was not natural, but
spiritual, and therefore John was sanctified in his mothers womb, and did
really rejoice at the presence of Christ in the Virgin. Now sanctification
presupposes justification, and justification faith; yea, this joy was a true
effect of faith in the Messiah. And therefore Infants are capable of faith, and
may be saved though they die in their mothers womb. As for the others faith,
it is out of doubt. Romans 10.17. Ephesians. 2.18.19. And here we are to take notice,
where that faith, which is the first part of Divinity, is wrought in us, to
wit, in the application of the Spirit after preparation. Faith in the rule is
general, particular to every one in the application. Furthermore, faith
wrought by the Word has two degrees; the first is as a grain of mustard seed,
the second, a Plerophorie, or full persuasion. We are at our first but as
reeds, feeble plants, tossed and bowed with every wind, and with much agitation
bruised, lo, yet we are in tender hands, that never brake any, whom their
sins bruised; never bruised any whom temptations have bowed. We are but
flax; and our best is not a flame, but an obscure smoke of grace: lo, yet
here is the Spirit as a soft wind, not as cold water; he will kindle, never
quench our little faith: others are better grown, and stand like strong Oaks,
unshaken, unremoved. Luke 13.19. and 17.6. Romans 4.18.19.20.21.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. Either the insition, grafting, and sciencing of the prepared into Christ,
or else his union, and coalition with Christ. First, the Spirit infuseth faith,
by that faith we are put into Christ, being put into Christ, we have union and
communion with him, and by receiving virtue from his fullness, we grow up with
him. Ioh. 15.2.5. The branch abiding in Christ, brings forth fruit. Not such
as are tied to Christ by an outward thread of profession: but such as have this
vital ligament of faith, to couple them with Christ.

Q. What is this insition?

A. When being cut off from the wild Olive, the Spirit of God by faith graffeth
and scienceth us into the true Olive, which is the Lord Christ. If we were
left as we are cut off by the law, we should wither away and perish; and
therefore we are set in Christ, that in him we may grow. Romans 6.5. We are
said to be planted into his life and death.

Q. How are we put into Christ?

A. By our effectual vocation: when the voice of God sounds in our ears,
and in our hearts, come, and we answer again as by a lively Echo, Lord we
come. Hence it is that all such as are prepared by the law, are called by the
Gospel to come unto Christ. Psalm. 40.7. Isa. 55.1. Math. 11.28. Romans 8.28. 2 Timothy 2.9.

Q. What are the degrees of our effectual vocation?

A. First, a meditation of the mercies of God in Christ, and from hence that
our sins are pardonable, and that we have need of the same mercy, then of the
means how we may obtain the same, as deep sighs to God for mercy, 2 Samuel
12.13. Psalm. 52.5. Romans 8.26. Heb. 4.16. Often praying by our selves and
others. Hos. 14.2.3. Luke 15.21. Act. 8.22. As also diligent hearing of the
word of God read and preached, and often frequenting of the Ministers and
others, for comfort. All these further the meditations of the mercies of God to
sinners. The second degree is Gods gracious perforation, or boaring of our
ears, that the comfortable invitation of coming to Christ, the only
Physician of our Souls, may sound and ring in our ears and hearts, Zech.
13.9. and we resound again, we come Lord at thy call, and so coming, it
pleases the Father to bestow his Son on us, and us again upon his Son.
Psalm. 27.8. Isa. 9.6. Ioh. 10.29. and 17.2.7. Romans 8.37. And thus sanctified
trouble, at the last, establishes our peace, and the shaking of the former
winds makes the trees of Gods Eden take the deeper rooting. Surely, after the
most toylesome labor is the sweetest sleep, and after the greatest tempests,
the stillest calmes. It is the blessed Lamb of God that carries all our sins
into a wilderness of oblivion, quite out of the remembrance of his Father. And
if Devils rend and rage in our Souls, he presently by a word of his mouth, can
cast them out. Never did Jonas so whist the waves of the Sea, being cast into
it, as Christ cures the wounds of conscience, being thereunto applied. Here all
our throbbing sores receive their ease by breaking; and even Sinai it self
covered with clouds of Gods displeasure, presently by his Gospel of peace, is
enlightened, and the trembling Soul that stands at the foot of it, comforted.
Thus it pleases the Father from Ebal the mount of curses, to bring us to
Gerizzim, the mount of blessings, Deuteronomy. 27.12.13. And this we shall find most
true, that as in the Sea the lower the ebb, the higher the tide: so the deeper
we descend in humiliation, the higher shall we ascend in consolation, etc.

Q. What is our union with Christ?

A. It is that whereby we being graffed into Christ, are made one with Christ
our head, and the Church his body. There is no science put into a stock, but
if it shall thrive, it must first be united, and become one with the stock,
and then grow with it: so it is with us branches of the wild Olive, we must
become one with Christ, if we desire to thrive in him. Ioh. 17.21. with Ioh.
15.1.2. Ephesians. 2.20.22. and 5.30. Colos. 2.7. Isa. 61.3. Lo, here is a growing
temple, in which whosoever is planted, shall flourish in the Courts of God.
Psalm. 92.13. Gods house, and the furniture thereof, is built of green growing
timber. Our bed is green: of living stones. Cant. 1.16. 1 Pet. 2.5. A
spiritual house, not only inhabited, but animated, that she may be the house
of the living God. 1 Timothy 3.15.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. Our justification: Papists count it absurd, for one man to be just by
another man's justice, or wise by another man's wisdom: wherein they show their
gross ignorance in this point of Divinity; for Christ and man being one, have
all things in common, our sins and punishments are his, his righteousness
and sufferings are ours; for union is ever the ground of communion. 1 Cor.
1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Q. What are the degrees of our Justification?

A. Two; Imputation and Reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.18.19. God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.

Q. What is this imputation?

A. It is the charging of Christ with all our debts, and the discharging of us
by his righteousness. As God imputes our debt to his Son, so does he impute
his Sons justice to every child he calls. Isa. 53.4.5. He is broken and
bruised by our sins, and we are healed and helped by his stripes.

Q. What is the imputation of our debt?

A. The laying of our blame and default, together with the punishment upon our
Surety. First, God imputes all our sins to his Son, as that first sin of
Adam, then the consequents of it, to wit, both original and actual sin, and
hereupon follows a real obligation of the Son of God to payment and
punishment. Romans 3.24. Gal. 2.16. Romans 8.3. Gal. 3.13. Math. 27.46.

Q. What is the imputation of Christ's Justice unto us?

A. First, in regard of Adams transgression, his conflict with the Devil, and
in spite of all his malice, his perseverance in obedience; as likewise the
ascribing to us of his justice both original and actual, and the merit of his
death both first and second. And hereupon a real remission, both of punishment
and sin, and the fruition of salvation and happiness. The debt and the
discharge, answer in a parallel and equal distance of proportion, Adams
transgression in his conflict with Satan, is fully satisfied by Christ's combat
and conquest: his and our Apostasy and continuance in it, by Christ's obedience
and perseverance therein. His and our original and actual sin, is crossed
and cancelled by the perfect lines of Christ's original and actual justice,
drawn over those crooked lines. His vnder-going of our punishment in the first
and second death, takes away our curse in both, and by so real an obligation
of himself, and full discharge of it for us, he brings us an acquittance
sealed in his own blood, that all our sins are pardoned, and gives us a new
stock of grace, for the fruition of a better life; so that now the poor
sinner may say with comfort to Satan's accusations, thou art now put out of
office, thou have nothing to do with me, here is my discharge from God, thou
may go on and slander, but thou have no power to arrest me, or carry me to
thy prison. He that is in good terms with his Prince, fears not the approach
of Heralds or Pursevants: he that is out of debt, fears not Baylifes or
Sergeants, but imagines they come upon some good message: so the child of God
needs not fear death, but that it comes from God as a messenger of his bliss
and happiness. He therefore that would die cheerfully, must thus know death to
be his friend: what is it but the faithful officer of our maker, who ever
smiles, or frowns with his master; It cannot nourish, or show enmity, where
God favors: when he comes fiercely, and pulls a man by the throat, and summons
him to hell, who can but tremble? then the messenger is terrible; but the
message worse. Oh, you that prosper and flourish in your sins, think of
this, death deals with you, as Creditors do with their debtors, says nothing
whiles you trade lustily for hell: but when once you begin to go down the
wind, in sicknesses, crosses, and poverty, then arest upon arest, action upon
action, then come the fowls of the air (I mean the Devils) and seize upon
the sick soul, as the Ravens upon a sick sheep, then does conscience begin
to write bitter things against the sinner, and makes him possess the forgotten
sins of his youth. Hence arise miserable despaires, furious ravings of raging
consciences, that find no peace within, less without. Oh, blessed Soul that
makes a timely exchange with Christ, getting his righteousness for the sins
thereof. Romans 3.24. and 8.33. Gal. 2.21. Tit. 3.5.7. 1 Ioh. 1.8.9.10.

Q. What is our reconciliation with God?

A. It is that whereby the controversy betwixt God and man is fully taken up,
and they are at one again. All being fully discharged, there is nothing
betwixt God and man but peace and love. Romans 1.7. Grace and peace. The grace of
imputation, brings us to this peace of Reconciliation. Romans 5.10.11. 2 Cor.
5.18.19. Col. 1.20.21.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. Both peace with God, and all the creatures. Psalm. 85.8. Romans 5.1. Job 5.23.
Romans 8.31. Here is the peace of conscience with God, of charity among our
selves, of amity, or an holy kind of league with all creatures, and of outward
prosperity, and good success in all our ways, etc.

Q. What will follow in the second place?

A. Our adoption: the branches being united once to the stock, may fitly be
called the Sons thereof. And being by nature of the wild Olive, but now
translated into the true Olive, and springing forth of it, may aptly be called
the sons thereof. By nature we spring from the first Adam, and are taken
from thence, and put into the second, and so united with him, are made the sons
of God by adoption. Isa. 9.6. Christ is called the everlasting Father, and so
we are his children: but because he begets us to his Father, and is to deliver
us unto him. Heb. 2.13. Our adoption is in regard of the first person, Christ
only the means thereof, and therefore the Scripture to avoid confusion of
names, uses to call us brethren, in respect of Christ, and sons in respect
of the Father, Romans 8.15.23. Gal. 4.5. Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 8.29.

Q. What are the benefits of our adoption?

A. Hence we receive the spirit of adoption, whereby we are made the sons
of the Father; and hereupon such is the care of our heavenly father, that he
makes all things work together for our good. Romans 8.28. both in prosperity
and adversity. 1 Cor. 11.32. 2 Cor. 12.7. Psalm. 32.4. Heb. 12.10. A gain, by
this, Christ is our brother, and we are co-heires with him of eternal life,
and have restored again unto us the sanctified use of all the creatures, yea,
and the very Angels are become our attendants, to keep us in all our ways,
Psalm. 91.11. Furthermore, Christ has made us to his heavenly Father, both
Prophets, Priests, and Kings, Rev. 1.6.

Q. How be we heirs of that which is purchased?

A. The purchase was made by the Father, who gave his only begotten son a
price for our redemption; So that we have title by our father who gives us our
right. Secondly, by sonne-ship; for every son of God is an heir, and we have
given us in this world the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Oh, then may
not all the sons of God endure an hard wardship here on earth, seeing they
know already what they are borne to? Shall men part with good things in
possession, for hope of better in reversion, and shall we stick at any worldly
pelf, for the gaining of heaven? Fie on such children, as with Esau, would
sell this birthright for a mess of this worlds pottage. Lord make me one of
thy heirs, and I will be content to wait thy leisure, for my pleasure in
inioying.

Q. Hitherto of our being in Christ, what is our coalition, or growing up with
him?

A. It is our daily putting off of the old man, with his corruptions, and the
putting on of the new man, with his daily renewing in righteousness, and true
holiness. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24. 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 2.20. and 5.24. They that are
in Christ cannot but be new creatures, and such as are daily crucifiers of
sin.

Q. What are the parts, or rather degrees of this our coalition?

A. Regeneration, and glorification. Being adopted of the Father, it is fit we
should come forth as his children; therefore it pleases the Father of his own
will to beget us, with the word of truth. Iam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. First, there
is a divine conception of the adopted Sons of God, and secondly, a bringing
forth of that work. Christ was conceived in the womb of the Virgin, by the
work of the Spirit, and so must his brethren be conceived in the womb of the
Church by the same Spirit. Psalm. 110.3. Christ told Nicodemus, that he was to
be re-borne, or else he should never see glory. Ioh. 3.3. Regeneration is as
the conception, Glorification, as the nativitie, or happy birth day. The
passion days of the Martyrs, were called of old Natalitiasalutis, the birth
days of their salvation, and that as well for festivitie, as the nativitie it
self. Thus from an obscure conception, we come to a glorious birth. 1 Ioh. 3.2.

Q. What is Regeneration?

A. It is, as it were, a new conception of us in the womb of the Church, by
the spirit of God, and that of the incorruptible seed of the Word, whereby our
corrupt nature is begotten again, or restored to the image of God. 1 Pet. 1.3.
2 Pet. 1.4. Tit. 3.5. Gal. 4.6. 2 Cor. 3.17. Colos. 5.9.10. Ephesians. 4.23. Which is
of the whole man, and in this life is perfect in the parts, though imperfect in
the degrees; as a child is a perfect man before he come to his full age. And
this may be called our sanctification, whereby of unholy, we are renewed by
the holy Spirit to the image of our heavenly Father. And here we are to
consider two degrees of our sanctification; the first is the inchoation, or
beginning of it; the second is the process, or passing forward to greater
perfection: hence Romans 8.30. our glorification follows our justification,
sanctification being no other thing then a degree thereof, still proceeding,
profiting, and perfiting in true holiness, which is the greatest reward of
godliness; for as to do ill and continue therein, is the greatest misery: so
to do well, and persevere therein, is the greatest felicity. Glory is the
reward of virtue, and God cannot crown his servants better, then with an
increase of grace. Now this progress is orderly, and begins in the Soul, even
in the very marrow and spirit thereof, and so proceeds to the outward man, and
the actions thereof. Ier. 4.14. Ephesians. 4.23.25.26.27.28. First, conversion, then
conversation. And here alas, how many set the Cart before the Horse, and
begin to change their lives before their lusts, their hands before their
hearts, to purge the channel when the fountain is corrupt, and apply remedies
to the head, when the pain is caused from the impuritie of the stomach. What
is this but to loppe off the boughs, and never lay the Axe to the root of the
tree, to prune the Vine that it may sprout the more? Miserable experience
shows, how such disordered beginnings, come to miserable endings. Many seem
to abstain from sins which they never abhor, and leave some evils which
they loath not, and so like swine wallow in them again, or like dogs follow
their former vomit, she wing plainly, they did never inwardly distaste those
sins, which for a time outwardly they neglected. Again, as we are to
observe order, so we are to labor for a through change. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Holiness, as a dram of Musk, perfumes the whole box of ointment, or is
placed in the Soul, as the heart in the body, for the conveying of life to all
the parts. Some turn from one sin to another; others, like Aethiopians are
white only in the teeth, that is, in verbal profession, elsewhere cole
black in conversation, they speak well and that's all. Others, think it is
well if they turn their minds from error, though they never change their
wills from evil; as a reformed Papist; but an unreformed Protestant; as wanton
in truth, as ever he was wild in error: others again think they have done
God good service if they give half the turn, as prostrating their bodies to
Idols, when God shall have their hearts; or on the contrary, when God has
their bodies, they suffer the Devil to have their Souls. When men's bodies are
in Sacello, their hearts (as Augustine complains) are at home in saccellis
suis. Many by their look and language, outface the congregation, whiles their
hearts are running and roving after covetousness. If we will believe, either
Philosophy, or experience, we shall find our hearts where they love, not
where they live. Lastly, others resolve to give all to God, yet have a leering
eye, and a squint respect unto some of their sins, with Lots wife casting a
longing look after their old Sodom. Know the rule of the School to be most
certain, that as virtues, so vices are coupled together, and though in
conversion to temporal good they look diverse ways, yet in regard of
aversion from eternal good, they bear all one face. Yet this must be added
for the comfort of the weak, that imperfect sanctification, if it be
impartial, is accepted of God. Only let us, as the air from dark to light
in the dawning of the day, proceed by degrees to our noone in grace; or as the
water from cold to lukewarm, and then to heat; so let us have our souls
(benumbed with sin) warmed with grace, and then further heated with true
zeal and ferveneie.

Q. What are the affections, or properties of Regeneration?

A. They are either from the death of Christ, our mortification of sin, or
his resurrection, our vivification in righteousness, and from hence our
spiritual war, between corruption dying in us, and righteousness rising
and growing in us. Mortification is a daily dying to sin, by applying Christ's
death to our selves. 2 King. 13.21. The dead body no sooner touched the bones
of Elisha, but it was revived again: so we no sooner touch Christ, but he
crucifies sin in us, and reviues us in the spirit. Romans 6.2.11. and. 7.4.
Colos. 3.3. Romans 6.6. Vivification is a dally rising to newness of life, by
the virtue of Christ's resurrection. Ioh. 5.11. Ephesians. 2.4.5. The spiritual
battle is waged between the part corrupted, and the part renewed; where there
is part taking; for corruption, the Devil, and the world are up in arms: for
newness of life, the Father, Son, and the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.12. 1 Ioh. 4.4.

Q. What are the parts of Regeneration?

A. They are according to the constitution of the subject, and that is of a
Soul and a body. The renovation of the soul, is either intellectual, or
moral. Intellectual, is the clearing of our understanding with spiritual
knowledge, and godly wisdom to use it. Reason without grace in the very
excellency of it, is but the Devils anvile, whereon he forgeth and hammereth
mischief. What is carnal wisdom, but serpentine subtlety? What is skill in
laws but coloring and covering bad causes and persons, and making truth a
nose of wax to bad ends. Mark, and you shall ever find the ring leaders of
all lewdness and lasciviousness, to be men of good wits: but alas, what is all
this without a fanctified mind? What are sacred oaths and holy obligations to
profane persons, but as Sampsons cords, which they snap in sunder, as fast as
they are given them? So well understand they themselves that they do and
undo, and discern God in his word, as they do Christ in his Sacraments,
which they regardlessely take, and as rashly break. There is no band that they
cannot make like a Monkies collar, out of which they will slip their necks at
pleasure. But reason truly renewed, will be constant in Religion. Luke 1.79. A
Candle set up in the mind, to discover darkness, and guide our feet in well
doing And this is true illumination. Psalm. 16.11. Romans 7.23. and 12.2. 2 Cor.
1.21. Colos. 3.10. Rev. 3.18. Moral sanctification is of the will, and all the
affections; of the will, hence freedom to goodness; of the affections, hence
repentance, which is the change of them all: hence our love of God and
goodness, and hereupon in the absence of good, hope and desire of it, and in
the presence, joy and gladness; Also our hatred of evil, if it be absent,
fear and flight, if present, grief and sorrow. By means whereof Repentance
is an aversion from evil, because hatred is an affection of separation; and a
conversion to good, because love is an affection of union. And by means of the
two cardinal and primitive affections, all the derivatiue and subordinate are
set on work. Our desires are made fervent, which before were saint in
following after God, but now are made impatient of delay. Prove. 13.12. Hell
mouth may be full of good wishes. Number. 23.10. And they that are troubled with
their farms and fat oxen, etc. count it a blessed thing to eat bread in Gods
kingdom. Luke 14.15.16.17. But these for want of penitent desire may be said
to want will. It may be said of them, they would be good, but they have no will
to it: there is none so prodigal, or slothful, but would be rich; yet we say
not such will be rich, set it down, and determine it vltimata voluntate. There
are none so wicked, but at sometimes have a faint desire to be good, and leave
sin, but these cold dispositions breed and beget imperfect essays and
proffers, and by their negligent propensities and inconstant bubles, show they
spring from corrupt flesh, which can be prodigal in momentanie purposes and
promiles. But sanctified desire is eager and earnest; and with David will vow
and swear to obey, yea, and be more vile in spite of mocking Michots. Never
was Ahab more sick for a Vineyard, Ruhel more ready to die for children,
Sisera for thirst, then the Saint of God is after holiness, Psalm. 42.1.2. and
81.10. and 119.20. and 143.7. Gant. 2.5. A gain, this will make our desire of
good laborious, and will not suffer us to be lazy: Christ Math. 5.4. compares
it to hunger, which will break through the stone wall, and it will make them
hold out, and be constant without fickleness. Psalm. 119.20. As for joy in the
fruition of good, oh, what an heaven brings it into the soul? This will make
us for sincerity to delight in the law with the inner man. Romans 7.22. It will
bring us to a full joy. Ioh. 15.24. Isa. 9.3. Psalm. 4.8. Yea, and will so
strengthen us in the good we have, that we shall as well in passive as active
obedience endure, etc. As for fear of evil it will set it the right way,
making us to dread more the doing of it, then suffering in it; and for sorrow
it, will make us see our sins thoroughly, and bewail them as heartily: and
as we see in nature, that there is the same instrument of seeing and weeping
to show us that weeping depends upon seeing: so repentance no sooner takes
notice of sin, but a godly heart begins to bleed for it: and so he that
intellectually sees well, morally weeps well. And by all this we see, how the
mind, will, and affections are sanctified, and the excellent work of
repentance, in regard of all our affections. Isa. 55.7. Act. 11.18. Romans
6.4.5.6. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24. 2 Timothy 2.25. Phil. 2.13. Ier. 4.4.

Q. What is the renewing of the body?

A. When the members of the body, which before were servants to sin, are now
become the servants of righteousness, every part executing his function in an
holy manner. Romans 12.1. Romans 6.13.19. Col. 3.5.

Q. What is our glorification?

A. The perfection of our sanctification, whereby we are made complete in
holiness and righteousness. Famous acts shall have glorious rewards. Glory is
the praise and price of virtue; for as shame and repentance are bridles and
curbes to sin: so praise, fame, glory, and honor are the spurs and speeders
of virtue. Praise follows the beginning of a good action fame runs with it as
it spreads further abroad, and glory is for the perfection of it, when every
mouth rings of it, and every heart honors it. I cannot but think, that the
wicked one day shall honor the godly, and speak of their glory, to their own
shame, and howsoever they speak all manner of ill of them in this world, yet
often do their hearts check them with their innocence, and to see their
honor, maugre the malice of all gaine-sayers. A field of sincerity charged
with the deeds of piety, cannot but be accomplished with the crests of glory:
all the fame which men have sought by buildings, by acts of Chivalry, and by
such other courses, which the light of nature offers and effects, for the
enobling of it self, time devoureth it, and within an age or two it is clean
put out: but that glory which springs from the roots of godliness, no tract
of time can make to wither, no blast of venomous tongues can overcome. It shall
break out as the Sun, in spite of all darkning clouds, it is watered with
the dew of heaven, and it shall grow and increase, in spite of the Devil
himself. Envy will be the companion of virtue as well as honor, and by
means thereof shall the godly be reviled of the wicked. Luke 6.22. 2 Cor. 6.8.
Ioh. 8.48. Math. 1^.25. Let the Moon shine never so bright, yet son Cur or
other shall be found to bark against it: but it is princely to do well and
hear ill, the spirit of glory rests upon such, 1 Pet. 4.14. Job speaks of a
whole volume of reproaches, which he will take upon his shoulder, and bind as a
crown to his head. Job 31.35.36. It is honor enough to be graced for
well-doing: and David may find comfort as well in the scoffs and scorns of
his irreligious wife, as the songs and praises of the religions maidens. 2 Samuel
6.22. Do worthily, and we cannot miss of fame. Ruth. 4.11. Ioh. 12.26. Romans
2.7. And if a good name be to be chosen above great riches. Prove. 22.1. who
will not affect virtue for the glory of heaven?

Q. What are the degrees thereof?

A. The first is in assurance of our election, and the love of God, never to be
violated, or broken off again, and that is by our effectual vocation,
justification, and sanctification; then for the time of this life, the
undoubted persuasion of faith, which makes those things extant, or present,
that are hoped for, and gives us undoubted evidence of those things which are
not seen. Heb. 11.1. And hereupon a certain and infallible hope and
expectation of the fruition of those good things which are prepared for Gods
elect, such indeed as the eye has not seen, nor so much as the ear heard,
nor that which is most, entered into the heart and thought of man. Lastly, the
fruition it self, of glory, and life everlasting. First, in the soul, and
that in the very instant of death, it being translated from earth to heaven, by
the ministry of Angels: Secondly, in the body, together with the soul, in the
day of the resurrection, and last judgment: when the good shall be separated
from the wicked to the right hand of Christ, to hear come ye blessed, etc. and
the wicked to the left, to hear, go ye cursed etc. In this life the godly
have a taste of the life to come, and shall have it in a greater measure, so
soon as the soul is separated from the body, for then it is with the Saints
departed, and is, for the model and measure, as it shall be with the whole man
inioying the presence of Angels, holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc.
Neither must we think, that they that dyed before Christ's coming in the
flesh, were deprived of this glory; for Christ is, has been, and shall be
yesterday, and to day and the same for ever. And then at the universal
resurrection, body and soul being conjoined together again, we shall receive
a further augmentation of glory. Psalm. 16.11. and 17.15. and 21.6. Ioh. 5.25.
and 6.47. and 13.3. and 17.3. Phil. 1.23. Rev. 21.4. Heb. 4.9. The body at that
day shall be either gloriously raised again, or in a moment changed into
glory, then shall every thing imperfect in it be made perfect, and it self
immortal. 1 Cor. 15.54. Children shall be men, and men shall be the mirrours
of glory, and then shall be taken up to meet their Lord and judge, and with
him shall judge the world; then afterward in the sight of the damned, shall
ascend with their Savior into heaven, and there shall be presented to his
Father, and by him placed in those mansions of glory, which are prepared for
them, where they shall serve the Lord continually, without any let, enjoying
his presence for evermore, at whose right hand they shall find fullness of
joy. 1 Ioh. 3.2. 2 Cor. 3.18. Rev. 7.14.15.16.17. and 21.3.4. In vision,
fruition, and perfection of holiness. Math. 22.30. How should this make us to
conquer our impatience, and to swallow down the miseries of this life? O
blinder then Beetles; the Merchant refuses no adventure, for hope of gain;
the hunter shrinketh at no weather, for love of game; the Soldier declineth no
danger, for desire, either of glory, or spoil; and shall we frame to our
selves, either an ease in not understanding, or an idleness in not using those
things, which will be a means to us, not only to avoid intolerable and
endless pains, but to attain both immeasurable and immortal glory,
pleasure, and gain? Let us summon the sobriety of our senses, before our own
judgment; and that which saying cannot, let feeling persuade. Do we not know
what these terms do import, death, judgment, hell? or whom they do
concern? or how near they are unto our necks? Will we like miscreants,
think, hell is not so hot, nor sin so heavy, nor the Devil so black, nor
God so unmerciful, as the Preachers say? Do we take these things for the
fables of Poets, and not for the oracles of Gods own mouth? Remember that
prospect on thy death bed, which in this life, by reason of the interposition
of pleasures, or miseries, could not so well be seen. If thou be good, thou
may look upward, and see heaven open with Steven, and the glorious Angels
attending, as ready to carry up thy soul. If wicked, then must thou look
downward, and see three terrible spectacles; death, judgment, and hell, one
beyond another; and all to be passed through by thy soul, and the very Devils
attend to lay fast hold of it, to carry it to torment. In this life thou wast
content with a condition common with beasts, and therefore in the other, art
thou only fitted for Devils. Art thou not (O wretched man) every, hour in
danger; and will thou not be in doubt to step into them? Remember, the wicked
are said to turn into hell, and their merry dance, to have a miserable
downfall. What? must thou be entreated (like a madman) to be good to thy
self? Had thou rather feel then fear these torments? Rather endure them,
then for a short time think of them? Where then is thy judgment become Where
are thy right wits? or where, at least, is thy self-love? Can thou pry after
profit for the world, and be careful to avoid both loss and harm; and yet
never think what may hurt thy foul, and loose thee heaven? Oh, the coldness
of care, that will not provide how to prevent these miseries. We think heaven
stands by our bed sides, and Lord have mercy upon us will bring us thither;
when indeed hell stands nearer, and is readier for entrance. Heaven is compared
to a hill, hell to a hole, he that climbes upward must sweat and blow, he that
will tumble downward, shall at ease fall into the pit. Oh, then let us neither
refuse the hardness, nor the hazards of the way: but as Jonathan, and his
Armor-bearer, passed betwixt two rocks; one Bozez, the other, Seneh; that is,
foul and thorny: so we must make shift here below, to climb on our hands and
knees; and when we are come up, we shall see our victory and triumph. Let us
with the holy and happy Apostles leave all, both pleasures and advantages, to
follow Christ; and by a foreible entry, by a maine and manly breach, through
all difficulties, to setle our souls in the cogitation of these last things.
Remember, that the best suite of apparel is laid up in the wardrobe or heaven;
here we must be either in black, mourning; or in red, persecuted; It matters
not, what rags or colors we wear with men; so we may hereafter walk with
our Savior in white, and reign with him in glory. In the mean time, let us
often exercise, to acquaint our nature, and draw it into some familiariue with
the joys of heaven; And (as one that makes a fire of green wood) not be
tired with blowing, until our devotion be set on flame; for the habit of
virtues does grow and increase with the exercise of their acts. Do we not
see, that our glorification is nothing else but our multiplied sanctification?
And those that endeavor God will help, and by our persistance, and his
assistance, we shall have continuance and pleasure in happy courses; for as
one that is either weary, or weak, recovereth strength by taking his food,
although he eats many times, without either appetite, or taste: so holy
exercises, which give both fuel and flame unto devotion, do increase in us
some spiritual strength, even when to us they yield little spiritual solace.
Let us grow in sanctification, and we shall be graced with glory, and
glorified with grace, and comforted in both. (*)

The second Book.
CHAPTER I. Of the Law.
Question.

HItherto of faith in God; What is our obedience toward God? Answer.

The duty to be performed to God by us, the power of the holy spirit working
in us by our faith. Luke 1.74. Romans 6.8. and 12.1. 1 Cor. 6.20. Tit.
2.11.12.14. 1 Pet. 1.17.18.19. Psalm. 56.13. Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. Faith, and
the inward dispositions of the soul are as the kernel; outward acts are as
the shell, he therefore is but a deaf nut, that has outward service, without
inward faith: And yet this divine Philosophy teaches us, not only to refer
our speculations, but our affections, and all the dispositions of our souls to
action, Tit. 3.8. So that as our service must be grounded upon our faith, so
must our faith be reduced to service. There is no faith but it works: It is
neither idle nor unable to set the whole man a doing well. In Rethoricke we
say, there may be Elocution without pronunciation: but in Divinity, we cannot
have the first part of the Art without the second. This Solifidian, like Aesops
Hen, too fat to lay, may sit at Rome as justified: but is pitied by David,
Psalm. 119. Rome says, there may betrue faith without works, as if a man
should have faith, and not live by it, or live and not perform the act of
life. Papists err grossly in both parts of divinity; for, they teach faith
in the Church and creatures, and so make not God the end of it; If the Church,
or Saints may terminate faith, it will rest there, and go no further for the
goal. Again, as in faith they shoot not at God, no more do they in works;
for they look to gain and merit heaven by them. Also hypocrites and civil
men know neither the ingenuitie of faith, nor liberality of works, for they
walk before men and not before God: but they are here soundly lessoned that
would so dissemble with God; as if service consisted only in wearing of
liueries, in taking of wages, in making of courtesies, and kissing of hands, I
mean, they put on the cognizance of Christianity in Baptism, know how to live
upon the trencher of Gods providence in their maintenance, and to give him the
complements of a fashionable profession, etc. I know there is nothing more
easy, or more common then this: such servants are as useful for God, as
drunken serving men for honest masters, which are not to be found, when there
is most use for them. Ransacke then thy heart (O sinner) and find sound
affection to God, firm resolution to goodness, true hatred of sin: ransacke
thy life, and find the truth of works, the life of obedience, or else Scribes
and Pharisees shall go before thee into heaven. Do not think, that because
thou have gotten Gods livery on thy back, and his name in thy mouth, that thou
shall be able to outface all reproves. God will smite thee, God will smite, O
thou whited wall. But if the civilly righteous shall not be saved, where shall
the notorious sinner appear? A Christian, and yet a form below a Jew? For
shame, what are we, and where is our emulation? Heaven is our goal, we all
say we run, lo, the very Seribes and Pharisees are gotten before many of
us, and what safety can it be for us to come short of those, that by the
verdict of our Savior, come short of heaven, Math. 3.20? Be zealous, and never
be at rest, till thou get a step further then the most honest civil man, and
that is both in faith and works to gain sincerity. which is the girdle of
truth. Ephesians. 6.14. Think thy self but a loose man as long as thou want it,
and thy graces, never so excellent, will be shaken off with a storm, as loose
garments with the wind. And here the Proverb is most true, ungirt, unblessed,
etc. Obedience, if we respect Gods justice, ought to be perfect, yet it is so
far perfect in us, as it is wrought in us by the spirit and faith; wherein
properly there is no imperfection; for it is the opposition of corruption, that
makes faith little. A small fire warmes but a little, and the reason is not in
the heat, but the coldness of the weather, therefore as far as we believe
we obey God perfectly, and our faith is said to be in part, because the
greater part is corrupt: only this is the comfort, that the new man shall
gain ground of the old; for though the old man, by his long experience, often
deceive the young man: yet the flourishing age of the one shall grow riper in
years and experience, when the old man in the end shall fall to plain dotage.
The spirit, faith, and man are all agents in well doing, and man deserves the
least praise; for he is beholding to the Spirit and faith, if he receive any
reward of his works: I wonder at Papists, that they should make those works
most meritorious, which are most remote from the fountain of well-doing. The
hand in Alms, or feet in Pilgrimages, or both in Christian war, deserve
least, if the reward be according to the doer; for then the spirit and faith
will carry all away, and teach the whole man to be thankful for mercies; and
not to stand pleading for merits.

Q. Wherein stands our obedience?

A. Either in observation of the law, invocation of God, or celebration of
Sacraments. Faith makes us every way dutiful to our Maker. It moves us to
seek him in all his ordinances, and most willingly submit unto his laws,
devoutly to sue unto him in our prayers, and holily to receive the pledge of
his love. Math. 28.19.20. They that for want of faith become weak in doing,
will soon become weary of well-doing. Dead work is soon given over for want
of this life.

Q. What is the Law?

A. The rule of all good, and condemner of all evil. Here alone may we try our
actions, how acceptable they are unto God. Isa. 8.20.

Q. Does God require of man obedience thereunto?

A. Man was to perform it by the law of creation; for, God made him able to
do it, and made his covenant with him for himself, and his heirs, upon the
promise of life, for the keeping of it, and threatening death, if he should
break it, and sealed the same with two Sacraments. The one, of the tree of
life; the other, of the knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 2.9.17. Lev. 18 5.
Romans 10.5.

Q. How had man this law by creation?

A. It was written in his heart; for as he was made by it, so was he governed
accordingly. Genesis 1.26. Let us make man in our image, etc. First, God slamped
his law upon him. Ephesians. 4.24. and then left him to his ordinary providence, to
conform himself and his actions to the will of that God, who with his own
finger did write upon the table of his heart, holiness to Jehovah. The iron by
the tincture of the Lodestone, points to a center, and is drawn too and fro by
it: so the heart of man having received the invnction of an holy law, was to be
drawn from point to point, as the will of God had ordered: only here is the
difference, that the Loadstone moves the iron-naturally: but Gods law was to
stir the heart freely, and as a cause by counsel, and so might be opposed by
man's free will, having liberty to turn with the law, or against it. Oh,
blessed be God that in place of this principle, to move to obedience, has
given another, by whose melting commands, or commanding entreaties, we think
nothing too good, too hard, or dear for God. If Maryes tears will wash
Christ's feet, she will not stick to pour them out, neither will she think
her hair too good to be the to well to wipe his washen feet, or any Spikenard
too costly for to embalme his head. Joseph will not deny Christ his own tomb
to lie in. Zacheus his wealth shall wast before he will want Christ. Faith is
the new principle that will take no repulse; It can constrain and extort more
from us then all rackes and strapadoes, allure more then all wages and prizes.
Does not this Magnes, as easily draw weighty iron, as other Iet does strawes?
What heart can resist faith? Let it but make the motion, and straight it
obtaines what it pleases. It stands not without doors (as one says well)
like a mendicant flexanimous perswader, but enters into the closets of the
heart, shootes the bars, vnlockes the boults, takes away all reluctation and
opposition, infuseth a pliable willingness, and brings with it such a love of
Christ, that we are constrained to obey. It makes docible the dogged nature of
man, and turns a wild and haggard disposition, into a morigerous and mansuete
behavior. Isa. 11.6.7.8.

Q. Can the natural man perform this law?

A. No; for it is almost wholly blotted out by sin, and as it were eaten out
with the rust of corruption: so that man in this estate is altogether
exorbitant in his ways, and cannot so much as do it in thought, will, or
desire. Furthermore, the very Legions of darkness, and powers of hell have so
long held possession in the strong Fort of the heart, that they plead
prescription, scorning, as the Iebusites, to be elected out of their
impregnable tower: so that man both outwardly and inwardly is made unable to
please God. Genesis 6.5. 2 Timothy 2.26. Oh Lord God of heaven, who shall help me
subdue Nebuzaradan, Goliath, Hollofernes, my raging lusts, that are too mighty
for me? Surely, through thee alone I shall do valiantly, and if by faith I
may but once touch the hemme of my Saviors garment, I shall find virtue
enough to recover strength again, and foil all my adversaries; yea, by it
shall I be able to roll away the stone from the cave of Makpelah, and bring
out those hidden Kings, that have domineered and tyrannized over me so long,
throw them down under my feet, trample upon their necks, and triumph over
them.

Q. But is there nothing of the law remaining in corrupt man?

A. Yes, so much is left still as may witness man to be made for God and his
worship, and leave him without all excuse in his sin, when God shall inflict
hell, death, and damnation upon him for the violation of his most holy law.
Romans 1.20. and 2.1.14. Me thinks as Libertines, Cyrenians, men of Alexandria,
Cilicia, Asia, etc. Act. 6.9.10. were not able to resist the wisdom, and
spirit by which Steven spoke: so the most transcendent and sublimated wits in
the world, be they never so obstinate, shall not be able to gainsay the
conviction of their consciences. Rev. 20.12.

Q. Can a man then in any proportion answer the Law?

A. No; of himself (as has been said) he cannot; for if we could see the
true image of a natural man, we should see that little light that yet
remains in him to be resisted, and contradicted. Think of some one man
compounded of all the vices of mankind, and in whom all outrageous sins reign,
and such a one is every man by nature, a Judas, a Julian, etc. We hate the
Jews, spit at the name of Judas, rail on Pilate, condemn the cruel butchers
of Christ, and with Hazael count them worse then dogs, etc. But alas, we see
not our selves. How many that can blaspheme, swear Christ quite over, curse,
swagger, lie, oppress, boil with lust, scoff, riot, live like debauched men;
yea, like humane beasts, or rather unclean Devils: and yet will be crying
Hosanna; but let them say what they will, they are Pilate, the Jews, and
Judas. Do not we all cruelly vex and wound him with our sins? And is not
every of our sins, as a thorn, nail, and spear to him? Thou that pourest
down thy drunken carowies, thou give thy Savior a potion of gall; and while
thou dispisest the meanest of his servants, thou spittest on his face, and
whiles thou put on thy proud dresses, and liftest up thy vain heart, with
high conceits, thou set the crown of thorns on his head, etc. Thus every
man when he little thinks it, crucifies again to himself the Son of God,
and makes a very mock of him; to themselves, not in himself, for he is far
enough out of their reach. Alas, poor man knows not what is within him. Paul
having his eyes opened, confesses that no good did dwell in him. Romans 7.18.
and that evil was ever present to do him a mischief, as if it watched
opportunities to do an ill turn to the spirit of grace.

Q. How then comes it to pass, that many natural men are so civil and honest?

A. God by his restraining spirit does bridle them so far, and in such
measure as pleases him, to the good of his who dwell amongst them: but all
this restraint of evil makes them not good before God, neither those actions
which are done by them. Ephesians. 2.10. Men are to be the new workmanship of God,
before they can be his workmen. Tit. 2.14. Purgation of sin must go before
zeal in good works. Tit. 3.8. They only which have believed in God, know how
to be careful in the maintenance of good works. Romans 8.1. We must be in
Christ, before we can walk after the Spirit. Genesis 20.6. I know (says God)
that thou have done this in the uprightness of thy heart. Some particular
actions may have a charitable construction in the very wicked, and yet the
whole course of their life be sinful and wicked: only the godly are upright
in their way. Psalm. 119.2. David was upright in all things, save only in the
matter of Vriah. A godly man is habitually good, when he is actually evil, and
a wicked man is habitually evil, when he is actually good. Hence it may be
said, the godly keep those commandments they break, and that the wicked
break those commandments which they keep. And therefore except the habit of
obedience be infused, the out ward act is nothing with God, and less to the
Agent. Heb. 9.14. The living God is not served as long as the conscience is not
purged from dead works.

Q. How is the Law further considered in man?

A. As it is known of man in it self, and in his reward, and applied to the
fact, good, or bad, it is called conscience; for conscience is either the
reading of the law in the heart; or the law read unto it by the understanding.
It is Gods spy, or Pinnesse sent out to make discovery of the coast, and to
return advertisement. Only sin so overclouds her way, that often she comes
home again, and says nothing. For blind and ignorant consciences speak
peace, or hold their peace, because they have not skill enough to accuse, and
find fault: they swallow down not only flies and gnatts, but camels and
beams, and digest all well enough. Surely, if the Soul were not fallen well
asleep, and had drawn the curtains about it, it could not concoct so well.
Whiles the scales were upon Paul's eyes, he was alive and quiet, and thought
concupiscence, the sink, and breeder of all sin, to be no sin. Alas, how
many think, because conscience is an Inmate, that she must stand by, hear,
and say nothing? And because it is now vacation, think term time will come
no more, and that they shall never be vexed and troubled with any law cases,
but they are to know that this calm is but the mother of a storm, and that
ere long they shall epsy a weather-gawle in the air. And the little cloud
will bring a dashing shower of fire and brimstone upon the Soul. The watch of
the Clock goes not, and the wheels stand still, being clam'd, and rusted in
their joints: but when the heavy waights of sin, shall be hung upon the lines
by the hand of God, no mercy counterpoyzing them, then shall the hammer strike
thick, and indistinctly, and his tongue blab out his own shame. Oh, how
pitiful a knell shall that be, when the Lord shall knole the great bell of the
conscience, and make his sins sound loud in his ears? Oh, the doleful
passing bell, that finners shall hear, when they are giving up the Ghosts to
their Creator and Maker. Let us in the fear of God think of it, and suffer
conscience to do his office; for thereby we shall prevent Satan by accusing
our selves, and God, by judging our selves betimes. What can Satan (the Accuser
of Man) say, when man by his conscience has said it before him? Truly, this
will stop his mouth; for we being accusers of our selves, God will become our
discharger, and then Satan shall but be our slanderer. Again, God has left
conscience to keep his Court here below, and to sit as judge, and God will not
either ex mero officio, or promoto, call us again, if we will discharge our
selves there. Indeed, in judging of others, we must not judge least we be
judged, Math. 7.1. but in judging of our selves, judge that we be not judged. 1
Cor. 11.31. If this inferior court be corrupt, then there is a court of
Parliament to reform it, and God himself will call it, and make our judge a
witness against our selnes; for God left conscience with man as a judge to
absolve, or condemn, and he will bring it before himself as a witness to
excuse, or accuse. Romans 2.14.15.

Q. Can we then that are Christians perform it?

A. We are to understand that God renewed his law to his Church, and did write
it again in their hearts by his blessed spirit, Ier. 31.33. First, that cur
sins might be the better discovered unto us, and that we might see how we
had eaten the law out of our hearts. Secondly, that by it we might see what we
ought to do, and finding thereby the evil we would not do, to be done by us.
Romans 7.15. and that good omitted which we should do, we might as by a
Schoolmasters be driven to Christ, who has both suffered for our sins, and
performed the law thoroughly for us, which being made ours by imputation, we
also may be reputed doers of it, and so be justified, as before has been said
Gal. 3.24.

Q. But has the law no further use for us?

A. Having brought us to Christ, it is thence forth to be the rule of the
reconciled man, to walk thereby according to the measure of sanctification,
wrought in him by the holy Spirit. Ephesians. 2.10.

Q. Can he then perfectly keep it in himself?

A. No; he cannot so long as corruption dwells in him; for the old man will
be still marring the best act, which the recovered man shall do, or cause to
be done. as much as he can; so that it cannot be answerable to the law in every
respect. Isa. 64.6. Luke 17.10. 1 Ioh. 1.8.9.10.

Q. How can this lame obedience be pleasing unto God?

A. Whatsoever in it is sin, is covered by Christ's righteousness, and
pardoned in and for him; for he is our advocate with the Father, and
propitiation for our sins; so that that which is good is accepted of God,
because it is done in obedience to him, and the rest is not laid to our charge,
because it is discharged in Christ. 1 Ioh. 2.2.

Q. Can it merit any thing with God?

A. No; for it is very imperfect; and if it should have his right merit, it
might more justly expect punishment then reward. For as in a rude ear, that
music may pass for current, which a skillful judgment will condemn for
course: so, in the sight of God, there will appear both errors and defects in
all those actions, which in our judgment were perfectly performed. Let us but
once begin to throw our thoughts freely into every corner of our consciences,
and we shall presently begin to cry out, Lord enter not into judgment with
thy servants; for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Psalm. 143.2.
Romans 3.20. and 4.6. Gal. 2.16. Neither will that dip or die of our works in
the blood of Christ help us: for howsoever the color, or tincture may be
perfect, yet the cloth it self is so stained, that it receives no perfect
wash, or holiness in grain, that perfectly answers the strictness of Gods
justice. Oh, the perfidious heart of man, that would steal the virtue from the
die, and give it to the cloth: surely, it is more hard to be stripped of our
pride, then of our gold and lewels; for even when those, and such like out ward
ornaments are gone, many times these inward rags swell up the soul. These are
the Scorpions and Snakes (as Iereme termed the errors of Origin) amongst which
poor Papists have walked, priding themselves in their own clouts for the
supposed die they have received: But Bellarmine the inventor of such a shift,
puts it off again, and says it is safer for a Christian to renounce the
merits of his works, not so much for their in certainty, as the imperfection
of their justice, and danger of vain glory, and to resolve and teach men to
repose their whole confidence, in the mercy and bounty of God.

Q. How is the Law distributed?

A. It is either concerning the worship of God, or love of our neighbor. Math.
22.37.38.39.40.

Q. Whatas the worship of God?

A. That reverent respect and love wherewith we are to embrace his majesty
with our whole man. 1 Samuel 12.24. Mat. 22.37.38. The Schoolmen define it to be
an immediate act of the will upon God: but this is the whole rule of Divinity,
which is nothing else but the ordering of the Will, so as it may please God.
Now the act of the will is either to believe, or obey, and obedience is either
immediate, as piety, or mediate, as charity. Hence the love of my neighbor
is not an immediate act upon God, and in this sense, worship is well
distinguished from charity: as haning no nearer object then God. The love of
man is so far forth: piece of Divinity, as it is done in obedience to God,
and his law: other wise it is but an act of humanity, etc. Furthermore, it
appears, that worship and prayer are not all one, nor that prayer is all the
worship of God, though indeed it be an only part, the Soul therein most
immmediately conferring with God; for worship, if it be taken for an act of the
will is as large as all Divinity, if for an immediate act of obedience, as
large as the first Table. if for an act of the affections, moving God with
things agreeable to his will, as large as prayer; for the act of the will
falling into the affections, and turning them about with earnest entreaties and
thanks, is the divine worship of prayer; In believing, obeying, praying,
celebrating of Sacraments, I worship God: but immediate obedience is that which
is required in the first Table, when without all other respects, I love God
purely and sincerely: whereas in duties of charity, I am bound by the law to
have respect unto my neighbor for Gods sake, and in prayer I respect mine own
wants, and come to God for supply, cyther in suites, or thanks, etc. Deuteronomy.
6.5. Luk 10.27.

Q. How is the Law coneerning Gods worship distributed?

A. It is either concerning the worshipping of him alone, or the worshipping of
him in due manner; of him alone, or with his alone worship. First, we must
have him for our God, and then give him his due. And therefore when the Papists
say, that the second Commandment forbids not images, but Heathen Idols,
counted for Gods, they are deceived, for it is the first, and not the second
Commandment that forbids such Idolatry. Math. 4.10. and 15.3.9.

Q. What is the worship of God alone?

A. It is the first Commandment, thou shall have no other Gods before me, or
in my eyes. Exodus 20.3. This is a pure Commandment, and brings the soul to a
most simple worship of one, that it may not be distracted with many.

Q What is here commanded?

A. That God is to be worshipped, and God alone, and that truly, and totally.
Truly, that there be no halting, wholly, that there be no halving. And all
this must be done as in his eyes. (...), eye-service is a fault with men: but
let us but serve God whiles he sees us, and it is enough. He must have all, or
he will have nothing; the Devil will be glad of any corner, for he knows full
well, that if he have any part, God himself will have none. Salomons Curtizan
talks of dividing, and many are content to share themselves betwixt God and
the world, mammon, and the Mediator. But the true Christian will cry out, no,
let God take all. I may well say of my heart (as Lot of Zoar) is it not a
little one? Alas, it is even too little for God; I need not think of taking in
an Inmate, it is happiness enough, if God will vouchsafe to take up all the
rooms for himself, and enlarge them for his own entertainment. I know the
bed, and the throne can abide no rivalls, and seeing God calls for the heart as
his throne, and the soul as his bed, let him rest there, and never be
disquieted with any partner. 1 Samuel 12.24.

Q. What is forbidden?

A. All not worshipping of God, as likewise worshipping of other Gods, or
preferring any other thing before him, as our selves, riches, bellies, etc.
Exodus 20.3. Romans 16.18. Phil. 3.9.

Q. What are the laws concerning the due manner of worship?

A. They either set forth the right worship of God, or the right handling of
it. It is not enough to worship God, and that with his alone worship, but we
are to be careful of the reverent usage of it, as also the diligent practice
of it, especially on his own solemn day. Ioh. 4.24.

Q. What is the law concerning his right worship?

A. It is the second Commandment, thou shall not make to thyselfe any graven
image, etc. Exodus 20.4.5.6.

Q. What is commanded?

A. That God is to be worshipped with his own worship, Deuteronomy. 5.12.16. Moses in
repeating the law, bids the people keep it as God has commanded. Deuteronomy. 6.25.
It shall be your righteousness to observe and do, as the Lord has commanded.
Our practice, and Gods precept must go together, and his will, nor ours, must
be done.

Q. What is forbidden?

A All Will worship, devised by man. Religion is not humane policy, but Gods
divinity: yet in circumstances which are rather the ornaments then the
elements of worship of the bye, then the substance, the Church is to be heard;
for nothing is left in the power of the Church but things indifferent: that
which is commanded, or forbidden, is to stand against all rules of men, and God
mustrather be obeyed then man. Act. 5.29. Notwithstanding, this is the folly of
many, that in things indifferent, will have a special Text to allow and
warrant every particular. It is enough for the Church, or Magistrate, to
command in these upon the general warrant of the word: they that oppose must
bring the particular inhibition from heaven, or else they neither obey God, nor
man. If they take from the Magistrate power in things indifferent, they leave
him none at all; for, in all the rest, he is as well bound as any other man.
And here some questions may be moved; first, whether of things indifferent, any
image may be made of Religion? It is plain, of God we are to make none, for he
is only to be taught by his own voice, and not by any image. Deuteronomy. 4.12. To
teach his nature and majesty by images, is to turn his truth into a lie. Romans
1.25. But of religion it self, there may be images and similitudes; for, man
has two senses that are above all the rest; apt to teach or receive
instruction for the mind, the eye and the ear: And almighty God has
provided, that we might learn by both: hence his word for the care in
speaking, and the eye in reading: hence in the old law his service was full of
visible sacrifices, and many other images of holy things. And now the worship
being more abstracted from sense, we have Sacraments, which are images and
similitudes of holy things. But all the question is, what man may do in these
things? for the precept is, thou shall not make, etc. I answer; Images of
Religion, are either in the substance of it, or the circumstances: In the
first, man has no power; for the whole essence of Divinity, must have God for
he sole Author. In the second, man has power for time, lace, and person, and
some outward rites and ceremonies of moral and historical signification; for
such ceremonies and circumstances as are of no signification, are most idle and
absurd in Gods worship. The history of the Bible in pictures of Kings, Priests,
and Prophets, of Altars, Beasts, Cherubins, Arc, Mercie-seat, Temple, etc. are
not unlawful: yet we are to understand, that these things serve only for our
intellectual part, and that God is not to be worshipped in, or at any of
these things, or the like. The Jews were commanded to worship God in the
images of things to come, and the thing being come, we are not to worship in
them, but learn from them. They may be to us of historical use, but not of
moral; for they are ceased, as appendices, or additions to the moral law; and
therefore are left us for instruction, not for adoration. Yet still it
remains, whether the Church have any power to set up religious images, of
moral signification, and such as ought to carry with them not only our
understandings, but our wills and affections unto the performance of some
moral duty? I answer; if moral be taken for the rule, the Church may
prescribe no such duties, they rest then only upon the moral law of God: but
if moral be taken for manners, then it cannot be denied, but the Church has
power to order the outward man in good behavior, and morally to teach him by
humane rites and ceremonies, yea, even such as should outwardly help the
inward man; for moral decency and order, ought to tend to edification. Now
that the Church has power in this general sense, to make some religious
images, I show by this example. Josh. 22. The Altar of testimony was not
civil, but religious, as may appear by ver. 24.25.26.27.28.29.34. It was not
to distinguish their borders, but to testify that they were Gods people, and
had all one God, and that this Altar should put them and their posterity in
mind, to sacrifice upon Gods Altar, wheresoever it should be set, etc. Yet this
Altar of moral signification, was subordinate to Gods Altar, and an help to
the people to bring them to worship God as he had commanded. And so must the
Church do nothing in things indifferent, hut as they help forward the
substance and truth of Gods worship. And in this sense, the Cross in Baptism,
a transient sign of Christ crucified, made in remembrance of the Cross
whereon he was crucified, cannot be denied, but to be an image of Religion, and
of moral signification; which if it should come in to thrust out Gods image, I
mean, water, we had as just cause to be offended with it, as the Children of
Israel at the two Tribes and an half for the new Altar: but when they
expounded it to bein token, not in taking away of Gods Altar, they were not
only pacified, but praised God for his goodness therein: So the Cross in
Baptism, though it come near a sign in Baptism, and may at the first blush
make us fear with Israel the revenge of the iniqu^^ie of Peor: yet seeing how
our Church has expounded it, that it comes not in to confront the water of
Baptism, or to conjure it with Papists, or to be any part of the Sacrament;
for he that may appoint a Sacramental sign, must be able to give the
Sacramental grace, and so the Church should blaspheme, making her self a God,
who only can give that grace, that in the Sacrament is sealed. It is therefore
by the doctrine of our Church, no sign sealing grace: but as that Altar, Josh.
22.27. was a witness betwixt party and party; so this betwixt the Child and
the Congregation; for the Minister baptizing in the name of the Trinity, says
I baptize: but in that action the phrase is altered; and he says in the name
of the Congregation we receive, showing that as God by Baptism admits the
Child into fellowship with himself: so they the Infant into the same
communion of the Cross of Christ with themselves, that is, they gladly
testify, that they are not ashamed of any ignominies, or reproaches for their
Saviors sake. And I would to God, that so Christian an exposition could stay
our brethren for going up against us in Battle. A second Question may be,
whether Christ as man may be pictured? I answer; that subject that is to be
adored, is not to be painted; for it can no ways be set forth as civil, and
so we cannot have an image of Christ (as he is to be adored) for civil or
historical use. We are flatly forbidden the very making of an image of God,
and whole Christ being to be adored as God, we are not only forbidden to
worship his image, but also to make it. If any by the subtlety of their wits
can abstract Christ's man hood from his Godhead, or worship from either of them
both, I shall not oppose the keeping of an image of Christ, as of the greatest
Benefactor that ever came into the world: but my brain is too dull to devide
in this case; and therefore from the precept, Than shall not make, that is, of
the proper subject of Religion, such as was expressed in the first
Commandment, any image. If it were of Religion it self, the precept could not
be so general; for the making of an image of God is morally a sin, I mean,
in the very nature of the thing it self, and admits no dispensation, nay, God
himself, though he took liberty in his worship to express it by images; yet
never did fie go about to paint out himself in any similitude. Deuteronomy. 4.12.
Ye heard the voyee of words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice;
this is the way to show his nature, which no other image can do. And therefore
I may conclude, that Christ as he is to be adored, so he is not to be painted,
etc. The third question is, whether things indifferent, abused, may again be
used in the worship of God, especially, if their first institution have been
superstitious? I answer; they may. Judge. 6.25.26. Baals bullock with Baals
wood is sacrificed to God by Gideon. His Altar is thrown down, first will God
have him cut the very throat of Idolatry, and when once Gods detestation, and
their danger is ceased, then may the good creatures of God, prophened to
Idolatry, be employed to the holy service of their makes. Ioh. 2.6. The fix
water pots were superstitiously abused, for private purification, whereas God
had only enjoined it for the Temple: yet our Savior used both the pots and
water, see the holy working of a miracle, etc. yet this rule must ever be
observed, that things indifferent when they become scandalous and offensive,
are to be foreborne. The Jewish Ceremonies were retained in the Church of God
as things in different after the dissolution of their necessary use. But when
they became hurtful and offensive to Gods Church, they were rejected by the
Apostles. Methinkes these four propositions should quiet any man, conscience
in this subject, which has in all times caused such trouble to Gods Church.
First, that the Church of God has power to retain things indifferent.
Secondly, that the same Church (as it ought) has power to remove them when
they prove scand aloua and offensive. Thirdly, that this power is to be
exercised by our Governors, and not by private men. Fourthly, that private men
sin not in the retaining of them, they cannot be taxed, or touched with that
which is none of theirs; for God requires reformation of none, but such as have
received injunctions from him.

Q. What is the Law concerning the right usage of Gods worship?

A. It either has respect to reverence in doing it, or diligence in learning
it. As we are to avoid all contempt of the glorious name of God, so are we to
neglect no time to learn his will. We are to worship him with all reverence,
especially upon his own solemn day. To whom is the account of our days,
either more due, or better known, then to God? All the days are his, who gave
time a beginning and continuance; yet some he has made ours, not to command,
but to use. In none may we forget him: in some we must forget all, besides
him. Isa. 56.2.4.6. and 58.13.

Q. What is the precept concerning the reverent worship of God?

A. The third Commandment. Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain, etc. By name we are to understand any thing by which
Almighty God is made known unto us, as his nature, attributes, word, and
works.

Q. What is here commanded?

A. All reverence possible to be showed in the worship of God, or in speaking
of God and his holiness, Isa. 48.11. Ier. 4.2.

Q. What is here forbidden?

A. All kind of profaneness, and light esteem of God and goodness. Hos.
4.2. The Jews have a conceit, that the sin of that Israelite which was
stoned for blasphemy, was only this, that he named that ineffable name of
four letters, Jehovah, Shall their fear keep them from once mentioning the
dreadful name of God, and shall not our fear keep us from abusing it? Durst
we so boldly sin God in the face, if we feared him? Surely, if any fear of
him stood before our eyes, we durst not dally with his name, or at our
pleasure tear him in pieces. We must needs despise his person, whose name we
contemn.

Q. What is the law of our diligent learning to worship God?

A. The fourth Commandment. Exodus 20. S. 9.10.11. Remember the Sabbath day to
keep it holy.

Q. What is here commanded?

A. The setting apart of the seventh day to the service of God, as like wife
all diligence in learning to know his will. He that will needs be his own
Scholar, has commonly a fool to his Master. It is dangerous meddling with the
things of God according to our own appoiatments. How perplexed, and in how
manifold minds are men, as those that are encountered with diverse ways, and
know not which to take, in this point of the Sabbath? It shall be well, if some
change not their master, as they seem to have changed their livery in their
service on this day. All our thoughts and vital spirits are too little in
remembering the sanctification of it. True it is that the substance of the
Sabbath consists not in hours, but in holiness, not in a natural day, but
the sanctification of it; and therefore the alteration of the time, is no
mutation, or change in the essence of the fourth Commandment, but only in the
accident of it. Time, as other natural things, is separate and set apart for
holy use. All time is Gods by creation, and waits upon the creature, and his
actions: but the seventh part of time is to be his by the holy observation of
it. And here a journey to Damascus were happily undertaken, to meet with some
good Annanias, that might cause to fall those scales of ignorance, where with
we are blinded in a fallacy of composition and division; thinking the Sabbath
to be abrogated, because the time is changed from a seventh day to a first day.
Truth is great and prevails; for I see no greater change in this, then if the
Sacrament should be celebrated with one kind of water, or bread, and not with
another. For natural things in both are elevated above themselves to
supernatural ends. Time therefore is as moral in the fourth Commandment, as
bread, wine, or water evangelicall in the Sacraments. First, the distribution
of time proves the seventh part consecrated to God. Exodus 20.9. And let him
take heed that sacrilegiously sleales it from God. I am resolved (like Surgeans
and Physicians) rather to force a bitter pill, or smarting salve, then suffer a
patient to perish. With what face can thou say (O wretched Soul) not six
days will I labor, but also play and please my self upon the seventh?
Secondly, the order and succession of parts, will prove, either the first, or
seventh part of time to be Gods. The whole is seven, and of these God must have
a part, and if it be neither the first nor the last, it will be in two weeks;
for either from the first to the last is a seventh day, or from the last to the
first: and therefore as the Logic in the distribution, so the Arithmetic in
the number, proves Gods uncontrollable wisdom in the removal of the Sabbath
from the last member to the first. Divines call (or rather miscall) the
Sabbath, the eight day; for eight is no part of seven: only in succession of
time the next day after the seventh is the eight, but this is not considerable
in the precept: which commands one of seven, and not one of eight. Thirdly, the
end of this separation is holiness, and rest: that a part of our time should
solemnly be employed for the sanctification of the whole, is as reasonable as
the author, who does all things in weight and measure. Again, by holiness
we are to enter into our perpetual rest; and therefore it is requisite, that
a part of time should be a Sabbath here, because we look for an everlasting
Sabbath hereafter, and that all our time shall be turned into an holy rest,
from sin and sorrow. Heb. 4.11. As God the Father rested after his works of
creation, and commanded the creature to imitate him therein: so God the Son
after his works of Redemption, finished in his humiliation, rested in heaven.
And David tells us, Psalm. 118.24. that even Christ being refused in his
humiliation, and made the head stone of the corner in his exaltation, brought
to pass a mavelous work in our eyes, and thereupon concludes, This is the
day which the Lord has made: we will retoyce and be glad in it. This day of
Christ's resurrection excells all other, and so is justly our Sabbath, and kept
by us as a pledge of our resurrection, and entrance into glory. Fourthly, the
lawgiuer is fayd to speak all these words, Exodus 20.1. Even these ten words.
Deuteronomy. 4.13. and therefore let them look to it that dare make them nine. Good
Surgeans and Physicians love their patients, when they are cruel to their
diseases. I cannot but count it a damnable error, to detract one word from
ten. They were all given equally in fire, and in fire shall equally be
required. They were all written in tables of stone, because they were first
written in the tables of our hearts, which as then lost all, like letters
written in water, and are now as hard to receive again, as the very stones:
the ceremonial Law was better remembered then the moral: and of all the
moralls, this has the memento, men naturally being most opposite unto it. Often
times that which we know not through our sloth, the same by tears is made
known unto us. And an afflicted mind certainly finds out a fault committed;
and the guilt which she remembers not in security, she clearly perceives
being troubled. He that finds and feels his own dullness on this day, will
judge the breach greater then of a ceremony. Lastly, holiness is the substance
of the precept; and that is as moral in the solemn worship of God, as the
having of a God, or worshipping of him with reverence. But if piety could not
prevail, me thinks policy should, men needing no teachers to be negligent in
their duties. To conclude the point, this first day of the week is according
to creation, for measure and manner. And that is from evening to evening, or
from darkness to darkness. Genesis 1.5.

Q. What is here forbidden?

A. The employment of the day to any other use, to the hinderance of any holy
exercise. Piety is no Ceremony, and in that we are as strictly bound to the
observation of it as ever were the Jews, wherein we do not Iudaize, but
moralize in true holiness. Isa. 58.13.

Q. What is the law concerning the love of our neighbors?

A. That we do to them, as we would they should do to us. Mark. 12.31.
Math. 7.12. The love of man begins at our selves, and as we in love are ready
to do all good to our selves, and prevent all hurt: so must we from the same
fountain, be in readiness to help our neighbor: how ill does any man
deserve to have an Occan of mercy powered on him, that will not let one drop of
it fall upon his brother, etc?

Q. Where is this commanded?

A. As the former in the first table; so this in the second, and our love of
man, is the declaration of our love of God. 1 Ioh. 4.20. He that loves not his
brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he never saw? The Devil,
when he cannot bring a man, who has known God, to confront and despise him
directly, he enters him with this politic train; first, makes him bold to
trample down his image, and then at length brings him to despise God.

Q. How does the second table concern our neighbor?

A. It consists either in the observation of due order, or preservation of him
and his. Honor is the first fruit of love, and then preservation of the life
and good things of him whom we honor. If we must love our neighbors as our
selves, then must we keep the same order with them, that we would have kept
with our selves. It is bred in the nature of man, either to wish there were no
authority, or none above himself.

Q. What is the law concerning due respect?

A. The fifth, or the first Commandment of the second Table. Exodus 20.12.
Hononr thy father and mother, etc. Where we are commanded, all due respect to
our superiors, inferiors, equals, in what condition, soever, and forbidden
all neglect of duty in this kind Lev. 19.3. Colos. 3.20. Luke 2.51. Ephesians.
6.5. 1 Pet. 2.18. 1 Timothy 6.1. Romans 15.1.

Q. What is the law of preservation?

A. It is either in the preservation of life, or the good things thereof. If
we give to all due honor, we will have respect to life above all other
things, neither will we be negligent of those things wherewith God himself
has honored the lives of men.

Q. What is the law concerning life?

A. The sixth Commandment. Exodus 20.13. Thou shall not kill. Where is
commanded, whatsoever may conduce to the preservation of life, and forbidden
whatsoever may prejudice the same unlawfully. Deuteronomy. 24.14. Ephesians. 4.32. 1 Ioh.
3.5. And here appears the virtue of fortitude.

Q. What are the good things of life?

A. They either concern the body, or the goods and good name of man, or the
whole man; for the last Commandment teaches us to do our duty in all most
freely, without either stop or stay: here must be no if, or and. If
concupiscence make any resistance, we fail in the work of our love.

Q. What is the law concerning chastity?

A. The seventh Commandment, or the third of the second Table. Exodus 20.14.
Thou shick not commit adultery. Where chastie, in thought, word, and deed is
commanded, and all kind of uncleanness whatsoever forbidden. Pro. 6.13. Ier.
5.8. Math. 7.27. 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.19. 2 Pet. 2.14. and here appearrs the
virtue of Temperance.

Q. What is the law of riches?

A. The eight Commandment. 20.15. Thou shall not steal: where all
uprightness in dealing is commanded; and all corrupt and false traffic and
trading or any other deccitfull course forbidden. Prove. 20.14. Mic. 2.2. Zach.
5.4. Josh. 7.21. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.28. 2 Pet. 2.14. And here appears the
virtue of justice and common equity; for we are to hold that what men hold not
in the consistory of God, they may and must hold in the commonpleas of men. The
child of God in regard of dominiumis gratificum, may be said to have all
things, when he possesses nothing; heir of the world, when he is poorer then
Job. Yet may he not by this his spiritual right, take the goods which the
worst in the world ownes by a civil and humane right.

Q. What is the law of fame in preserving the good name of our brother?

A. The ninth Commandment. Exodus 20.16. Thon shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor: where we are commanded, that we circumspectly, and in
due time give our testimony for the truth, and are for bidden all speeches that
may harm the truth, by lying against it. And here is commanded the virtue of
prudence. Portitnde preserues life, temperance chastity, justice our goods,
and prudence our good name: so that in these four Commandments, are contained
the four tardinall virtues. 1 Samuel 23.19. Prove. 17.25. and 29.11. Lec. 19.17.
Isa. 5.20. Romans 1.29. Iam. 3.17. Rev. 22.15.

Q. What is the law of the whole man in regard of desire and appetite?

A. The tenth Commandment, Exed. 20.17. Thou shall not covet, etc. There is a
natural appetite of meat and drink, and likewise a reasonable desire of
things good or bad. Here then we are commanded to love our neighbor without
all resistance of conoupiscence; for if concupiscence resist never so little
the pure love of man we sin. Here any language, or look of lust is a sin.
Carnal suggestion, delectation without consent are here condemned. The Devils
iniection of a temptation, if we resist not is this evil concupiscence.
Original sin is forbidden in every Commandment, and here the not resisting
of the least stirring, or motion ofit. That is the fire that is ever burning
within us, and here the not quenching of the flames is judged of God. Here the
thoughts of the head, lusts of the heart, deeds of the hand are all reproved,
if they turn never so little from the line of the law. And this is that
precept that presses most the heart and conscience, and lets us see how far
we are from our created perfection; for Adam in his innocence was made able to
perform obedience without all inward or outward resistance: but we his sons
find resistance inwardly, in regard of our will and affections, outwardly, in
regard of the temper of our bodies, temptations of Satan, lewd company,
idleness, etc. Furthermore, beside all this we are commanded by this precept
to be content with our own estate, and rejoice at the prosperity of others,
and forbidden all grudging and repining at their good and welfare. Heb. 13.5.
Phil. 4.11. 1 Timothy 6.6. Iam. 5.9. Too many think, there is no such law that
requires a man to be so strait laced, as not to dare to look awry. Pharisees
fume and chafe, and ask, what needs all this ado, as if it were not enough to
keep the law in their hands, but their very thoughts must be bound up with it.
The covetous man thinks it no matter to be greazed in his fist with a bribe,
to remit but a little of the rigor of a good conscience. Well, here is a rule
that lays things hard to our charge, that if we resist not the very first
motions to sin, we make our selves guilty before God, and liable to his
just wrath, etc.

CHAPTER II. Of holy and heavenly Prayer.
Question.

HItherto of obedience to the Law; What is Prayer?

Answer.

It is an affectionate moving of God, with things agreeable to his will. Romans
8.27, and 10.14. Iam. 1.5.6. and 4.3. 1 Ioh. 2.1. and 5.14.

Q. How ought it to be performed?

A. With all comely gesture, in respect of that mighty Majesty whom we move,
and our own baseness who do move, and that with ardent affection, according
to the nature of the thing we move for. Hos. 14.2. Genesis 18.27.

Q. How is Prayer diflinguished?

A. It is either mental, or vocal; for the Lord understands the language of
the heart, as well as of the tongue, Romans 8.27. Math. 6.8.

Q. What is mental Prayer?

A. It is a moving of God without a voice, with the inward affections of the
heart and soul. Exodus 14.15. Moses cried to God when he spoke never a word,
and hereupon our sighs, sobbes, and groans are good prayers. Romans 8.26. Nay,
it is fit that the heart should pray a long time before the mouth: full vessels
do not presently run at the first piercing, neither does the flesh that is
deeply wounded, bleed presently: the heart that is truly touched with sin
and misery, is not able upon the sudden to vent it self; for; as great throngs
of people, pressing out at some narrow passage, stick fast, and cannot go
forward but very slowly: so the abundance of matter in the heart, wanting
words, is streighted in coming forth, and often a broken heart, discharges it
self in broken prayers. And yet the harmony of such prayers is most sweet and
pleasant to God; nay, sometimes contraries, as the interlacing of discords,
graceth this music.

Q. What is vecall Prayer?

A. When according to the nature of the thing we move for, we labor to
express our selves in words, that the tongue may be the true interpreter of
our prayers, and that the breath in which they are uttered, like pillars of
smoaks perfumed with Myrrh and Incense, and with all the chief spices. Cant.
3.6. may come up before God, as the prayers and alms of Cornelius. Act. 10.4.
Otherwise our words will be but like the Egyptian flcsh pots, reeking out the
hot vapors of the strong smelling Onions and Garlike of our own corruptions.
If our prayers be not mental before they be vocal, they speed not: Ezekias 2
King. 19.4. bids Isaiah lift up his prayer to God, that is, pray heartily.
Lusly beggars that flourish in their Rhetoric, move small compassion in the
passenger; if they were hunger bitten, their hearts would teach them another
dialect. The guilty thief pleading for his life, goes not about to entertain
the Judges ears with quaint phrases, and fine words, but he studies to show
the passion and affection of his heart. Carnal eloquence shows small
repentance; and affectation of Rhetoric, is without all affection in prayer.
Too many savor in their words more like the golden sockets of the holy lights,
blazing in speculations, then the bowls of the Altar full of the liquor of
heavenly devotion. Such have more words then matter in their prayers: but
humbled suitors have more matter then words, and ever desire to fit their words
according to their matter. This makes the heart like the pots in Zech. 14.20.
send up sweet fumes of contrition, righteousness, thanksgiving, into the
nostrils of God, that he may smell a savor of rest from us; we a savor of
peace and life from him. That which was said of Mary's Spicknard, wherewith she
anointed Christ, that the whole House was filled with the savor of the
ointment. Ioh. 12.3. The same may be said of these pleasant perfumes of our
religious prayers, that they are fragrant to God and men: and the reason is,
because Christ by a lively faith, lies as a bundle of Myrrh between the
breasts of every Christian, and that he himself in regard of the graces of
Gods spirit is as an Orchard. Can. 4.13. of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits,
as Cypres, Spicknard, Saffron, etc. and all the chief Spices of the Merchant.
And in this sense, the voice of the Church is most sweet in prayer. Can. 2.14.
On the contrary, if our hearts be like Ezechiels bloody pots. Ezekiel. 24.6. that
boil with the scum and rust of lust, revenge, ambition, wanton pampering of
the flesh in painted faces, prodigal garishnesse, monstrous disguisednesse,
etc. bringing in all excess in our respects to our selves, and content with
all defects in our respects to God, we may well say, death is in such a pot,
and that the sacrifice thereof is more noisome to God then any caryon. Never
did the five Cities of the plains send up such poisonous vapors to God, as
the prayers of a corrupt and polluted person, and God being not able to abide
these ill sents, sends down upon such, a counter-poyson of fire and brimstone.
Oh, then let not this pot of the heart that should boil these sweet sacrifices
of prayer, either be dry for want of the liquor of grace, or grow rusty for
want of daily use, but let them be full of liquor and meat; so the fleshpots
of these sacrifices, erunt sicut aromata, shall be as perfumes in the bowls of
incense. Zech. 14.20. I know some are very short in prayer for want of matter
and affection: but this will make us short and pithy for the abundance of
matter and affection. Prayer consists not more in fragore quam fervore, more in
contention of voice, then in intention of heart.

Q. How is vocal prayer distinguished?

A. It is either in prose, or meeter, sung, or said: And hereupon it follows,
that the Liturgy of the Church may be not only in set form of prayers, but
also in dimension of words, for meeter is the measure of words and syllables.
Let therefore the doting and dizie headed Brownists, either confess Psalms,
hymns, and spiritual songs to be no parts of divine worship, or else that
prayer may be in a set form: but they can on the sudden both sing and say; yet
in their dotage they have taken pains to bring David's Psalms into an English
meeter, and use them when they meet, notwithstanding, they reject their own
practice, and will not pray in any set form of words, as if singing as well as
saying, were not praying. Colos. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19. But our case is never the
worse, for that the Lords prayer bears part with us in this baffling of theirs.

Q. How must all these be done?

A. Seriously in the spirit. Romans 8.26. Colos. 3.16. It must be done with grace
in our hearts to the Lord.

Q. How is vocal prayer, delivered either in prose or meeter, distinguished?

A. It is either public, or private; In the Church, Family, or Chamber. Act.
10.2.9. and 14.23. Zech. 12.11.12.13.14.

Q. What is public Prayer?

A. That which is performed to God in the public place of his worship, and in
the public meeting of the Congregation; where the Pastor is to go before in
a lively voice, and the people to follow after in mind and heart; and in the
conclusion, to say, Amen, to testify their consent, and desire to be heard.
Deuteronomy. 27.14. to the end.

Q. What is private Prayer?

A. It is every where, and in all places, and at all times, where either more
are gathered together, and then one is to go before, and the rest follow in
consent as before; or else one by himself alone, which may pray only in mind,
or also with his voice; and this again may be more solemn and accustomed, or
a short ejaculation, etc. 1 Timothy 2.8. Math. 18.19. Ion. 2.1. Exodus 14.15. Zach.
12.13.

Q. To whom are we to pray?

A. To the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, and to them alone. Psalm. 50.15. Romans
10.14. We are only to call upon them, in whom we are to believe, and that is
only in God. I believe in God, not in any creature, for that is blaspheme.
Neither is there in all the prayers of the Bible any other mentioned, to whom
we are to sue but God alone. If any shall demand, whether he may direct his
prayer to one person of three; the answer is, he may do it safely, and with
comfort. What need we fear, while we have our Savior for our pattern: Oh, my
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass. And Paul every where, both in
thanks and requests, bows the knees to the Father, etc. yet must this be done
with due care of worshipping all in one. Exclude the other, while we fix our
hears upon one, our prayers will be sin; retain all and mention one, we
offend not. None of them does ought for us, without all. It is a true rule of
Divines, all their external works are common: to solicit one therefore and
not all, were injurious.

Q. Hitherto of Prayers general affections; What are the kinds?

A. Prayer is either simple, or compound. Sometimes we are all suites unto God,
another time all thanks; and sometimes again we join all together. 1 Timothy
2.1.

Q. Whas is simple Prayer?

A. Where Prayer is of one nature only. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God. ver. 2.
Grace be to you, etc.

Q. How manifold?

A. It is either Petition, or thanksgiving. Either we request some thing at
Gods hands, or bless him for the receipt of it.

Q. What is Petition?

A. When by prayer we crave any thing of God, according to his will. Math.
26.39. Iam. 1.6. 1 Ioh. 2.1.

Q. What may fall out heresometimes?

A. Making of vows, which is a solemn promise made to God, with mature
deliberation of things lawful, and possible, etc. Psalm. 76.11.

Q. How many sorts of Petitions are there?

A. Two; either a craving of some things to be done for us, or an entreating
that some thing may be avoided by us, or removed from us. Ephesians. 6.18. Heb. 5.7.

Q. What is the craving of something to be done for us?

A. Our petitions to God, to bestow good blessings upon us; where we are to
labor to have a true sense of the want of these blessings. Psalm. 119.17.18.

Q. Wherein consists it?

A. Either in good things that concern God, or our selves: the first we must
desire infinitely, as the end of our thoughts, the other, with moderation, as
means to help us to that good. No man desires meat, or medicine infinitely,
but for health, we never think we have enough of it: so God and his
goodness must be sought without measure, but the things of this life in a
mean, as means of a better kingdom. Math. 6.33.

Q. What concerning God?

A. Our sanctification of his name, the coming of his kingdom, and
performance of his will: first, we pray that God may be glorified by us; and
secondly, we pray that the means of his glory may be sanctified unto us.
Math. 6.9.10.

Q. What concerning Man?

A. All things convenient and necessary for him in his condition, that both
himself may line by Gods blessing, and others by him, etc. Math. 6.11. Ephesians.
4.28.

Q. What are the things we entreat to be removed from us?

A. Sin and misery: Where we are to make use of that holy exercise of
fasting, which is to abstain from Gods creatures for a time, to testify our
humiliation before his Majesty. Iocl. 2.15.

Q. What is our deprecation for the pardon of our sin?

A. It is our entreating of God to forgive them, and that he will never lay
them to our charge; Remission is an action of God the Father, whereby for the
merits of his Son applied by his spirit, he accounts sin as no sin, or,
as if it had never been committed, Isa. 38.17 and 44.22. Ier. 31.34. and
50.20. Mic. 7.19. Math. 6.12. Colos. 1.14 1 Ioh. 1.7.

Q. What is our deprecation in regard of miseries?

A. That the Lord would deliver us out of all temptations, and other
afflictions and calamities, which if we consider them as they are sent of God,
then our entreating is in Lamentation; if as they are inflicted by the wicked.
It is a Complaint. Psalm. 35. and 69. In both which Psalms, David lamenteth for
the wicked and complains of their ingratitude to God. Ier. 9.19.20.

Q. What is thanksgiving?

A. An hearty acknowied gement of Gods mercies bestowed on us, yielding him
due praise, and ascribing unto him, kingdom, power, and glory for ever, Amen.
Psalm. 29.2.9. and 66.2.3. and 96.6.7. Luke 1.68. Ephesians. 1.3. Col. 3.17. 1 Timothy
2.1.

Q. What is a compound Prayer?

A. A prayer consisting of all, or some of these simples. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort,
that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men. As faith is the Conduit cock, that waters all the herbs and
flowers that grow in the Garden of obedience; so prayer is the messenger that
knockes at heaven gates, for the showers and dewes of heavenly benediction, to
make all thrive and prosper. Oh, that every soul whiles it is feasting and
banqueting with God by faith, as Ester with Ahasuerosh, could bethink it
self, what suites it has to him, or what trouble some enemy it would be rid
off, suppose it to be some potent Haman of pride, etc. How soon should it be
executed and crucified before our eyes, if we could but make our complaint to
our best beloved? or if we find we have more need to petition for ourselves,
then deprecate against others, then let us duly consider what grace we want,
ana make our suite to God, as Achsah to Caleb, and we shall have given us the
plentiful springs of grace, both above and beneath. And that we may do all
these, the Lord powere upon us the spirit of grace and supplication, and that
we may cheerfully look up to him whom we have pierced with our sins, etc.
Zech. 12.10.

CHAPTER III. Of the Sacraments.
Question.

HItherto of Prayer; What is the celebration of a Sacrament?

Answer.

An act of faith, whereby according to Gods institution, we celebrate the
Sacraments or dained of God by the reciprocal action of godly giving and
taking. 1 Cor. 11.23.24.25.26. Hence the Lords Supper is called a Communion,
God communicating to us by giving, we with him by receiving. 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is a divine testimony, wherein external sensible things, by a solemn
right, are separated from common use, to signify, seal, and represent unto
the faithful, assurance of life in Christ Jesus. Romans 4.11. Circumcision is
said to be a sign and seal of righteousuesse by faith. A sign in regard of
the thing fignified, a seal in regard of the covenant made betwixt God and
man; of righteousness not our own, but that of Christ, both active and
passive; for all the ways of God are just and true, and therefore no imperfect
righteousness can be sealed in Gods contracts, and treaties with men by faith,
for that as the instrument makes the righteousness of Christ ours by
imputation.

Q. How many parts, or members be there in a Sacrament?

A. Two; The outward and sensible sign, and the inward and spiritual grace;
for as man consists of a body and soul, and that nothing ordinarily comes to
the soul but by the body, Almighty God condescending to our weakness, has
ordained outward teachers, to convey knowledge and comfort to the inward man.
Math. 26.26. This is my body. If bread, and the body of Christwere not two
distinct parts of a Sacrament, the Sacrament it self should be lame and
imperfect, both in reason and religion: In reason, because the relation betwixt
the sign and the thing signified should be taken away, the one being present
without the other, as a real presence of flesh, without a real presence of
bread; and so the teacher of the outward man being removed, God is so far in
the Sacrament above our capacity, that it is incredible to believe either the
thing, or the power of God in such a conversion; for it were unreasonable to
turn a piece of bread into a glorified body, or a glorified body into an
omni-present God. A Sacrament is the plainest part of Divinity, and comes
lowest both to our necessity and capacity: yet Papists elevateit above all
Divinity, and make it obscure above measure. Secondly, it is against reason in
proper speech to call a member the whole, and to say the body of Christ is the
whole intyre and perfect Sacrament. If they say it is but a part, then let them
show us the other, the bread being vanished away, and remaining no more in his
substance. Thirdly, it is against Divinity and Religion, to think any part of
it to be corporal food; for it is the rule of the will, and consequently of
the whole man; and so is a spiritual teacher, though it be helped by sensible
means to convey it self into the soul, and therefore Christ in the Sacrament
profits not, except he be eaten by faith. A reprobate may receive bread; but
the sign, seal, and thing signified are none of his; for he has no
experience of this mystery, that wants the first part of Divinity; without the
which the second cannot work, no more then a man live without a soul.

Q. What is the sensible sign?

A. That external part, which is liable to the senses, whereby our faith being
weak, and our sanctification but in part, our chedience very imperfect, and
prayers, not as they should be; Notwithstanding the divine Goodness witnesses
to our senses, the constancy of his purpose to save us, and it is (as it were)
the badge, symbol, and token, whereby the true Church is married to the spouse
Jesus Christ; and therefore separated from all other companies, and hence it
is, to show, to whom she belongs, and to distinguish her from all other
sects. Hos. 2.19.20. Math. 28.19. Act. 8.36.37. 1 Cor. 10.17.18.19.20.21.

Q. Have these signs been always the same?

A. No; They have been diverse, accerding to the times of Christ, either as he
was to be exhibited, and then they were ordinary, and extraordinary; or else as
he as exhibited in our flesh. Before his coming, he confirmed the ordinary
signs by extraordinary miracles, least the Jews should doubt of the Messiah,
or of the virtue of such external rites and ceremonies. The Cloud, Pillar of
fire, Manna, Rccke, Red sea, etc. were all Sacramental signs to the Jews, as
well as Circumcision, and the Passover. 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3.4.

Q. What is the spiritual part?

A. Jesus Christ, both God and man, with all his benefits, which has never
varied. Heb. 13.8. The Cup, and the Bread 1 Cor. 10.16. are called, a
Communion, that is, the drinking of the wine in the Cup, and eating of the
bread, makes a communion betwixt us and them in corporal nourishment: So
Christ with all his benefits, being received, and the fruit thereof being truly
perceived by faith, is our happy communion with the body and blood of Christ:
otherwise we communicate no more with Christ in the Sacrament, then we do
with the bread and wine, whiles they stand untouched upon the Communion Table.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two; one of our Nativitie, and another of our education: our Christianity
is sealed unto us both in the birth, and growing of it; for as the application
of Christ unto us, is both for our being in him, and rising with him: so the
two seals thereof, are either for our grafting into Christ, or growing up with
him. Hence the first Sacrament may be called the symbol, or seal of our
entrance, or initiation in Gods Church: it is (as it were) our matriculation,
etc. The second, is the Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment, and
continuance therein. It has been an ancient custom in the Church of God, to
set the Font below in the Church, and the Table above, and thereupon have
called it the high Altar, not for to sacrifice Christ upon it with the Papists,
but to remember that everlasting, and perpetual sacrifice he offered once for
us upon the Altar of his Cross. This is a humane Ceremony, and not without
edification, because it carries with it a proportionable signification to both
the Sacraments, and yet are these places, or instruments set up in them no
ways Sacramental, though profitably significant. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup, in
the Communion, is no more Sacramental, then the Font in Baptism; and yet the
Apostle says, the Cup, which we bless, is it not the Communion, etc? He makes
an holy use of the Cup which contains the wine, and so may we of the Font
which holds the water: yet must we not think the Cup more holy then the wine,
the Font then the water, or the table then the bread and wine, etc. And
therefore it is a sin in some ignorant people, that more reverence the high
Altar, then the Sacrament it self, and think that the supplenesse of their
knees, in bowing at, or before the Communion Table, should be a mask to hide
the starknesse and numbnesse of all the ioynrs of their Souls, in their
submission to the Commandment it self, in a spiritual eating and drinking at
the same Table, which is therefore to be reverenced, because it is the Table of
blessing so spiritual a banquet. For it is too well seen and known, that
superstitious Papists, and carnal Protestants, (for I speak not of them that
reverence the place for the mysteries themselves (as Paul did the Cup for the
Sacramental wine) that their knees, which are Camel like in the common
courtesy in Gods house, are ioyntlesse and Elephant like, in the special
obedience unto his precepts, to whom the house and place is consecrated.

Q. What is the Sacrament of our Nativitie?

A. It is the Sacrament of our ingraffing into Christ; and therefore but once
used of us. For we are but once borne Christians, though we have daily use of
nourishment, no grow up in Christianity, Romans 6.3.4.5. Col. 2.12.13.

Q. What is the external part thereof?

A. Before Christ was exhibited in the slesh, the extraordinary signs were the
passing of the Israclites through the red sea, and the Cloud, that was by day
to cover them, and the Pillar of fire by night to guide them in the
wilderness: the ordinary sign was the circumcising and cutting of the
foreskinne of the flesh, but since Christ's coming our Baptism, or washing of
the flesh. Math. 28.19. 1 Cor. 10.2.

Q. What is the spiritual meaning of this?

A. Christ's righteousness washing away our sins: secondly, the presenting of
us as holy, clear, and clean before the Father, whereby we are delivered
from death, and restored again to life. Ephesians. 5.26.27. Tit. 3.5.6.

Q. What is the Sacrament of our spiritual education?

A. It is that Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment, or growing up with
Christ, after we are once in him, and therefore this is more often to be
performed by us. 1 Cor. 11.26.

Q. What is the sensible part thereof?

A. Before Christ was exhibited, the extraordinary signs, were Manna, and the
water which ran from the Rock; the ordinary was the Lamb in the Passover.
Since Christ was exhibited, the bread and wine in the Lords Supper. Math.
26.26.27.28. 1 Cor. 10.3.4.

Q. What is the spiritual meaning?

A. Our continual strengthening of the spiritual man by his often feeding (as
it were) by faith upon the Lord and his righteousness, to the undoubted
assurance of eternal life. Ioh. 6.32.33.35.50.51.54.55.56. etc. Say not now (O
careless Christian) when thou have run over these rules, thy Catechism is
done: but consider it is not done, till thou have done it. Thou may be an
unclean beast for all thy chewing of the Cud, and frequent repeating of these
lessons, except thou devide the hoof in holy practice. I have endeavored to
anoint thy right ear with wholesome advise, but labor thou to have thy right
thumb and toe anointed with the holy oil of grace, to walk more smoothly
and currantly in the ways of God. Remember thy Baptism, and entrance into the
flood Jordan, not there like boys, to play and paddle in so holy a water, but
to wash and be clean. And for the Lords Supper, be not like the changeling,
Luther mentions, that is ever sucking, never batling: rather take Saint
Peter's advise. 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes drsire the smeere milk of the
Word, that ye may grow thereby. The bottle and the Bible are both alike, if
we drink not the liquor, it cannot cheer us, and if we eat not the little
book, concoct, and digest it, what nutriment can it afford unto our spiritual
life? Let us all in the fear of God, like Gedeons Soldiers, learn to be as
able to carry in our hands the burning Lamps of godly life, as we are with
our mouths to sound the trumpets of Gods truths. I say not a word more, make
the rule the rudder of thy life, and the fountain of thy well-liuing, and then
do that which thou know to be good, and happy art thou. (*)

FINIS.

