THE DISCOVERY AND CONQVEST of the Provinces of PERV, and the Navigations in
the South Sea, along that Coast. And also of the ritche Mines of POTOSI.

THE RICH MINES OF POTOSI.


Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones. Febru 6. 1581.

The strange and delectable History of the discovery and Conquest of the
Provinces of Peru, in the South Sea. And of the notable things which there are
found: and also of the bloody civil vvarres which there happened for
government.

Written in four books, by Augustine Sarate, Auditor for the Emperor his
Majesty in the same provinces and firm land. And also of the ritche Mines of
Potosi. Translated out of the Spanish tongue, by T. Nicholas.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, dwelling over against the Fawlcon, by
Holburne bridge. 1581.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Master Thomas Wilson, Doctor of the Civil Law, and
one of the principal Secretaries, to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
TVllius, and Caius Plinius, wrote that neither Posie nor Rethoricke seemed
sweet or delectable without the ornament of eloquence Yet an History, of
whatsoever sort it be written, does please and delight: because, men may
thereby know, the success of things happened, to the knowledge whereof, the
nature of man is bent: yea, the tale of a Plowman, is sometime delightful to
the hearer, especially when any new thing is discovered.

And where the style of this history in our English tongue is not, nor at the
least, I ca^ not polish as learned me^ might require. Yet the troth and pith of
the matter uttered in plain sort shall suffice giving license, as much (as in
me lies) to whosoever that will take the pains, to write it over again, to
beautify the same, as to him or them shall seem convenient: as often times,
has happened among the Greek and Latin Historiographers and Translators.

The Author of this work, right honorable, was a Gentleman of woorshipful
stock or lineage, he was highly esteemed of the Emperor Charles the fifth:
unto whose Majesty, he was sometime Secretary in his royal counsel of
justice, and afterward ordained Auditor of accounts of the revenues
appertaining to his Majesty in the Provinces of Peru and firm land.

This well minded Gentleman, after the writing of this History, feared the
publishing hereof for two principal causes: The one, least the discendent of
such as had committed things not worthy of praise, would conceive some evil
oppinion of him: or else the issue of the virtuous and noble sort, would judge
the praise and commendations of their progenitors sufficiently set forth
according to their deserts: In consideration whereof, he called to remembrance
the oppinion of Horatius, which was, that no History should come to light
until nine years, were fully past after the action thereof.

This oppinion liked him not, but rather thought it more convenient, that
Histories^ worthy of writing should abide in scile^ce for the space of lxxxx.
years, thinking that in so many years space, the lineage and offspring of the
one sort might consume, and the race of the noble and virtuous, to be contented
with the commendation of their Ancestors.

The King of Spain that now is, having perused the original Copy of this
History, requested mine Author to publish the same in Printe: and in
accomplishment of his Majesty's commandment he has so done. And the
Englishing of four books of his work, I most humbly here present unto your
Honor.

I may at this day, God be praised, boldly write that, where the Spanish and
Portingall Nations dare glory of their discoueries and Nauigacions, with great
commendations of their Captains, Colon Vasco dela Gama, Magalanez, Hernando
Cortez: Don Francisco Pisarro, and Don Diego de Almagro. Now may our most
gracious Queen, most justly compare withal the Princes of the world, both for
discovery and nauigacion.

The Discovery of the Portingall East India, was atchiued in 26. months, and
the West India, in shorter space: Magalanez returned not to manifest his
dooinges: But our valyant and noble minded Captain, Master Francis Drake, in
his Navigations, was occupied more, or nighe three years: In which time, he
sailed, and attained to the knowledge of the East, and West course, which none
at any time had ever atchiued.

His paineful travail, and maruailous Navigations, was not obtained with white
hands, perfumed gloves, dainty fare, or soft lodging: no, no: Honor is not
gotten with pleasures, and quiet minds. For the sweet Roses grows among
Thorns: yet the ignorant will judge, that perpetual Fame and heavenly
Felicity, is a thing to be gotten with facility and ease. But if the poor
Sayler should sit as Judge, I am sure that he would say, how extreme hunger,
thyrst, hard lodging upon Hatches, foul garments, blustryng storms of wind,
with Hayle, Snow, bitter cold, Thunder, Lightning, and continual peril of
life, leads the hie pathway to the Court of eternal Fame. The honor of our
good Captain and company, lies not in my Pen to set out accordingly:
therefore, I remit the same to such as hereafter shall justly set forth his
pains and travel: My humble suit, is to beseech your Honor, to accept this
work into your patronage, and the Almighty grant your hearts desire.

Your honors at commaundment, Thomas Nicholas.

TO THE READER.
THe doubt which has been held, gentle Readers, upon the verefiyng, by what way
it was possible to pass into the Provinces of Peru, I mean for the people,
which of antiquity, there first inhabited: But to satisfy that doubt,
seems sufficient, the authority and opinion of the divine Plato, who (in
brief) makes rehearsal thereof, in his book, entitled: Thimeum, otherwise
called, the nature things: and afterward in another book, or Dialogue, more
at large, proceeding on forward, after his Thimeum called Atlanticum: where he
treats of an Historye, which the Egiptians set forth in praise and
commendation of the Athenienses, saying: that in times paste, they were of such
power, that they overcame and atchiued victory, against certain Kings, and an
infinite number of men of war, which came by Sea, from a great Island, called
Insula Atlantica, which had Origin at Hercules Pillars, and was accounted
greater then al Asia, and Africa, wherein was contained ten Kingdoms, the
which Neptunus divided among his ten Sons: but to the eldest called Atlas,
he gave the greatest Kingdom.

He also writes of many other memorable things as also of the customs and
riches of this great Island, but especially, of a famous temple, which was
built in the principal City: the walls and roofes whereof, were wainscotted,
with plate of gold, silver, and latton, and other many particularities, which
are long to rehearce, as originally may be seen, where they are written at
large.

Many of which customs and ceremonies, at this day we have seen in Peru.
From this Island they sail to other great Islands, which stand on the farther
side thereof, nere adioynyng to the firm or continent land, beyond the which,
is the sea, called, the broad or true Sea. The formal words of Plato, in the
beginning of Thimeum, says: That Socrates speaking to the Athenienses, said:
it is holden for troth, that your city in time past did resist an
innumerable number of enemies, which came from ye Sea, called Mare Athlanticum,
who had taken and enjoyed the most part of all Europe and Asia: For at that
time, that straight was Nauigable: having not far from ye mouth an Island,
which began near unto the Pillars of Hercules, which was reported to be
greater then Asia, and Africa: and (jointly) from the same, was contractacion,
in bying and sellyng with other Islands, which Islands had conference with the
fyrme and continent land, which stood in frent of them, who were neighbors
unto the true sea.

For that Sea, with reason might be called the certain and true Sea, and the
land, continent and fyrme^ ^his mutche writes Plato. He also affyrmeth,
that.9000. years before the writing hereof, the Sea increased with so mighty
a power of water, in those parties, that in one day and one night, this great
Island suncke, and all the people perished, and that afterward, the same sea,
remained full of sands and shallowes, so that ^hereby never after any might
pass unto the other Islands, nor fyrme land.

All those which write upon Plato, affirm and hold opinion, that this History
was true, so that the most of them, especially, Marsilius, Ficinus, and
Plantinus, will not admit the meaning to be Alegoricall, although many others
judge the contrary, as the same Marsilius refers upon the anotations upon
Thimeum. But, where he speaks of the.9000. years, it seems not a fabulus
argument: for according to Eudoxus, those years were to be understood
according to the Egiptians account, where every monthe was accounted one whole
year, and not according to ye course of the Sun: so that.9000. months,
makes.750. years. Likewise it is almost a demonstration, to give credit to the
oppinion, touching this Island, consydering that all the Historiagraphers^ and
Cosmographers that wrote of old time, do call the Sea, where y^ Island suncke,
Mathanticum, reseruinge the name which it had when it was land: Than
presupposyng that the History is true, who can deny that this Island
Athlantica, began from the straight of Gibraltar, or not far from Cadiz, and
extended into the great gulf, where as well North and South, as East and
West, is a greater space then the situation of all Asia and Africa.

The Islands whereof the text makes mention seems to be Espaniola, Cuba,
Iamaica, and the residew which stand in that Comarke.

The firm lands, which is said to stand in frent of the said Islands: does
appear by reason, to be the same firm land, which now is called after the same
name, and all the other provinces, where unto it is continent: which, beginnynge
from the straight of Magalanez, does contain (runnyng Northward) the land of
Peru: the Province of Popayan, Castillia del oro, Beragua, Nicaragua,
Guatimalla Nueua Hispania, the seven cities, Florida, Bacallaos: and the said
land, runs along from thence Norward, until it come to ioygne almost with
Norway: In the which (without doubt) is more ground, then as yet throughout
all the world is inhabited, or at least was known, before the discovery of
this country. This matter does not cause any great dificultie, that the
Romans and other nations, which in time past, inioyed the Land of Spain, had
not discovered this country: It is to be thought, yt the roughnes of those
Seas, in those days, did disturb and hinder the Navigations.

So that this Land, may well be called the firm and continent Land, whereof
Plato writes: which does agree with all the tokens and signs, which he
gives of the other: cheefely, wherein he affirms, that it lies infrent of
the South Sea. Then forasmuch as has been sailed in our days, in the said
South Sea, does appear, that in respect of the breadth and greatness of the said
South Sea, all the Mediterraneum Sea, and as much as is known of the Occean,
vulgarly called, the Northen Sea, are Rivers in comparison of the other.

Then all this approved true, the signs, tokens and words of Plato, do
therewith accord: so that there is no doubt or difficulty in the first passage
into Peru, of innumerable people, as well from the great Island Atlantica, as
also from other Islands, from which Islands they used to sail: and also out of
the firm Land, they might pass into Peru: And if in this point should seem
any difficulty, yet it is to be credited, that by the South Sea, they had use
and knowledge of Navigations, by contraction and traficke, which they had with
this great Island, where the text declares, that they had great abundance of
Ships, yea, and Roades, and harbors, made by force of hand, for their
conseruacion, where nature wanted.

This is as much as may be gathered, touching this matter, which is not small,
for a thing of such antiquity, without light: cheefely, that in all the
Provinces and Country of Peru, were found no kind of Letters or Writing, to
conserve the remembrance of things past, nor yet the pictures or paynting,
which served in the new Spain, for Letters, saving only, certain stringes, of
diverse colors, full of knots: so that by those knots and distance between
them, was an account kept among that people, but maruailous strange to be
understood, as hereafter in this History shall be declared. Therefore I may say
with Horatius: Si quid nouicti restius istis, candidus imperti: si non vis
vtere mecum.

And as concerning the Discovery of this new country, the words of Seneca
does fit, which he set out in his Medea Tragedy.

Venient annis saecula seris,
Quibus Oceanus vincula rerum
Laxet, nouosque typhis detegat orbs
Atque ingens pateat tellus
Nec sit terris vltima thyle.
Besides the oppinion of Plato, at this day are to be seen the Islands of
Asorez, Canarie, Madera and Islands of Cabo Verde: with wonderful shallowes
and Sand, lyinge far out into the main Sea, which are thought to have bin
part of the said Island Athlantica.

This History does also set forth the duty, and royal service, of the Subject
to his Prince, and how Mutynies are justly punished: And likewise, last of all,
how blood is punished with blood: and the high way to Honor, is great pain,
and danger of life. And I for my part (Gentle Reader) desire no more for my
pains, but that thou will as willingly accept my travail, as I with good
will do offer the same.

Farewell.
THE HISTORY OF THE Discovery and Conquest of the Province of Peru, and of the
wars and other notable things which there happened.
Of the notice of Peru, and how the discovery was begone. Chap. 1.
IN the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 1525. in the City of
Panama which stands situated on the border of the South Sea, in the Province
of firm Land, called Castillia del oro, dwelt three Gentilmen, among whom, was
sundry times conference concerning the understanding which they had obtained
of Peru, whereupon they agreede to proceed on the discovery of the same, and
thereupon laid all their goods into stock of company.

The first and principallest of them was called Don Francisco Pisarro, who was
borne in a City of Spain called Trugillio: The second was named Don Diego
de Almagro, natural of the Town of Mallagon, whose stock or lynage, could not
unto this day be perfec^ly known: yet some does hold opinion, that he was
found at the Church door in his swaddling clothes, after that he was newly
borne: The third was a Priest called Fernando de Luque: And where these three
were the richest and principallest men in that Country, they determined to
increase their riches, and also to serve herein, his Majesty the Emperor
Charles the fifth: whereupon they concluded to take in hand, to discover by the
South Sea, the Easterly coast of the firm Land, toward those places which
afterward were named Peru: So that after they had obtained license of ye
Governor, who at that instant then governed for his Majesty, called Pedro
Arias de Auila, Don Francisco Pisarro arrived, and rigged forth a Ship,
wherein he himself took shipping as Captain General, with 114. men in his
company, and so proceeded on the Uoyage, and in short space he discovered a
small and poor Province, Every league con^aineth 3. English Miles.
fifty Leagues distant from the City of Panama, the which he named Peru,
and afterward called the whole Country of the same name, which was discovered
for the space of 1200. Leagues: And proceeding forward he found another Land,
which the Spaniards named the burnt Town, where the Indians of that place held
them cruel war, and slew many of his men, so that he was forced to retire
sore wounded, to the Country of Chinchama.

In this mean season, Don Diego de Almagro, who abode at home, had prepared
another ship, and therein took shipping with 70. Spanyardes, and with them
proceeded to seek Don Francisco Pisarro, sailing along the Coast til he came
to the River which he named the River of S. Ihon, which stands 100. Leagues
distant from Panama: And findinge him not, he returned to the burnt Town, and
there had understanding of his being there, where he also came a score, but
the Indians encouraged with the victory and expulsion of Don Francisco, did
like wise valyantly resist his entry, yea, and also put him and his company to
the worse: in so much that they entered a Forte, where the Spaniards defended
them selves through the oversight of those which had the charge of that part of
the Fortress: by mean whereof, they put the Spanyardes to flight, and also
with a stripe put out one of the eyes of Don Diego, by reason whereof they were
forced to flee and to retire to the Sea side to take Shippinge again, and from
thence sailed along the Coast of firm Land, until he arrived at Chinchama,
where he found Don Francisco, wi^h whom after long communicacion, and
refreshing of themselves, they gathered together about 200. Sp^nyardes, and so
proceeded again upon the discovery with two Ships and 3. Canoas, which were
small Uessels, built like unto Troughes: In which Nauigacion, they passed many
and great troubles, by reason the Coaste is low, and full of Marrish ground,
and replenished with great Lizarts, Great Lizar^
which the Indians call Caymanes, and are Beasts which breed in the mouths
of those Rivers, which are so great, that commonly they are of 20. yea, and 25
foot long: Their property is, as well, to refresh themselves on the Land, as in
the Water: but if any of them can lay hold upon Man or Beast in the Water,
their strength is such, that they carry the^ under water, where as they devour
and consume them: But cheefely they smell a Dog a far off, and they lay
their Eggs on the Land, a great number together, where they breed: but among
the Sands they are slow of their creepinge: after they have hatched, they
lead their Young to the Water: in the which their natural properties, they
may be compared to the Crocodilles of Nilo: they also suffer much honger, for
their feedinge when they want meat, is the fruit of a Tree called Maugle, The
Tree called Maugle.
whereof are many in those Rivers, which are of hard Timber, high and straight
in grows, and grow in salt water, which is not only salt but also bitter.
But the opinion is, that those Beasts use to eat of that Fruit, when other
feeding fails: they eat also Fish. In all this Coast, the Grain called Maiz
grows not.

In this sort they went rowinge with their Canoas against the current of the
Sea, which always runs Northward, and their way was Southward: and in this
Nauigacion all along the Coaste, the Indians assaulted them according to the
custom of their Wars, thundering out cries and noise, calling them banished
men, with hair on their faces, yea, such as were bred of ye scu^ of the Sea,
without any other Origin or Lineage, because the Sea had brought them thither:
demanding also why they went like Uacabondes wandringe the World: it should
appear said they, that you are idle persons, and have not wherein to employ
your selves, because you abide in no place, to labor and till the ground.

And whereas many of their men and Captains were slain by these Indians, as well
by hunger, as other wise, Don Diego determined to return to Panama for mo men:
the which his determinacion he performed, and had from thence 80 men, so that
with them and the residew that remained alive, they arrived at the Land called
Carame, which was without the dominion of the Mauglares, and a Country
abundant of meat, but meanly inhabited: The Indians of ye Country, which
were men of War, had their Cheeks full of holes, wherein were placed Pearls of
Gold: and findinge this place so fruitful^, they abode there until Don Diego
de Almagro returned again to Panama for more men: But in this mean while Don
Francisco Pisarro returned, abiding the coming of his companion, in a little
Island which stood near unto the Main, called Insula de Gallo, whereas he
stood in need of all things necessary.

How Don Francisco Pisarro abode in the Island of Gorgona, and how with the
small company of men, which he had remayninge, he sailed till he passed the
Equinoctial. Chap. 2.
WHen Don Diego de Almagro returned to Panama for succor, he found that his
Majesty had provided for government of the same City, a Gentilman of
Cordoua, called Pedro de los Rios, who staid his proceeding personally, because
those which remained in the Island of Gallo had sent secretly to this new
Governor, to entreat that he should not permit any more men, to die in that
dangerous Journey, without any profit, whereas tosore others of their Nation had
ended their days, and that it might please him to command them also to
return. In consideracion whereof, Pedro de los Rios sent his Deputy with
especial commandment, that all such as were willing, might safely retu^ne to
Panama without danger, and without disturbinge of any that would force them to
abide there.

And when this news and order taken, came to their knowledge, they forthwith
took Shippinge with great joy, even as though they had es^aped out of
captivity of Moares: so that only 12. men abode willingly with Don Francisco
Pisarro, 12. Men only remain with Don Francisco Pisarro.
with the which, being so few in number, he durst not abide there, but went
to an Island uninhabited, situated sire Leagues, from the Main in the Sea: and
because this Island was replenished with many fair Springes and brooks, he
named it Gorgona, whereas he with his company maintained themselves with
Cockles, Crabbes, and great Snakes, which are there in abundance: he abode
there until his Ship returned from Panama, which brought nothing but only
Uictuall, wherein he with his 12. men took shipping, who were so constant and
virtuous, that they only were the principal cause of the discovery of Peru, of
whom one was called Nicolas de Ribera, natural of Olbera: The names of the
first discoue^ers^
Pedro de Candia, borne in Greece, in the Island of Candia: Ihon de torre,
Alonso brisenio, borne in Benauent: Christopher de Peralia, borne in Baesa:
Alonso de Trugillio, borne in Trugillio: Francisco de Cuellar, borne in the
Town of Cuellar: Alonso de Molina, borne in the City of Vbeda. Their chief
Pilot, was named Bartilmew Ruiz, borne in the Town of Moguex. This happy
company sailed with great perril and danger, against the wind and current
until they arrived at a Province called Mostripe, which stands between the
Uillages which the Christians had inhabited: the one they named Truxillio, and
the other S. Mighell, and there abode a certain time, for want of men, they
durst not proceed beyond the River called Chira, an^ there provided themselves
of the Cattle of that Country, which were Sh^epe, and also of Indian
Interpretors, who willingly served them. Notwithstanding being there well
refreshed, embarked again and sailed unto the Port of Lumbez, where they had
intelligence of a princely House, which the Lord of Peru had in that place, and
also a Town of Indians which were exceeding rich. This place was one of the
most notablest things in Peru, until such time that the Indians of the Island
Puna distroyed it, as hereafter shall be declared: and there he left three
fugitive Spanyardes, who were slain by the Indians, as at the length was
known. So that with this intelligence they returned back again to Panama,
having been three years in the same Discovery, in great perrill, suffering
many miseries, as well by want of Uictuals, as by the Wars and resistance of
the Indians, and also mutiny among themselves, who were in despair the most
of them, to find any profitable thing: But yet the wisdom and gentle
condition of Don Francisco Pisarro, pacified their discord with great courage,
persuading them of the great hope which he had in Don Diego de Almagro, for
they provision of Men, Uictuals, Horses, and Armor: So that where those three
Gentilmen, the setters forward of this Uoyage were the ritchest men in that
parts, were now the poorest, and yet indetted in great sums of Money.

How Don Francisco Pisarro came into Spain, to give knowledge to his Majesty,
of the discovery of Peru, and of some of the Customs and properties of the
naturals of the Country. Chap. 3.
THe Discovery being begun, in the manner before declared, Don Francisco
Pisarro came into Spain, and gave intelligence to the Emperor his Majesty,
of all such things as had happened, beseechinge his highness in recompense and
reward of his pains, to grant unto him the government of such Countries as
hereafter he should discover and inhabit. The which his request the Emperor
granted, upon certain conditions and Articles of agreement, drawn and
engrosed according as tofore his Majesty had done with other Captains, in
affairs of Discovery. With this order taken, he returned to Panama, taking
with him Hernando Pisarro^ Ihon Pisarro^ Gonsalo Pisarro^ and Francisco Martin
of Alcantara, his Brethren, among the which Hernando Pisarro, and Ihon Pisarro
were only legittimate Brethren, of Father and Mother, Sons unto Gonsalo
Pisarro, the long Citizen of Trugillio, who had sometime been Captain of
Infautery in ye Kingdom of Nauarra: Don Francisco Pisarro; and Gonsalo Pisarro
were his natural Children, but not by one Wife, and Francisco Martin was his
Son in Law. Besides these before named, he carried many others with him for
the pretended discovery, but the most of them were of the Cities of Trugillio
and Caseres, and other Uillages of the Province, called Estremadura.

In this sort with prosperous Nauigacion, he arrived and came to his desired
place of Panama, and there began to provide the things necessary for the
Discovery, in the name of the first company: Although there was some discord
between Don Francisco and Don Diego de Almagro^ because Don Diego received
great unkindness that Don Francisco had brought to pass his desire with the
Emperor, and obtained the Title and name of Governor, and chief Discouerer
of all the dominion of Peru, without any remembrance made of him, nor yet of
his service, although the said ^on Diego had been one of the cheifest
adventurers, and also personally partaker of the pains. But yet
notwithstanding Don Francisco perceauing by his countenance how the matter
went, did comfort and persuade him, that the Emperor at that time when he was
with his Majesty, pleased not to take order for him, to remunerate his
travail accordingly, although he did in his behalf require the same: but
notwithstanding he gave unto him for his part, both his word and promise,
to renounce the Office and Title of chief Discouerer in him, and also would
send to the Emperor, to beseech his Majesty to confirm the same. With which
fair words, Don Diego was somewhat pacified: so that now we will leave from
that matter, and speak of the Navy, and other necessaries concerning the
Discovery: and also declare the scituacion of the Province of Peru and the
notable things of that Country, with the customs of the People.

Of the people which inhabit under the Equinoctial Line, and other notable
things which are in that parts. Chap. 4.
THe Land of Peru, whereof this History (God willing shall treat) did begin
from the Equin^^t^all forward until the Meri^ian, the people which inhabit
under the Equinoctial and near there unto, are in Phisnomie like Jews, they
pronounce their spe^ch in the throat like unto Moriscos, they are in^l^^^^ to
the sin of Zodome: by reason whereof they are rigorous to their Wives, and make
small account of them: they wear no kind of garment, saving their privy
parts, which are covered: Their Women do plough and sow the ground, they
grind their Grain, and thereof make their provision of food: their Corn is
called in their Island language Maiz, and in Peru it is called Zara. The men
wear short Shyrtes, which come to the Nauill, and their privy parts are
uncovered, they have their heads shorn with a Crown, like Friars, and the
hinder and forepart of the head is shaven, and the hair somewhat long on the
sides.

They delight much to wear Jewels of Gold in their ears and Nostrilles, and
also Emralds which are only found in those parts: But those Indians would
never discover the Mines or veins of them, although it is certainly believed
that there is their Origin, because they find in their earthen Uessel many
small stones sticking in the sides.

They use about their legs and arms, Bra^lets of Bedestones, of Gold,
Plate, and Turkies, and small Periwincles shelles, both white and red, and they
permit not any kind of bravery to their Women. This Country is exceeding hot,
and apt to infirmity, cheefely, a kind of Pox which are very venomous, and
breed in the face, and other places of the body, rooted deep, which are (in
manner) of worse quality then the French Pox.

In this Province they have their ydolatrous Temples with their doors to the
East ward, with Curtains of a clothe made of Cotton Wool: In every Temple
were two Images, made of the bigness and likeness of black Goats, before the
which, they used always to burn a kind of wood, of a maruailous sweet smell:
Sweet Trees of a straung^ Balm.
The Trees of this odiferous wood grow in that ^^untrey, and by incision of
the Bark they distill a maruailous sweet lycor, wherewith if any annoint a
dead body, the carkas corrupts not. There are also in the Temples Images of
the figure of great Serpents, which they adore and worship: besides these Idols
every of those people had a particular God, according to his trade and office,
which they also worshipped. The Fishermen had the ^ogge Fish called Tiburon,
in great veneracion, and the Raungers or Hunters had likewise their God
according to ye game which they most esteemed: and in like manner every sort
of people accordingly. But in some Temples in the Uillages called Pasao, The
decking of the Idols temple.
they used to have hanging on the Pillars of the Temple, the dead carkases of
Men and Children sacrificed, or else their skins tanned in such order that the
evil smell or savor was taken away: Also their skulles were in such manner
placed, but first with a certain coction, they were dressed, yt they were
shrunken to the smalenesse of a man's fist, and than nailed on the said
Pillars, or Walls of the Temple.

This Country of his own nature or property is dry, although there it raineth
daily, there are few runninge Waters which are sweet, so that their chief
drink is of Wells, or of water preserved in Cesternes, which they call
Aqueyes.

Gold.
Their Houses or buildings are of great Canes which there does grow: The Gold
which there is found is base, and of few Oarets: there is also small quantity
of fruit. Their Navigations is with Canoas, made out of the bodies of Trees, as
is before declared, and also upon Raffes of Timber: All the Sea coaste is full
replenished with Fish, and great abundance of Whales: In some Towns of this
Province, called Caraque: they had upon their Temple doors the Images or
figures of men, clothed like the vestment of a Deacon.

Of the veins of Pitche, which are at the Cape called Destahelena, and of the
Giants which in time past inhabited there. Chap. 5.
Near unto this Province, is a point or cape of Land, which the Spanyardes
named Destahelena, which lies into the Sea, where are found certain springes
of Pitche, or Tar, and it serves for the same purpose, for Ships: Not far
from the sa^^ Cape, the Indians of that country does affirm, that sometime
dwelt certain Gyantes, Giants.
who were of maruailous great stature, in comparison to four times the
bigness of a mean man of stature, but they knew not from whence their Origin
was, yet their food and maintenance was like unto theirs, but only Fish was
their principal food, because their chief delight was in fishinge, and their
Boats were raffes of Timber, which each of them used severally of their own
proper, because these raffes were made of such manner, that they could not well
carry more then one of those Gyantes.

Their chief pleasure was, when any had taken any great Fish, because thereby
their store was the better, for each of them would easily eat more then
thirty Indians: they used no kind of clothing, because of the dificultie to
make their Garments.

These Giants were exceedinge crewell, for without any cause they slew many of
the poor Indians, by mean whereof they were much feared.

The Spaniards saw in the Port called Puerto Viejo, two Images of those
Gyantes, the one of a man, and the other of a Woman: There is a certain kind
of Cronicle, or remembrance among those Indians, which was left unto them by
their fore Fathers, of sundry particularities of those Gyantes, especially of
their consummation. They also held opinion how a young man came down from
Heaven, shyning like the Sun, and fought with those Giants, throwing flames
of fire at them with such vehemence, that the tokens and signs thereof
remained in the hard stone, and as yet said they, until this day the same does
remain: at which time they went retyringe to a Ualley, where he made a
final end of them. But notwithstanding these Indians tale, no perfect credit
was given unto the circumstance thereof, until the Captain Ihon de Holmos was
appointed Lie^tenant of the Governor, in the Port called Puerto Viejo, in Anno
1543. who beeinge informed of those antiquities, ^^mmaunded certain of his men
to dig in that Ualley, where they found maruailous great Ribs, and other
bones, which if they ^ad not joined with the skuls it would have been thought
incredible they should have been men's bones: so that the matter being
thoroughly examined, the Indi^ns opinion concerning such Gyantes, was true, and
some of the Teethe found in those skulles, Giants teeth
were sent to diverse places of Peru: some of the said Teethe, which were
there found, were of three fingers broad, and o^ ^^ure fingers long, which was
reported by witness of sight, who were men of credit, of the Spanish Nation.
By records also, that sort of People were known to be offenders in the sin
against Nature, called Zodomy, by reason whereof, the Justice divine, permitted
them no longer to live, but rather the Almighty sent his Angel to consume
them, as in Zodom and other places.

As Well in this point as all other antiquities, which is known and found in
Peru, the only difficulty is to be presupposed which is in the verefying
thereof, because that the Naturals of that Country knew neither writing nor
reading, nor yet certain pictures which the Indians of new Spain used in lue
of books, so that their records or registers did chiefly consist in memory
from one to another: But their accounts or recknings of time, were made upon a
string or coard made of cotto^ woolle, which the Indians called Quippos, on the
which they kept their reconing by making of knots on those coardes, with a
difference ascending from one to ten, and so upwards accordingly. And always
the coard was of the color of the thing which was meant to be signified, so
that in every Province were Officers who had the charge to keep the things
in memory with those coardes, which were called Quippo Camayos, so that many
public houses were found full of those coardes, and the said officers could
by them easily declare any matter concerning their effect, although it had
been of many years part.

Of the people and things that are beyond the Equinoctial line, toward the
Meridian, along the sea Coast. Cap. 6.
Beyond the Equinoctial line toward the Meridian, stands an Island 12.
leagues distant from the town of Boio, near adioy^ing to the firm land. The
which Island is called Puma, and has in it abundance of sundry sorts of
beasts: and store of dear, and much fresh fish in sweet waters. In time past
this Island was replenished with people, and maintained wars with all the
towns about their frontiers: but principallye they were enemies to the
inhabitants of Tumbez, which stands 12. leagues distant from them. They were
lords of many Raffes, for their navigations: these Raffes were made of long
light poules, bound one upon another, Raffes.
so that always those which were placed uppermost, were odd, as ordinarily,
five, seven, or nine, and the middle powle was longer then the rest, as a
Ruther to guide the Raffe, and thereon sat the rower, so that the raffe is
made like an open hand, even as one finger is longer then another: And on the
top are plankes laid to keep soldiers or passengers from wetting.

There are Raffes that 50. men and 3. horses may well be carried on them. They
use for them as well sails, as oars, the Indians are very good Marryners for
such kind of vessels, although it has happened that when Spaniards have
sailed on those Raffes, Indian deceipt^.
the Indians suttlely have undone the ropes wherewith the timber was bound
together, and so each piece suddenly to separate from other: By means whereof
many Christians have peryshed, and the Indians saved them selves upon the
powles, witho^t any other thing to succor them, by reason that they can swim
exceeding well.

Their chief weapons for the wars were slinges, clubbes, and hatchets, made
of silver and copper. They had many spears or Iauelings, with the sharp
points of them made of base gold. Both the men and women used to were many
jewels, and ringes of gold. Their ordinary vessel was wrought and made of
silver and gold. The Lord of that Island was greatly feared among his people,
he was also exceeding ielious of his wives, in so much that all those
seruitours which attend upon them had their noses cut of, and likewise their
genitall members.

In another little Island adjoining to the same, they found a house and a
gardeine plot or orchard within the same, A strange Orchard.
having little trees and plants ther^in, made of silver and gold. Over against
this Island in the firm land were certain Towns, the which by displeasure
taken by the Lord of Peru, he commanded that as well men as women should have
all their upper teeth drawn out, of which toothlesse people until this day are
some living. A sharp punishment.


Proceeding forward beyond Tumbez toward the Meridian, for the space of 500
leagues along the coast, and ten leagues into the main, there neuex rayneth,
thundreth, or falls any lightning or thunderbolt: But passing the said ten
leagues within the main land distant from the sea, it both rayneth and
thundreth, and have both winter and summer in their due seasons, and in the
same manner as is in Spain. But when it is winter in the mountains, A strange
thing.
then is it summer on the sea coast, and the like contrariwise. So that the
length of that coast which is already discovered of the land of Peru, which
takes his beginning and is accounted from the city of Pasto, unto the
Province of Chili, is one thousand eight hundred leagues, as large as the
leagues of Castillia, The length of peru ^800^ Leagues.
and throughout the said Country lies a long mountain or ridge of hills
very troublesome to pass, which in some places does stand distant from the sea
15. yea, and 20. leagues, and in some places the branches of that mountain
approaches nere the sea brim.

So that all which as yet is discovered of Peru, is to be understand by two
names, that is to say, all the ground between the mountains and the sea, is
called plains: and all the rest is called mountains. The plains are dry and
the most part sands: for as before is declared, there it never rayneth, nor yet
has there been found any spring or fountain, saving nere the sea side are 4.
or 5. aqueys or cesterns, the water whereof is saltish. But the people do
provide themselves of water of the Rivers which descend out of the mountains.
The cause of those rivers is the thawing of the snow and rain which comes
from the said hills where very few natural springes are found: These rivers
are distant one from another, some 10. and some 15. and 20, leagues: but the
most ordinary are of seven and eight leagues: so that commonly the trauelers
do appointe their journeys accordingly, to come unto their fresh water. Some of
these rivers are a league broad, and some less, according to the disposition
of the ground. Along those River sides are fair prospectes of trees and
fruits, and ground convenient for the Indians to sow their ^orne called Maiz.

After the Spaniards began to inhabit this country, they sowed wheat, all the
said plain ground they used to water with s^ewces, conveyed out of the
Ryuers, in which art they have great experience, and industry: the beauty of
those Rivers, with Trees and fruits aforesaid grow along the said Rivers, even
from the Sea^ unto the Mountains: those Rivers coming from the ^illes,
discendinge with such vehemence, that the Spanyardes could not pass them on
Horseback, especially the River called Sancta, and many others: so that those
which journey in those Playnes, they keep all along the Sea coaste, but in the
Winter season it is dangerous trauailinge that coaste, by reason of the
exceedinge great currantes of those Rivers, that the way is not vadeable on
Horseback, but only on Raffes, or else with a bundell of Gourdes, which they
use to bind before their breasts and under their arms, and an Indian Pilot
goes before swimmyng to lead the way.

The ground alonge these Rivers is exceeding fruitful, as we have declared:
where Wheat and Maiz grows in abou^dance, without respecting any time of
sowing

These Indians dwell not in houses, but their abidyng is under Trees, and
shadows made for the purpose. Their women were garments made of Cotton woll,
like unto gowns which come down to their feet. The men were shirtes down to
the knees, and certain Mantels upon the same, and although their attire is
after one sort, they differ in the attire of their heads, according to the
use of every country: some use their hair bound up with laces of woll, some
with one lace, and other with many laces of sundry colors, so there is none
but has some device in his head, and in every Province of a several kind.

All the Indians of the Playnes are divided into three sorts, the one are
called Yngas, another sort are called Tallanes, and the third Mochicas: in
every Province they differ in speech, notwithstanding the Noble men, called
Cas^ikes, besides, their natural speech, do all generally understand the
language of the City of Cusco, because the King of Peru, called Guaynacaua,
Father of King Atabaliba, thought it a base thing yt his Subjects, especially
noble men should talk with him by interpreters, whereupon he commanded that
all the Cascikes of his Country and dominions, and their Brethren and kinsemen
should send their Children to serve and attend on the King in his Court,
under the color to learn the courtly speech: but cheefely the Kings intent
was to assure his country with the principal men of his Kingdom, in having
their children in pledge. But be it as it will, by this means it came to
passe^ that all the Nobility of his Land, understood and could speak the
language used in Court, as in Flaunders the Gentilmen and others speak the
French tongue: so that in conclusion, any Spanyarde that attained to the Cusco
speech, might well pass throughout the dominions of Peru, as well in the
Playnes as in the Mountains, to understand and to be understood among the
cheifest.

Of the ordinary Winds which blow in the Plains, and the cause of dryness.
Chap. 7.
WIth great reason, those which read this History, may stand in doubt of the
cause, why it rayneth not in the Playnes of Peru, as before is specified, for
by evident tokens, should be thought that those things could not be true, by
reason of the grown Rivers which fall into the Sea, and commonly engender
moisture and vapors, coming out of the Mountains, having their beginning of
the continual Snow, which there abides, whereof relation is made before, yea,
and the said Hills never want clowdy weather, intermixed with rain. The
natural reason thereof, found out by such as diligently have sought the secret
thereof: which is, that in all those Playnes, and Sea coast, Note.
all the whole year blows one only Wind, which the Mariners call Siluestre,
which runs alonge that coast with such force, that the Clouds and Uapors
have no rest in those playnes nor Sea coast, to come unto the region of the
air, and from the high Mountains: The clouds and vapors, do show like
another Heauen^ so those which are beneathe in the Playnes, and about them
again, it is as clear as Crystal: and this only wind also causes the
Seagate or Current to run always Northward, although some men are of another
opinion, which is, that where the South sea comes to fall into the mouth of
the straight of Magalanus, beeinge there so narrow, and exceeds not the
breadth of two Leagues, so that the great power of the water can not there have
issue, and also their encounteringe with the Northen Sea, which likewise
disturbeth his passage: so that of force it makes reflection and recoyle
backward, and so forces the Current toward the North. And here rises another
inconvenience, which is, yt the Nauigatio^ from Panama to Peru, is with such
difficulty, because the wind is always contrary, and also the most part of
the year, ye Current likewise, so that ye Sailors do sail continually by the
bowlinge against the fury of ye wind, or else it were not possible to sail
that Coast.

All along the coast of Peru are great number of fish, and many Zeal fishes.

From the River of Tumbez forward are found none of those great Lizartes of
which we have spoken. But some hold opinion the cause is, that the country
forward is more temperate, and those beasts are lovers of heat, but the most
certain reason is, because the Rivers thereabout are of a more swifter
current, and suffers them not to breed, for their ordinary breeding is in
the calm places of Rivers.

Now at this day in all the length of the playnes are Uillages and Towns of
Christians, and five Cities, Five Cities.
the first is called Puerto Viejo, Puerto Viejo.
which stands very nere unto the Equinoctial. This City has but few
inhabitants because the country is poor and apt for diseases, yet there are
some mines of Emraldes, as is before declared. Fifteen leagues with in the
main is another city called saint Mighel, S. Mighell.
which in the Indian spech they call Pura: This is a pleasant soil and
fruitful, but no mines of gold nor plate. This place is apt for sore eyes,
and few or none that passes that way escapes that disease.

Threescore leagues forward along the coast stands another city in a valley
called Trugillio, Trugillio.
and is distant from the sea, two leagues. The port or harbor belonging to
this city is perilous. This city is placed in a plain plot, nere unto a
River side, and is abundantly provided of wheat, Maiz, and cattle. It is
also exceeding well built, there are in this city above three hundred households
of Spaniards.

Four score Leagues forward, stands another City, two Leagues distant from
a Port of the Sea, which is an excellent good Road for Ships, it is
situated in a Ualley called Lyma, The City called Rei^, in the Province of
Lyma.
and named the City of the Kings, because the day of Epiphany it was begun to
inhabit, it is placed in a plain ground, near unto a mighty River: The
Country there about is plentiful of Corn, and many sorts of fruits and
cattle: the building of this City is such, that all the streates do meet
in a fair large place, from the which a man may see through every streat into
the Feeldes: the dwelling is maruailous healthful, because it stands in a
temperate Climat, and not vexed throughout the year with neither heat nor
cold, extremely. The hoatest season of the year is more temperate then in
Spain: for in the time of their heat in Lyma, which is in So^mer, there
falls every morninge a sweet Dew, which is nothing hurtful to man's health,
but rather profitable, for such as have the head ache use to wash their heads
with the Dew water, and therewith find great ease.

All Spanish fruit grows and prospers well in this Soil, especially
Orenges, Sidrons, Lemons, Figs, Powngarnardes and Uines, whereof had been
there abundance, if the alteracions in the Land had not disturbed their
plantinge, for experience has showed that the very Kernel of the Grape has
perduced fair Uynes: There grows also great store of Pot earbes, such as
ordinarily grow in Spain: every house has belonging unto it a little runninge
water, or Brook, brought in by conueyance of slewce, which water is sufficient
to drive a mill, although along the River side they have their common milles
where the Spaniards grind their corn.

This city is judged the most pleasant dwelling in all the land, because the
port and road for ships makes the City to be of great contractation for
Marcha^ts: So that the people of all Cities, Towns, and Uillages, within the
maine land use to come thither for their provision and furniture.

From the mines of this Province is brought great^ abundance of gold and
silver. The situation is in the midst of the land, as yet discovered, by
reason whereof the Emperor his Majesty placed there a chauncery royal, and
Judges to decide his subjects causes, which also causes the greater resort
of people. It is thought that in process of time this City will increase to
be of marvelous fame and greatness. At this day there are above five hundred
households of Spaniards, and every house has a greater compass of ground then
the houses built in Spain: so yt these 500. houfes seem bigger the^ 1500. in
Castillia, by reason that the streets are broad, and has also a place of
great compass in the midst of the city, each house has in the front 800.
foot, and twice as much large. Their buylding is but of one story high, for
want of timber to build a height, and yet that timber within three years
begins to rotte and consume, yet notwithstanding the low building, the
houses are sumptuous and of great Majesty. The walls are of five foot
broad, and the plot whereon the houses stand, are raised of like height with
earth, by reason whereof, the houses seem of reasonable height. The Roofes of
those houses are made of rafters laid crossewise, and upon the Timber is laid
for seeling gallante painted mattes, like unto those which are made in Almeria,
in the kingdom of Granada, and upon that seeling are laid boughs, so that the
lodgings are high, fresh, and not troubled with the sun: and as for the
water, they need not to care: for as before is declared, it never rayneth in
those plains.

Thirty Leagues from this City along the Coast, is another City, entitled
the fair Town of Aroquipa, Aroquipa.
which has in it 300. houses of Spanyardes: this also is a healthful soil,
and abundant of all kind of victual, but it stands 12. Leagues from the
Sea coast, by mean whereof it is thought that the Town will increase with
inhabitants, for the River by which it stands, is so good and fair, that
Ships laden with Merchandise may come up the river, even to the City: and
from this place the City of Cusco is served of all things needful, and
likewise the Province of Charcas, from which places comes the most people of
that Country, by reason of the contractacion of the Mines of Potosi: Also
great quantity of Plate is brought thither, to be laden in the Ships back
again in return to the City of the Kings, or Panama, which is a great
help, for to avoid the carriage by land, beeinge very dangerous and
troublesome in the high ways, since the time that the new Orders or Laws set
forth by the Emperor, were executed.

From this City, men may travail forward alonge the Sea coaste, for the
space of 400. Leagues, unto the Province that the Governor Pedro de Valdiuia
did discover and inhabit, called Chili, Chili.
which is as much as to say in the Indian tongue, Cold, by reason of the
extreme cold, which the travelers pass in the way thither, as in this
History shall be declared hereafter, when the journey made by the chief
Discouerer Don Diego de Almagro shall be spoken of: so that now is understood the
scituacion and habitacion of the part of Peru, and the Playnes thereof,
wherwithall is likewise to be considered, that the Sea coaste is clean, and
without danger of Rocks, as far as hither unto has been discovered, nor yet
any furious or tempesteous weather does vex that coaste of the South Sea, and
therefore it may well be called, the quiet and Golden Sea, yea, and moreover,
any ship along that coast may with one Ankor ride in safety, with out
danger of any wind.

Of the qualities and nature of the Mountains of Peru, and of the habitacions
and dwellinges of Christians and Indyans. Chap. 8.
THe Indians which dwell in the Mountains do differ much from those which dwell
in ye Plains, or low country, both in strength, knowledge, and living: for
in the Mountains, their dwelling is in houses covered with earth, their
shirtes and garments are wrought of sheep wool, which there do breed: they
wear nothing on their head, but have their hair laced with a stringe. The
Women wear garments without sleeves, gyrded with woollen gyrdels, which makes
them long wasted: they also wear certain Mantels over their heds, which are
pinned about their necks, with pinnes of Gold or Plate, according to the
ability of every one: those pinnes are called in their language Topos, Indian
pins.
because the heads are great, plain, and flat, and the sides and points
exceedinge sharp: These Wives do help their Husbands in the labor and
tillage of the ground, nay I may say, that their pains is greatest in all
s^ruice. These Women of complexion are white, and well favored, exceeding
much, the women of the Plains: and so likewise the country does much differ,
the one from the other, because the Mountains does bring forth great
abundance of Grass, and has much fresh water, of which, and from which, the
Rivers proceeds, which runs down into the Playnes: there are also many
kind of Flowers and pleasant green plottes, with sundry kind of Earbes, and
sundry sorts of Trees, of maruailous fruits, so pleasant in taste, that in
all Spain there is no better: there are also wild Walnut trees, and Willowes:
these Indians have many wild Sheep, and others very tame and domestical: they
have also Dear, and sundry other kind of Beasts, and great number of Foxes:
The Indians are great Hunters, Hunting.
and call the game Chico, but when they are disposed to make a general feast
of huntinge, they join together four or five hundred Indians, and place them
selves one by one in the compass of the ground which they mean to hunte,
which oftentimes is two or three Leagues in circuit, and then they come
enclosing foot by foot, by the sound of certain songs, which they use to
singe for that purpose, so that at the end they join altogether in a round,
and take each other hand in hand, and some arm in arm, so that they bring in
among them a great number of siluester Beasts, even as though they were penned
in a Pownd, and than they kill and make their choice at their pleasure: but the
exceedinge showtes, and hallowinge which they make, does not only fear the
wild Beasts, but also oftentimes with the same noise they amaze the Partriges,
and other Foul, that easily they may be taken by hand.

There are also in the Mountains, Lions, and great black Bears, wild
Cattes, and Apes of diverse sorts, and many other kind of wild Beasts,
unknown to our Nation: Foul^.
The Foul which most frequent yt plains and Mountains, are Eagles, Doves,
and Turtle Doves, Quails, Parats, Hawks, white and russet, Nightingals, and
diverse other sorts of fair and gallant Foul: alo^ge the Sea coast are
Buytres, that having their whinges spread, contain.15. and.16^ palms or
spannes from the point of whinge to whinge: these Buytres feed upon Zeales
when they come on Land, to sleep and refresh them selves, than come the
Buytres, and season some on the feet, and some on the tail, and lay such
hold on him, that he cannot stir whilst other pluck out his eyes, and
then they feed on the carkas: there is another sort of foul called
Alcatraces, which are like unto Hens, although much exceeding in greatness, for
his throat will hold three gallons of corn, and of those all along the coast
of the South Sea are abundance, at the least for the space of two thousand
leagues and more, the chi^fe feeding of these fowls are f^^h. They have also
another marvelous property, which is: They will smell the carkas of a dead
man a far of, so that they will enter thirty and forty leagues into the land
to seek the dead bodies. The flesh of these fowls are of a marvelous evil
smell, and ^ath happened that some for want of food have eaten of them,
whereof they have dyed, as of a rank poison.

Here before is declared, how in these mountains there rayneth, hayleth, and
snoweth, and in fine, extreme in cold, yet notwithstanding from those high
hills are valleys descending so deep, that it may be thought incredible to
some to speak thereof. In which val^eys, the heat also is marvelous, and
there grows a certain herb called Coca, Coca.
which the Indians do esteem more then gold or silver: the leaves whereof
are like vnt^ Zumake, the virtue of this herb known by experience, is, that
any having of those leaves in his mouth, has never hunger nor thirst.

In some places of those mountains are no trees at all, so that wayfaring men
which pass that way use to make their fire of tur^es, which they find
exceeding good for that purpose.

There are also veins of earth of sundry colors, and veins of gold and
Plate: whereof the Indians had understanding and could melte the same better,
and with less cost than the Christians: they also used in the high hills to
make little Fornaces, with their mouths toward the Meridian, whereas the wind
most ordinary does blow, and then they lay in the same Fornaces the metal,
with Sheep doung, and coals, so that the wind does kindle the fire, and the
metal melts and cindreth the Gold and Silver, and yet unto this day is
seen the great abundance of Silver, which in this sort is molten in the Mines
of Potosi, which could not otherwise be wrought with Bellows: so yt the
Indians are the chief melters with their small furnaces, which they call
Guayras, in their Language, and is as much as to say, as wind, because the
wind does kindle their Fornaces.

This country is so fruitful, that it yields for one bushel of Wheat
sown, 150. yea, and sometime 200. and an hundred for one is ordenary, although
they have no Ploughes to till the ground, but use to turn it up with shouels,
and so the Indians use to sow: and likewise they make holes in the ground with
a wooden Pin, and put therein Wheat, in such sort as they use to set Beans in
Spain. All kind of Gardaine carbes, prospers exceedingly: the Indians food
is cheefely boiled Maiz, and toasted^ in lue of bread, and Dear ^lesh dried,
and also dry fish, and sundry kinds of Roots, which they call Iuca, and
A^is, Amotes, Papas, and such like, with many kind of earbes: They also use a
certain kind of Beueredge in stead of Wine, which they make of Maiz, and the
manner is, they lay their Maiz in water, in certain earthen Uessels, which
they keep under earth, and there it voyleth, and besides the whole Maiz, they
put thereunto a certain quantity of ground Maiz, the which one Neighbor
lends to another, as we use to lend Leven for Bread.

They hold opinion, yt the standing water makes better and more stronger
beueredge, than the running water: This drink is commonly called Chicha in the
Island Language, and in the Peru speech it is called Acisa: of this drink
there is both white and red, according to the color of ye grain whereof it is
made. But it is of greater force then any Wine, to overcome the brain, and to
make drunkardes: but yet notwithstanding if the Indians may have Spanish Wine,
they would not care for their own natural drink. They use also another sort
of drink, made of a small fruit which grow upon certain Trees called Molles:
this drink is not so precious as the Chicha.

Of the Cities of Christians which are in the Mountains of Peru. Chap. 9.
IN the Mountains of Peru, are sundry places of habitacion of Christians,
which begin at the City of Quito, Quito.
which stands four degrees beyond the Equinoctial: this City in times
past was a pleasante thing, and plentiful of corn and cattle, and in the
year of 1544. and 45. there was discovered rich Mines of Gold, whereupon the
City began to enlarge his bowndes with inhabitants, and flourished until the
fury of the cruel wars among the Spanyardes begone, which was the cause that
the most part of all the Citizens were slain by the hands of Gonsalo
Pisarro and his Captains, because they did both favor and serve the Uize-roy
Blasco Nunez Vela all the time that he there aboade, as hereafter perticularly
shall be declared: From this City is no poblation of Christians, in the
Mountains, until you come to the Province of the Bracamoros, which was
discovered by Captain Ihon Porsell, and Captain Vergara, who built there
certain Uillages, to the intent that from thence they meant to disco^er
forwards: But these Uillages came to ruin, because Gonsalo Pisarro took those
Captains and their men to aid him in his Wars. This Discovery was first
taken in hand by the order and consent of the lycenciat Vaca de Castro, who
was governor of that Province, and sent Captain Porsell by the coast of Saint
Mighell, and farther up into the Main, he sent Vergara, by the Province of
the Chachapoyas, thinking that they should have made their entries by several
places, although it so happened that both the said Captains met in their
journey, and fell to discord about their Discovery, concerning to which of them
it should appertain, so that they were both sent for, by the Governor Vaca
de Castro to pacify and take order in the causes of their contencion, so that
they were of the first Captains, that were at the beginning of the Wars, in
the City of the Kings, in the service of the Uice-roy: and after that the
said Uice-roy was taken prisoner, they abode with Gonsalo Pisarro, and left of
their proceeding in the Discovery.

This disco^ery reached 160. leagues from the City of Quito, along the
mountains, so that other 80. leagues forward stands the Province called
Chicapoyas, Chichapoya
where is a Town of Christians, entitled Leuanto, Leuanto.
and is a fruitful soil for all kind of victual, and has also reasonable
rich Mines. It is well fortified by reason that it stands high, and is
compassed with a marvelous deep valley, wherein is a River that runs
almost in circuit of the hill where the Town stands.

The Marshall Alonso de Aluarado, was the first that did inhahite this
Province, unto whom it was commended. Beyond this province about 60. leagues,
stands another Town of Christians called Guanuco, G^anuco
which was buylt by the commandment of the Licensiat Vaca de Castro, who
named it Leon, Leon.
because he him self was borne in the city of Leon in Spain. This town is
well provided of victuals, and is thought to be abounda^t of Mines, especially
toward that part, which Prince Inga holds, ye people whereof were occupied
in wars in the Province called Andes, as hereafter shall be declared: So that
beyond this place there is not in the Mountain any village of Christians until
you come to Guam^nga, which was named Saint Ihon de Victoria, and stands
distant from Guanuco sixty leagues.

This village is but meanly inhabited of Christians, but it is thought that it
will be better, if the Prince Inga cease from his wars, who has usurped a
great part of the best ground thereunto belonging, and specially where the best
Mines are, and greatest quantity of the rich herb called Coca. From this
Town of Guamanga, unto the city of Cusco, is distance 80. leagues: In the
which are many plots of Rocky and troublesome way to pass, which causes great
peril unto ye wayfaring men. The city of Cusco before the Christians coming
thither, was the chiefest seat and court of the Indian kings of all the whole
Province, so that from that princely city was governed and ruled all those
countries and Provinces here before declared, and hereafter shall be declared. To
this city all the Cascikes or noble men resorted from all places of the Empire
to bring their tributes appertaining to the Prince, as also to deal about
particular affairs, and to demand justice in their suites one with another.

In all the whole dominions of that country, there was not any place of
habitacion that had the Majesty or manner of a city, but only Cusco, where
was a fair Fortress, wrought of square stones, which were so huge and great,
that it was a wonder how they were brought thither, by Indian strength of men,
without help of Oxen, Muyles, or other Beasts: and yet there are some one
stone, that ten yoke of Oxen could not with their strength move them from
the place from whence they were brought: and the houses wherein the christians
dwell in at this day, are the very same that the Indians made for their own
dwellinge: so that some of those houses are repaired, and other increased of
the same fashion. The city was divided into four parts, in such order, that
all such as came thither to dwell or to lodge in, King Inga commanded that
they should lodge or inhabit in the streat which lay toward the place from
whence they came. Those which came from the South part were called collasmo,
by the name of a Town called collao: and he which came from the North, was
called chinchasuyo, by reason of a Province which lay that way called Chincha,
which is now appertaininge to the Emperor, and is uninhabited and nothing worth:
and in this manner they name accordingly the other two parts which lies East,
and West, Andesuyo and Condesuyo^ so yt no Indian might dwell or lodge in any
other streat, but only in that streat which lay toward the place from whence
he came, upon a great penalty.

All the country near adjoining to the city, is exceeding plentiful of all
kind of victuals, and exceedinge healthful, for it is approved that any sound
man of body that comes into this country, does long continue in health. It
is environed with many rich Mines of gold, out of the which has been
gathered the infinite sum, which until this day has been brought into
Spain, although now since the discovery of the Mines of Potosi, they leave the
gold mines, and work in those silver Mines, because therein they find a
greater gain then in the gold works, and also is gotten with less danger
both of Indians and christians, which deal in those affairs.

From the city of cusco to the Town called Villa de Plata, Villa de ^lata.
which stands in the Province of charcas, are 150. leagues and more, and in
the midway stands a great province in the plain called collao, which is
about fifty leagues long. The principals^ part thereof is called Chiquito,
which now appertains to his Majesty. And being so great a piece of ground
uninhabited of christians, the Licensiat Dela Gasca in Anno.45. commanded to
buylt a village in the province of Collao.

This town called Villa de Plata, is a place of extreme cold, and none like
unto it in all the mountains, by mean of which cold there are few dwellers,
but those which abide there are marvelous rich, and those few inhabitants of
this town abide the most part of the year in the mines which are in the
circuit of Porco and Potosi, as hereafter shall be declared.

From Villa de Plata entringe inward to the maine on the left hand Eastward
was discovered by commandment of the Licensiat Vaca de Castro, who sent for
that purpose captain Di^go de Ro^as, and Philip Gutierez to the Province which
now is called by the name of Diego de Rojas, and is reported to be a good and
wholesome country, abundant of al necessary victual, howbeit the tresure of
Mines expected, was not there found, for which consideration captain Domingo
de Italia, and his companions came into Peru, in anno 49. so that in
conclusion, they travailed all the Land that is between the South Sea, and the
North Sea, at the time when they went up the River of Plate, in discovery of
the Northen coast.

This is the situation of all the Land discovered, and inhabited throughout
the Province of Peru, toward the South Sea, presupposing the Discovery along ye
South coast, without entry into the Main, because in the discovery of the
Main, the certainty is not yet known, by reason of the troublesome and
perrilous ways, that leads ye course both with cold, double cragged Hills,
destitute of victuals, and al comfort for man: yet nevertheless the Spanyardes
would not have feared these great perrils, Spaniards.
if they had not doubted the gain of treasure, which they thought was not to
be had in that proceedinge.

Of the opinion which the Indians had concerning their creation and other
things. Chap. 10.
WHere as the Indians had no kind of writing, as before is declared, they knew
not the Origin of their creation, nor yet the end which the World had, at the
time of Noes Fludde. But according to the judgment and heresay of their
Ancestors from time to time.

These people held opinion, that out of the parts of Sep^en^^ion, came a man
that had neither bone nor joint and when he went any whither, he both
shortened and also enlarged the way, according to his own will: he also, said
they, set up some hills and threw down other: and this was he, said they,
that first created the Indians, but this Creator with a displeasure that he
took with his People of the Playnes, converted their country into Sand, and
commanded that it should never Rain in those Playnes: Yet in the mittigacion
of his wrath, he sent them out of the Mountains, the Rivers to comfort them.
This their God, was called among them Con, who was a^cordinge to their opinion,
the child of the Sun and the Moon, and this Con was held for their God,
whom they honored and worshipped: and it was he, said they, that did
maintain them with earbes and siluester fruits. But afterward out of the
South, came a great God, called Pachacama, who propperly was called Creator,
who also was the child of the Sun and Moon, but after his coming their God
Con vanished away, and left hi^ people without a Captain, by mean whereof
Pachacama converted the^ into Foul, Apes, Cats, Bears, Lions, Parrattes, and
sundry other kind of Fowls, which now abound in that country, and he it
was, say they, that created the Indians which are at this day, and gave them
industry to pl^ugh the ground, and to plant Trees: he was only holden for
God, and all the principal men which deceased in that country, were carried to
be buried in the Province which is called Pachancama, after his name. In which
Province his chief abiding was, and stands four leagues from the city of ye
Kings. This God Pachacama abode among the^ till the coming of the Christians
into Peru, and after their coming be never more appeared, whereupon it is
thought that it was some devil which made them believe all those vanities.



These Indians hold opinion that there was in time past an universal flood, at
which time their auncesters escaped in ca^es, which they had buylt for that
purpose in the high hills, where, and before the flood they had laid in
their provision of victualles: And when they went into those canes they dammed
up the little doors whereat they entered, to defend them from the water. And
when they understood that the water vanished away, they first put out their
dogs, and when they returned vnwet, then were they sure that the flood was
past, and then came they out of their caves. Also they say that with the
moisture which remained of the flood, came the snakes to breed, which did
greatly annoy the^, ^owbeit in process of time they were destroyed.

Also, it is most true, that they had intelligence of the general flood, but
they knew not that Noe did escape in the Arc, with seven persons, which did
again replenish the world: but they imagined that they escaped in the Caves,
as before is declared: but yet their flood might be particular, as was the
flood of Deucalion.

They believe also, that the world shall have an end, but before the end (say
they) shall come a great drought, and shall not rain in many years: and to
provide for that time of necessity, the Noble men had great large houses
built, to keep their Grain in store, against the time of drought. When the
Sun or Moon is eclipsed, than they make a terrible cry, with fear, thinking
that the last day is comen, and that all shall perish: they believe assuredly,
that the Sun and the Moon shall lose their light, even as when either of them
is eclipsed.

Of the Rites and Sacrifices of the Indians, used among them in Peru. Chap. 11.
THis people adore and worship the Sun and the Moon for Gods, and the earth
for their Mother: in stead of ye sun, they have in their Temples certain
stones, which they worship, and are called Guacas, which is the name of
mourninge and weepinge, and even so they weep when they enter into their
Temples, they presume not to come near their Guacas or Idolles, but only such
as are Ministers, appointed for that service, and those priests or ministers
ware white garments, and when they make intercession to those Idols, then take
they certain white clothes in their hands, and prostrating themselves on the
ground, they make their supplicatio^s to the idols in such a language, that ye
other Indians understand not. These priests also received such offerings as was
offered to the idols, and buried the same in the temple, for the offerings were
always either gold or silver, or images made like unto the thing which each
person most desired. Those priests used to sacrifice both men and cattle, but
in the hearts and lights of men, after they are taken out of the bodies, they
behold and mark certain signs and tokens, and the like of beasts, and until
they find the sign which they seek for, they cease not to kil^ both man and
beast, for (say they) until we find the signs that we look for, our gods
are not pleased with our sacrifice. Those priests did seldom go abroad into the
town, nor yet lie with any woman in the time of sacrifice, and all the night
long they ceased not crying out with loud voices, inuocating ye devils in the
fields wh^ras this Guacas were, of which there was many, for unto every Indians
house appertained a Guaca. But when they should talk with the devil, they first
fast, and sow up their eye lids, yea, and some break their eyes because they
are exceeding devout in their wicked, horrible, and blind religion. Their
Cascikes or noble men, do take nothing in hand without they first consult with
the idol priests, or speking more plainly, with the devil. The Spaniards found
in many of those temples of the Sun, certain great earthen vessels, full of
dried children, which had been sacrificed. And among those, pieces of silver
and gold, which were found among those Guacas, were also found cross staves, and
miters, naturally like unto those which bishops use, and some images had the
like miters on their heads. When father Thomas de Verlango, bishop de tierra
firm, came into Peru, and there having his Miter on his head, at divine
service, ye Indians thought verily that he was a Guaca, and demanded if he
were ye Guaca of the Christians. They did also many times enquire to what
purpose they used the miter, but they could yield no reason for it, saving that
it was an orname^t of great antiquity. Beside this Guacas throughout Peru were
many houses or monasteries, wherein a great number of weme^ were dedicated to
the Sun. Cloyste^ women.
These weme^ after they were once entered into those houses, they never came
forth again, but there continued spinning and weauing very good cloth of
cotton wool, and sheep wool. And when their cloth was wrought and finished,
they burned the same with ye bones of white sheep, and then took the ashes
and threw them into the air toward the Sun. These women lived chaste: but if
by hap any offended against chastity, they slew her for her labor: but
contrariwise if any chanced to be with child, the^ she was put to her
purgation by oath, and if she swear that she was gotten with child by the Sun,
then was she pardoned of death. At the time of harvest when the Indians
gathered in their corn called Maiz, they used yearly to make a solemn feast,
and in yt fairest place of the town they pitch into the ground two masts like
so^merpoles, upon the top of each they placed ye image of a man, and the middle
of the poales are trimmed with flowers: Then come they in four several
companies with their drums, and by the sound of their drums they come also
making a great noise, each company throwing their wands at the images, and after
they have so done, then comes the priest bringing an idol, which they place
at the foot of the poales, before who^ they sacrifice either a man or a
sheep, and with the blood of either of them, they annoint the Idol. This done
they take the heart and lights to search for their accustomed signs and tokens.
And then they signify thereby unto the people what shall happen, upon which
news, the feast is either pleasant or sad, and all that day they spend in
daunsing and drinking, and in other pastimes which they use with instruments of
music according to their manner with their weapons in their hands, which are
hatchets, and clubs, and such like.

The opinion which these Indians hold concerning the resurrection. Chap. 12.
THe Cascikes of Peru, and all the principal persons in the Land, they do use
to bury in vaultes, sitting in chaires, and have upon them and about them, all
their rich clothing: they were wont to bury also with them one or two of
their wives, which were best beloved. It has happened about this poinct,
sometime the wives to go to law, to approve which was best beloved, and to
avoid that discord, the husband does leave determined before his death, who
was his best beloved: they also buried alive with him two or three boys or
Pages of service: they laid also into the grave al his vessel of Gold and
Silver. The effect and meaning hereof was, that they believed to rise again
in another worlds, and therefore they would not then be to seek for such
furniture or service. So than when the Spaniards came to break up those
Sepulchers, for the gold and plate that was in them, the Indians besought them
that they would not scatter ye bones, because (said they) their bones beeinge
together, they shall more easily, and with less^ pain rise again. The
obsequies which their kinsfolk make for them is in this sort, from the top of
the Grave there goes a pipe made of Cane, that reaches down into the mouth of
the dead, whereunto the kinsefolke do often put into the drink or beuaredge,
called Chicha: they also make upon their Graves the Image of the ded, made of
wood, and other common folk has the sign of their occupacion made upon their
graves, but the Soldier or man of War, has a remembrance according to his
valiantnes.

Of the Origin of the Kings of Peru, called Ingas. Chap. 13.
IN all the Provinces of Peru, were principal persons, called in the Indian
tongue Curacas, which is as much to say, as Cascikes, in the Island speech,
because the Spanyardes which came to conquer in Peru, had learned these names
in the Island of Santo Domingo, Cuba, Saint Ihon, and in Tierrafirme, where
they had dwelt, so that at their first coming thither, they understood not the
proper names of things in the Peru speech by mean whereof the Indians
themselves at this day use to name those things according to the Spaniards
terms of speech, and therefore they leave from calling their noble men Curaca,
and call them Cascikes, and the corn or grain which they were wont to call
Sara, they called Maiz, and the drink which they called Asua, they now call
Cieha.

These noble men did maintain their vassals in peace and quietness, and in time
of war they were their captains: In this sort they lived without any general
Prince throughout the land, until such time as from the parts of Collao, came
from the great lake called Ti^icaca, which is in circuit nere 80. Leagues,
certain warlike persons, which were called Ingas, they used to have the here
of their heads rounded, and heales in their ears, whereat did hang round pieces
of gold: The ear in their language was called Ringrym. The cheifest of this
newcome people was called Sapalla Inga, which is as much to say, as only
Lord, although some say he was called Inga Vira Cocha, which is to say, the
scumme or fatnes of the Sea, for because they knew not the Origin from whence
they came. They believed that they were bred of the said great lake, out of
the which runs a River toward the East, which in some places is half a
league broad, and this River falls into another little lake 40. leagues
distant from the great lake, and there consumes without any other vent, with
great admiration of such as would consider how so great a River should consume
in so small a lake. But the said lake is of such depth that they can find no
bottom.

Wherefore it is thought, that by the inward bowels of the earth, the water
enters into the Sea, as ^oth the River Alpheo in Greece. This Ingas began
first to inhabit the city of Cusco, and from thence they conqu^red and brought
into subjection al ye land, and their children successively inherited the
Empire: that is to say, not the eldest son, but rather the second brother is
always successively heir to his eldest brother, and when brethren wa^teth to
inherit, tha^ the eldest son inheriteth. The token or Crown which those
Princes used, was a Tassel made of red wool, which was worn upon their heds,
and came down to their eyes, so yt when any governor was appointed to rule in
any part of the realm, tha^ was delivered unto him, one of the threads of the
Kings tassal, so yt with one of those simple threads, he was obayed and
esteemed even as though the person royal had bin present, the like was never
seen in any place of the world: Nay, moreover, I am bold to say, yt the
obedience of those people unto their Prince was such, that it has happened one
of those governors having but ye only thread from his Prince, A maru^ilous
obedience.
and being sent therewith, has slain both men and women, of a whole Province,
without any greater power, writing, or commission: But when those poor
subjects saw ye thread, they submitted them selves even unto death.

By succession of those Kings, Ingas, the State came unto one called
Guaynacaua, which is to say, a rich young man, and he it was that had gotten
most cou^treyes to the augmenting of the estate, he was also a lover of
Justice, and executed the same throughout his land, and brought the country to
policy and tillage, which was thought in those days a thing impossible, that
a barbarous people without learning and Letters, should govern with such
consent and order, and his subjects also to show them selves so loving and
obedient, in such wise, yt to show their loving ha^ts toward their Prince, they
made two notable high ways in Peru, yea, such, yt it were very unmeet they
should be without remembrance, for none of those things which old writers
account to be of the seven maruailes of the world, was wrought with such
difficulty, pains, and cost, as those high ways were made, when this Prince
Guaynacaua went from the City of Cusco with his Army, to conquer the city
of Quito, which is near 500. leagues distant, going by way of the mountains,
in which journey he was sore troubled, because those ways were so Rockie and
perrilous, yea, and a man would have thought the^ impossible to pass: whereupon
the Indians thought it meet and convenient to make a high way for him, by the
which he might return with victory from the conquest: and to accomplish the
same, they took the work in hand, and began the same along the mountain
side, both broad and plain, and with force brake down the rocks for that
purpose, so that al those barrankes or gutters, which came from a high out of
the Mountains, were filled and made even with the same way, only by force of
hand, yea, some time they were forced to carry vpwardes ye stuff for the
work, above 20. fadom, so that this high way or cawsey indureth five hundred
leagues and more. The report is, that when the way was finished, a Cart lade^
might pass all the way: but since ye time, with the wars between the
Christians and Indians, this high way is now spoiled, to disturb such as
should pass that way: and who had seen this way, might well consider the
charges, by the making plain of only two leagues of mountain, which are
between two cities in spain, called Segouia, and Guadarrama, which was as yet
never perfectly finished, being an ordinary high way, by the which the kings of
Spain do pass, when they travail with their householdes into Andaluzia, or
into the kingdom of Toledo. These Indians not contented with so famous a piece
of work, when at another time their Prince Guaynacaua determined to visit the
Province of Quito, which he entirely loved, because it was his own conquest:
he went by the way of ye plains, where his said subjects made for him
another high way, almost as costly as the mountayn way, because the rivers
where their green and fresh things do grow, does occupy in some places near
three miles from the River, through the which they wrought a Cawsey forty
(...) of earthen walls on each side, which were of three yardes of height. They
continued tbe same high way through the sandy places, with evident marks that
the passengers could not mis their way, which also e^dureth all along ye said
space of 500. leagues. But now these marks are spoiled also by mean of the
said wars, but the walls of ye ways in the valleys are at this day whole
and sound, whereby the greatness and majesty of the work may easily be judged,
so that the prince Guaynacaua went out by the one, and returned by ye other,
having all the way as he should pas trimmed with boughs and flowers of maruailous
sweetness.

Of the notable things that Guaynacaua caused to be done in Peru. Cap 14.
BEsides those famous high ways before de^lared, Guanacaua commanded to buyld
at every ten Leagues end, in the mountain ^^ayes, certain houses made of a
great ^readth, wherein were sundry repertitio^s, and rooms sufficient to
receive his own person when he should pass that way with all his family and
army, and the like in the other high way in the plains, although not so nighe
the one to the other as the buildinge in the mountains: But according as the
rivers lay, so was the building by reason of succor and provision of water,
and in this sort they stood distant fifteen, yea, and twenty Leagues. These
lodginges were called Tambos, whereas the Indians, in whose jurisdiction they
fell, had provision always in store of all things necessary for his army and
host, not only of meat and drink, but also of all kind of armor, apparel,
and weapon, which they used for the wars, in such sort, that one of those
Tambos, if need required, was able to furnish in every respect twenty or
thirty thousand fighting men.

This Prince carried with him for his guard a great number of men of war, with
pikes, halberds, clubbes, and battle axes, of silver, copper, and some of gold,
and also several sorts of slinges.

They made bridges for Rivers, of timber, and those Rivers which were so broad
that those kind of bridges would not serve, they used for them mighty long
cables made of a certain kind of Rushes, called Maquey, which is more stronger
then hemp. These cables are made fast on each side of the River, so that from
the one side to the other there were of length 200. paces.

And by skillful art, a certain little vessel like unto a great basket
serves to pass over the wayfaring men, by the stay and help of the cable.
These kinds of passages the Indians do maintain at their costs and charges:
I mean those of the jurisdiction where they fall.

Princely estate.
The king used to go in his Litter made of plates of gold, which Litter was
not drawn with any kind of beasts, but only carried upon noble men's shoulders,
which always atte^ded at his court, to the number of one thousand: who were
also his best beloved, and of his counsel. Likewise these noble men when they
went abroad, and attended not on the king, were also carried in Litters upon
their vassals shoulders. These Casikes had their prince in great honor,
reverence and estimation: so that when any Piere or great Estate had occasion
to come to his Princes presence, his duty was to come barefooted, and to
bring his mantel on his shoulder, with some present wrapped therein to present
to his Sovereign, in token of duty and obedience: So that if occasion served
to talk with ye Prince twenty times in one day, so often were they bound to
bring him some new gift. Likewise, it was holden for a great offense to look
their Prince in the face, and if it happened any of them to stumble when they
carried the Prince in his Litter, his head was stricken of for his labor.

In every half league was appointed for the Princes service a foot Poast,
which ordinarily did run with greater speed then the horse poast. When this
Prince had conquered any Province, forthwith he commanded the chiefest men of
that place to be sent into some other Province of his kingdom already in
subjection: And the Inhabitants there to come and abide in the Province newly
discovered, for the greater security of his estate. And these people that were
in this sort changed from one Province to another were called Mitimaes.
Miti^aes.


Out of every Province throughout his whole Dominion they brought yearly unto
their prince certain tribute of such things as the country yealded, in so much
that in some barrain soiles where no good commodity grew, yet from thence they
sent yearly also to the king in token of duty and obedience certain loades,
called burdens of little Lizarts, as far as 300. leagues from cusco. This
Prince Guaynacaua did reedifie the Temple of the sun, which was of old time
founded in the city of Cusco, and seeled the Roofes and walls thereof with
boordes of silver and gold. And because a certain noble man which ^welled in
the playnes had rebelled against him, called chimocappa, chimocappa
who was a man of great possession, and had more then one hundred leagues of
ground, he went personally against him, and slew him in the field, and
commanded that from thenceforth no India^ of the plains should at any time
were weapon, which o^der is kept until this day: yet notwithstanding his
successor enjoyed through the Princes favor, ye province of chimo, where at
this present stands the city of Trugillio.

Guaynacaua and his father took an order for the breeding of cattaile, by mean
whereof the country was well provided, out of the which they paid tithing,
which they sacrificed to the sun. The chief cause of the estimation of gold
among the Indians, was because the king made all the vessel for the service of
his court of that metal, and also Jewels for his person, and offerings for the
Temple. The king had always a chair of gold carried with him to sit in, of 16.
carrets in fines, which was esteemed at 25000 dukets, and this chair was one
of the things ye Don Francisco Pisarro chose for his jewel at the time of ye
conquest: For according to the articles of agreement between his Majesty and
him, was agreed that of ye best Jewels which should be found or taken at any
victory, he should have one out of ye first choice of the whole treasure. At
ye birth of the first manchild which Guaynacaua had, he comanded a cable of
gold wier to be made in remembrance of ye birth of his son, that was of such
greatness, as many India^s do affirm which are as yet living, that 200. strong
men could scarcely lift or bear, and also in remembrance of this memorable
jewel he named his son Guasca, which in ye India^ speech is called a cable or
great rope, and added thereunto for his surname Inga, which is as much to say,
as Emperor.

This example, I thought good to declare in this place for to convince an
opinion which is held in Spain, among such as know not the fashions of India,
and was, how that people esteemed no gold nor yet knew the value thereof:
although it is true that they had many strange vessels wrought of silver and
gold, and also images of men, women, sheep, and many other kind of beasts,
and sundry kinds of herbs, wrought in the same metal, of exceeding cunning
workmanship.

Of the estate of the wars when the Spaniards came into Peru. Chap. 15.
ALthough the principal intent of this History, was to set out the things
happened to the Spaniards which at that time conquered the land, and of their
discovery since. But since this could not well be done without touching
somewhat of the estate of the Indians which then ruled: And also that it may be
understood it was the divine permission that the Spaniards should come thither
at such time as the land was divided into two parcialities, for otherwise, it
would have seemed not only difficult, but also almost impossible. Therefore I
will recite in brief the estate which the Spaniards found the country in at
their arriual.

After that Guaynacaua had brought into subjection to great a number of
Provinces to his Empire, for ye space of 500. Leagues, accounting from Cusco
westward, he then determined to go (in person) to conquer the Province of
Quito, in the uttermost part whereof finished his dominion. So that he provided
on his journey thitherward with a great army, and being come thither, and
having finished and quyeted that Province, he delighted much in that country,
because it was a pleasant Soil and wholesome for his complexion, whereupon he
abode there a great space, leuing in the city of Cus^o certain of his Sons
and Daughters, among whom was his eldest son, called Guascar Inga, Mango
Inga, and Paulo Inga and diverse others. And in Quito he married another Wife,
Daughter unto the Lord of that Country, and of her he begot a Son, called
Atabaliba, who he loved exceedinglye: so that now he determined to return to
Cusco, leauinge his Son with a Tutor in Quito, but in this return, he found
the Calsey in the Mountain broken and spoiled, as herebefore has been
declared.

After he had abode in Cusco certain years, he determined to return again
to Quito, not only because that Country contented him much, but also with
desire to see his Wife, and young Son, whom he loved more than any other of
his Children: and this Journey he took in hand, by the high way that was
made in the Playnes, and from this time forward, he returned no more to
Cusco, but abode all his life time in Quito, and gave that Land or Province
which he had with force conquered, to his Son Atabaliba, because the same
had been of his Grandfathers.

When Guaynacaua died, his Son Atabaliba took pocession of his Army, and of
all his Fathers riches, which were in that Province, although his greatest
treasure was left in his Treasury in the City of Cusco, in the custody of
his eldest Son, unto whom, Atabaliba sent Ambassadors, giuinge him to
understand, the decease of his Father, and also submittinge himself to his
obedience, beseechinge his Majesty that he would ratify the gift of his
Province of Quito, which the Father of them both had left unto him, considering
that, that Province of Quito was conquered by their Father; after the marriage
with his Mother: and moreover, the Land came by his Mother, and Ancestors,
and was not pertaining to the Crown of cusco, or his inheritance.

Guascar made answer, that he should come to Cusco and render up unto him the
Army, and in so dooinge, he would give unto, such Lands as should maintain
him like a man: but the state of Quito he should not have, because it was the
uttermost part of his Kingdom, and from thence he meant to conquer forward,
and always there to maintain a Garrison as a Frontier: And if upon this
warninge he refused to come unto him that then he would bend his power
against him, as an open enemy.

Atabaliba took counsel upon this matter, with two of his Fathers Captains,
who were both wise and valyant in the Wars. The one was called Quizquiz, and
the other cilicuchima, who counseled that he should not abide his Brothers
coming, but that it might please him to begin to take that enterprise in
hand, to meet him and to offer him the Battle, if he would not grant to his
request: and in so doing, he might easily possess all the Provinces through
the which he should pass: and in this sort his Army should daily increase,
yea, and also by this means should force his Brother to grant unto his
desire: this council liked him well, whereupon he personally with his whole
Host departed from Quito, and daily incroched the Country into his hands:
Guascar hearing of this news, sent to encounter with him one of his cheifest
Captains, with a company of light foot men, the which with great speed came
to a Province called Tumibamba, one hundred Leagues distante from Quito, and
there having notice how Atabaliba proceeded forward with all his power, they
dispatched a post to Cusco to Guascar, aduertising him of the proceedinge of
Atabaliba, and besought him to send forthwith unto them 2000. of the expertest
men of War, for with them and under their government, they had ready 30000
men of that only Province, which people were called Canares, unto which their
request, Guascar provided accordingly: and when those 2000 men were come, there
joined with them the Casikes of Tumibamba, and the Chaparas, Paltas, and
Canares, these affairs beeinge known to Atabaliba, he came with his power,
and gave them battle, Battle.
in the which many were slain on both sides, and the power of Atabaliba
overthrown, and he himself taken prisoner upon the Bridge of the River of
Tumibamba, and whilst the Soldiers of Guascar were occupied in pastimes, and
drunkenness, triumphing of the victory: a certain woman gave in at a Window
to Atabaliba where he was Prisoner, a Bar of Copper, wherewith he brake down
a Wall, and so fled unto Quito, which was about 25. leagues from thence, and
there began to geather another Hoaste of men, making them believe that his
Father had converted him into a Snake, when he was Prisoner, and by that
means he was delivered out of Prison, creepinge out at a hole, and that his
Father also promised him victory, if he returned again upon his enemies:
Second Battail^.
whereupon his people willingly went with him, and incountered again with his
enemies, and gave them the overthrow, but many were slain on both sides: so
that until this day remains heaps of boanes of those that at that time were
slain.

Atabaliba beeinge encouraged with this great victory, determined to go
against his Brother: and when he came to Canares he slew near 60000.
persons, because they were against him in the first Battle, so that he
consumed them all with Fire and Swoorde, and beat down plain with the
ground all their Habitacions, and Town of Tumibamba, which was planted in a
fair Plain, near unto three fair Rivers.

From this place he went conqueringe all the way as he went, and of such as
went about to resist him, he left not one alive: But such as came unto him
offeringe their service, he did lovingly receive, and in this manner his Host
dailye increased: and when he came to Tumbez he minded to conquer by Sea the
I Will of Puna, but the Casike of that Island, came and defended his purpose with a
great number of Raffes: Atabaliba consideringe that the conquest of that place
would require more time, and also having in remembrance how his Brother Guascar
was coming toward him with all his power, h^e therefore proceeded on his
journey toward Cusco, and when he was come to Caxamalca, there he stayed,
and sent two of his Captains with 4000. men to discover the way: and when
they had discryed the Camp of Guascar, they returned secretly by another way,
in the which by chance they met with 700. of the cheifest men of Guascars
Camp, among whom was Guascar him self, so that the company of Atabaliba set
upon them and slew the most of them, and took Guascar Prisoner, whereupon all
Guascars Host environed them about, with determinacion to have slain them
all. The Captains on the behalf of Atabaliba, Gu^scar taken P^iso^er.
commanded Guascar to warn his Captains to stay their proceeding, for
otherwise, they would cut of his hedde: for said they, our Princes coming is
not to indamage you, but that you would consent that he may quietly enjoy his
estate of Quito, reserving his obedience, and vassallage toward you. When
Guascar had heard and understood his Brothers desire, and also with fear of
his life, he commanded his men of War to proceed no further, but
incontinent to retire back^ again to Cusco, which was forthwith accordingly
performed.

When Ataebaliba understood his great good fortune, he commanded his
Captains to bring his Brother Prisoner unto him, to Caxamalca, where he abode
his coming. At this in^tant, came ^on Francisco Pisarro, with all his company
of Spanyardes, which he had brought with him into Peru, so that he had now
opportunity to begin his conquest, as at large in this second Book shall be
declared, for the Hoaste of Guascar, for the most part, were fled, and also
the Army of Atabaliba, for the most part, were discharged.

THE SECOND BOOK
of the Conquest which was atchiued in the Province of Peru, by Don Francisco
Pisarro, and his company. Chap. I,
IN the former Book is declared, how Don Francisco Pisarro abode in Panama,
after his return from Spain, preparinge things necessary, for the
proceedinges of the Conquest of Peru, yea, and also Don Diego de Almagro, did
furnish that voyage with as great a good will and charge, as at the first he
had begone, for in him only did consist the principal credit and stock: but
some cause of slacknes was, because Don Francisco Pisarro had not remembered his
good will and deeds, when he was in Spain, nor yet brought any kind of
countenance of favor for him, from the Emperors Majesty: but yet with
sufficient excuses they joined again into freendship, although he never
after bare any cordial good will to his Brethren, especially to Fernando
Pisarro, who he took to be his Capital enemy.

Don Francisco fraughted the Ship of Hernando Ponce de Leon, in the which he
shipped himself and his four Brethren, and also the most of his company, of
Horsemen and Footmen, with great difficulty, because many of them stood in
doubt of the Conquest, by means of the unfortunate success and repulses
happened the years before: he hoysed up Sails in the beginning of the
year.1531. and the wind beeinge contrary, he was forced to alande his men a
hundred Leagues on this side the place that he pretended.

And travailing alonge the Coast, they were in great extremity of victualles,
by mean that they could not pass the Rivers, but only by swimminge, as well
men as Horses: in which troubles, the valiant mind and courage of Don
Francisco, did greatly animate them, yea, and the great perrill of his own
person, who let not to pass over upon his own shoulders, such as could
not swim, until at length they came to a Town of Indians by the Sea side,
called Coaque, Coaque.
which was ritche of Merchandise, and plentiful of victuals, where he
comforted his men which were weak, and brought low, with their troublesome
Journey.

From this Town, he sent two ships to Panama, and Nicaragua, and in them
the sum of 30000. Castlins of Gold, which he had taken up in Coaque, to the
intent that they might see in those Cities the likelyhoode of gain, that
might ensue of their travails, and to encourage them to follow his steps.

In this Town of Coaque, they found some Emralds which were exceeding good,
and fine: this Town stands under the Equinoctial Line: there were some
through covetousness, lost much money, because they understood not the finenes
nor goodness of those stones, for they made their experience, taking Hammers to
prove the hardness of the stones, and so they spoiled many fair and rich
Jewels. After they had abode here a while, his men were vexed with ye sort of
small Pox, of which heretofore has been spoken, so that few or none of all
his Army escaped: Notwithstanding, the Governor persuaded them, that evil
constillacion of that Clymat, was the cause, whereupon they proceeded forward,
until they came to the Province, called Puerto Viejo, conquering and pacifiyng
the People, all the way as they went. At this place met with them, Captain
Venealcasar, and Ihon Fores, who were come from Nicaragua with their ship, in
which they brought certain Footmen, and Hors^men.

Of the things which happened to the Governor, in the Island of Puna, and the
Conquest of the same. Chap. 2.
THe Province of Puerto Viejo beeinge pacified, the Governor with his company
took the way toward Tumbez, and there he determined to pass upon Raffes,
which were provided into the Island of Puna, which stands in ye front of
Puerto Viejo, so that he passed over his Horsemen and Footmen with great
danger, because the Indian had devised to cut the Ropes, wherewith the Raffes
were bound, and in that sort to drown and spoil his men. This policy being
understood by the Governor, he gave warning to all his company, that each
should have his Sword near drawn, and to have a vigilant eye to every Indian.
When they were arrived at the Island, the Indians came and offered them peace,
and also courteously entertained them: Notwithstanding they had prepared a Snare
or Ambush to have slain them all that night: howbeit the Governor had notice
thereof, whereupon he forthwith set upon them, and took their Cascike Prisoner:
Yet nevertheless, the next day, the Governor and all his men were environed
with Indians, men of War. Than the Governor and his Brethren with great
courage, took their horses, and placed their men in good order, and sent other
some, for the sauegard of the ships which rode near the shore.

The Spaniards fought so manfully, that in short time the India^ enemies were
put to flight and many of the^ wounded and slain, at which assault (only).3.
Spaniards were slain, but diverse sore hurt, especially Gonsalo Pisarro, who
was daungerously wounded on his knee. Th^n arrived Captain Hernando de Soto
with more men, as well footmen as horsemen, which also came from Nicaragua, so yt
now the Indians being fled to their Raffes, they wandered among the Marshes
in such sort, that they were safe from the Christians.

Then determined the Governor to pass unto Tumbez, after he had divided among
his soldiars the spoil of gold and other things which they had there obtained,
and also because that Island was very apt to diseases, lying nere unto the
Equinoctial.

How the Governor came to Tumbez, and of the conquest which he made until he
had inhabited the city of Saint Mighell. Chap. 3.
IN this Island of Puna were captives above 600. men and women of Tumbez, and
one principal person of Tumbez also, who was likewise captive: the Governor
gave them all their liberty, and sent them home into their Country, and when
he him self had taken shippinge, to pass unto Tumbez, he sent three of his
men with some of those Indians, whom he had set at liberty, thinking that the
Towns men of Tumbez would have been thankful, for the good turn received:
so that his three men passed with certain of those Indians upon a Raffe, and
arrived sooner than the Governor. But as soon as they were arrived, the
Indians sacrificed those three Spanya^ds to their Idols, in recompense of the
great liberality which the Governor had extended to them, in the delivering
them out of captiui^ie: the like also had happened to Captain Hernando de Soto,
who also had passed upon a Raffe, with one of his men which attended on him, if
by good hap Diego de Aguero, and Rodrigo Losano had not at that instant
arrived, and entered the River of Tumbez, who advised him of the danger that
he was falling into. Now also the Country being revolted, the Governor
wanted Raffes to vnship his Men, and Munition, whereupon that night there came
none a Land but the Governor, Hernando, and Iho^ Pisarro his Brethren, Father
Vincent of Valuerde, Captain Soto, and other two Spanyardes, they alighted not
from their Horses all that night, although they were thoroughly wet with the
Seagate when they came a shore upon a Raffe from the ship, which Raffe also was
overthrown at their coming a shore, for want of knowledge, Hernando Pisarro
abode at the water side to see both Men, Horses, and furniture unshipped, but
the Governor proceeded forward for the space of two Leagues, and could not
attain to the speech of any Indian, for they were fled unto the Mountains
with their Armor, whereupon he returned back again to the Sea side, where he
met with Captain Mena, and Captain Ihon de Salzedo, which were come to seek
for him, with certain Horsemen, which were newly unshipped, and had gathered
together many of the Governors company, which had strayed abroad.

And then the Governor pitched his Camp in Tumbez: in this mean while came
Captain Benalcasar, who had remained to see the residew of the men shipped
from the Island, who duringe the time of his abode there, had many skirmishes
with the Indians.

The Governor abode in Tumbez twenty days, sendinge daily Ambassadors to the
Lord of that Soil, requiring him to yield to the Emperors service, but all
was in vain, for he would never accept that freendship^ rather he did much
hurt, and spoiled many of his men of service, called Laborers, when they went
abroad to seek victuals for the Camp: and the Spanyardes could not annoy them
in any respect, because they were on the other side of the River, until at
length the Governor made Raffes, in such secret sort, yt the Indian enemies
had no understanding thereof: so that in an Evening, he with his Brethren Ihon,
and Gonsalo Pisarro, with Captain Soto and Benalcasar, passed on those Raffes
50. Horses over the River, and travailed all that night by a troublesome narrow
way, among Thorns, Briers, and Rocks, so that when it drew nere day, he came
and set upon the enemies camp, and made a marvelous spoil among them, which
endured with fire and sword the space of 15. days. in revenge of the three
Spaniards which the Indians had so traitorously sacrificed, in recompense of
the liberty which the Governor gave them in the Island of Puna.

The Cascike of Tumbez seeing the great hurt done unto them, yealded himself,
and in token of submission, he presented to the Governor certain gold and
silver. The^ he proceeded on his discovery with the most part of his company,
leaving the residue with his Majesty's Auditour. Antonio Nauarro, and the
Treasorer Alonzo R^quelme and iorneyed til he came to the river of Poechos,
which stood 30. Leagues distant from Tumbez, and obtained peace with all the
Cascikes and Towns which were on the borders of that River: He also discovered
the port of Payta, which was accounted the best harbor in all ye coast.

To this place came messengers to the governor from Cusco from the Prince
Guascar, giving him to understand the rebellion of his brother Atabaliba, who
as yet was not apprehended, as before has been declared, craving at his hands
succor and defense against his said brother. With these joyful news the
Governor sent his brother Hernando Pisarro back again to Tumbez to bring away
with him all the remainder of his company, which had abode behind, and when he
had so done, he inhabited with them in ye City of S. Mighel, which sometime was
a town of Indians called Tangarara situated on ye River side of Chira, not far
from the sea, where was an exceeding good harbor for the ships which came
from Panama, and having here divided their gold and plate which was presented
in this Coast unto them. The governor provided forward leauinge certain of
his men for Citizens of ye new city, and took his way toward ye Province of
Caxamalca, because he had intelligence how Atabaliba was there.

How the Governor came to Caxamalca, and what there happened. Chap. 4.
IN this journey to Caxamalca, the Governor and his army passed great
extremity of thirst in a desert without habitatio^, of.20^ leagues long, where
was neither tree, bush, nor water, but only al sandy ground and very hot. At
the end of 20. Leagues he came into the Province of Motupe, where he found
fresh and pleasant Ualleys, replenished with many Uillages, where he well
refreshed his army with ye great abundance of victual^ which he there found,
and as he went from thence, asce^ding into the mountains, he met with a
messenger which came from Atabaliba, who brought unto him for a present, a
pair of painted Shoes, and a pair of hand ruffes of gold, beseeching him
that when he should come before his Prince Atabaliba, to wear those Shoes on
his feet, and also to wear the ruffs accordingly, to thentent that he might
be known by those tokens.

The Governor received thankefully the present, and promised that he would
fulfill his request, and moreover that he should certify Atabaliba, that his
coming was not to offend him, if notorious wrong were not offered unto him:
Because, said he, the Emperor king of Castile, who sent me hither, commanded
that I should not attempt to displease any, without reason. With this answer,
the messenger departed, and the Governor likewise followed with great
foresight, that no enemy should disturb his passage.

When he came to Caxamalca, he met with another Messenger, which came to
advertise him that he should not take up his lodging without express
commandment from Atabaliba. To this embassage, ye Governor made no answer,
but rather took up his lodging according as he thought good.

And than he sent captain Soto with twenty hor^men well trimmed to Atabaliba
his Camp, which stood one League distant from the Gouer^ours lodging, to
signify unto him the arryuall of his General. When Captain Soto came in
sight of Atabaliba, he set spurs to his horse as though he would have run
against an armed man, which bravery did not a little amase the poor Indians,
who with all have fled out of his way. But for their labor, Atabaliba
commanded them to he slain, and would give Soto no answer of his embassage,
until Fernando Pisarro came, who the Governor sent after Soto with another
company of horsemen, but he told his mind to one of gis noble Cascikes, and
the Cascike declared his saying to the interpreter, and the Interpreter to
Soto. But to Hernando Pisarro he spoke personally by the mouth of the only
Interpreter: Unto whom Pisarro said, that his brother the Governor came from
the Emperor his Majesty, and to know his royal will, he only desired that it
might please him to signify whether he might freely come unto his presence,
and to be accepted as his friend. Unto whom Atabaliba answered yt he would
freendly accept his offer, so that he would return the gold and plate which
since the entrance into his land, he had taken from his Indian subjects, and
also that forthwith he would depart his country and dominions, and to take
order with him in these causes, he meant the next day to meet him at a certain
place called Tambo de Caxamalca.

When Hernando Pisarro had received this answer he beheld the great number of
tents which were in the Camp of Atabaliba, which seemed unto him a great
City, and then took his leave and returned with his answer to the Governor,
and when he was come to his brother, having declared what he had heard and
seen, it some what discouraged him, having for every Christian 200. Indians.
But notwithstanding, he and all his company being haut^e minded and also of
great stomach. The night followinge they comforted one another, putting their
only confidence in God, so that than they occupied them selves in trimminge
their Armor and other Furniture, without taking any rest of sleep the whole
night.

How the Battle was given to Atabaliba, and the taking of him Prisoner. Chap.
5.
THe next day following, the Governor early in the morninge, set his Army in
good order, deuydinge 60. Horsemen into three parts, and placed them in Ambush
in several places, under the government of Captain Soto, and Captain
Benalcasar: and for their Chiefetaines he appointed his three Brethren,
Hernando, Ihon, and Gonsalo Pisarro, and he himself went with the infantry,
which is to be understood al sorts of armed footmen, prohibiting that none
should stir without his watchword, and the great ordinance shot of: Atabaliba
likewise set in good order his men of war, appointing convenient ground for his
captains to give the onset. He also commanded that where he judged the most
danger of the christian force, that one of his chief captains called
Ruminagui should attend, that if need required, he might set on the Spaniards
at their flight.

In this order Atabaliba set forward with great consideration and leisure, that
he was at the least 4. hours going one little league. He himself was carried
in his litter upon noble men's shoulders. There went before him 300. gentlemen
attired in one sort of livery, making clear his way of all such stones and
dust, even to the very strawes that might disturb him.

Then followed the rest of the nobility carried upon their vassales shoulders
in a certain kind of Litters^ esteeming in nothing the christian force, but
rather judged to take them napping, w^ithout any kind of resista^ce, because a
certain Indian R Ruler sent word to Atabaliba, that these newcome men were but
few in number, yea such as could not trauai la on foot, but of necessity were
forced to ride on great strange sheep. Requesting therefore that he might
have the vauntgard.

But when he came to the place called Tambo of Caxamalca, and saw but the
company of Footmen, because the Horsemen lay in ambush, he deemed that those
ryders on the great Sheep durst not appear. Whereupon he went into his
Litter, saying these men have already yealded, and the others confirmed his
saying.

Then came the Bishop, father Vincent de Valuerde, with a Breuiary in his
hands, saying: That one God in Trinity had created Heaven, Earth, and all
Cre^a^ures. He also made Adam, the first man on the ear^h, and also made Eve
his wife of a ribbe taken out of hi^ body: Of which two persons all mankind
were engendered, and that through the disobedience of these two persons, our
forefathers, we al fell into sin, so that we could not obtain grace to enter
into heaven, to enjoy the sight of God, until Christ our redeemer came and was
born of a pure virgin, to save vs^ and for that intent and effect he
suffered m^st bitter death and passion.

After the which, the third day he rose again gloryfied, and for certain
days he abode in the world, and then ascended up into heaven, leaving for
teachers of his holy Laws, his sacred Apostles.

Furthermore (said he) this our Country God has left in charge to the
Emperor of Christians called the Lord Charles our Sovereign: who has sent
in his stead the Governor Don Francisco Pisarro, who is here present to warn
and notifye unto you on Gods behalf, all my former words. And also if you
will believe, and be baptized, rendering obedience to his Majesty, as a
great part of Christendom does, he will defend you, and also maintain
your Country in peace and justice, and reserve unto you your Liberties as he
has used to do to other kings and princes.

But if this gentle offer be refused, the Gouernoure here present, will
commit you to cruel war, with Fire and Sword, and the Lance in hand.

And as touching the Faith of Jesus Christ, and his holy Gospel, after that ye
shall be well^instructed therein, and will assuredlye believe the same, you
shall then do the things conuenyent for the salua^ion of your fowls. But if
not, you shall not be forced thereunto.

When Atabaliba had heard the Bishops r^lasion, he answered, how that
Country and all therein contained, his Father and Ancestors had gotten, and
left the same to his Brother Guascar Inga, and because at that instante he
had ouercommen him in battle, and had him Pryson^r, the Land appartayned
unto him, and that by means thereof he possessed the same, and therefore he
understood not how the Emperor, or by what title could require his Country:
But (quoth he) I will defend his pretense.

And as concerning Jesus Christ, and his mighty works, he said, yt he knew
nothing thereof, ^or yet believed that there was any other Creator but only the
Sun, who he held for his chief God, and the earth for their mother: And
that the Gods called Guacas, and Pachacama, had created all other earthly
things. And as touching the Emperor, he knew not what he was, because he
never saw him.

He also demanded how the bishop did know that all those things were true
which he had rehearsed unto him. The bishop answered, that in the book which
he held in his hand, therein those things were written, and that the same
book was holy scripture come from God.

Atabaliba desired that he would let him see that book, which forthwith was
delivered unto him, and having it in his hands, he turned from leaf to leaf.
Why (quoth he) this book speaks not one word to me, and therewith threw it
on the ground: Wherewith the bishop taking up his book again, cried, upon
them, upon them. But the Governor expecting that the Indians should have
begun, meaning thereby to have the greater advantage, but now thinking it not
convenient to make any longer delay, he sent word to his brother Hirnando
Pisarro, that he should give the onset, and also forthwith commanded the
Ordinance to be shot of, and then the horsemen began to encounter with the
force of the enemy in three parts, and the Governor with the footmen took
the way to the personal force of Atabaliba, and brake the array of his front,
even until he came to his Litter, where he ^lew the Cascikes which carried the
Litter, who were no sooner slain, when others took the place.

But the Governor seeing the victory, as he thought long, and although many
Indians were slain, yet the death of one of his men did import much, whereupon
he him self with noble courage came to the Litter of Atabaliba, and took him
by the hear of his head, which he used to wear long, according to the use of
his country, and with force drew him out of the Litter. In the mean season,
his company were so vehemente, that they so ^a^hed with their W^apons on the
Litter which was of Gold t^^t by ^ish (...), they hurt the Governors hand,
and alth^ugh a great troop of Indians ca^e to rescue their Prince, yet it
prevailed not, but in fine, was taken Prisoner by the Governor. But when his
Warriers saw their Chiefetaine taken, and they assaulted on every side, and
especially, with the fury of the Horsemen, to whose force they had not been
accustomed: they began to retire and fly with all speed possible, leauinge
their Armor behind them: yea, the haste in the retire was such, that one
disturbed another: in the flight the Horsemen made great spoil among them, and
followed their Uictory, till the night caused them to cease.

But when the Indian Captain of greatest trust, called Ruminagui, heard the
thunderinge noise of the Ordenance, and also saw his privy Watch, which stood
on a high Rock, thrown down by a Christian: then fearing ^he danger, he
with all his charge also, took them to the swiftnes of their feet, and never
rested until he came to the Province of Quito, which was distant from the place
where the Battle was, above 250. Leagues, as hereafter shall be declared.

How Atabaliba commanded his Brother Guas^ar to be slain, and how Hernando
Pisarro proceeded in the Discovery. Chap. 6.
WHen Atabal^ba was taken Prisoner, the next day following, the Treasure and
spoil was joined together, and assuredly it was a rare, yea and maruailous
thing, to see the number of Uessels, both of Silver and Gold, which was found
in the Indian Camp: and also the gallaunt Tents, made after their fashion,
and many strange garments: The vessels of Gold, was esteemed in 60000.
Poyzes, which is accounted seven shillings starling to every poyze, and this
vessel was for the service of the only person of Atabaliba. And also 5000.
women which submitted themselves willinglye to the Spanyardes commandment.

And when these things were ended, Atabaliba said unto the Governor, sithence
you have me now Prisoner in your power, use me favorably, and for my ransom
and liberty, I will give this Quaderne place, or house full with vessels and
pieces of Gold, and so much Plate as you will reasonably demand. And when his
offer was in this sort declared, he thought that the Governor took his
sayings to be a thing impossible, wherefore he replied again, saying: I will
perform what I have said, and somewhat more.

The Governor answered^ that he would deal freendly with him, according to
his request: Atabaliba gave him most hearty thanks, and forthwith dispatched
messengers throughout his Dominions, and especially, to Cusco, to gather
together the gold and Plate, which he had promised for his rau^some, which
was judged a thing incredible to be performed, for the covenant was, to give
full of the said Treasure, a certain house in Caxamalca, as high as the same
Atabaliba could reach with his hand, standinge on the ground, and the like in
compass, according to the height, and to make his promise the playner, he
marked out with a red Line, the plot which he would fill with the said
vessels of Gold and Plate: but notwithstanding, that dailye, came great store
of Treasure into the Camp, yet the Spanyardes thought it not sufficient for a
foundation of the performance of Atabaliba, his promise, whereupon they began
among them selves to murmr, saying: the time passes away and Atabaliba
complyeth not with us his ransom, consideringe that his day is past: But
said they, it is to be thought that with this policy, he means to geather
a new Army, and so to come suddenly upon us to our destruction. Atabaliba being
a sencible and wise man, understood the murmuring of the Christians, he
demanded of the Governor ye cause of their muttering and secret conference?
who informed him of the matter, even as it was: why answered he, as yet they
have no reason to complain of the delay, for the day of payment is scarcely
paste, and that they ought to have consideracion, yt the place which was the
City of Cusco, from whence the greatest part of his ransom should come,
stood distant from Caxamalca 200. long leagues of evil way, and moreover the
treasure should be brought upon men's shoulders: by reason whereof he prayed not
to think the time long, nor yet to think it impossible, yt he was able to
perform his promise, ye premises considered, it was not much to have patience
for one Month, more or less? but yet said he, for your more quicker
dispatch, let one or two of your company go unto Cusco, to see the thing which
I have affirmed. Upon this poinct there were sundry opinions among the
Christians, whither they might give credit to Atabaliba his words, and also,
how it was not a thing convenient to put any christian in the Indian power:
when Atabaliba had understood their meaning, he laughed, saying: I marvel
that any christian should stand in distrust of my word and security in the
journey to Cusco. Do ye not consider how ye have my person prisoner in Chai^es,
and also my wives and Children in your power: with this answer, they
determined that Captain Soto, and Pedro del Barro^ should go to Cusco, who by
the commandment of Atabaliba were carried in Litters upon the Indians
shoulders, and had for their Guard a great company of Atabalibas Soldiers: and
in this order they iorneyed by post, for those Littermen presume to make great
speed, and abhor slow iorneyes, yet only two men do carry the Litter at one
time, notwithstanding 50. or 60. persons attend upon every Litter, and so they
go runninge with their burden for a space, and the^ are ready other two for to
take the burden. In ye way as they went, they met Atabaliba his Captains, who
brought his Brother Prince Guascar prisoner, who was desirous to talk with the
said Captain Soto, and his co^panio^, of who^ he was informed, of such things
which had happened, and also what their pretense and coming into ye country was

But when Guascar understood the Emperors meaning, and also the intent of the
christian governor, in his name, which was as well to maintain in justice ye
christians as the Indians which he should conquer, and that every one might
enjoy his own, he then discovered the discord between him and his brother,
and how his brothers intent was to disherite him of his kingdom and estate,
which of right was his own inheritance by descent from his father Guaynacaua,
and for this purpose he was now carried prisoner to be slain.

Wherefore he most humbly besought them to return back again with him, to
open his doliens to the Lord Marquis their Governor, beseeching him, that
since they both brethren were at that instant in his power, and he of right
being absolute Lord of the land, that it might please him to see justice
executed between the^, and to give judgment to which of them the kingdom did
appartaine, considering that as he was enfourmed, his only coming was for that
intent. And if, said he, yt Marquis will take this matter in hand, I will not
only see performed the sum of gold and plate, promised by Atabaliba to be
delivered at Tambo in Caxamalca: But I will also fill all that house called
Tambo, even to ye roof, which should be three times as much and more that his
brother had promised, requesting them to make enquiry whether he were a man of
power to perfourm his offer, with greater facility then his brother was able
to perform his promise. For Atabaliba to accomplish his ransom, should be
forced to spoil the rich Temple of the Sun, in the city of Cusco, which was
wainscoted with board of gold and plate in equal panes, because he had no
other remedy, nor from whence to have any other quantity.

But I (quoth he) have in my power all the treasure and jewels of my father,
wherewith I may easilye perform much more then I have spoaken. Wherein he
said the truth, although his said treasure was hidden under ground, in such
place as no man living knew where it was but only he himself, and as yet until
this day, it is not known: for the multitude of Indians which carried the same
to the secret place where it was buried, as soon as the said treasure was
hidden, they were by his commandment all slain, because the place should not
be discovered: Although since the winning of the Country, the Spanyardes have
sought and dug in many places where they suspected the treasure to be
hidden. But until this day they could not attain to the knowledge thereof.
Captain Soto and Petro del Barrio, made answer to Guascar, that they could
not leave of from ye journey which they had in hand, but with all speed possible
they meant to return, and then they would solicit his suite and request, and
so departed and proceeded on their journey, which was ye only cause of Guascars
death, and also the loss of all the said wonderful treasure: Oversight.
for the captains which carried him prisoner, gave intelligence by poast to
Atabaliba, of all the talk had between the Spaniards and Guascar. But
Atabaliba considered with him self, that if this matter should come in
question before the Governor, as well for that Guascaer had justice on his
side, as also for the great abundance of gold by his brother offered, and
knowing also ye great love and affection that the Spaniards bare to the golden
metal, he feared by these means that ye kingdom should be given to his
brother: yea, and so it might fall out, that for ye causes aforsaid, he might
be slain, to put all matter out of question, and therefore he determined to kill
his said brother, yet he feared ye enterprise, because he had heard say that ye
christians had a law among the^, that whosoever did kill any of their nation,
should therefore also be killed. And thereupon he devised to prove the
Governors mind in that case, the which he put in ure with great industry, and
on a day he feigned great sorrow, with tears and sobbinge, and would neither
eat nor drink, nor speak with any man, although the Governor did earnestly
enportune him to declare the cause^ At the length he began to say, that he
had understood and received news, how a Captain of his, seeinge him Prisoner,
had slain his Brother Guascar, the which was no small grief for him, for he
loved him not only because he was his elder Brother, but rather he held him
in stead of a father, and although he was the occassion to take him prisoner,
it was not to the intent to hurt his person, nor yet to usurp his kingdom,
but only that he should permit him to inioye his Province of Quito, which his
Father had given unto him, after that he had conquered it: which Province was
also out of the dominion of Cusco.

The Governor hearing his sorrowful complaint, comforted him, and bid him
be of good cheer, saying moreover, that death was a thing natural: and when
the Country should be quieted of all dissencions, then he would make
informacion to know who they were which consented and procured his Brothers
death, and punish them accordingly.

When Atabaliba perceived that the Governor took the matter so slightly, he
then fully determined to execute the thing which he had devised, and sent
privily to the Captains, who had the keepinge of Guascar; express commission
to kill him, which was forthwith committed with such speed, that it was never
certainly known whither he was slain in the time that Atabaliba made his
fained mourninge, or afterward, of which evil success, the principal fault
was laid to Captain Soto, and Pedro de Barrio, who were so presise in their
determined journey to Cusco.

The Indians does report than when Guascar saw that he should die, he said I
have been a small while, Lord of this Land, and less shall be the traitor my
Brother, by whose commandment I now must die, being his natural Prince: the
which his words were well remembered: for when they saw Atabaliba slain, as in
this next Chapter shall be declared, they called to remembrance his words, and
said verily, that Guascar was a Prophet, and child of the Sun, consideringe
how his words came to pass, he also said, that when his Father departed from
him, he warned him, that when a white people, bearded, should come into that
Country, that he should submit him self unto them, because (said he) they
shall be Lords over this Country, although this thy Fathers Prophecy seemed
strange, yet through the industry of the Devil it might be known, for so much
it happen^d before Guaynacaua died. The Lord Marquis went conquering along the
coast of Peru, and also when he abode in Caxamalca, he sent his Brother
Hernando Pisarro, with certain Horsemen, to discover the Country, who
proceeded till he came to Pachacama, which stands in the Province of
Guamacucho, where he met with a Brother of Atabaliba, called Illescaes, who
brought more the^ 300000 poyzes of Gold, toward the ransom of his Brother,
beside a great quantity of Plate: who after he had passed many dangerous
ways, and perrilous Bridges, and was come to Pachacama, he there had
intelligence how a Captain of Atabaliba called Cilicuchima, abode in the
Province of Xauxa with a great Army, which might be about forty leagues from
that place, unto who^ he sent, requiring him to come unto him, but the Indian
Captain denied his request: whereupon Hernando Pisarro determined to go and
talk with him, although his men commended not his enterprise, to be so bold
to put him self in his enemies power, who was a man of great might, but in
fine, when Pisarro had spoken with him, and through his persuasion, the Indian
Captain discharged his men, and went personally with him to Caxamalca, to see
his Lord Atabaliba, but when he should enter into the place where he was, he
put of his Shoes, and took upon his shoulders the present, which they were
wont to present him withal: and with sorrowful countenance, the tears
droppinge from his eyes, he said: O mighty Prince, if I had been with you at
the time of your apprehencion, the Christians had now possessed your person.

Atabaliba answered, that it was Gods judgment that he should be Prisoner,
and also to be taken with so small a company of strangers: But said he, the
principal occasion was the flight of my Captain Ruminagui, with 5000. men, in
whom I put my only trust.

How Atabaliba was slain, and the occasion was laid to his charge, how he
went about to murder the Christians, and how Don Diego de Almagro came into
Peru the second time. Chap. 7.
THe Lord Marquis Pi^arro, Governor, beeinge in the Province of Po^chos,
before he came to Caxamalca, as before is declared, he received a priuye
Letter without firm, which afterward was known to come from the Secretary of
Don Diego de Almagro, from Panama, wherein was given to understand, how Don
Diego had builte a great Ship, with the intent, that with the same and others
he meant with all his power to pass personally into Peru, to intercept the
Gouernoure proceedinges, and to place and possess, the best soil in all the
Land to his use, which ground did lie beyond the Limittes, discovered by the
Marquis: the which according to a provision received from the Emperor, did
contain from the Equinoctial Line forward 250 Leagues, directly North, and
South: This Letter the Governor kept in secreat, and would make none of his
friends priuye thereunto, but yet he believed, and it was true, that Don Diego
de Almagro had taken shippinge, according to the tenor of the Letter, which
he had received, and was on his way toward Peru, arrived at Puerto Viejo, where
in effect Don Diego after his arriual, understood the good success and
proceedings of the Governor, and how he had in his power maruailous treasure,
of Gold and Plate, whereof according to the articles of agreement made
between them, at the first beginning of the Discovery, the one half was, and
did appertain unto him: He now knowinge that the Governor had advise of his
coming, and the same to be done by his own Secretary, he forthwith
commanded his Secretary to be hanged, and with all his power proceeded on his
Journey, till he came where the Governor was in Caxamalca, where he found a
great part of the ransom of Atabaliba gathered together, which was a strange
sight both to him and his company, for they thought that in the whole world was
not so much Gold and Silver. And the same day that the Saymais^er had made his
ensay of the Gold and Plate, which belonged to the company. The Gold only,
did amount to one Million, and eight hundred thousand Poyzes: and yet the ensay
was made very slight, for the Gold was of greater value: the want of strong
water was the defect, so that the ensay was made two or three Carets baser than
the finenes, whereby the valuacio^ was found 300000 Poyzes to little. And
concerning the Plate, the quantity was great, so that the Emperors fifte
part, amounted in fine Silver 600000 Poyzes, and yet in the same plate was
Gold of three and four Carettes: whereof the Emperor his part was 300000
Poyzes, every Horseman had for his share 12000 Poyzes in fine Gold, besides
his part in Silver: and every Footeman ha^ a quarter part less then the
Horsemen. Yet notwithstanding, this great treasure, the one fifte part of
Atabalibas ransom was not delivered: and because that Don Diego brought with
him a great company of men, there was alleged yt unto them did not appertain
any portion of the ransom of Atabaliba, for why? they were not at the taking
of him prisoner: yet the Governor commanded to give unto every of them a
thousand poyzes toward their cost. And determined to send his brother Hernando
Pisarro to certify the Emperor of his proceedings and good success, and
because the true account was not yet perfectly known, he sent unto his
majesty 100000. poyzes in gold, and 20000. marks of plate, containing six
ducates to every mark out of the whole stock: Which present was wrought in
sundry sort of vessel according to the Indian use, whereof some were great
vessels for water or wine, called Tinages, chafingdishes, drums, sheep,
figures of men and women, all wrought in the foresaid metal.

With the said portion Hernando Pisarro took shipping with great grief of his
departing from Atabaliba, who loved him exceedingly, and also discovered unto
him much of his secrets, and said unto him at his leave taking, O good
captain go you now away? Truly your departure is grievous unto me, for when
you are gone, I shall be slain by this one eyed man, and this he spoke by Don
Diego de Almagro, who had but one eye, as before has been declared.

Likewise he liked not the iesture of Alonso Requelme, who was Treasorer for
his majesty. And truly, poor Atabaliba judged right, for as soon as
Hernando Pisarro was departed, his death was conspired by mean of his
Interpreter, who was named Philip, and was so called, because he had been in
Spain with the Governor, who most falsely accused his Prince, saying yt he
was minded to murder secretly the Spaniards, and for that purpose, he had
appointed in secret places a great number of Indians, and where the
information was made by ye mouth of Philip, who interpreted the witness
sayings, according to his own pleasure. But the cause of his wicked dealing
was not certainly known, but it was judged to ^e one of two causes, which
were, the one was thought that he was in love with one of Atabalibas, wives,
thinkinge by his death to enjoy his desire without peril: of which his
pretense, Atabaliba had understanding, and thereof had made complaint to the
governor, saying yt that shameless ascent grieved him more the^ his imprisonment,
or yet any other mishap yt might come unto him, although it were present death,
to see so base a man, and his subject enterprise such villainy, knowing ye great
punishment in his country prepared for such an offense, which was to burn
alive any that should attempt such things. The man being an offender was not
alone thus punished, but also the woman, her father, mother, brethren and
kindred, yea, even the cattle of the aduouterer, and the town where he or she
were borne, was destroyed and made uninhabitable, and the ground sowed with salt,
the trees cut down, and the houses beaten flat with the ground, and other
grievous punishments were devised in remembrance of the offense.

Others held opinion that the chief cause of Atabaliba his death^ was the
exceeding couetuosnes of Don Diego de Almagro, and also of his men, because it
was told the^ that they had no right to have any share of al ye ransom of
Atabaliba, which they thought impossible to be performed, although all the
gold in the world were gathered together. Upon which occasions, the soldyars of
Don Diego desired the death of Atabaliba, saying, that as long as he should
live, the Governors men would say, that al ye gold which should come to their
hands was his ransom, and they should not be partakers thereof. But be it as
may be, they condemned him to death, where at the poor Prince was not a little
amazed, saying that he never thought nor imagined the things which were laid to
his charge, and for the verifying of the matter, that it might please him to
lay more Irons on him, with greater guard, or to carry him aboard one of their
ships til the truth were thoroughly known. He said, moreover, to the
Governor and the chiefest of his company. I know not for what cause ye do
judge me, for a man of so small judgment, or to think that I would go about
to work treason, considering how I am your prisoner, and bound in Iron chains,
and also if any of my people should but show them selves for any such purpose,
ye might then with the least suspicion, strike my head from my shoulders. And
if ye think that any of my subjects should come to rescue me against my will,
ye are also deceived, and know not what obedience my people bears unto me,
for against my will the fowls of the air shall not flee, nor the leaves of
the trees stir.

All these allegations prevailed not, nor yet to give great gages for the life
of ye basest Spanyard that should pearish in the land. But since it was thought
among the Spaniards that it was not a lawful cause to condemn him to death
upon suspicion, they charged him with the death of his brother Guascar,
whereupon they gave judgment of death, and executed the sentence. But before
his death he still called for his friend Hernando Pisarro, who was gone toward
Spain, saying, if he had been here I should not so wrongfully be put to
death. And at the hour that he should die, he was baptized by the Bishop.

How Ruminagui made insurrection in the Province of Quito, and how the
Governor went to Cusco. Chap. 8.
THe Captain in whom Atabaliba had put in his life time a great trust, as in
the former Chapter is declared, and how he fled from the battle in Caxamalca,
with 5000. Indians: He (I say) being in the Province of Quito, gathered
together all the Indians of Atabaliba, and possessed himself of the estate of
that Country, compelling them to obey him as their right and only Lord.
Atabaliba a little before his death sent his brother Illescas to Quito, to bring
unto him his children, which Ruminagui most unnaturally caused to be slain.

When Atabaliba saw, that of force he should die, he earnestly desired
certain of his Captains, to see his body carried to the Province of Quito, to
be buried with his Father Guaynacaua, the which request, they faithfully
performed, and when the dead body was brought to Quito, Ruminagui received it
with great honor, and buried him with his Father, with great pomp and
solemnity, according to the custom of the Country: and when the Funerals
were ended, he caused a great drunken Feast to be made, in the which, when the
Captains that had brought the dead body were thoroughly drunk, he commanded
them al to be slain, among whom was Illescas, Brother to Atabaliba, who had
his skin plucked of being alive, and with the same skin, he covered the
ends of a Drum, and his head hanging at the same Drum.

In this mean while, the Lord Marquis, Governor, divided all the Gold and
Plate in Caxamalca, and when he had so done, he had advice how one of
Atabalibaes Captains called Quixquix, went up an^ down in the country,
stirring the Indian People to insurrection, whereupon he determined no longer to
abide, nor yet to tarry his coming in the Valley of Xauxa: he also sent
before him Captain S^to, with certain of his Horsemen, and he him self went
in the Reregard.

In the Province of Viecasinga, the Indians came suddenly upon Captain Soto,
in such sort, that he stood in perrill of the overthrow, and four of his men
were slain: but the day being spent, the night forced them to cease, and to
retire to the Mountains. The Governor hearing of this great danger of
Captain Soto, sent Don Diego de Almagro to suckcour him, with certain
Horsemen, so that the next morning, the Indians coming again to skirmish, the
Christians made as though they would fly, to allure the enemies down into the
Plain, out of the danger of the high places, from whence they did much hurt
with their Slinges: But the Indians suspectinge the pollicye of the Christians,
retired back again, and kept their skirmishing near the Wooddes, not knowing
of the succor which was come, because of the great mist which did fall that
morninge, they could not discry their coming, by mean whereof, the Christians
had the victory, and slew many of the enemies. Then came the Governor with the
Reregard, at whose coming, came a brother of Guascar, and Atabaliba, who was
chosen Inga, or King of the Land: by mean of their deaths, he had received
the great Tassell, which was as much as to say, as the Crown of the Princely
estate, and was called Paulo Inga, who certified the Governor, how in the
city of Cusco attended his coming a great number of men of War: with this
news he let not, but proceeded forward by his ordinary Iorneyes, until
he came in sight of the City, out of the which he saw assend a maruailous
smoke, by mean whereof, he judged the City to be on fire, and to the intent
to preserve the same, he sent with all speed a company of Horsemen, but they
were no sooner comen near the city, when a great number of Indians came out
to encounter with the^, with slinges and sundry other sorts of weapons, in
such sort, that the Spanyardes were glad with all haste possible to retire,
above the space of a long League, where they met with the Governor, who
understanding what had happened, sent from thence his two Brethren, Ihon, and
Gonsalo Pisarro, with the most of the Horsemen, who set upon the enemies on the
Mountain side, with such courage, that they caused them to retire, and in
their flight slew many of them, until the night compelled them to cease. The
Governor seeinge the good success, gathered his army together, and the next
day thinkinge to have had resistance in his entrye into the City, he found
not one man, to withstand him, so that he and his company entered peaceably,
where he aboade at pleasure.

Twenty days after his abode in Cusco, came news, how Quixquix had a great
Army, wherewith he did great hurt, robbing and spoiling in the Province of Conde
suyo: whereupon the Governor sent Captain Soto, with 50. Horsemen, to disturb
his proceedinges: whose coming being known to Quixquix, he durst not abide,
but with all speed, fled toward Xauxa, thinkinge there to find some small
company of the Christians, whom he might easily subdue, who were such as had
remained behind to keep the Fardage, and the Kings portion of treasure, which
was at the charge of Alonso Requelme Treasorer.

But the Spaniards having advise of his pretense, although they were but few,
who in effect attended in Xauxa, for the purpose aforesaid, did so valyantly
defend his enterprise, that his desire took no place, but rather was forced
to pass forward the high way toward Quito.

When the Governor had intelligence of ye dealings of Quixquix, he sent after
him again, Captain Soto, with his company of Horsemen, and after him he
sent his Brethren, who generally followed him above a hundred Leagues, and
could not overtake him: whereupon they returned again to Cusco, where they had
as great a pray of Gold and Plate, as before they had in Caxamalca: the which
the Governor divided among his Soldiers, and began to inhabit the City,
which was the head and Princely seat, of all the whole country of Peru: and
so continued a long space among the Christians: he also divided the Indian
People among the new Inhabitants, which there determined to abide, for there
were many of his men that were not willing to remain there, but rather to
return into Spain, to enjoy the Treasure which they had gotten, both in
Cusco, and Caxamalca.

How Captain Benalcasar, went to the Conquest of Quito. Chap. 9.
HEre before in this History, has been declared, how at the time when the
Governor came into Peru, he inhabited the City of Saint Mighel, in the
Province of Tangarara, near unto ye port of Tumbez, for the only intent that
such as should come from Spain, might have a sure and safe Road, or harbor
for their ships: he now considering that the number of his Horse were but few,
which he left there, after the taking Prisoner of Atabaliba: he sent for his
Deputy from Caxamalca to Saint Mighell, Captain Benalcasar with ten Horses,
at which time came many Indian Canares, to make their complaint against
Ruminagui^ and his people saying, that daily they were by them molested with
cruel War. At the same season were many men comen from Panama and Nicaragua,
so that when Captain Benalcasar, had heard of the injuries of the Indians of
Quito, he chose 200. of those freshmen, whereof was 80. Horsemen, and with
them he took his Journey toward Quito, as well to defend the Canares, as also for
the great same of Gold that was thought to be in those parts, in the
Treasury of Atabaliba, when Ruminagui had understanding of the coming of
Captain Benalcasar, he came and encountered with him in many dangerous
passages, with ye number of 12000 Indians, and also had many privy snares made
to intray ye Christians, in the high ways: which policies Benalcasar did
prevent with great diligence, for in the night season he sent 60. or 70.
horsemen, to assure his way, either above or beneath ye accustomed high ways,
which was ordinarily done before the morning, so yt with this industry, ye
enemy was forced to retire into the plains, where they durst not abide the
battle, for the great spoil which the horsemen made among them ^ut if by hap
they stayed in any place, it was where their usual snares were between them
and the christians, which were great holes made in the ground, sticked full of
stakes, covered over with a false covering of grass, straw and sand, or else
with turues which was so well handled, that with great difficulty those snares
could be discovered, and might well be compared to those which Caesar writes in
his seventh commentary, which the people of Aexia devised for the defense of
their city. But notwithstanding all their inuentio^s, they could not deceive
Benalcasar, and his chief policy was, that always he would be sure not to
give any onset, where the Indians showed countenance to expecte his coming,
for there was always the snares ordained: But rather he would go and compass
them about 2. or 3. leagues to assault them on their backs, or sidewise, with
great advise, not to pass upon any green thing that might seem counterfaite.

But now the Indians seeing their practices would take no place, they devised
another practice, which was, they having understanding, or at the least
suspecting, which way the Christians would pass, made certain heales in the
ground, of the breat^h of a horse foot, and somewhat deep, not much distant
one from another, pretending by this policy to break their horse legs. But
yet their devises could not preuail to deceue Benalcasar, who still proceeded
on, conquering as he went even to the principal city of Quito, where he had
advertisement how Ruminagui had said unto his wives (which were many) now shall
you have your desire and pleasure, for ye Christians whom ye love are at hand,
with whom ye may take your repast. But those poor we^ches thinking that he
had speaken those words in meriment or jest, laughed at his sayings, which
laughter cost them dear, for with mere ielicusie incontinent he commanded
their heads to be stricken from their bodies, and when he had executed this
cruel act, he determined to flee, and forthwith ^e set on fire a war^drope
which was full of rich princely ornaments, which sometime did belong for the
ordinary appartel of Guainacaua. When these his venemo^s factes were ended, he
fled and in his flight he gave a sudden assault upon the Spaniards, but no
hurt done, so that now entered Benalc^sar, and took quiet posse^sion of the
City.

In this mean season, ye Lord Marquis, Governor, sent Don Diego de Almagro to
the new city of S. Mighel, and there to take information of certain news
which was certified unto him, which was, how Don Pedro de Aluarado, Governor
of Guatimalla, had taken shipping to come into Peru, with a great power both of
horsemen and footmen, to discover Peru, as more at large shall be declared in
the next chapter.

Don Diego de Almagro came to the city of S. Mighel^ without hearing any
^urther news of that matter, but he had understanding how Benalcasar was in
the siege of Quito, and of the resistance of Ruminagui, whereupon he determined
to go succor him, and accordingly took that journey in hand, which was 120.
leagues from saint Mighel. And when he was come to Quito, he took all
Benalcasars men, and joined them with his army, with whom he conquered certain
towns, which until his coming would not yield, but when he saw that ye great
treasure of gold which he expected, could not be found, he returned toward
Cusco, leaving Captain Benalcasar for Governor of Quito, as he was before his
coming.

How Don Pedro de Aluarado came into Peru, and what followed. Chap 10.
AFter that Don Hernando Cortez, Lord Marquis of the valley of Huaxacac, had
conquered and pacyfied the new Spain, he had understanding of a country
adjoining thereunto, called Guatimala: for the discovery thereof he sent one of
his captains called Don Pedro de Aluarado, who with ye company which he had
with him did conquer and win the same, with great peril and danger: And in
recompense of his pains taken, the Emperor his majesty gave unto him the
government of the same country. From whence he had intelligence of the
Province of Peru, whereupon he besought his Majesty, to grant unto him some
part of that discovery, which according to his request was given unto him,
with the conditions accustomed for discouerers. By virtue of which grant under
letters patents, he sent a Gentleman of the town of Casarez, called Gartia
Holguin with two ships to discover the coast of Peru, at whose return
bringing news of the great quantity of gold which Don Francisco Pisarro had
obtained in his discovery, he determined personallye to take that journey in
hand, and whilst that Don Francisco was occupied in his affairs in Caxamalca,
he imagined that he might easily proceed beyond his jurisdiction, upon his
pretended discovery, and take possession of the City of Cusco, which in his
judgment did stand without the limittes of the 250. Leagues of ground,
discovered and granted in government to Don Francisco Pisarro, and to bring
the better his purpose to effect, he feared least succor might come from
Nicaragua, to the Governor, whereupon on a night he sailed to Nicaragua, where
he took by force two great ships which were there rigging, to effect, that
when they were trimmed, they should pass a company of men and horses to the
governor Pisarro in Peru. In which ships, and in his own which he brought
from Guatimalla, he embarked 500. horsemen and footmen, and with them sailed
til he came to ye coast of Puerto Viejo, and from thence he took the way to
Quito by land, in yt parallel of ye Equinoctial, along some part of the
plains among thickets, called Arcabucos, in which journey they passed extreme
necessity of victualles, as well of meat as drink, which would have been much
greater, if by good hap they had not met and fallen into a ground of great
Canes, whose property was, that cutting any of them at the knot, they found
the hollow full of sweet water, exceeding good and wholesome. Those canes are
ordenarily as big as the calfe of a man's leg, so that between two knots of each
cane was found a pottle of fresh water. Canes of fresh water.
They hold opinion the particular property of those canes is to gather water
by atraction of ye dewes which daily fall in the night season, by mean
whereof, although the said plains are dry without any kind of Springs, yet
with this succor of water the camp of Don Pedro was well comforted, as well men
as horses, yet notwithstanding their hunger was such, that they were ^orced to
eat many of their horses, although each horse was worth by just valuation in
that country, 5000. castelins in gold. And as they went on their journey, the
most part of that low way, there rayned hot ashes upon the^, which afterward
was known to come out of a Volcan which is not far from Quito, Volcan.
out of the which proceeds such a marvelous fire, that lanched out ashes and
imbers above 80. leagues compass, and sometimes the noyce and thundering that
came from thence, was heard a hundred leagues of.

In all the towns and villages which Don Pedro passed through under the
Equinoctial Line, he found great plenty of Emraldes, and after he had passed
so troublesome ways, whereof in many places he and his men were forced to
make way by force of hand, he then came unto a loine of hills covered with snow,
where it snowed continually with an exceeding cold, through the which he was
driven to pass, A perilous pass^ge.
where with the extremity of cold dyed above sixty of his men, although as
many as were of his company, put on their bodies all the apparel which they
had, to pass that extremity of cold, yea they made such have, that none of
them would tarry one for another, neither to comfort nor help them: so that it
happened that a Spanyard who carried his wife and two daughters with him, and
seeing them tired with wearines, and that he could neither succor nor yet
carry the^ away with him, he having his heart kindled with paternall love, An
example of true Love.
abode with them, where as they al four were frosen to death, and although, he
might well have escaped, yet the love of his wife and children was so great,
that he rather desired to die, than to depart from them. So that to conclude,
with this great danger, the Captain with his Army passed these snowy
Mountains, holding them selves for most happy, when they saw them selves on
the other side, and gave God praise, with exceedinge joyful hearts: and
although the Province of Quito is environed with high Mountains covered with
Snow, yet notwithstanding in the midst are temperate valleys, both fresh
and pleasant, where people inhabit, and have plenty of corn.

At that instant, was so great a thaw of the snow of one of those mountains,
that the water which proceeded out of that snow, came down with so great a
furye, that it drowned a town called Contiega: the force of this water was so
maruailous, that it drove stones bigger than any Millstone down with the
stream, with such facility as if it had been of Cork.

How Don Diego de Almagro, met with Don Pedro de Aluarado and what passed
between them. Chap. 11.
BEfore has been declared, how Don Diego de Almagro having left for Governor
in Quito, Captain Benalcasar, and not having perfect news of the coming of
Don Pedro de Aluarado into Peru, he returned unto Cusco, in which journey, he
wan certain Fortes and fortresses, where the Indians had lodged them selves for
their safety, in which affairs he was so long time occupied, yt Don Pedro had
time to aland his men, and came into the Province of Quito, before Don Diego
had thereof intelligence, by mean of the great distance of way which is betweue
these places, and also where no town of contractation is, neither of
christians nor yet of India^s. As he went on a day conquering the province of
Liribamba, he passed over a mighty river with great peril, for y^ Indians had
broken down the bridges, so that he was forced to wade over in the shalowest
place that he could find, and when he was comen over he found ready to receive
him a great number of Indians men of war, against whom the victory h^e had
obtained with great difficulty: for their women did great hurt w^ slings: yet
not withstanding the Indians had the overthrow, and their Cascike was taken
prisoner, who certified Don Diego that Do^ Pedro de Aluarado was 15. leagues
from thence, besieging a fort, wherein was an India^ captain called
Sopasopagui. When Don Diego had understanding of these news, forthwith he sent
seven horsemen to discry his camp, but their fortune was to be taken prisoners
by Don Pedro his men: notwithstanding he released them again, and came with all his power and pitched his camp within five leagues of the Real of Don
Diego, with determinate intent to break with him, and to take from him both
his men and country. When Don Diego saw the great advantage that his enemy
had, he determined to return to Cusco, with only 25. horsemen, and to leave
the residue with captain Benalcasar for to defend ye country. At this instant
the Indian Interpreter, called Philip, of whom mention has been made, who was
the only cause of Atabalibas death, and fearing punishment for the same, he
fled from his master, and went unto Don Pedro, he also carried with him one
principal Cascike, and privily conserted with Don Diegos army, that when he
sent for them, they should pas unto Don Pedro his side. When Philip was come to
Don Pedro his presence, A traitor.
he offered to put into his hands all that country in quiet possession. He
advertised him also that Don Diego was retired unto Cusco, and moreover he
said, that if it would please him to apprehe^d him, he might now do it with
great facility, for (quoth he) he has but 250. men, of the which are 80.
horsemen. Don Pedro giving credit to the false Interpreter, furthwith began to
direct his way toward Don Diego, who^ he found in Liribamba, with determination
to die in the defense of the country. Don Pedro, in like manner, set his
company in good order, and with spread ensign was in readiness to give yt onset.
But Don Diego having but few horsemen meant to resist his encounter on foot:
wereupon he divided his men into two quadernes, with the one was captain
Benalcasar, and he himself had the other: And in this order being in sight one
of the other, there began a parle of peace, and for that purpose to stay the
battle for one day and a night, in which mean time, the Licenceat Caldera
took up the matter between them in this sort: that Don Diego de Almagro
should pay unto Don Pedro de Aluarado 100000. 100000 poizes for agree^ment.
poysez of gold for his ships, horses, and all other furniture of his navy,
and that they should both go friendly together to visit the Lord Marquis
Pisarro, and that there the payment should be made. This agreement was
accepted, and also kept in great secret: For if Don Pedro his men had
understood these dealings, among whom were many gentlemen, some tumult might
have risen, considering that the remuneration of their service was not spoaken
of, the premises considered, and proclamation was made that they should travel
in uniformity of company together, in such sort that Don Pedro his navy
should continue on his navigations along the sea coast, proceeding on his
discovery, and that al his men should be at liberty, either to abide under
captain Benalcasar at Quito, or else to go with their general by sea, considering
yt now they were all linked in peace, brotherly love, and co^formity: When this
order was manifestly known, many of D. Pedro his me^ abode in Quito, and Don
Diego, and Do^ Pedro with al ye residue of their retinue came together to
Pachacama, where they had knowledge y^ y^ governor Pisarro was come from xauxa
to receue the^. The night before Don Diego departed from the Province of Quito,
Iusti^^.
he burned alive the Cascike that fled from him, and the like had been done to
Philip the interpreter, if Don Pedro had not entreated for him.

How Don Diego de Almagro, and Don Pedro de Aluarado met with the Cascike
Quixquix, and what passed between them. Chap. 12.
DON Diego and D. Pedro going on their journey from the province of Quito toward
Pachacama, ye Cascik of the Canares enfourmed the^ how Quixquix who was some
time a Captain appertaining to Atabaliba, was coming toward the^ with an army of
12000. Indians men of war, and that daily his host increased: But (quoth he)
if ye will abide his coming, I will deliver him into your hands: Unto whose
words Don Diego gave no credit, but proceeded on his journey, and would not
tarry their coming, so yt when they were come to the Province of Chaparra,
they espied about 2000. Indians which were come about two days journey before
their General Quixquix, under an other Captain called Sotaurco, because
Quixquix used always this policy in the way as he went, to have ye said
Captain always in his vau^tgard, and on his left hand he had likewise 4000.
Indians who gathered victuals in all the villages as they passed: he also used
in his reregard other 3. or 4000. Indians, who followed one days journey behind
the rest, and Quixquix went in the midst with ye body of the host, with their
cattle and prisoners, so that hi^ whole army did always occupy 15. leagues in
circuit. And whereas Sotaurco his meaning was to have taken a passage that he
thought the christians of force should pas, to which place Don Pedro was come
before him, where he took him prisoner, and of him had understanding of al
Quixquix his pretense, whereupon on a night he prepared an ambush of horsemen,
although he could not so soon bring his purpose to pass, because he was forced
to stay the shooing of his horses, who had passed a perilous way of rocks and
stones, by reason whereof they were vnshooed, So that lea^ing his pretended
ambush, he made al have possible til he came within sight of Quixquix his camp,
who when he had espied the Chris^ians, he took another course with his wives
and servile people, and he placed a brother of Atabaliba called Guaypalcon,
with the chiefest of his soldyers in another part which was very asperous, so
that he went to encounter with Don Diego de Almagro, going up a hill, having his
horses welnigh tired with the troblesome way which he had passed, and with much
ado leading them by their brydels, they came to the hill top: They also
received great hurt with the stones which ye enemies rolled down the high
hills upon the^: notwithstanding, at the length, the christians enuyroned
Guaypalcon, who seeing himself so beseeged on every side, he then fortifyed
him and his company on the top of a high cragged rock, where he stood to his
defense until night, at what time Don Diego and Don Pedro sounded the retire
for their soldyers: and the Indians with the darkness of the night came from
their hold to seek their General Quixquix. 14. Spanyardes, behedded^
Afterward was known how the Indians on the left winge had slain and cut of
the heads of ^xiiii. Spaniards which they had taken at advantage, and proceeded
on their way til they met with the reregard of Quixquix, The Indians made them
strong at the passage of a river, so that all one day they suffered not y^
Spaniards to pass, but forced the^ to seek another way, which was toward the
mountains, where the Spaniards meant to have taken a high hill, but they
received great damage in their pretended purpose, for when they would have
retired, the cragged and troublesome way was their hynderance: by mean whereof,
many were wounded, especially, captain Alonso de Aluarado, who was thrust
through the thighe, and another Knight of the order of S^ Ih^n, sore wounded:
all that night the Indians kept good watch, but in the morning the passage was
left clear, that the Christians might pass at ease, and the enemy driven into
the Mountain, where they rested in peace. Don Diego would no longer abide, but
proceeded on his journey: all the stuff which the Indians could not carry with
them they burned, leaving behind them about 15000. Sheep, and 4000. men and
women, which yielded themselves to the Spanyardes, having been prisoners unto
Quixquix.

When the Christians were come to S. Mighel, Don Diego de Almagro, sent Diego
de Mora to Puerto Viejo, to receive to his use the Navy of Don Pedro de
Aluarado, who on his behalf sent to that effect, Garcia de Holgun to make
delivery of the same accordingly: and afterward Don Diego in the city of S
Mighell, provided as well his own men, as Don Pedro his men, of all furniture
necessary for the wars, and the like of money and apparel: this done, they
took their journey toward Pachacama: and in the way as he went, he left
inhabited the city of Trugillio, in the government of Captain Martine Astete,
according to the order of the Governor Don Fancisco Pisarro.

In this mean while, Quixquix coming nere unto Quito one of ye Captains
appertaining to Captain Benalcasar, gave the overthrow to his vauntgarde, and
thereby put him in such an agony, that he knew not what to do: and moreover his
Captains of greatest trust, persuaded him to yield to Benalcasar: but in
recompense of their counsel, he threatened them with the reward of death, and
commanded that they should prepare them selves to retire, but his men not
having furniture of victuals for their return, his Captains joined
together, and took for their chieftaine Guaypalan, who in the name and voice
of all the rest, said unto him, that it were much better for the^ to die in
fight with christians, than to perrish with hunger in the retire into places
uninhabited: Unto which suit and request, Quixquix gave a lowering answer,
whereupon Guaypalan struck him to ye heart with his Lance, and incontinent came
other of his captains, who with clubs and hatchets made him into pieces, and
than the soldiers scattered the^ selves some one way, and some another, eue^
at their own pleasure.

How the Governor paid Don Pedro de Aluarado the 100000 poyzes for the
agreement, and how Don Diego would have (perforce) bin received Governor in the
City of Cusco. Chap. 13.
WHen Don Diego and Don Pedro were come to Pachacama, the governor who was come
thither from Xauxa, received and entertained the^ joyfully, and also according
to agreement, paid unto Don Pedro the 100000 poyzes, in ready gold, for his
Navy brought from Guatimala, although there were many yt persuaded him to stay
the payment, alleging that the fleet was not worth so much money, no, nor yet
the one half of the said sum, and that the former bargain was made by Don
Diego with fear, considering that Don Pedro had great advantage of him, and
there now he might do well to apprehend him, and send him prisoner to the
Emperors Majesty. And although the Governor might have taken that council,
and also have brought it to pass accordingly without perrill: yet he chose
rather to ratify and perform the word and promise of his friend Don Diego de
Almagro, and notwithstanding the council of his captains, he made present
payment of the 100000 poyzes in good gold, and than permitted him quietly and
freendly to depart, and to pass unto his government of Guatimala, and he
himself abode, and took order for the habitacion and citizens of the city of
the Kings, and brought from Xauxa ye dwellers there, to inhabit the said city,
because it seemed unto him a singular place of contractacion, and exceeding
wholesome for man's health. From this city departed Don Diego de Almagro, with a
great company toward ye city of Cusco, and the Governor went to reform the
buildings and other things in the city of Trugillio, and to make reperticion
of the ground among the citizens: In this mean season came news, how Don
Diego de Almagro meant to possess ye city of Cusco to his only gouerme^t,
because he had received aduertiseme^t, by Hernando Pisarro how ye Emperor had
granted unto him the government of one 100. leagues of ground, beyond the
limits of the government of Don Francisco Pisarro: which according to here say,
did not extend so far as Cusco, but against this opinion and possession, both
Ihon Pisarro, and Gonsalo Pisarro, the Governors brethren, did not only speak
against, but also resist with many of their friends, which daily came unto the^:
and also when the matter came in question in the council house of the City,
among the principallest of the Citizens, the greatest number held with the
Governor, Pisarro and his Brethren.

When the Lord Marquis had perfect relation of the proceeding in Cusco, he
forthwith took his journey thither by post, so that with his presence, al
controversies were ended, and pardoned Don Diego of his offense, who was not a
little amazed, because he had intermedled in so weighty a matter, with just
title or provision from his Majesty, but only with the news of heresay, he
presumed to take the Office upon him: so that now again they confirmed their
former freendship and company, with this condition, that Don Diego de Almagro
should go to discover the country, toward the South sea: and if he should
find the land fruitful and to his content, that then he would make suit to
the Emperor, to grant unto him the government thereof: And if it happened that
he could not find any soil to his content, that the^ the land under the
government of Don Francisco Pisarro, should be equally divided between them
both: And upon this conclusion, each of them made a solemn oath, ^ solemn
^the.
at the communion of the holy sacrament, to perform the couenantes made
between them: and furthermore, at the same communion time, Don Diego
pronounced these words, saying: Lord, I beseech thee than, when I break this
oath before th^e made, that than thou confound me body and soul. When these
things were done, Don Diego began to prepare things necessary for his journey,
with 500. men, which he had under his charge, and the Lord Marquis returned to
the city of the Kings, and sent Alonso de Aluarado to conquer the country of
the Chachapoyas, which stands distant 70. leagues from Trugillio, among the
Mountains: in which conquest, both he and those which went in his company
passed great misery and troubles, until they had pacified, and inhabited the
country, for whose pains the Government of that Conquest was given unto him.

THE THIRD BOOK, contains the Journey that Don Diego de Almagro made into
Chili, and of things that happened in the mean season in Peru, and how the
Indians rebelled.
How Don Diego de Almagro took his journey toward Chili. Chap. 1.
DOn Diego de Almagro, departed on the discovery of his conquest, with who^
went 570. horsemen and footmen, well provided of al furniture necessary: yea
there were some citizens that left their houses and repartitio^s to go with
him. He sent before him Iuan de Sayauedra, been in the city of Civil in
Andoluzia, with 100. men, who in the Province which afterward was called Ch^rc
1^, met with certain Indians which came from Chili, no^ knowinge what had
passed in Peru, to give their obedience to Inga, and to present him with
certain wedges of fine gold, which wayed 150000. poizes: which pray he took,
and also was determined to have taken Gabriel de Rojas, who had the charge of
justice by the appointment of the Governor Pisarro, and having understanding
of his pretense, fled to the city of Cusco, and Don Diego with all his power
proceeded on his way, at the time when Mango Inga, who sometime had the state
and crown of Peru, departed from Cusco, as before has bin declared, he (I
said) agreed with his brother called Paulo, and with another called Villaoma^ who
was high priest among the Indians, which two persons of authority, with a great
n^m^er of the Indian people, went in company with Don Diego, that when he
thought him self in most security, they should set upon him, to murder both
him and al his retinue, and concerning the governor who abode in Peru, he would
also take the like order to dispatch him, and his army: at ye time of this
conclusion, Inga commanded to sow the ground, that victuales might not want
when time should require, of which provision the Spanyardes had no
understanding. But when Villaoma could not bring his purpose to effect at
Charcas, he came flying to Cusco. And when Don Diego was entered into the
Country of Chili, Philip the Interpreter (who was privy to all the
conspiracy) fled likewise, howbeit he was taken by certain Spanyardes that
followed him, and as well for this treason, Justice.
as the other that he committed in Quito: the Governor commanded his body to
be cut in quarters, who at the time of his death, confessed that he was the
only cause of the unjust death of Atabaliba, only to have his wife at his
commandment, as before has been rehearsed. And as Don Diego was occupied in
the conquest of Chili, a servant of his named Iuan de Herrada, ouertooke him,
he it was that his said master had left in the city of the kings, to gather
more soldyars for his service in the discovery, who brought unto him a
provision, which Hernando Pisarro had brought out of Spain for him, by virtue
of the which, the Emperor had made him Governor of one hundred Leagues of
ground, beyond the borders and limits of the jurisdiction and government of
Don Francisco Pisarro, the which office and gouernmente was called in the
letters patentes, new Toledo, for the Precinct of Don Francisco his
Jurisdiction was named, new Castile. But now Don Diego judging that the city
of Cusco did fall within the compass of his Regiment, without any respect of
his former oath which he so solemnly had made, he determined to cease and
leave of the discovery which he had in hand, and to return to take into his
possession the City of Cusco.

Of the troubles which Don Diego de Almagro passed in his journey toward Chili,
and of some other particularities of that country. Chap. 2.
Great were the troubles which Don Diego and his company passed in the journey
toward Chili, as well with hunger and thirst, as also with encounter of Indians,
which were mighty great men of grows. Also there were in some places
exceeding good archers, who were clothed in Zeal skins: But the extreme
cold did much annoy them, as well the bitter sharp air, as the frost and
snow, and also the passage over the mountains, which were covered with snow,
where it happened that a captain called Ruydias, who followed Don Diego de
Almagro, had many of his men and horses frozen to death, for neither their
apparel nor armor could resist the exceeding sharpnes of the air, which did
so vehemently penetrate and freese them. The extremity of this cold was such,
that at the end of five months, when Don Diego returned toward cusco, he found
some of his company which had followed outward, frozen to death, standing on
their feet, leaning upon the Rocks, and holding their horse bridels in their
hands: and their horses likewise frozen to death, as fresh without corruption,
as though at that instant they had dyed.

The carcases of which horses was a great relief for his men at his said
return, for want of other victualles, and after they were past the extremity
of cold, the^ came they into such a wilderness, without any kind of habitation,
where they stood in as great a need of water to drink, so that their chief
remedy was to carrye with them from the snowy hills, sheep skins full of
water, in such sort, that every live sheep carried on his back, the Skin of
an other dead Sheep full of water.



Among diverse properties, which the Sheep of Peru have, one is, the strength
of their ordinarye burden is half a hundred weight, and many times three
quarters of a hundred, being laden upon them as Cammels use to carry their
ladinge, and are in making much like unto Cammels, saving that they want the
knop on the back: The Spanyardes has now brought them ^o such purpose, that
they will carrye a man also in a rode Saddell, four or five leagues a day, and
when they feel the^ selves weary, they use to lie down, and will not rise
again although they should be beaten never so much, or lifted up with
strength upon their feet, yet they will not go one ^oote further except they
be unladen: And it happens often times, that when any rides upon them, and
they feelinge them selves weary, they then lift up their heads, and looks
upon him that spurreth them, and casts out of their mouths a thing of an
exceeding evil savor, which is though to be of the food which lies in their
stomachs.

They are beasts of great commodity, and their wool is in every respect as
fine as silk, especially, one sort or kind of them, called Palos: their
^eedinge is very small, cheefely such as labor, whose ordinary meat is Maiz,
also they drink very seldom (that is to say) once in four or five days: the
flesh of them is passing good, and in every respect as good, or rather better
then the Sheep in Castile: of this kind of flesh, all the country is
abundantly provided, and in every City and town, it is the principallest
flesh in the Shambles, although at the first coming thither of the Spanyardes,
they used no shambles: for why? every one had cattayle of his own, and when
one Neighbor killed any sort of Beast, his other neighbors might have thereof,
what they would require.

In certain places of Chili, were many Abstruses in the Plains, so that when
they were disposed to hunte them, the Spaniards would ride p^st after them, and
very seldom could overtake any, although their flight was on their feet,
runninge and hoppinge: and although their bodies were hugie and weighty, yet
with their leapes, a good horse runninge never so swifte, could very seldom
out run them.

There are also many running Rivers, which runs in the day season, and at
night not a whit, which is a thing to be noted, and especially, among them
that understand not the reason thereof: which is, that in the day time the sun
melts the snow and Ise of the mountains, so that the water that comes from
those high hills in the day makes great Rivers, and at night all remains
frozen again. But after we pass 500. leagues al^ng the coast, and come into
30. degrees, 30. degree^^
on ye other side of the Equinoctial toward the Southward, there is plenty of
rain, and also al winds as ordinarily do blow, as it does in Spain, and
other places Eastward. All the country of Chili, is inhabited, and has as well
plain ground as mountains, and by reason of many crekes and bays, which are
in the sea coast of this land: ^ote.
so that sayli^ge North and South, requires sundry winds. Chili stands in
40. degrees, as is said, North and South, from the City of the Kings, till
you pass to the said 40. degrees in altitude: the country is very temperate,
and has Winter and Summer in due season, according to the quality of
Castile, and their North Star is in comparison like unto ours, sauinge
always he is accompanied with a little white cloud: this star according to
Astronomers opinion, is called Pole Antartike, and has also not far from him
the cross stars, with other three more, that follows him in their order,
and moouinge so that there are seven stars yt attends on that North star,
which differ not much from ours, which the said Astronomers call Triton, saving
that the fourth which are toward the South, stands cross wise, and are
joined nearer together than ours: our North star also is clean out of sight:
within 200. leagues of Panama, coming directly under ye Equinoctial Line,
where at one instant, is easily seen both those Tritons, or north stars,
Artike, and Antartike, although a great space from the Pole Antartike, seems
most plain the four cross stars: by the moouinge whereof, the Sea faringe
men do keep their reckoninge, and when they come to 30. degrees, then all the
other three stars serve for their purpose.

In this country of Chili, the day differs from the night, and the night
from the day, according to the course of the year, as it does in Spain,
although not by the same times.

In the Land of Peru, and in the Province of Tierra firm, and also in all
other places there adioyninge to the Equinoctial: the day and night is equal
throughout all the year: and if at any time in the city of the Kings, the
day or night increase or diminishe, it is so small a thing that it can not
easily be decerned.

The Indians of Chili, go apparelled like unto the Indians of Peru, both men
and women are of a good iesture, and feed ordinarily of such meats as those
of Peru. Beyond Chili 38. degrees from the Line, are two great men of power,
which maintain always war, the one against the other, and each of them is of
power to bring into the Feelde 200000 men of war: the one was named
Leuchengorma, which is Lord of an Island, which stands two leagues from the
firm land, dedicated to his Idols, in which Island stands a great Temple,
whereunto appertained 2000 Priests.

The Indians of this Leuchengorma, informed the Spanyardes, that 50. leagues
beyond that place, between two Rivers, was a great Province, all inhabited with
women, which consent not to have any sort of men among them, except a
certain time convenient for generation: and then if any happen to be with a
child, Amazo^^^.
and bring forth men children, they are after certain years sent to their
fathers, and the daughters which they likewise bear, remains with them:
these women also are in subjection to Leuchengorma. The Queen of these women
is called Guayboymilla, which in their language, is as much to say, as Heaven
of Gold, because the report was, that great quantity of gold grows there,
and thereof they make exceeding rich cloth, and of all their commodities, they
pay tribute to Leuchengorma. Maake^
And although oftentimes ye Spaniards has had notice of this country, yet
they never took ye discovery in hand, because Don Diego would not abide to
inhabit in ye coast: and also sithence that time, Pedro de Valdiuia was sent to
inhabit ye country, who could not bring his desire of furniture to pass,
convenient for ye voyage, although he has inhabited 33. degrees beyond the
Equinoctial Southward, and also perfect knowledge of habitacion was known to
be unto 40. degrees alonge that coast, especially, one ship, which Don
Gabriell de Carauajall, Bishop of Plazensia, sent in discovery, which had
passed through the Straight of Magalanes, who from the said strait came
sailing along that coast Norward, until he arrived at the port of the city of
ye kings, and before the coming of this ship there was no memory of Rats
found in all Peru, so that it seems that ye first brood of Rats came out of
that ship, and since that time, all the cities in Peru are replenished with
abundance: it is thought that among chests and fardels of merchandise they
were carried from place to place: whereupon the Indians do name them Ococha,
which is to say, a vermin^ comen out of the sea.

Of the return of Hernando Pisarro into Peru, and of the dispatch which he
brought with him, and of the rebellion of the Indians. Cap. 3.
AFter that Don Diego de Almagro, was departed from Cusco, Hernando Pisarro
came from Spain, having received at ye Emperors hand great favor, who also
made him knight of the order of S. James: He also brought for his brother Don
Francisco, prorogation for certain leagues of ground in his government. And
also the provision which has been spoken of, for the gouerme^t of Don Diego
de Almagro. At this instant Mango Inga, Lord of Peru, was prisoner in Cusco,
for the conspiracy which he had wrought against the Christians, with his
brother Paulo Inga, and Villaoma Almagro wrote unto John Pisarro reques^ing him
to set the^ at liberty, because he was loath that Hernando Pisarro should find
them prisoners at his coming to Cusco, at which time John Pisarro was in the
conquest of Collao, and at the sight of his letter, they were discharged out of
prison.

When Hernando Pisarro was come to Cusco, he became a singular good friend to
Inga, and used him very courteously notwithstanding, he had always regard, to
attend unto him. It was thought that this freendship was to the intent to
crave some gold of him for his Majesty, or else for him self. So that after
two months that he was come to Cusco, Inga besought him to grant unto him
leave to go unto Yncaya, to celebrate a certain feast, and in consideration
of his courtesy, he promised to bring unto him an Image of gold, which was
made in remembrance of his Father Guaynacaua, both in proportion and
likeness: the coueteous desire of gold, caused Hernando Pisarro to grant his
request. And when he was comen to Yncaya, he put in ure the conspiracy which
he had pretended since the time that D. Diego de Almagro departed from Chili,
so findyng him self at the place where he required to be: He began to murder
certain Miners that wrought in the gold Mines, and other housdand men which
were in the fields, he also sent one of his Captains with a great number of
his people, to take the Fortress of Cusco, the which his commandment was
done accordyngly: so that in six days the Spaniards could scarcely win the
Fortress again, and at the winnyng thereof Ihon Pisarro was slain in the
night season with a stone, Death of Iho^ Pisarro.
which struck him on the head, so that by the mean of an other wound which
he had on his head, he could not suffer his head piece, his death was bewailed
throughout the land. And certainly the loss of his person was great,
because he was a valliant manne, and well experimented in the wars of that
country, and singularly beloved of all men.

When Inga had intelligence of the death of Ihon Pisarro, he came with all his
power upon the city, and besieged it for the space of eight Months and more:
and at every full Moon he assaulted the City on every side, how be it
Hernando Pisarro and his brethren defended his assault like valliant
gentlemen, with many other Capitaines, and approved good Souldiars which were
within the City, especial^y Gabr^ell de Rojas, Hernando Ponso de Leon, Don
Alanso Henriquez and the Treasorer Requelme, and many others, who unarmed them
selves neither day nor night: and did assuredly believe, that the Governor and
all the other Spanyardes were slain by the Indians, because they had knowledge
that all the land had rebelled, and were occupied in the wars. So that these
valliant minded men fought so manfully, as men that expected no human
succor, but only put their trust in the help from GOD alone: although they
daiely deminished by the hands of the Indians. In the mean while that the
war and siege endured, Gonsalo Pisarro with other twenty horsemen came out
of the City, to vewe the siege, and proceeded forward till they came to the
Lake called Chinichera, which stood five leagues distant from the City,
where the enemies came so thick, and thronged upon him, who, although he and
his company fought valliauntly, yet they had yielded, if Hernando Pisarro and
Alonso de Turo, had not rescued them with an other company of horsemen,
because Go^salo had entered too far among the enemies, which he did with
greater courage then wisdom.

How Don Diego de Almagro came with his power upon Cusco, and took prisoner
Hernando Pisarro, Chapt. 4.
HEre before has been declared, how Iuan de Herrada carried into the province
of Chili, to Don Diego de Almagro, the provision which the Emperor had granted
to him, concerning his new gouernation, which did extend beyond the limits
of Do^ Francisco Pisarro his grant, whereupon he determined to return, from
his pretended discovery of Chili, and to take the City of Cusco into his
power: to which purpose, the gentlemen which were in his company encouraged
him, to make all the have possible, especially Gomes de Aluarado, brother to
Don Pedro de Aluarado and his Uncle Diego de Aluarado, and Rodrigo Orgonios:
among whom, some desired the reparation of the City and Country, and other
coue^ed to be alone in the gouernation of Chili, so that to bring this matter
to pass, they devised to cause their interpretars to proclaim, that Don
Francisco Pisarro, and all his company of Spanyardes were slain by the
Indians which had rebelled, who had likewise understanding of the rebellion of
Inga. So that now Don Diego took this enterprise in hand, and when he was
come within six leagues of Cusco, without giving knowledge to Herna^do Pisarro
of his coming, he wrote to Inga, promisyng to pardon all that was paste, if he
would become his friend, and assist him in his pretended purpose, alledgyng
moreover, that all the land appertainyng to Cusco, was within the precinct of
his government, wherefore his meaning was to possess the same. But Inga
deceiptfully sent him word, that he should come personally and talk with
him, and so he did, with suspicion of some deceipte: wherefore he left some of
his men with Iuan de Sayauedra, and took the rest with him. But when Inga
espied time convenient, he set upon him with such a vehement courage, that
Don Diego was glad to retire. In the mean season, Herna^do Pisarro, having
knowledge of his coming, went to visit Iuan de Sayauedra at his Camp, and
might have taken him prisoner if he had would, as the Citezens of Cusco had
counseled him to do, but he would not, rather when he had spoken with him, he
returned back unto the City, without the giuyng unto him of any ungentle
language, How be it, Iuan de Sayauedra reported afterward, that he had offered
unto him 5000. poyzes in gold, to deliver into his power all the men which
were in his company, and that he refused the money. When Don Diego was
returned from Inga, he came with all his army in the sight of the City with
his Ensigns spread, where he took four horsemen, which Hernando Pisarro had
sent to talk with him, he also sent to require the state and Cheef Magistrates
of the City, to receive him for their governor according to the Emperors
letters Patentes granted to him, which were ready to be seen. The said
Magistrates made answer, saying: that he should cause the limittes of his
grant to be measured with Don Francisco Pisarro, and when it should be
verified that the City of Cusco, should fall out of the league of ground,
specified in the grant of Don Francisco, then would they yield to his
request, and also obey him, as reason and duty should require. But their
wise and gentle answer was never performed: By mean whereof after did
follow such great damage, slaughter, and discord, between these two
valliaunt Captains: and although sundry times they met to measure by line
the land, that should appertain to each of them, yet they never agreed upon
the cause: For sometimes they would say that the leagues of land,
appertainyng to the gouernation of Don Francisco, should be measured a long
the Sea cost, acceptyng into the reconyng all Creekes, Bays, and crooked head
lands, or Capes. Others held opinion that the measure should be by land,
acceptyng likewise into the account all crooked ways, which of force were to
be gonne almost circular, and not directly straight. So that by each of these
two reconynges, the government of Don Francisco did finishe a great way,
before they could come to Cusco: yea some said, before they could come to the
City of Kings. But Don Francisco pretended that their opinions were not
just, nor lawful in that form of measuring: but rather said he, that they
should measure according to the rules of the altitude of the Sun, allowing
the due number of leagues to every degree, beginning at the Equinoctial line,
according to Astronomers reconyng in the North and Southe course, by the
superior line, and in so doing the City should fall into the iursdiccion of
Pisarro. But be it as may be: for as yet until this day the matter was
never agreed upon, that is to say, whether the City of Cusco does fall into
the new Castile, or in the new Toledo, although sundry times, both Pilotes
and learned Geometricia^s has met to decide the cause, especially the
Licenciall Vaca de Castro, who had a particular Commission touching that
matter, and as yet sentence was never pronounced. But now letting this discord
cease, and returnyng again to the History.

Hernando Pisarro, sent word unto Don Diego that he would prepare a certain
part of the City, for him and his retine we to lodge in, and in the mean
while he would advertise his brother Don Francisco, of his demand: who at
that instaunt was abiding in the City of the Kings, to the intent that some
order might be taken between them, considering that they were both friends
and companions: And to treat of this matter, some do affirm, that truce was
taken upon that condition, so that under that conclusion, each one held him
self to be in security. Hernando Pisarro caused that night all the Citezens
and men of war, to take their rest in their houses, because they were
greatly wearied with watchyng, and wearyng their armor days and nights,
without taking any rest at all.

When Don Diego had advise of the Citezens rest and security, and the night
being very dark, especially through a dark Cloud, which at that instaunt
covered the City, he forthwith assaulted the City. But when Hernando and
Gonsalo Pisarro heard the noise, they made great haste in arming them selves,
and their house being the first that was assaulted, they like valliant
gentlemen defended them selves, until they had set fire on every side of the
house, whereupon they yielded, and were in this order taken prisoners.

The next day followyng Don Diego compelled the cou^saill of the City, to
receive him for their cheef ruler and Governor: and also commanded Hernando
and Gonsalo Pisarro to be put in Irons, yea and many of his councellers wished
him to put them to death, the which council he refused considering the noble
courage and mind, which they showed in the defense of their house, so that
they were put in the custody of Diego de Aluarado. Also it was credibly
thought that certain Indians were the occasion, that Don Diego did break the
truse that was made, and also some Spanyardes, who brought news unto him, that
Hernando Pisarro had commanded to break done the bridges, and the Fortress
in the City, which news seemed to be the very original cause. For when
Don Diego entered into the City, he spoke these words with a loud voice: Oh
how have ye deceived me with your deceiptfull news, for here I find both
bridges, and every thing whole and sound.

Of all these proceadinges the Governor Pisarro, knew nothing, nor many days
after the taking of the city, and imprisonment of his brethren Don Diego de
Almagro, made Paulo brother to Atabaliba king, and gave unto him the Cassal of
the Empire, the which news being known to his brether Mango Inga, he fled
with a great number of his people into certain asperous Mountains called
Andes.

How the Indians slew many that the Governor sent to succor his brethren in
Cusco. Chap. 5.
Among other things which the Governor Don Francisco Pisarro sent to crave
of the Emperor, he besought his Majesty in remuneration of his service done
in the conquest of Peru, to grant hm 20000. Indians perpetually to him and his
discendentes, in a Province called Atambillos, with their Rentes, Tributes, and
Jurisdiction, with title of Lord Marquis of that place and people. The
Emperor answered, that as touching the Indian people he would take
aduisement, and also of the quality of the Country, and what profit or
damage thereof might grow: and that in consideration of his service, he would
so gratify him as lawfully with reason he should think convenient, so that at
his request the title of Lord Marquis was granted, and the Emperor commanded
that from thence forth he should be s^ called. And therefore hereafter in the
prosecution of this History we will call him by the name of Lord Marquis.

The Lord Marquis having understanding of the rebellion of the Indians, and
not thinkyng the matter would have come to such extremity, he began to send
succor of men, to his brother Hernando Pisarro, to Cusco, by little and little
as he could get them, by ten, and fiftene at a time. The Indians also
hearing of this weak succor, appointed many men of war to attend their
coming at every dangerous, passage that was in their way, so that as many as
the Lord Marquis sent in this order, were as fast murdered by those Indians,
which thing would not so have fallen out, if he had sent them all together.
And as he went to visit the cities of Trugillio, and saint Mighell, he
determined to send one Diego Pisarro, with 70. horsemen, to the succor of his
brethren, all the which the Indians s^ue at a straight passage, which of force
they should go, and at this day is called the hill of Parcos, which stands
fifty leagues from Cusco: and the like happened to the Marquis his brother in
Law, called Gonsalo de Tapia, who he sent afterward with 80. horsemen: they
also put to the worse Captain Morgoujo and Captain Gaete, with their
companies, yea, few or none of them escaped: so that those which always
followed last, could have no knowledge of the success of those which went
before. And an other policy the Indians also used, which was, they would let
them pass, till they came into a Ualley between two Hills, and then would
they enuiron them both before and behind, and from the high places came the
stones as thick as Hail, being thrown with slings in such sort, that
they slew many of them, before they could come to hand strokes. So that they
slew above 300. horsemen, 300. horsemen slain by the Indians.
and took from them great quantity of Jewels, Armor, and apparel of silk.

Now the Marquis having no answer from none of those succors, he sent
Francisco Godoy borne in Caceres with 45. horsemen, who by chance met with
only two men, which had served under Captain Gaete, and escaped from the
tyranny of the Indians: so that by them he had intelligence of all that had
passed, whereupon he returned with all speed, although he was almost taken in
the snare of his fellows, and was followed by the Indians above twenty
leagues, and daiely by them encountered before, and in the reregarde: So that
he was forced to travail in the night sea^on, for fear of the multitude of
enemies. And when he was come to the City of Kings, whither also was comen
Captain Diego de Aguero, with certain men that h^d escaped the Indians rage.

The Marquis had understanding, how a great number of the Indian enemies
followed Captain Aguero, whereupon he sent Pedro de Lerma with 70. horsemen,
and many Indians his friends, to encounter with the Souldiars of Inga: with
whom they fought almost a whole day, until the enemies were forced to take a
high Rock for their hold and sauegarde. Whereunto the Spanyardes laid siege
on every side: the same day captain Lerma had his teeth broken with the
stripe of a stone, and also nine of his men were wounded, and one horseman
slain. But the Christians drove them into so great an extremity, that if the
Marquis had not commanded them to retire, they would that day have ended the
wars: because the Indians were in extreme misery shutt up in their fort,
and no way to help them selves. So that the Spanyardes also seeing them
selves free from the tyranny of their enemies, they gave unto God most
hearty thanks, and th^s done they removed their Camp unto an high hille, that
stands not far from the City of the Kings, daiely skirmishyng with the
enemies.

The chief Captain of the Indians was called Tysoyopangui, and the brother of
Inga, which the Marquis sent with Captain Gaete, in these wars which the
Indians attempted nere the City of the Kings: it happened that many Indians
who were servants to the Spanyardes called Yanaconas, served the Indians of
the wars in the day season for wages, and at night came to their supper and
lodgyng with their masters.

How the Marquis sent into diverse parties to requier succor, and how Captain
Alonso de Aluarado came to aid him. Chap. 6.
THe Lord Marquis seeing such a great number of Indian enemies in readiness,
for the besiging of the city of the Kings: he then thought assuredly that
Hernando Pis^rro, and all his company in Cusco were slain, and that the
insurrection and rebellion was general through the land, thinkyng also that
Don Diego had the like success in Chili. And because the Indians should not
think, that with fear he kept his Navy of ships, to fly in them when need
should require. And also that the Spanyardes should not have hope of succor to
repair to the said ships, The policy of a good Captain.
to escape out of the land, and by that mean to fight with less courage,
then manhood should require, he commanded the ships to be sent from thence
to Panama. He sent also messengers to the Uiceroye of the new Spain, and to
all the Christian governors of all the Indies: crauyng their favor and help,
aduertisyng the^ of the great danger that he was in. Signifiyng the same with
words, not of such courage as he was wont to show in other ^hynges. But it
should seem that his so doing, was through the pe^swation of some faint hearted
person, which councelled him so to do.

He sent likewise to his lieutenant of Trugillio, commanding him to leave the
City without people, and to embarke their wives, children, and goods in a
ship which he sent for that purpose, that they might be conuayed to the firm
la^^e, and he with all the rest of the citezens to come with their horses and
armor to aid him. Because he thought assuredly that the Indian enemies would
come and spo^le their City, and he not able to defend them. So that he judged
the surest way to be, to join them selves together in one body: yet he
required that their coming should be in secret. When thinhabita^tes of
Trugillio were ready to depart toward the Marquis, came thither Captain
Alonso de Aluarado with all his company, who was come from the discovery of
Chachapoyas, being also sent for, by the Marquis, and having left a certain
company of men of war in the City of Trugilio, for the sauegarde of the
same, they came al together to the City of the Kings to aid the Marquis, who
louyngly entertained them. And incontinent made Alonso de Aluarade captain
general, in lue of Pedro de Lerma, who until that time had enjoyed that
office, yet the vnplacyng of him was so grievous unto him, that afterward it
caused Mutynie, as in place and time shall be declared.

When the Marquis saw him self so well provided of men, and other ^urniture
necessary, he determined to succor, where most need should require.
Whereupon he sent captain Alonso de Aluarado with 300. Spanyardes, footmen and
horsemen to discrie the country: who proceeding on his journey about 4 leagues
from the city, in Pachacama he had a sharp battle with the Indians, of whom
he had the victory, and slew many of the^: this done, he took the way toward
Cusco, in which journey passing through the country uninhabited, he suffered
great penury, and only for want of water, died above 500 of his Indians with
thirst, who were laborers and carried his bagage, and if the light horsemen had
not been, who road by post with certain vessels for water, which was the
mean to save the lives of a great number mo of the footmen, which were all
in danger of the same end. As he in this manner proceeded forward, he ouertooke
in the Province of Xauxa Gomes de Tord^ya, natural de Villa Nueua de Barca
Rota, who had in his company 200 footmen and horsemen, so that they were now
in number 500 men, with whom Alonso de Aluerado took his way to the bridge
called Lumjchaca, where the India^s had environed them on every side, and
having their battle together, the Christians had the victory, yet they
ceased not skirmishyng until they came to the bridge called Aban cay, where
Alonso de Aluarado had understanding of the imprisonment of Hernando and
Gonsalo Pisarro, and of all the affairs which passed in Cusco, so that he
determined to proceed no further, until he should have further Commission from
the Marquis. When Do^ Diego de Almagro had notice of the coming of Alonso de
Aluarado, he sent unto him Diego de Aluarado with other seven horsemen, to
notify unto him the provision granted by the Emperor. Who at their coming
Alonso de Aluarado took them prisoners: saying, that the Lord Marquis ought
to be cited with their provisions, and not he who was no party for such
matters. But when Don Diego saw that his messengers returned not again,
fearyng least Alonso de Aluarado, meant to enter into Cusco by some other way.

About xv. days after he came with his whole power, determinyng to set upon
Aluarado, because he understanding how Pedro de Lerma had practiced a Mutiny,
for to pass unto him with 80 men, and when Don Diego drew nigh to Aluarado,
his scoute, took prisoner Pedro Aluarez Holguin, who was a light horsman to
Aluarado, who having intelligence of his imprisonment, was minded likewise to
apprehe^de Pedro de Lerma upon suspicion: who fled from him the same night,
carriyng with him the fines of all those, which had promised their faith and
freendship to Don Diego.

On a night Don Diego came to the bridge, having knowledge how Gomes de
Tordoya, and a son of the Coronel Vilalua, were tariyng his coming, who had
sent over at a shallow place many of the men, which were of the co^spiracie
with Pedro de Lerma, who were encoraged to pass the water without fear. It
was manifestly known, that some of the conspirators, who watched that night
had stolen above fifty Lances, which they brought away with them. So that
when Alonso de Aluarado was minded to have attempted the battle, he found
the conspirators missyng, and many more of his men which went to seek their
Lances, that were stolen from them in the night watch, were also wanting: by
mean whereof Don Diego obtained the victory without bloudsheding, saving that
Rodrigo Orgonios had his teeth broken with the stripe of a stone. Now when the
spoil was divided, and Aluarado taken prisoner, Don Diego retu^ned to Cusco,
where he showed some bitterness of cruelty to his prisoners, yea and so exalted
him self in pride, that he let not to say, that in short space he would not
leave one of the name of Pisarro to stu^ble at in all the dominion of Peru.
Pride has a fall at length.
He said also, that the Marquis might go rule among the Manglarez, which
dwell under the Equinoctial line, if he li^t to govern.

How the lord Marquis took his journey to Cusco to succor his brethren, and
hearing of the overthrow of Alonso de Aluarado, he returned back to the City
of the Kings. Chapt. 7.
WIth the victory which Alonso de Aluarado had obtained against the India^s,
as soon as he was departed from the city of the Kings toward Cusco, as well
in Pachacama, as in Lumychaca, as before has been declared, Inga and
Tisoyopanguj were glad to retire from the siege of the City of the Kings.
Whereupon the Marquis seeing him self at liberty, and with a great company of
men at his commandment, he determined to take his journey toward Cusco, to
succor his brethren: and carie^ in his comp^nie 700 horsemen and footmen,
thinkyng that his aid should have been against the Indians only. For he knew
nothing of the return of Do^ Diego de Almagro from his discovery, nor yet of
any thing which had happened.

Many of his souldiars which he carried with him, were sent unto him by Don
Alonso de Fuen Mayor Archbishopp, and lord President of the Island of Santo
Domingo, with his brother Diego de Fuen Mayor brought likewise a certain number
of men from Panama. And also Diego de Ayala was returned from Micaragua with
an other company of men. So that the Marquis proceadyng on his journey, until
he came to the plains in the Province de Nasca, which stands distant 25.
leagues from the City of the Kings, where he had news of the return of Don
Diego from his discovery, and also of all other perticularities which had
happened, since his coming, as before at large has been rehearsed: the greef
of those proceadynges, moved his patience not a little, yet notwithstandying,
he considered, that his army was furnished to fight with Indians, and not
armed to war with Spanyardes. Wherefore he determined to return back again
to the city of the Kings, to increase his power with more men: and to
accomplish his pre^ence, forthwi^h he put in ure his return. Se^ding unto
Cusco, the Licenciat Espinosa to take order in the pacifiyng of the broiles
which were begun, and to inform Don Diego, that if the Emperor should know
of the discord that was happened between them, that then he would send an
other to take the charge from them both, and enjoy the land which they ha^
gotten with such great trauaill and perilles. The Marquis also desired him,
that when he could not make any lawful agreement between them, yet at the
least that it might please Don Diego to set his brethren at liberty, and he
to abide in Cusco, and not to proceade any further, till the matter should be
consulted, and the Emperor to explane and declare, what each of them should
quietly govern and possess.

With this Embassage, the Licenciat Espinosa departed on his journey, how be
it, he could not bring to pass any of those things, which were committed to
his discretion. But whilst he was dealing in the agreement, he fell sick and
died. And Don Diego with his men, came down to the plains, leauyng in the
city, for his lieutenant, captain Gabriell de Rojas, in whose power he left
prisoners Gonsalo Pisarro, and Alonso Aluarad^, and carried Hernando Pisarro
prisoner in his company, and in this order he continued on his journey, till
he came to the Province of Chincha, which is within 20. leagues of the City
of Kings, and there he builte a Town in remembrance of his possession of
government.

How the Marquis joined his army, and how Alonso de Aluarado and Gonsalo
Pisarro escaped out of Prison, and what other things happened Chap. 8.
WHen the Marquis was returned to the City of the Kings, he commanded all
his men to be paid for their service, his army multiplied by reason, that he
gave to understand how he meant, to go to resist and defend him self against
Don Diego de Almagro, wh^ was coming to invade his gouernation, so that in
few days his army increased to the number of 500. footeme^ and horsemen,
among whom were many Hargubuziers, by mean that Pedro de Vergara was returned
from the discovery of Bracamiros, and come in company with Diego de
Fuenmayor, who had brought from Flaunders, where he was married, a great number
of Hargubuziers with all fu^niture to them belongyng, for until his coming,
were but five in all Peru. Whereupon the Marquis appointed for Captains of the
Hargubuziers, the said Pedro de Vergara, and Nunio de Castro, and Diego
Vrbina, borne in Ordonia, who was Nephewe to the Camp master, he ordained
Captain of the Pikemen. He also appoincted Diego de Rojas Captain of the
Horsemen, with Porausuerez and Alonso de Mercadillio, and now he named Pedro de
Valdiuja Camp master, and Antonio de Vilalua, chief Sariant.

In this mean while, Gonsalo Pisarro and Alonso de Aluarado, who remained
Prisoners in Cusco, brake Prisone and came to the Marqnes with the number of
fifty persons, who had also taken Prisoner, Gabriell de Rofas Liuetenaunt of
Don Diego de Almagro, with whose coming, the Marquis rejoiced excedyngly, not
only because they had escaped the peril that they were in, but also their
coming was a great encouragement to all his army. So that now he appointed
Gonsalo Pisarro Captain general, and Alonso de Aluarado Captain of the
Horsemen.

But when Don Diego de Almagro understood the skape made by his prisoners, and
the mighty power of the Marquis, he determined to come to some agreement with
him, yea, and he himself to make the first motion. For which purpose, he sent
with his full power and authority, Don Alonso Henriquiez, and the Emperors
Factor, called Diego Nunez de Mercado, and also the Auditor Iuan de Gusman, to
deal with the Marquis upon some quiet conclusion. Who when they were come to
the Marquis and declared their message, he was contented to put the matter in
compromise in the hands of the reverend father Francisco de Bouadilla, and Don
Diego consented thereunto. Whereupon each party having discovered his grief,
and made whole relation of each cause: father Franciso having indifferently
understood the matter pronounced sentence, in the which he commanded that
first and principally, Hernando Pisarro, who was prisoner, should be set at
liberty, and the possession of the City of Cusco, restored to the Marquis as
in his first estate, and that both their armies should forthwith be
discharged, and to be sent to discover such Countries as before that time was
pretended: and that both parties should inform the Emperor of all their
proceedinges, to such end that his Majesty might take order in their matters
of discord. And that both the Marquis and Don Diego, should come personally to
talk the one with the other, and for that purpose, each of them should meet
at a Town called Mala, and bring with each of them 12. Horsemen and no more:
which Town did stand in the midwaie of their two Camps. And upon the
pronouncing of this sentence, they took their way toward the Town of Mala,
although Gonsalo Pisarro gave no great credit to ye truce that was taken, nor
yet to the words of Don Diego, wherevpo^ he with the whole army came after
them, and secretly lodged his men near unto the said Town, commanding
Captain Castro to lay him self in ambushe in a certain Cane field with 40.
Hargubusiers, which was in the high way that Don Diego should pass: to the
intent that if Do^ Diego should bring with him a greater number of men then was
agreed upon, that then they should discharge their pieces against them, by
which token he would also be ready with his company.

How the two Governors met, and how Hernando Pisarro was set at liberty.
Chap 9.
WHen Don Diego departed from Chinicha, to go to the Town of Mala with his 12.
Horsemen, he left order with Rodrigo Orgonios who was his general, that he
should be in a readiness, that if the Marquis did happen to bring more men then
was agreed upon, that then he to repair with his army, and that he should use
Hernando Pisarro, according as he should see, how the dealing fell out at their
meeting.

When these two Gentlemen met, they embrased the one the other very lovingly,
and after many words and much talk had betwixt them, without any speech of
the principal matter, a gentleman appartaining to the Marquis, came to Do^
Diego and told him in his ear saying. My Lord get you hence with all speed
possible, for it imports you so to do, and I as your friend and seruitor,
do so advise you. This warnyng he gave unto him, because he understood of the
coming of Gonsalo Pisarro: Don Diego geuyng credit to his friends word,
called in haste for his horse, and when certain of the Marquis Gentilmen
perceived that he would depart, they persuaded their Lord to apprehende him,
considering he might easily do it with the Hargubuzers, which Nunjo de Castro
had in ambush. But the Marquis would in no wise consent thereunto, because he
had given his word to the contrary, nor yet would not believe that Don Diego
would return, with out some order taking between them.

And when Don Diego in the way as he returned, espied the ambushe, then he
gave credit to the advice which was given him, and when he was come to his
Camp, he complained of the Marquis, saying that his meaning was to have taken
him Prisoner, and by no means the Marquis could not otherwise persuade him.
Yet notwithstanding, by intercession of Diego de Aluarado, Don Diego de Almagro
released Hernando Pisarro upon certain promises made between them, among the
which, one was that the Marquis should grant unto him a Ship and safe harber,
to send for dispatches which were come from Spain for him, and also until
the Emper^ur had taken order in their discention, the one should not deal with
the other: (...) Rodrigo Orgonios did withstand and speak against the
liberty of Hernando Pisarro, because he knew of discourteous dealyng which was
used against him, in the time of his imprisonment in Cusco: Iudgyng that when
he should inioye his liberty, he would revenge those injuries received, so
that always his counsel was that his head should be taken from his
shoulders. But yet the opinion of Diego de Aluarado was of greater efficacy,
hopyng in the agreement that was taken.

When Hernando Pisarro was clearly released, Don Diego sent him to the Marquis
his brother, accompanied with his son and other Gentlemen: he was no sooner
gone, when Don Diego repented him of that which he had done, yea, and it is
thought that he would have apprehended him again, if he had not made great
haste on his way, even until he met with many of the principal Gentlemen
which served the Marquis, who were come to receive him.

How the Marquis proceeded against Don Diego, and how he returned toward
Cusco. Chap. 10.
WHen the agreement was made between Hernando Pisarro and Don Diego, the
Marquis had received new^ provisions from the Emperor, which Pedro A^sure^ had
brought, wherein was contained that each of the ^ouernors should poss^sse and
inio^e the land, which ^ache of (...) had discoue^^d, inhabited and conquered
at the time of the notifiyng of his Majesty's prouicion, although it were with
in the limittes of the others gouernation, until his Majesty should provide
in ye principal cause, what justice should require.

So that when the Marquis had received this order, aft^r that his brother
Hern^ndo Pisarro was set at liberty, he sent to require Don Diego that he
should depart out of that Country and Towns, which he had both discovered
and inhabited according to the Emperors commandment. Don Diego answered,
that he was ready to obaie the provision and the content^ thereof, which was:
that each of them should abide in the possession which they were in, at the
time when his Majesty's provision should be notified unto them, or either of
them. So that in like form Do^ Diego required the Marquis to obaie and observe
the same, an^ to suffer him quietly to inioye his possession without war or
contention, with protestation to obaie any other determination or order, that
his Majesty hereafter should take in their discord dependyng.

The Marquis replied, that he first discovered, conquered, and inhabited, all
the Toun^s, Cities, and Country of Cusco, and that by his wrong means and
force, he was now dispossessed of proper right. Therefore once again he
required him to leave his former possession unto him, according to the plain
meaning of his Majesty's commandment, for otherwise, he would compel him to
avoid, willing him also to consider, that the time of truce taken between
them, was now expired.

When the Marquis saw that Don Diego would not conform him self with the
Emperors commandment, but rather scan the plain words of the provision to
his own will, he proceeded to give him battle with all his power, and Don
Diego retired as fast toward Cusco, making him strong in a high Mountain
called Guaycara, which lay in the way as he went, workyng all the po^licie
and mischief which he could devise, to spoil the high way for to hinder and
disturb the Marqu^s passnge. But Hernando Pisarro with a company of men
followed him at the he^les, and on a night by a secret way he assended in^o
the Mountain, and with his Hargubuzei^s he ^^tercepted his way, so that Don
Diego was forced to ^l^e: and findyng him self some what evil at ease, he made
the more have leauyng in his Reregard Rodrigo Orgonios, who in good order
continued the retire, and also having understanding by two of the Marquis
company whom he had taken prisoners, how the Marquis followed with all have
possible, he also made the greater haste on his way, although some of his
Souldiars gave him counsel to abide to encounter with him, saying that all
those which ascended the Mountain, were the first days as men that were sea
sick. But this opinion, Rodrigo Orgonios liked not, because the governor Don
Diego, had given him a contrary commission: Yet the Soldiers judgment was
held among men of experience for the best way, and would so have fallen out
if it had bin accepted, for truth it was that the Marquis company were those
first days, like men that were so si^ke and far out of order, with
weariness of the passage through the snoe in the Mountains: in consideration
whereof, the Marquis descended down into the plains, and Don Diego passed to
Cusco, always breakyng down the bridges, and spoylyng the high ways as he
went, thinkyng that the Marquis had followed him, and when he was entered the
City of Cusco, he abode there two months, ioynyng al his whole power and
force of men together, trimmyng and setting in good order his armor, municion,
and all his furniture necessary for the wars, he wrought weapons of silver
and copper, and of the same metal he cast Ordenance and sorts of Artillery.

How Hernando Pisarro came to Cusco with his army and fought the battle at
Salinas, and took Don Diego de Almagro Prisoner. Chap. 11.
THE Marquis with all his army being in the plains, having descended from
the Mountains, he found among his Captains sundry opinions concerning their
procedinges. But in fine it was concluded, that Hernando Pisarro should go
with the Host which was there in readiness, for the Marquis Lieutenant unto
the City of Cusco, and his brother Gonsalo Pisarro, to be his Captain
general, with title and voice to execute justice to certain Citizens of Cusco
which were in his company, who had made complaint of wrong that had bin done
unto them by Don Diego de Almagro, who had taken their houses, lands, and
Indian slaves from them against equity and right. In this sort the army
marched on, and the Marquis returned to the City of the Kings, and his
brother Hernando Pisarro by ordenarie iourneyes, came to the city on an
euenyng, all his Captains desired that they might rest that night below in
the plains. But Hernando Pisarro would not grant their request, rather he
commanded to pitche his Camp in the Mountain.

The next morning followyng, Rodrigo Orgonios was attendyng his coming with
all his power in battaill araie, having for Captains of his horsemen,
Francisco de Chaues, Iuan Tellio, and Vincent de Gueuara, and on the Mountain
side, he had certain Spaniardes, with a great number of Indians to aid them,
and all the friends and seruitors of the Marquis which were in the City, were
apprehended and kept prisoners in two several parts of the City, who were so
many and imprisoned in so narrow a room, that many of them were stifled. The
next day following Gonsalo Pisarro and his men having made their prayers unto
God, descendyng from the Mountain down into the plains, where he ordained
his Quadrons and marched toward the City, with intention to plant him self
upon a high plot of ground that stands nere to the forte of the City,
thinkyng that Don Diego should discrie his mighty power, that he would refuse
the battle, the which was desired for many considerations, and specially the
great bloodshed that was like to follow.

Notwithstanding Rodrigo Orgonios was in the feeld with all his power and
munition, attendyng the battle, thinkyng that he could not be damnified by
any other way, because of a certain Marishe ground that was nere unto them.
But when Hernando Pisarro had vewed his enemies power: he commanded captain
Mercadillio to ^e ready with his horsemen, as well to fight with the Indians if
they made any offer of fight, as to succor the maine battle, if need
required. So that now before the joining of the battle, there began a
skirmish between the Indians of Don Diego, and the Indian friends of the
Marquis. Then began the horsemen of Pisarro to pass the Marishe ground, and in
the mean while the Hargabuzers shot of against a Quadron of horsemen of Don
Diego his side, with such courage, that the horsemen retired. But when Pedro
de Valdiuja Camp master to the Marquis saw the retire, he assured the^ of
victory on his side. Then was a piece of great Ordenance shot from Don Diego
his side, which slew five of the Marquis his men. But when Hernando Pisarro
had passed the Marishe ground, and a certain ronnyng brook, also, he went with
good deliberation to encounter with the enemy, aduertisyng every Cap^aine what
h^ should do, at the time that the onset should be given, and with noble mind
and courage he cherished and co^^orted his men, and when he saw the Pikemen of
Don Diego in a readiness with their Pikes, he commanded the Hargabuzers to
shote at the Pikes, so that with two dewes of shot, they spoiled above fifty
Pikes. But when Rodigro Orgonios saw this, he commanded his captains to give
the onset, who were somewhat slow in the obeyng of his commandment, whereupon
he him self brake forth with the maine battle toward the left side, where
he saw Hernando Pisarro like a valliaunt Captain before his Quadrons. An
uncomfortable Captain.
And Orgonios went cr^yng with a loud voice, saying: O verbum diuinum, follow
me, ye that li^te, for I go to die.

When Gonsalo Pisarro and Alonso de Aluarado, saw the traues, that Orgonios
set forth, they brake in upon the enemies, and at the first encounter threw
to the ground above fifty me^: and when Rodrigo Orgonios came to the rescue,
he was wounded with the bullet of a Hargabuze in his forehed, which bullet
passed through his hedpeece. And after that he was wounded, he slew two men,
and thrust with his lance a servant of Hernando Pisarro in at his mouth,
thinkyng that it had been Pisarro him self, because he was well armed, and
gallantly attired. And when both the armies were joined, the battle was on
both sides valliantly fought, until at length the Marquis his side had the
better hand, and Don Diego his men began to turn their backs and fly, in
which flight a number were slain. But when Don Diego who stood on a high
place to se the battle, because he was somewhat evil at ease, saw his men
fly, he said: By our lord God, I had thought that we had come hither to
fight. Then happened two horsemen to have taken prisoner Rodrigo Orgonios, unto
whom came another, who had in time paste received a certain injury at his
hande^, and in revenge of the same, struck of his hedde: and in such sort were
used other some that had yielded them selves, and yet Hernando Pisarro could not
defend the^, although both he and his captains did what they might: and the
cause was, that where the souldiars of Alonso de Aluarado had received by them
the afrent at the bridge of Aua^cay, they now procured to revenge by all the
means that might be devised. Yet the revenge was such, that where captain
Ruidiaz carried one behind him, who had yielded him self, there came another,
and slew him with a Lance.

When Do^ Diego saw his army overthrown, he went and lodged himself in the
fortres of the City, where Go^salo Pisarro and Allonso de Aluarado took him
prisoner. The Indians seeing the battaill ended, they left fighting also: so
that the one and the other of the^ went to strip the ded hodies of the
Spaniardes. Yea, and some of them were not fully ded, but yet were also
stripped naked: for by reason of their wounds, they could not defend them
selves from those that stripped them naked, and there was none to disturb
them, for the victors minded no other thing, but to follow the victory: Yet
both conquerers, and conquered es:+caped such encounters, that it had been a
very easy thing for the Indians, to have consumed them all, if they had been
of courage, seeing the weakness that they were in. This battaill was fought
the 26. day of April 1538.

What passed after the battaill of Salinas, otherwise called Salt pit, and how
Harnando Pisarro came to Spain. Chapt. 12.
WHen the battaill was finished, Hernando Pisarro took great pains, to
obtain the love and good will of the Capitaines, which had served Don Diego,
and remained alive. And when he saw that he could not bring his desire to
pass, he banished many out of the City, and seeing that he had not
possibilite, to gratify those that had served him: For each of them did
think, that if all the government had been given him, yet the payment was not
sufficient, whereupon he determined, to divide his host, and to send his
warriers to discover the Land, which he had knowledge of, wherein he brought
to pass two things: The one, to remunerate his friends, and the other to
banishe his enemies. So that he sent Captain Pedro de Candia with three
hundred of his own men, whereof part were of those of Don Diego, to take in
hand a certain conquest, which had fame of great riches. And whereas Pedro
de Candia having taken the journey, could not bring his desire to pass, by
mean that the way was so asperous and tro^blesome, he returned again toward
Collao, with a Mutiny kindled among his men, because one whose name was
Mesa, who had been Captain of the Art^llerie of the Marquis, had sai^d that
in despite of Herna^do Pisarro, he would pass through the Province of Collao.
But these words he spoke by mean of the favor and countenance of those
which had served Don Diego, who were there present in the company, because
they being overcome in the late battle: yet their grief remained still in
mind. Whereupon Pedro de Candra sent the same Mesa prisoner with the process
and prouaunces which were made against him, to Hernando Pisarro. Who
understanding that whilst Don Diego de Almagro lived, the Country should
never be in quiet, nor the people pacified, also as well in the profes of Mesa
as others, which Hernando Pisarro had made, he found mutynies in many places,
and persons coniured to that intent, which was to have Don Diego out of
prison, and by that means to usurp the City. The promises consulted, he
thought convenient to kill Don Diego de Almagro, iustifiyng his death with all
his offenses, which he had committed in the broils and alterations past,
alledgyng that only he had been the vrger and only cause of the said fact:
and likewise how he was the first that brought men of war into the City, and
occupied the same by his own authority. And moreover, had slain many that
resisted him, and likewise had come with an army and Ensigns spread into the
province of Chincha, which was manifestly known to be of the Marquis
government. For which causes and considerations, he gave sentence of death
against him. But when Don Diego de Almagro hard the sentence of death
pronounced, he made a piteous moan, and spoke many doleful and sorrowful
words to Hernando Pisarro, laiyng to his charge, how he was the only cause
that his brother and he were come to be exalted, and brought unto the estate
wherein they now remain: And had furnished them with money at the beginning,
wishyng that he would remember how, when he had him prisoner in his power, he
set him freely at liberty without any ra^some, refusing the counsel of his
captains who persuaded him to put him to death. And if he had received any
discurtesie in the time of his im^risonment, yet that he would consider that he
neither commanded it, nor was privy thereunto. Likewise he besoug^^ him to
consider, that now he was very old, and although at that instant he would remit
his death: his age and time according to the course of Nature, would shortly
make an end of his days.

Unto whom Hernando Pisarro made answer, saying: that his words did not become
a personage of so great a mind and courage as he was of to speak: nor yet in
such a case to show him self so frail and fearful of death, and since his
Judgment could not be revoked: he ought to confirm him self with the will of
God, like a Christian and a gentleman. Unto which words Don Diego made answer,
saying: sir, marvel you not that I as a frail man and a sinner do fear
death, for the humanity of Christ did feel the same fear. But in conclusion
Hernando Pisarro in execution of his sentence, caused his throat to be cut^ and
when he had so doeu, he went to the Collao against the company of captain
Candia, where he commanded Mesa, who was the author of the Mutiny to be
executed, and the same 300 men that Ca^dia had, he delivered to Pedro Ansuerez,
whom he had sent unto a new discovery: where they thought al to have perished
with hunger, through the great marshes and evil way that they passed, and in
the mean while he abode conquering the country of Collao, which is a plain
Country, and has many gold Mines, and by reason of the cold, the Grain Maiz
grows not there.

The Indians of this Province eats certain Roots called Papas, which are
very like both in making and taste to Turnepes: There are great store of
cattaile, and chiefly the sheep which have been spoken of. And when Hernando
Pisarro had understanding how the Marquis his brother was come to Cusco, he
left all his business and came to visit him, leaving in his place to go
forward with the Conquest, his brother Gonsalo Pisarro, who proceeded in that
discovery until the Province of Charcas, where he was environed with many
India^ warriers which bent their force upon him, and drove him to such
extremity: tha^ his brother Herna^do Pisarro, hearing of such danger tha^ he
was in, was forced to go from Cusco with many ho^smen to succor him.

And because the aid should come unto him the sooner, the Marquis caused to be
blown abroad, that he in person would follow with all his power: and to give
the better countenance to the matter, he went two or three days journey out of
the city. When Hernando Pisarro was come where his brother Gonsalo was, he
found that the India^s were put to flight, so that certain days they kept
both company together, in that conquest, where they had many incounters with
those Indians, until they had taken Tiso their Captain, prisoner, and then
with victory they returned to Cusco, where the Marquis received them with great
honor, and gave lyuinges in that country, to as many as he (possible) might,
and the residew he sent to other Conquests, with the other Captains, Vergara,
and Porcell, and by another way he sent Captain Alonso Marcadillio, and
Captain Iuan Perez de Gueuara, and the Camp Master, Pedro de Valdiuia, he
sent to Chili, from whence Don Diego de Almagro came, when he returned to Cusco.

All those things being done, Hernando Pisarro took his way toward Spain, to
make relation to the Emperor, of the proceedings in Peru, although many of his
friends persuaded him rather to abide, for (quoth they) it is doubtful how his
Majesty will take ye death of Don Diego de Almagro. The Marquis also counseled
him to beware, and not to trust any of the friends of Don Diego, which commonly
were called the men of Chili, and not to permit them to council, and gather
together yea, and if at any time he should see above six of the^ together,
that then he might be assured that some conspiracy was in hand.

What happened to Captain Valdiuia, in his voyage, to the Province of Chili.
Chap. 13.
PEdro de Valdiuia, with his company, came to the Province of Chili, where the
Indians received him with fained peace and freendship, because their harvest
was at hand, and not as yet fully ripe: but after their corn was had into
their Garnets, they made a general insurrection, and suddenly came upon the
Spaniards, who went wandering careless abroad in the Feeldes, and slew
fourteen of them. Valdiuia hearing of the danger which his men were in, he
made all haste possible, to succor them: and beeinge occupied in the aid of
his company, there were certain Spanyardes that had conspired against him: but
when the parties were known, and the case evidently to be approved, he
forthwith commanded the conspirators to be hanged, among whom was Captain
Pedro Sancho de Hoz, who he esteemed as his companion, on that Journey.

Whilst he was executing of Justice in the Feeld, there came above 7000.
Indians upon the city, who put the few Spaniards, which had the guard of the
city in great extremity, among whom were Captains, Francisco de Villagran^
and Alonso de Monroy, with only thirty horsemen, who came out of the City
into the Feelde, where they fought like valiant men of War, with the Indian
Archers, from the morninge, till the night compelled them to rest: of which
skirmish, they were al both wounded and wearied: The Indians also were as glad
of the retire, through the slaughter and damage which that day they had
received. So that from that day forward, all the country was on an vproare,
and prepared for the Wars, and so continued for the space of eight years,
all the which time, Valdiuia and his men resisted their fury, and never left
the country, but rather caused his soldiers to plough and sow the ground,
and gather the corn to maintain them, without any aid of the Indian help,
and so continued until he returned to Peru, which was at ye time when the
lycenciat De la Gasca was preparinge an Army against Gonsalo Pisarro, in all
the which wars he served, as hereafter shall be declared.

THE FOVRTH BOOK, treats of the voyage and discouerye made by Gonsalo
Pisarro, of the Province of Zinamon, and of the death of the Lord Marquis
Pisarro.
How Gonsalo Pisarro prepared him self for the Journey of Zinamon. Chap. 1.
AFter that knowledge was had in Peru, how within the precinct of the dominion
of Quito Eastward, was discovered a rich country, where abou^dance of Zinamon
did grow: By reason whereof vulgarly that Country or Province was called the
land of Zinamon. Whereupon the Marquis determined, and also took in hand to
conquer and inhabit that Country: so that for the same purpose he chose his
brother Gonsalo Pisarro, with intent that always from Quito that vyage should
be furnished with all necessaries. And in accomplishment of his pretended
purpose, he made assignation of the government of Quito to his said brother
Gonsalo, in hope that the Emperor his Majesty would confirm the same. This
don, Gonsalo Pisarro took his way toward this discovery, with a reasonable
number of men.

In the way as he went, he was forced often times to fight with the Indians of
the Province of Guanuco, wh^ drove him to such extremity, that he was
compelled to write to the Marquis for succoure, who sent unto him Francisco de
Chaues, and after al those broils were past, he came to Quito.

In this mean while, the Marquis sent Gomes de Aluarado, to conquer and
inhabit the Province of Guanuco, because he was informed how certain Cascikes
had conspired, and with a great number of Indians were gone to the siege of the
city of Trugillio, who also slew as many Spaniards as they met withal:
Robbing and spoiling likewise the pe^re Indians which were Comarea^s to the
city, and all the spoil and carkases of the dead, they offered to an idol
which they carried with them, called Caraquilla: And in this order proceeded on
their journey, until Mighel de Lacerna issued out of the City with as many
Citizens as he could gather together: Who joining with Francisco de Caves,
fought with the enemy, and obtained victory.

How Gonsalo Pisarro departed from Quito, and came to the Country of Zinamon,
and what happened to him on his way. Chap. 2.
GOnsalo Pisarro having prepared all necessaries for his determined vyage, he
departed from Quito, having in his company 200. Spaniards well trimmed in all
points, of the which number was one hundred horsemen, and above 4000. Indian
friends, with 3000. sheep and hogs. After he was passed a town called Inga, he
came into the country of the people called Quixos, which is the farthest
Country that Inga Guaynacaua conquered toward the North, where as those
Indians made a countenance of war. But in one night they vanished all away,
so that one of them could not be taken.

An Earth^uake.
After a while that he had abode with his Army in the towns and dwellinges of
those Indians, refreshing the^ selves, there happened a maruailous great
Earthquake, with rain and tempest of Lightning and Thunder, and the ground
oppened in many places, and swallowed up more then 500. houses: yea, a river
which was not far from them, did so much increase, that it was not possible
for them to pass over to seek victuals: by mean whereof, they were driven to
great penury and hunger.

After he departed from these Indian dwellings, they came to a row of high
hills, which of force they should pass: The extreme cold on the top of those
hills was exceeding great, in such sort that many of their Indian friends were
there frozen to death: and because that will dernesse of mountains was without
any succor of victuals, they were compelled to proceed forward, till they
came to a Province called Sumaco, which stands at the foot of a high Volcan,
Volcan.
and finding there sufficient provision of victuals, the army abode there
whilst Gonsalo Pisarro, with some of those countrymen, entered again into the
mountains, to seek a conuenyent way for his army to pass, and finding none,
he came to a town called Coca, and from thence he sent for his company which
abode at Sumaco, and for the space of two months that he abode there, it never
ceased rayning neither day nor night, yea in all that space, there was not so
much dry wether that they might dry the wet clothes which they ware on their
backs, So that in this Province of Sumaco, and 50. leagues in circuit,
grows the Zinamon whereof they had notice, zinamon,
which are great trees with leaves like unto Bay trees, and the fruit of these
trees is like unto clusters of small fruit which grows round like an egg,
and although the fruit, leaves, bark, and roots of those trees have the
savor, odor, and substance of Zinamon, yet the most profit is, where the
fruit grows, like unto a great acorne, and although in all this country are
many of these wild trees, which fructify and grow without any labor of man's
hand.

The Indians have of the same kind many trees in their tillage ground, which
they trim and keep with labor and pain, and those trees produce finer
Zinamon a great deal, which they esteem in much, because they batter with it
in other Cornarcan Provinces, for victualles, cloth, and all other necessaries
which are needful for their sustenance.

Of the Country and Towns, that Gonsalo Pisarro passed, until he came to a
Land where he built a Vergantine. Chap. 3.
Whilst Gonsalo Pisarro abode in Sumaco, the greatest number of his men yt
were whole, and sound of body, went before to discover the way, according as
the Indians gave the^ instructions, yea, and oftentimes they led them out of
the way, even as the inhabitants of Sumaco had done, only for to expel them
out of their country, and their deceit was, they taught them a way saying:
follow ye this pathe, which will bring you to a country, full of towns and
villages, replenished with abou^dance of victuals: but this advice was found to
be false, for they found the same country, which they so highly commended, to
be barren, uninhabited, and absolutely without any succor, until they came to
the villages of Coca, which stands near unto a great river, where Gonsalo
P^sarro had been, before his coming to Sumaco, and there rested for the space
of six weeks, abiding the coming of his companion: the Lord of that place
submitted him self to his freendship: from thence they travailed all together
along ye river side, downward, until they found a narrow glo^e, where they made
a Bridge to pass over, although the water was of 200. fadom deep, and had a
mighty great fall downewarde, which fall made a maruailous strange noise, which
sounded and was heard more the^ six leagues from the place: certain days
journey from this passage, they found that the river ran circuit, so yt they
came to a narrow place yt was little more then 20. foot broad, where also was
another like fall, and each side garnished with hard Rock, so that for the
space of 50. leagues, they found no convenient passage, but at this place were
a number of Indians, attended their coming to resist them. But yet the
Hargabusiers made the passage clear, and forced the Indians to give place: in
the mean while they made a bridge of timber, and passed over all the army in
safety. In this form, they iorneyed through a great wilderness of Mountain,
until they came to ye country called Guema, which was somewhat plain, but
replenished with many bogs and brooks: in which place they were driven to
great extremity of victuals, and through want, were forced to live with
siluester fruits, until they came to another country, where they found some
succor of food, and the soil indifferently inhabited: these people were
clothed in garments made of cotton wool, but in all the other cou^treyes which
they had travailed, ye people went naked, which was either through ye great
heat which they have continually, or else through poverty, as they have not
wherewith to buy apparel: they also used the forepart of their privy members,
to be tied with a string of ^otten wool betwixt their legs, and made fast at
their girdling: and the weme^ had certain rags, to cover their secrets, but no
other kind of clothing.

In this place Gonsalo Pisarro commanded a certain vessel, called a
Uergantine to be made, The building of a Vergantine.
for to carry their fardage, and other necessaries down the river, and
likewise their sick men, and also for his own person, because that in some
places the country was so full of bogs, that they could not journey. The
buildinge of this Uergantine was very troublesome, for they were forced to make
a Forge for their Iron work, in the which they also profited with the
horseshooes of the dead horses, for want of other iron: they made also coals to
serve the turn. In these works Gonsalo Pisarro permitted none of his company
to be unoccupied, from the eldest to the youngest, and he himself ye first at
al assaults, as well with the axe as with the hammer: in steed of pitch, A shifte,
they used the gum which distilled from certain trees, and in steed of Aucom,
they took old Mantels of the Indians, and some of the Spaniards shirts which
were rotten through the great wet which they had passed, so that every one was
contributar with such things as he might spare: In this order the vessel was
finished and launched into the river, and al their fardage laden, they made
also certain Canoas, to go in company with the Uergantine.

How Francisco de Alerano, fled with the Vergantine, and into what misery they
were driven by want thereof. Chap. 4.
WHen Gonsalo Pisarro had finished the Uergantine, he thought that all his
trouble was at an end, and with this new vessel to discover all ye land,
whereupon he continued his journey, and all the force of his army trauayled by
land through ye bogs: keeping along the river side, in which way they passed
through many deserts of mountains, and Cane fields, making their way by force
of hand with their swords, hatchets, and axes, and when they might not pas on
the one side of the River, the Uergantine carried them over to the other side,
so that always at night the Landmen, and watermen lodged together.

When Gonsalo Pisarro considered how they had travailed above 200. leagues
down along the river, and found no provision of victual, but only siluester
fruits, and some roots, he commanded one of his Captains called Fra^cisco
de Orellana yt with 50. men he should go before to discover the River, and to
seek victuals, with commission that if he should happen to find any, that
then he should therewith load the Uergantine, leauinge the fardage which was
aboorde at the meeting of two great Rivers, of which he had understanding to
be of 80. leagues distant, and also that he should leave two Canoas at
certain Rivers which crossed over, to the intent that with them he might pass
his men over. When Orellana had taken his leave, he departed, shortly after
found the current of such force, that in short time he came to the meetinge of
the two great Rivers, without finding any kind of sustenance: and also
considering what way he had made in three days, he found that in a whole year
if was not possible to return that way again, by reason of the vehemence of
the great current, whereupon he determined to proceed down ye river, even
whither fortune should lead him, although he judged it a thing more convenient
to abide there, yet notwithstanding, he proceeded on, and took likewise the
Canoas with him, although some of his company required him to abide their
generals order and coming, especially Father Gaespar de Carauajall, who was
their preacher, and because he insisted more then the residue, the captain
used him very discourteously, as well in word as deed, and with will or nil, he
proceeded on his enterprise, making some entries into ye land, where he fought
with such Indians as would have resisted him: and many times they came to
encounter, with him in the River with their Canoas, with whom they could not
fight at will, because the Uergantine was so full of men, that one disturbed
another.

In a certain country where he found place convenient, he abode and buylt
another Uergantine: Another Vergantine.
For the Indians of this soil came and submitted themselves unto him, and also
provided him both of victuals and al other things necessary: in another
province forward, he ^ought with ye Indians and obtained victory against them,
of who^ he had intelligence, that certain journeys from thence, within ye
main, was a country in y^ which dwelt none but women, who were valiant, and
defended themselves against their Comarcans. Note.
With this advertisement he proc^eded on his way, without finding in all his
journey, either gold or plate, and ceased not till he came out into the Northern
sea, being 325. leagues distant from the Island of cubagua: This River is called
Maranion, because the Captain which discovered this navigations, was called
Maranion. Maranion.
The beginning or headspring of this River, comes from Peru, out of the side
of ye mountains of Quito. It runs by direct course (accounting by the rule
of altitude of the sun) 700. Leagues, and with the crookednes and compass
which the same River makes in many places from his origin, until it comes
into the main Sea, contains.1800. leagues, and the mouth of the same river
is fifteen leagues broad, and further inward it waxes three, yea and four
leagues brother.

When Orellana was commen out of the River of Maranion, he took his way toward
Castile, where he informed his Majesty of his discovery, and also how he had
finished the same at his own cost and charge. And more over in his said
discovery, was a country exceedinge ritche, in the which lived none but
Women: which country commonly was called the conquest of the Amazones:
Beseeching his majesty to grant unto him the government and discovery of ye
said country: the which his request accordingly was granted unto him. Whereupon
he gathered together the number of five hundred men, among which were many
Gentlemen, and men of great credit, with whom he took shippynge in Saint
Lucar de Barrameda, and after he was commen to the Altitude of the Canaria
Islands, the wind was contrary for his Navigations: and also driven to want of
victuales, whereupon the Fleet was separated, one ship clean without sight
of the other, and he himself died on the way, in such sort, that his
company were scattered among the Islands.

Of all the which his proceedings, Gonsalo Pisarro made great complaynt,
principally for so treacherous a part, as was to leave him in such necessity
and want of victual, and likewise, without any succor or help to pass his
army over the Rivers: And also, because he had deceived him of a great sum
of Gold, Plate, and Emraldes, which was aboorde of his Uergantine, with the
which he had sufficient to finish both shippyng, and all other furniture,
necessary for the discovery, which the Emperor had granted unto him,
through his deceitful practice.

How Gonsalo Pisarro returned to Quito, and of the great pains and miseries,
which he passed in the return. Chapter. 5.
WHen Gonsalo Pisarro was come to the place, where he commanded Orellana to
leave the Canoas for his coming, for to pass certain Rivers: By mean
whereof he was driven to great extremity: and forced to make Kaffes, and
Canoas for that purpose. And when he was come to the meeting of the two Rivers,
where he appointed Orellana to attend his coming, and finding him not: yet
there he had understanding of a Spaniard which Orellana had left on shore
behind him, because he stood against his pretended voyage: and Orellana also
intending to take this new discovery in hand in his own name, and not as
Liuetenant to Gonsalo Pisarro, whereupon he desisted from thaucthorie received
of Pisarro, and compelled his company to elect him for their captain and
general.

Now Gonsalo Pisarro, being left succourlesse and void of help for his
Navigations, and the only way to provide sustenance for his army, yet he found
somewhat among the Indians for barter of small bells and glasses:
notwithstanding his grief and heaviness was not small, whereupon he determined
to return back again to Quito, from whence he had travailed more then.400
leagues of most evil way, among Monntaynes, and country uninhabited: the which
when he had discovered, he wondered at his own trauayles, which he had
passed, and escaped the cruel death of hunger in ye wilderness of Mountains,
where 40 of his me^ ended their days, without any hope of succor but even as
they axed for meat, lening to trees, they fell down dead with very hunger. But
now committing him self to God he returned by another way, leaving ye way yt
he came, which was not only troublesome to pass, but also void of al kind of
sustenance, and so at al adventures sought another way, which was as evil and
rather worse then the way which they had comen, in the which they had much to
do to sustain life, ^reat hunger
although they killed their horses which were left, and greyhounds, with other
sort of dogs to eat: the extremity of hunger was such, that a cat or a hen,
was worth fifty poyzes, which is starling near twenty pound, and one of those
poisoned fowls called Alcatrax, was worth ten poyzes.

In this manner, Gonsalo Pisarro continued on his way, toward Quito, where as
long before he gave advice of his return: whereupon the Citizens of Quito
provided great abundance of hogs, and sheep, and came out of the city to
meet him on his way: they carried also with the^ some horses and apparel, for
Gonsalo Pisarro, and his Captains, the which succor came unto him, being 50.
leagues from Quito, who coming unto him with such provision, God he knows,
how joyfully it was accepted, but cheefely the victuals: Gonsalo Pisarro and
his company, were almost naked, for long sithence with the great waters of
rain, and otherwise, their clothes were rotten from their bodies, so that now,
each of them had but only two small Dear skins, which covered their fore
parts, and also their hinder parts: some had left old rotten breeches, and
shoes made of raw dear skins: their swords wanted scabards and were spoiled
with rust, they came all on foot, their arms and legs, were scratched with
shrubs and briars, their iestures seemed like unto dead men, so that scarcely
their friends and old acquaintance knew them: In which painful Journey, in
more then 200. leagues, they could find no salt, which they found to be a
great want unto them. But when they were come into the country of Quito, and
had received that freendly succor, they fell on their knees, and kissed the
ground, yeeldinge unto God most humble and hearty thanks, who had delivered
them from so many perrils and dangers.

Their exceeding hunger was so great, that they began to feed like raueninge
woolfes, so that it was thought convenient for their health, to tax their
meat, with moderate diet, until by little and little, their stomachs were
comforted, and strengthened for disgesture.

When Gonsalo Pisarro saw that the horses and apparel which was brought, A
noble mind.
would but only furnish him and his Captains, neither he nor they would not
take any part thereof, nor yet change their old rags, which they had on
their backs, to observe the rule of equity, like good soldiers: so that in
this form and attire, he with his company, entered into the city of Quito, in
a morninge, and went directly to the Temple, to render unto God most humble
laud and praise, who of his infinite goodness had delivered them out of so
many perrils and dangers: and after their praises given, each one attired
him self according to his possiblitie.

This country where the Zinamon grows, stands under the Equinoctial Line,
even as the Islands of Maluco does, which also brings forth Zinamon, which
ordinarily is spente in Spain, and in other oriental parts.

How the inhabitants of Chili, began to conspire The Marquis death. Chap. 6.
WHen Hernando Pisarro executed Don Diego de Almagro in the city of Cusco, he
sent a Son of his, which he had begotten of an Indian Woman, to the city of
ye Kings, whose name was also Don Diego de Almagro, who was a virtuous young
man of great courage, and well brought up: his chief exercise was to ride a
horse well, both after the Genet use, and warlike order, in the which faculty
he proved a gallaunt Horsman: he could also write and read exceedinge well:
his Schoolemayster and Tutor, was a Gentleman called Iuan de Herrada, who had
likewise the government of his person. The Father of this young man commended
his Son unto this man: Now when he was in the city of the Kings, with his
Pupil, he used great conversation with such as he thought meet to be of
his parcialitie, who were such as went wa^dring up and down in the Country,
without a guide, as men left succourlesse, and overcome, and none would
entertain them because they were with Don Diego de Almagro, at the time of his
overthrow.

Now Iuan de Herrada, calling to remembrance, how Hernando Pisarro was gone
into Spain, and his brother Gonsalo, likewise gone into the country of
Zinamon, in discovery, and he also beeinge set at liberty by the Marquis, for
until this time, he was as a Prisoner. So that now the young man and his
Tutor, began to prepare armor and other furniture of War, in a readiness,
meaning to revenge his Fathers death, and the destruction which was made in his
Fathers army: the remembrance whereof, was as yet very fresh in mind, although
the Marquis often times procured to have them for his faithful friends: but
yet he could never bring his desire to effect: whereupon he took occasion to
take from them certain Indians of service, thinking by that mean they should
not have wherwithall to maintain such as daily came unto them: but his
pretense auayled not, for they were so knitte together in league of
freendship, that all which they possessed, was a thing common among them, and
that which was gotten by play, or stealth, they brought to Iuan de Herrada, his
House, as a common stock to maintain him withal: so that dailye they
multiplied, and furnished them selves with Armor: yet not withstandinge, there
were many of the Marquis friends, that gave him warninge of their dooinge.

But he not regarding their counsel, being a man of a gentle nature and
condition, answered them, saying: that they should not increase the sorrow of
the overthrown men. Alas (quoth he) their grief is great enough, to see
themselves poor, ouercomen, and almost of all men abhorred.

Don Diego de Almagro, and his company, beeinge assured of the plain meaning
of the Marquis, they became every day more shameless then other: yea, they
let not the cheifest of them, to pass by the Marquis in the streate,
without any submission or reverence dooinge unto him: and also on a night they
had tied three Halters on the Picot, which is a Pillar, whereon they use to do
execution of hanginge, in the Market place of every city.

The one of those Halters was set toward the Marquis house, and another
toward the house of his Liuetenant, and the third toward the house of his
Secretary.

Yet the Marquis dissimuled all these dooinges, excusinge them as men overcome,
and without shame, and therefore they used such practices.

But these long sufferings, made them a great deal the bolder: so that from
two hundred leagues distante, came diuers^ of the parcialitie which were tofore
banished, among whom they absol^tely conspired the Marquis death, and to be
Lord of the Lande^ as afterward followed. Yet they stayed somewhat ye longer
in the execution of their determination, only to hear some news, because
they had understanding that Captain Diego de Aluarado^ was gone into Spain,
to accuse Hernando Pisarro, of his former proceedinges, and how Hernando was
for his offense apprehended, and the cause earnestly followed: they had also
intelligence, how his Majesty had provided the Lycenciat Vaca de Castro, to
come into Peru, to make informacion of all the former success, but not to
punish the offenses with such rygor as they expected.

Whereupon leaving all delays aside, they forthwith determined to execute
their intended purpose, although they had a great desire to se what Vaca de
Castro, would do, saying: that if this new Judge do not as soon as he
comes, apprehend and put to death the Marquez, that then they would murder
them both together: and for to have more assured advertisement, they sent Don
Alonso de Monte Mayor toward Tumbez, and others in his company. Because there
were certain ships arrived, which came from Panama, who brought news, how
Vaca de Castro was preparyng his viage into Peru. Afterward it happened, that
when Vaca de Castro had inbarked him self in Panama: the current of the Sea
being contrary, drove him in such sort to Leeward, that he was forced to come
on land at the Island of Gorgona, and to pass up the River of Saint John,
and by good hap came into the gouernacion of Benalcasar, and from thence
passed by land into Peru, as hereafter more particular shall be declared.

The men of Chili seeing the delay in the coming of Vaca de Castro, they
suspected that by their own delay of their pretense, intelligence might be
given to him of their doing, and thereby be an occasion of the losinge of all
their lives. So that they now were agreed to execute their intent, as in this
chapter folowinge shall be declared.

How the Marquez his friends gave him a special warnyng of the order of the
conspiracy of his death. Chap. 7.
IT was openly known in the City of the Kings, how the men of Chili had
conspyred the Marquis his death, and many of his friends giving him warning
thereof: unto whom he made answer, saying, that their heads should keep his:
so yt in fine, he was careless of his enemies, in such wise that oftentimes he
would go out of the City, to certain Milles that he had a making, with only
his Lacky (...) ^ttend upon him. And to such as demanded of him, w^^ he had
not a Guard to wait upon him: he would say, that he would not that men should
think, that he stood in fear of the Lycenciate Vaca de Castro, who was
coming for to be Judge against him.

Whereupon the men of Chili, blewe abroad that Vaca de Castro was dead, seeing
that the Marquess stood in such security of him self. So that on a day Iuan
de Herrada went to visit him at his house, with certain of his parcialitie,
and found him in his Garden: where after certain words, he demanded why his
Lordshippe would consent to kill him and his fellows?

The Marquess answered with a great oathe, that he never had any such
intencion. But rather (quoth he) it is told me, that you and your friends go
about to murder me, and for that purpose ye provide daily Armor and Municion.
Unto whom Iuan de Herrada made answer, saying: Sir since your Honor does
provide Lances, it is no marvel though we buie Corselettes to defend us: he
was so bold to speak so presumptuously, because he had near at hand in
Ambushe, above forty armed men. Furthermore he said, that because his Honor
should put away his suspicion, that it might please him to grant license to
him, and Don Diego de Almagro and his men, to depart out of the Country.

The Lord Marquess having conceived no suspicion by his words, did rather
pity them, and assured them with amorous words, saying: that he had not
bought Lances to contend with them.

He had no sooner spoken these words, when he went to a^ Orange tree, and
gathered certain Orenges, which there were highly esteemed, because they were
the first that grew in that Country, and gave them to Iuan de Herrada, saying
in his ear, that if he stood in need of any thing, that he should tell him,
and he would provide him according to his desire: for the which his gentle
offer, Iuan de Herrada kyssed his honors hands.

And leaving the Marquess with this security, he took his leave, and went
home to his house: where he with the principallest of his parciallitie agreed,
that the next Sunday following they should make an end of the Marquess days,
since they had letten the matter slip, which should have been done on Saint
John Baptist day, past. It happened that on the Saturday, one of the
conspirators, opened the matter in confession to the Curate of the Church, who
the same night advised Antonio Picado, Secretary to the Marquess, beseeching
him to bring him to his Lords presence: Whereupon the Secretary went with
him to the house of Francisco Martin, brother to the Marquess, where he was at
supper with his Children, and incontinent arose from the Table, and came to the
Curate, who informed him of the truth of the conspiracy, at whose words the
Marquess was not a little amassed: and within a little while, he said to his
Secretary, that he believed not the Curates advise, because (said he) it is
not long agone, since Iuan de Herrada, came unto me with great humility, and
that the party which had opened his mind to the Curate in confession, should
seem by that practice to crave somewhat of him, and to have him more bound to
gratify him, he had devised that policy. But notwithstanding, he sent for
Doctor Iuan Velasques, his Lieutenaunt, who being evil at case could not come.
So that the Marquess went unto him the same night home to his house, having in
his company only his Secretary, with other two or three persons, and a
Lynck carried before him, and finding his Lieutenant in his bed: he told him
the cause of his coming. Who having heard all the matter, made light of it,
wylling hi^ Lordshippe not to fear: for as long (quoth he) as I have this
white wande of Justice in my hand: there is none in all this Land that dares
to stir or make an uproar. In which his saying it fell so out, that he kept
promise, for afterward as he was running away, as hereafter shall be
declared, at the time when they were kylling the Marqu^sse: he fled out at a
window, and descending down the side of a wall, he carried the rod of Justice
in his mouth.

Of the death of the Lord Marquess, Don Francisco Pisarro. Chap. 8.
WIth all those fair words and assurances, the Marquess was so troubled in
mind, that the next day being Su^day, he would not go to the Cathedral
Church, as he was accustomed: but rather had divine Service said in his house,
and meant not to go abroad till he had provided for his security. When
Service was ended in the Parrishe Church: the Doctor Iuan Velasques, and
Captain Francisco de Chaues, who at that instaunt was the cheifest person in
the Land, next unto the Marquess, came together accompanied with many others,
to the Lord Marquess his house, and after their visitation was made, the most
of the Citizens returned home to their houses. And the Doctor, and Francisco
de Chaues, abode dinner with the Marquess: And after they had dyned, which
might be be^ween the hours of twelve and one of the day, thinking that all the
people of the City were, according to the custom of the Country, taking
their rest, and the Marquess servant also at dinner.

Iuan de Herrada, with other twelve companions, came from his house which
stands three hundredth paces dista^t from the Marquess house, through the
open streets, with their swords ready drawn in their hands, crying with a
loud voice, saying: Let the Tyrant traitor die, who has commanded the Judge
to be slain, which the King our Master sent into this land. The cause which
they held, not to go in secret wise, but rather with all the noise possible,
that the Citizens should imagine their number to be great, considering yt they
durst attempt such a weighty matter so publicly, and also at such an hour,
that although they should come with all speed to the sacker, yet they should
come too late, or else them selves to be slain.

In this form they came to the Marquess house, leaving one at his gate, with
a drawn sword in his hand, which was bloodied with the blood of a Ram: who
cried with a loud voice, dead is the Tyrant, dead is ye Tyrant. The which his
proclamation, was the cause that many of the Citizens which were coming to
the rescue, returned home to their houses again, believing that ye thing was
true, which that one man had spoken. Whereupon Iuan de Herrada proceeded up a
pair of stayres with his men, in the mean while, the Marquess was advised by
certain Indians which stood at his chamber door, and there upon he commanded
Francisco de Chaues, that whilst he went in, to arm him self, to keep the
Hall door: who was so sore troubled in mind, yt he forgot the shutting of
doors, and went down the stayres, to know what ye matter was, and suddenly one
of the conspirators thrust him through with his sword: who seeing him self
mortally wounded, drew his sword, saying, what have ye no regard to your
friends. But the stripes came so thick upon him, yt he was soon dispatched,
and leaving him there dead, they ran like desperate men into the Marquess
Hall, where were in number xij. Spaniards of the Marquess friends, who fled,
leaping out at ye windows, among whom was doctor Velasques his Liutena^t, with
his white rod of Justice in his mouth, according to his promse, for because
both his hands were needful to help him down the wall. The Lord Marquess being
in his bed Chamber, and his brother Francisco Martin, helping to arm him, with
two Gentlemen and two Pages, the one was called Iuan de Vargas, who was son
to Gomes de Tardoya, and the other was named Escandon, who seeing the enemy so
nigh, that they had not time to arm their Master: the Marquess took his
sword and Target (which is a sheelde of leather) in hand, and came to his
Chamber door: where he and his folk valiauntly defended them selves a good
space, and fought so manfully, that the enemies could not enter, saying with a
loud voice, Oh brother, upon them, upon them, let them dye like Traitors as
they are. But the men of Chili fought so long, that they slew Francisco Martin,
in whose place entered one of the Pages: The Chili men seeing them defend them
selves so long, and fearing that succor might come, and assault them on their
backs: they determined to put the matter in hazard, so that they took one of
their own company, and thrust him in at the door with force of hand, being
well armed: and whylst the Marquess was occupied in killing of him, the
residue had time to enter the Chamber door, and they all with one accord
stroke at the Marquess, The cruel death of the Marquess.
who fought so long with them, that with very weariness, his sword fell out
of his hands, and then they slew him with a prick of a Rapyer through his
throat: and when he was fallen to the ground, and his wind failing him, he
cried unto God for mercy, and when he had so done, he made a cross on the
ground and kissed it, and then incontinent yielded up the Ghost: and when he
was fully dead, they slew also his two Pages: And on the Chili side were four
slain, and diverse others wounded.

When this sorrowful news was known in the City, there came above two
hundred men to aid Don Deigo de Almagro, for though they were armed and in a
readiness, yet they durst not come abroad, till they perfectly knew how the
matter would pass. But now they ran up and down the City, taking the Armor
from such as were coming to succor the Marquess. When the murderers came out
of the Marquess house, with their blooddye swords in their hands: they
forthwith caused Don Diego to mount upon his Horse, and to pass through the
cheifest streets of the City, saying: that in all Peru, there was no other
Governor, but only he, nor yet any King above him. And when this was done, he
sacked the Marquess house, and also the houses of his Brother and his
Secretary. And then he compelled the Council and State of the City to
receive Don Diego for their governor, under ye color of the Capitulation,
which was tofore made with his Majesty, at the beginning of ye discovery,
which in effect was. That Don Diego de Almagro, should have the government of
new Toledo, and after his decease, his son, or whom he should appoint to
enjoy the same. When all this diligence was done, they commanded to be slain
certain Uassailes, which were known to be servant and friends to the
Marquess.

It was a sorrowful spectacle to behold and hear, the Wives of dead men, what
doleful cries they made, yea, and the lamentable words that they spoke. The
corpse of the Lord Marquess, certain Negros drew a long the streets toward
the Church, and none durst bury him, until Iuan de Barbaran, Citizen of
Trugillio, who sometime had been servant to the Marquess, he and his Wife
buried both the Marquess and his Brother, as well as they might, having first
obtained license for that fact of Don Diego: they made all the haste possible
to bury him, and yet they had not leisure to attire him according to the
usual ceremony of Knights, of the order of S. James, because they were advised
how the men of Chili were coming to cut off the Marquess head, for to put
it on the Picot, which is a Gallows after their use. In this form Iuan de
Barbaran, buried his Lord and Master, and after the burial he caused the
Funeral pomp to be solemnized, according as he was able, at his own cost.
After all this good will and diligence was showed: he went to seek his
Children, which went wandering astray, to procure their security.

The Chili men were now Lords and Rulers in the City. By this success we
may learn and see the worldly things, and the variety of Fortune, that in so
short a time, a Gentleman who had discovered, conquered, and governed so great
Countries, so many Kingdoms, such innumerable sums of Treasure: who had given
so great rentes and livings, in respect of time, the greatest Prince in the
world had not done the like. And now to be suddenly slain, by the hands of
only twelve men, at noone time, being in a City, where all the Citizens
were either his servants, Kinsemen, or Soldiers, unto whom, generally he had
given sufficient living, and none among them would come to succor him: nay,
rather they fled away, even the Servant of his own house, and his noble
corpse so vily buried. And all the infinite Treasure which he possessed,
consumed in a moment, not having so much left to bury him, according to the
degree and state of his person: and all these things to happen unto him after
he had thereof sufficient warning by sundry men, as here before has been
declared. This has happened the. xxvi. day of June.1541.

Of the customs and qualities of the Marquess, Don Francisco Pisarro, and the
Discouerer, Don Diego de Almagro. Chap. 9.
Since this History and Discovery of the Province of Peru, has origin from
the two valiant Captains, of whom hither unto we have spoken: Who are ye
Marquess, Don Francisco Pisarro, and Don Diego de Almagro: It is meet and
convenient to write their customs and qualities, comparing them together, as
Plutarchus uses, when he writes of two Captains, which are in any respect
comparable one to the other: and touching the lynage of these our Captains, at
the beginning of this History, is written as much as could be known. But in
the residue they were both valiant persons of great courrage, they were also
great sufferers of pains and trauails, and very virtuous, they were friends
to do pleasure to al men, at their own cost. They were much like of
inclynation, especially, in the state of living, for neither of them was
married, although the youngest of them both at the time of their death, was
above three score and fiu^ years of age.

They were both inclined to affairs of Wars, although, Don Diego de
Almagro, when occasion of Wars wanted, applied him self to things of
gaynes: they were near of one age, when they took the conquest of Peru in
hand, in which Discovery and conquest, they took the pains which has been
declared although the Marquess did suffer greater travail, and passed greater
peryls then Don Diego. For whylst the one was occupied in the greatest part of
the Discovery, the other abode in Panama, providing necessaries and Furniture
for him, as likewise has been declared. They were both noble minded, and
always they pretended and conceived haughty things, they were gentle and
amyable to their Soldiers, they were equal in lyberallitie: although in
show, Don Diego had the advantage, because he loved that his gift should be
published and blown abroad: unto which condition the Marquess was contrary,
for he would not permit that his lyberall gifts should be spoken of: but
rather procured to have them kept in secret, having more respect to provide
for the necessity of such as wanted, then to obtain a vaineglorious report.

It once happened that a poor Soldiour, had his chief riches in a Horse,
which dyed of an unknown disease, of which mishap the Marquess having
understanding, and coming down into his Tennis Court, thinking to find the
poor soldiour there, he brought in his bosom a wedge of Gold, of ten pound
weight, to give unto him with his own hands: and not finding him there at that
instant, he chanced to make a match at play, and without putting off his
coat, he played his match, because he would not that any should see the wedge
of Gold which was in his bosom. The play continued the space of three hours,
and then came the Soldior for whom the gold was brought, the which he
delivered unto him secretly, saying: that he had rather have given him three
times as much, the^ to suffer ye pains which he had taken in his long tarying:
with many other like examples, which might at length be spoken of.

So that always the Marquess alms and gifts were distributed by his own
hands, and with as much secrecy as might be, yea, and always procured the
receyuers to keep silence: And for this consideration, Don Diego was belde to
be more liberal, for although he gave largely, yet he had a form how it
should seem much more then it was: notwithstanding, touching this virtue of
Magnificence, they may justly be called equal. The Marquess also was wont to
say, that considering the company of adventure and fellowship made between
them, that neither of them could give any thing wherein the other had not his
part, and therefore as lyberall was he, which permitted the other to give: and
for comprobation, this shall serve. That where they were both the ritchest
men, both in Rent and Treasure, and as lyberally might dispend the same, as
any Prince in the world, not having a kingly Crown: yet they came both to
death with great poverty: that at this day, there is not any remembrance of
any thing proper, which was theyrs: saving, that of all their goods and lands,
they had not wherewithal to bury them: as the like is written of Cato and
Silla, and of many other Roman Captains, which were buried of alms.

These two valiant Captains, were aff^ctioned to do for their servant and
soldiers, both to enritch them, and to deliver them from peryls. But the
Marquess did rather in that respect exceed: For once it happened, passing the
River called Barranca, that the great Current carried away one of his Indians of
service, which by mishap was fallen therein: and when the Marquess saw the
peril of his servant, he forthwith stripped him self, and leapt into the
River, having good skill of swimming, and plucked him out by the hair of his
head: putting him self in great danger, through the extreme force of the
Current, in such sort that the valiantest man in all his host, durst not take
the like enterprise in hand: whereupon some of his Captains did reprehend his
over much boldness, unto whom he answered, saying: Ye know not what thing it
is to love a servant well.

Although the Marquess governed long time, and more quietly: yet Don Diego was
more ambicious, and desirous of rule and dignity. Both of them conserved
antiquity, in their ordinary apparel, even from their youth vpwardes,
especially the Marquess, who ever used to wear ordinarily a Coat of black
cloth, with long quarters, and short wasted, his shoes of a white Dear skin,
and a white felt Hat, and his Sword and Dagger of ancient facion. And when
through the importunate request of his servants, upon any solemn holy day, he
happened to wear a Gown furred with Martins, which the Lord Marquess Cortez
had sent to him from the new Spain: as soon as he came from Church, he would
throw it from him, and used to have a towell about his neck. In the time of,
Peace, he used much to play at Tennis, or at Bowls, and therefore cheeflie he
used the Towell about his neck, to wype the sweat from his face.

Both these Captains were most patient in pains taking, and also in any
extremity of hunger: But perticularly the Marquess, showed the same in the
exercise of the said pastimes, for there were very few young men that could
endure with him. He was also more enclyned to any kind of pastime, then Don
Diego, so that many times he would play at the Bowls, all the whole day, and
passed not with whom he played, although it were either with Mariner or
Myller, nor yet would permit any to take up his Bowl for him, nor to use
toward him any usual ceremonies of duty, accustomed to his Estate and
dignity. It was some weighty matter that should cause him to leave from play,
especially, when he was a looser. But if at any he had advertisement of
rebellion, or insurrection of Indians: then forthwith his Armor was at hand,
and Lance in readiness, he used in such extremities, to ride Post alone
through the City, toward the place where the alteration was, without tarying
for more company.

These Captains were so ready, and of such haughty courage in the Indian
war, that either of them would not let to give the Encounter, although the
enemies were in number.100000. They were of good understanding and judgment in
any thing, that was to be provided for the wars, or for government:
especially, being both men unlearned, for they could neither write, read, or
yet firm, which was a thing of great deffect, in such noble Personages,
dealing in such weighty affairs. Yet nevertheless, in all other things, of
virtuous inclynations, they showed them selves to be Noble men, only the
former want excepted, wherein the ancient wise men, did hold such want for an
argument of bas^nesse of lynnage.

The Marquess was a man that had great confidence in his servant and
friends. All the dispatches which he made, as well in government, and
reprehencion of Indians, he used to make two marks, between the which,
Antonio Picado, his Secretary, fyrmed, the name of Francisco Pisarro. But these
men may excuse them selves, as Ouidius excused Romulus, saying: that he was an
evil Astronomer, but rather had more knowledge in Arms then in Letters.

Both these Captains were so affable and plain, among their people, that
they used oftentimes to go from house to house in the City, to visit their
neighbors alone, and took such fare as they found, and were always ready to
come to any honest neighbor, that would invite either of them. They were
equally abstynent and moderate in their feeding, and diet, as also in
refraining of sensuallitie, and especially from abusing of any Spanish Women:
for they deemed that they could not deal therein, without prejudice of their
neighbors, whose Wives or Daughters, those Women were: they neither overmuch
enclyned to the Indian Women.

The Marquess had the company of an Indian Gentlewoman, who was sister to
Atabal^ba, by whom he had a Son, named Don Gonsalo, who deceassed at
fowreteene years of age: and a Daughter named Donca Francisca. By an other
Indian Woman of Cusco, he had an other Son, called Don Francisco.

Don Diego de Almagro, had that son of whom we have spoken, who slew the
Marquess, which Son, he had by an Indian Woman of Panama. They both
received honor at the Emperors hands, for as has been declared, to Don
Francisco Pisarro, he gave the tyttle or addition of Marquess, and made him
Governor of new Castile, and also ordained him Knight of the order of Saint
James.

To Don Diego de Almagro, he gave the government of new Toledo, and the title
of chief Discouerer. Particulerly, the Marquess was greatly affectioned, and
held in great fear and reverence the name of his Majesty: in so much that he
abstayned from doing of many things that he had power to do, declaring that
he would not that his Majesty should say, how he ascended in the Land: and
oftentimes when he was present at the melting of the Silver and Gold, he would
rise from his Chair, to take up the graynes of Silver and Gold, which fell
from the clypping, saying: that with his mouth, when hands failed, he would
gather together the kings portion.

These two Gentlemen, were equal even in their kinds of death, for the
Marquess brother, put Don Diego to death^ and Don Diego his Son, slew the
Marquess. The Marquess was desirous to benefit the Country, by tyllage and
other commodities.

He buylt a fair house in the City of the kings: he also buylt for the
benefit of the City, two rows of Mylles, along the River side, in which
buylding he occupied him self, at all times of leisure, giving his council
and opinion to the Master workmen. He took great pains in setting forward
the works of the Cathedral Church of the City of the kings, and other like
Monumentes.

How Don Diego de Almagro the younger, joined an Army of men of War, and
how he slew certain Gentlemen: and how Alonso de Aluarado spread his
Ensign for his Majesty. Chap. 10.
AFter that Don Diego had gotten the City, into his power, and taken the
wandes of Justice from the Officers, and placed other by his own election: he
then apprehended Doctor Velasques, Lieutenannt to the Marquess, and Antonio
Picado, his Secretary, and chose for the chief Captains of his wars, Iuan
Tellio, Citizen of Civil, and Francisco Chaues, and also Sotelo. When the
noise was spread abroad, of the election of these new Captains: all the
Uagabounds, and idle persons which were in that country came to this city,
pretending liberty, to rob, spoil, and live at pleasure.

And to furnishe those Roges with money: he took the Fiftes appertayning to
the King, and also the goods of such as were deceassed, which was kept in a
common Chest, to perform their Testamentes and Legacies. But afterward,
discencion began to grow among them selves, for some of the principal
persons, moved with envy, were minded to kill Iuan de Herrada, seeing that
although Don Diego had the name of governor and Captain general, yet the
said Herrada, ruled and governed all. And the mutiny being known, many were
executed, especially: Francisco de Chaues, and also Anthonio de Oribuela,
Citizen of Salamanca, was beheaded. Because when he came from Spain, he said,
that they were Tyrants.

Afterward, Don Diego sent his Messengers unto all the Cities of his
government, wylling them to admytte and receive him for their governor. And
although he was accepted in the most Cities, for the fear only which they
had of him: yet in Chachapoyas, where Alonso de Aluarado was Lieutenant, as
soon as the Pursuiuantes were come, with the commandment from Don Diego, he
commanded them to be arrested, and also fortified him self to withstand him
in obedience, and had an especial confidence in the people of the Country,
and also in a hundred men of war, which he had attending on his person.
Whereupon he spread his Ensign on the behalf of his Majesty, esteeming in
nothing the threatninges, bragges, and fair promises of Don Diego, which were
written unto him by his Letters: But rather made a plain answer, that in no
wise he would receive him for Governor, until such time as his Majesty
should command the same by express order and Commission. And in the mean
while, he hoped through the help of God, and those Gentlemen which were in his
company, to revenge the death of the Lord Marquess, and to punish their
disobedience and offenses, done against his Majesty.

When Don Diego understood the pretense of Aluarado: incontinent he dispatched
Captain Garcia de Aluarado, with a great company of foot men, and Horse men,
commanding him to encounter, and give him the Onset with all his industry and
power, and that in the way as he should pass, to enter into the City of Saint
Mighell, and there to take both Armor and Horses from the Citizens, and at
his return to do the like in the City of Tr^gillio.

In this order Garcia de Aluarado took his journey by Sea, until he arrived at
Puetia Sancta, which stands fifteen Leagues distaunt from Trugillio, where
he met Captain Alonso Cabrera, who came flying away with all the people of
the Town of Guanuco, to ioygne with the Citizens of Trugillio, against Don
Diego: which cause being perfectly known, he took both him and certain of
the cheifest of his company. Who as soon as he was come to the City of Saint
Mighell, he caused to strike of the heads, both of him, and one Villegas which
came in his company.

How the City of Cusco arose for his Majesty, and chose for their Captain
general, Pedro Aluares Holgui, and what followed. Chap. 11.
WHen the Messengers and Provisions of Don Diego, came to the City of Cusco,
where at that time, Diego de Silua, son of Felisiano de Silua, borne in the
City of Rodrigo, and Francisco de Caruatall, Sheriffs of the City. But
Caruatall was afterward Camp master to Gonsalo Pisarro: So that the Estate
of the City agreede in Council, not to allow, nor yet receive him: although
openly they durst not deny his commandment, and request, until they might
pefectly understand, and know what number of men, and provision he had in
readiness, to proceed with his enterprise: whereupon they made a brief
answer, saying: that they desired it might please Don Diego, to send a more
ample authority and power, touching the premises, then as yet he had done,
and then in continent they would allow the same. After that the Messengers
were dispatched back again with this answer: the Estate of the City,
calling to remembrance how Gomer de Tordoya, who was one of the cheifest of
Council of the City, was at that instaunt recreating him self abroad in
the Country. They agreede to send advertisement unto him, of all the
proceedinges of Don Diego: but it so happened, that their Messenger met him
coming toward the City, and when they had enfourmed him of their Message,
he having a Merlin Hawke upon his fyst, wrested the head from the body, saying:
from henceforwarde, it is more convenient to exercise Feats of War, then to
go a Hawking. And coming toward the City, he entered in the night season:
where secretly he dealt with the Estate of the City in Council, what was most
necessary to be done, and then he departed again, to the place where Captain
Castro was: with whom he concluded, to send a Messenger to Pedro Asueres,
Lieutenaunt of Charcas, to will him to rise on the behalf of his Majesty: and
then the said Gomer de Tordoya, with all his power, went after Pedro Aluarez
Holguin: who was gone with a hundred men, to encounter with certain Indians,
and with good hap he ouertooke him: at which meeting he certified him of the
news at Cusco, beseeching him to accept the charge of so just and honorable
an Enterprise, as to be their general and chief Ruler over their Host: in
consideration whereof, he also offered to be his Soldiour and the first man
that should obey him. Upon which request, Pedro Aluares accepted the charge,
and incontinent spread his Ensign in the behalf of his Majesty. And this
being done, they conuocated the inhabitauntes of the City of Arequipa, with
whom they went to Cusco: where, at their coming, they found many congregated
on the behalf of Don Diego, who forthwith fled toward him, to the number of
fifty persons. After whom followed Captain Castro and Hernando de
Bachiaco, with certain Hargabusiers, who ouertooke them in the night season,
and apprehended them with whom they returned to Cusco.

The Council of Cusco hearing of this good success: came and joyfully
received him, and with conformity of all the Captains, both swore and chose
Pedro Aluares Holguin for Captain and chief Judge of all the dominions of
Peru, until such time as his Majesty should otherwise provide, whereupon
war was proclaimed against Don Diego and his retinew. The Citizens also of
Cusco bound themselves to pay all such sums of money which he should spend
of the Kings Treasure among his Soldiers, if that his Majesty should not
think well or accept the same in just and lawful accoumpt. And for the
furnishing of these proceedinges, all the Citizens of Charcas, Arequipa, and
Cusco, offered their goods and persons, so that in short space there joined
together, above.350. men, of whom were.150. Horsemen, a hundred Hargabusiers,
and a hundred Pykemen. But notwithstanding, Pedro Aluares, having intelligence
how Don Diego had eight hundred men and more in his Camp, he therefore durst
not abide his coming in the City of Cusco: but rather chose to pass with
his power into the Mountains, to join with Alonso de Aluarado, who likewise
was risen on the behalf of his Majesty, and also, expecting there to meet
with the friends and Seruitors of the Marquess, which were hydden in those
Desartes. So that he proceeded with his company in good order, meaning that if
Don Diego should happen to meet him on his way, to give him battle.

And when he departed from Cusco, he lest for the defense of the City, as
many men as was thought sufficient, for that purpose, he appointed Gomez de
Tordoya for Camp master, and Garcilaso Delauega, and Pedro Asuerez for
Captains of the Horsemen, and the charge of the Infauterie or Footmen he
commended to Captain Castro, and the Offices of Alerez of the Standard royal,
he committed to Martine de Rolls.

How Don Diego went to seek Pedro Aluarez, and finding him not, he passed to
Cusco. Chap. 12.
DOn Diego, having understanding of the proceedinges in Cusco, and how Pedro
Aluarez was departed out of the City, with all the power that he might make:
whereupon he judged that he was gone into the Mountains, to join with Alonso
de Aluarado, so that he determined to meet him on the way, and to stop his
passage: the which his pretense he could not bring to pass, with such
expedition as he desired, for staying for Garcia de Aluarado, whom he had sent
for by Post, at whose coming they left proceeding after Alonso de Aluarado,
and at the time when they came to the City of Trugillio, he was minded again
to disturb his passage, had not the Town of Leuanto, which stands in
Chachapoyas, persuaded him to the contrary.

When Garcia de Aluarado was come to the City of the Kings, Don Diego
forthwith took his journey against Pedro Aluarez with three hundred Horsemen,
one hundred Hargabusiers, and a hundred and fifty Pikemen. But before his
departure, he banished out of the Country, the Lord Marquess children, and
beheaded Antonio Picado, after that he had extremely racked him, and put him
to sundry torments, only that he should confess where the Lord Marquess
Treasure lay. This done, he proceeded on his journey: but before he had passed
two leagues from thence, came secretly certain provisions from the Lycenciate
Vaca de Castro, which were sent from the country of Cuito, directed to father
Thomas de Saint Martine, and Francisco de Barrio Nueuo, giving unto them
thereby authority to deal in the government of the Country, until that he
him self might come thither.

Whereupon the Estate and Council of the City had secret conference, obaying
the prouicions which were at that instant orderly presented, and admitted the
Lycenciate Vaca de Castro for Governor, and Geronimo de Aliaga for his
Lieutenaunt, because he was so appointed by like provisions: After the doing of
these things, the Aldermen fled to the City of Trugillio, and many other
Citizens in their company: these things were not so secretly done, but the
same night Don Diego had understanding of all at large, whereupon he was minded
to return to sack the City: but fearing least Pedro Aluarez should escape
him, he durst not retire, and likewise, because his Soldiers should not come
to the knowledge, how there was a new governor in the land: So that for these
causes he proceeded forward: yet notwithstanding, when news was known in Don
Diego his Camp, many of his Soldiers fled from him: especially, Father Thomas
de Saint Martine, Diego de Alguero, Iuan de Sayauedra, Gomez de Aluarado, and
the Factor, Yllansucarez de Carauaiall: in this journey happened to fall sick
Iuan de Herrada of a certain infirmity, whereof he died. By mean whereof Don
Diego was forced to stay his journey, and in the mean while, Pedro Aluarez
passed by into ye valley of Xauxa, where Don Diego thought to have abode his
coming: yet at the length he followed him, so that they were not far a
sunder, the one from the other.

Pedro Aluares, imagining by conjecture, that he was not sufficiently manned to
encounter with Don Diego^ he used this policy, to deceive him in this sort:
He appointen twenty Horsemen on a night, to enter upon the face of the
Uautgarde of Don Diego, to apprehende as many of his men as they possible
might, the which his commandment was accordingly done: and in the assault
they took three me^ prisoners, which they brought away with them, of the which
Pedro Aluares commanded to hang two, and the third he promised to pardon, and
to give him a thousand Poyzes in gold, on condition that he should go to the
Camp of Don Diego, and there to give warning to as many of his friends as he
might, to be in a readiness to aid him, Policy.
for that the next night following, he meant to enter Don Diego his Camp, on
the right hand. And for the performance of this fact, the Soldiour made a
solemn oathe: For Pedro Aluares feigned that he had put in him his faithful
and special trust, not to discover his secrets. Whereupon the young man, with
the desire of the thousand Poyzes, departed to accomplish his promise, and
being Soldiour to Don Diego, he passed so much the more surer on his way.

When Don Diego saw his Soldiour come, and by him understood how Pedro Aluares
had hanged two of his men, and that he had released that one man, without any
special cause known, he fell in suspicion of the matter, and thereupon brought
his Soldiour to the Rack, who then opened all the secrets that was committed
unto him, unto whose sayings Don Diego gave credit, thinking all to be true
that was confessed. Whereupon the night following, he prepared all his force on
that hand, where he thought Pedro Aluares would have entered: but God wot, Pedro
Aluares meant no such thing, for as soon as he had dispatched the Spy, the
night being dark, he removed his Camp, and with all possible haste proceeded
on his way, leaving the enemy expecting all the night long, when he should be
assaulted, until at length he saw how he was deceived, and laughed to scorn,
so that then he also removed his Camp, and continewed on his way, with great
ha^te after him. When Pedro Aluares understood ye speed that his enemy made:
he sent a Post to Alonso de Aluarado, praying him to come and succor him. Who
as soon as the Post had done his Message unto him: he came with all his power
to aid his freende Pedro Aluares. But when Don Diego understood, yt both his
contraries were joined with all their force, he ceased from following of them,
and took his way toward Cusco. Then Pedro Aluares, and Alonso de Aluarado,
sent their Messengers to Guito, with advertisement of all their proceedinges,
to Vaca d^ Castro, beseeching him to make speed to come unto them, promising
that with Gods help, they would deliver the Country unto him.

In Xauxa deceassed Iuan de Herrada, and Don Diego sent some part of his Host
by the way of the plains, to join with the inhabitants of Arequipa, whether
his Captains also went, who robbed and spoiled all yt they might lay hold on in
the City, yea, and not contented with the riches which they found above
ground, they dug and delued in Churches, because some there were that had
informed, how the Citizens had buried their Treasure there.

How Vaca de Castro, came to the Camp of Pedro Aluares, and Alonso de
Aluarado, and was by them received for Governor, and what followed. Chap. 13.
THe evil success of Vaca de Castro, in his Navigations, has been already
declared, how coming from Panama, to pass into Peru, he happened to loose an
Anchor, whereby his Ship road at an extremity. By means whereof, he was
forced to ariue at the Port, called Buena^Ventura, which is as much to say: as,
the Port of good Fortune, and from thence he came to the gouernation of
Benalcasar, and so into Peru: In which journey, he passed much trouble, because
the way was long, and unprovided of victualles, and he also weak of infirmity,
and not accustomed to such kind of diet: yet notwithstanding, the premises,
in Popayan, he had understanding of the Marquess death, and of all the
success of the affairs in Peru: in consideration whereof, he contine wed daily
on his journey, hoping that with his presence, all discord should end.

It is to be understood, that although the Lycenciate Vaca de Castro, his
coming, was principally to make informatio^ of the death of Don Diego de
Almagro, and of all such things which had happened concerning the same,
without suspending the Marquess government. Yet moreover, he had secret
Letters Patents, in such sort, that if in the mean while that he abode in that
Country, should happen the Marquess to deceasse, and leave this mortal life:
that then he should take and exercise his room and charge, until his Majesty
should otherwise provide. By virtue of which Letters Patent, he was accepted
and received, as soon as he was come to the Camp of Pedro Aluarez, and Alonso
de Aluarado, where also were many others, that having notice of his coming,
came thither to receive him.

He brought in his company, Captain Lorenso de Aldana, who was at that instant
governor in Cuito, by the appointment of the Marquess: From hence he sent,
before his departure Pedro de Puelles, to prepare all furniture necessary for
the Wars: he dispatched also Gomez de Roias, borne in the Town of Cuellar,
with his power and provisions, directed to the Rulers of the City of Cusco:
requiring them to admit him according to the contents thereof, who made such
haste on his journey, that he came to the City, before Don Diego, and ascited
the Citizens with his message, which was wyllingly accepted.

When Vaca de Castro passed by Bracamoros, Captain Pedro de Vargara, who was
occupied in the conquest of that Province, came and submitted him self unto
him, and to serve him, he left a Town which he had newly inhabited without
people, in which Town he had once fortified him self, meaning there to resist
the force of Don Diego de Almagro. When Vaca de Castro was come to the City of
Trugillio: he found there Gomez de Tordoya, who was lately come from the Camp
about certain words which he had passed with Pedro Aluarez, and with him were
Garcilasso de la Vega and other Gentlemen.

At the instaunt when Vaca de Castro departed from Trugillio to go to the
Ca^pe of Pedro Aluarez, he had in his company above two hundred men of war
well furnished: as soon as he was come to the Camp, both Pedro Aluarez, and
Alonso de Aluarado received him joyfully: and after that he had showed the
Emperors order unto them, they delivered incontinent their Ensigns unto him,
and he forthwith restored them again, saving the royal Standard which he
kept for him self.

This done, he appointed Pedro Aluares Holguin Camp master, and sent him with
all the Army to Xauxa, to abide there his further order, whylst he went down
to the City of the kings, to gather together all such men, Armor and
Municio^, which there he might find, leaving the City furnished. He
commanded also ye Captain Diego de Roias should always go twenty leagues
before the Army, with thirty light Horsemen, to discover the way: he sent
likewise Diego de Mora for Lieutenant of the City of Trugillio, and with
great dexterity and diligence, he provided all other things necessary for
his pretended enterprise now in hand, even as though all his life time, he had
been brought up in the Wars.

How Don Diego slew Garcia de Aluarado in Cusco, and how he came out of the
City with his Army, against Vaca de Castro. Chap. 14.
IT has been declared, how that after that Don Diego, saw that he could not
overtake Pedro Aluares, he went to Cusco: but before his coming, Christouall
de Sotelo, who he had sent before him, had taken possession of the City, and
placed the Officers of Justice, according to his own pleasure, and vnplaced
such as were appointed by Vaca de Castro: As soon as Don Diego was come to the
City, he began to gather all the Artillery, and Gunpouder that he might come
by.

In Peru, there is good provision to make Ordenaunce, by reason of the
abundance of Metal, which there is found: and also at that time there were
certain Leuantiscos, who were cunning Masters in casting of Artyllerie, and
also expert in the making of Gunpouder, whereof they had store, by the mean of
the great quantity of Salt peeter, which there is found.

He also made Weapon for such as wanted, of paste of Silver and Copper, mixed
together, and of the same stuff they wrought exceeding good Corselets: besides
this provision, all the Armor of the Country was brought to his Ca^pe, so yt
he furnished two hundred Hargabusiers. He also ordained certain men of Arms,
although until this time they used in Peru, to fight on Horseback, after the
Genet facion, and seldom used to skyrmi^h with light Horsemen.

Being in this readiness, happened a certain discor^e between Captain
Garcia de Aluarado, and Christouall de Sotelo, in the which, Sotelo was slain,
whereupon great mischief was like to ensue, among the Soldiers, because each
of them had many friends, so that all the whole Camp was divided. so that if
Don Diego with amorous words had no pacified the matter, they had one slain an
other. Notwithstanding Garcia de Aluarado, understood that Don Diego was
greatly affectioned to Sotelo, and would not let to revenge his quarrel.
Wherefore, from that time forward, he had the greater regard to look to his own
safety, not only for the defense of his person, but likewise, minded to kill
Don Dieogo, the which his pretense, he determined to put in execution. So that
on a day he invited him to Dinner, purposyng to kille him in his diete. But
Don Diego suspectyng the matter, feigned that he was not well at ease, after
that he had excepted the banquet.

When Garcia de Aluarado saw that his devise could take no place, having all
thing in a readiness for his pretended enterprise, he determined with diverse
of his friends, to go and to inportune him co come to the banquet, and in the
way as he went, he chanced to disclose his mind to one Martine Carillio, who
persuaded him, not to proceed upon that journey, for, quod he, I fear you
will be slain: an other soldier likewise gave him the same counsel, but all
their advise could not prevail. Don Diego fained him self sick, and lay him
down upon his bed, having secretly in an other chamber certain armed men. So
that when Garcia de Aluarado entered the chamber with his company, he said
unto Don Diego, sir, if it may please your lordship to arise, for your
sickness is nothing, you shall also find ease, if you will recreate your self
awhile, for although you eat nothing, yet you shall garnishe our table. Unto
who^ Do^ Diego answered that he was content, and sorthwith arose and called
for his cloak: For he lay upon his bed having on his privy coat, his
Rapier and Dagger. Garcia de Aluarado and the residue, were going out at the
Chamber door, but when the most of them were clean without the door, and as
Aluerado was passing out before Don Diego, Iuan de Herrada which stood next
the door, stayed his going out, and made the door fast, which locked without
any keye, and thereupon took Garcia de Aluarado in his arms, saying: yield
thy self for prisoner, and then Don Diego drew his Rapier and struck him,
saying: he shall not be prisoner, but rather slain. And then came forth Iuan
Balsa, Alonso de Sayauedra, and Diego Mendez, brother to Rodrigo Orgonios, and
others of the^ which were in ambush, who gave him so many wounds that he was
soon dead.

When this news was known in the City, there began a broile among them. But
when Don Diego came out into the Market place of the City, he quieted the
people: yet notwithstanding many of Garcia de Aluarado his friends fled away,
After this success Don Diego proceede^ out of the City with his army, to
encounter with Vaca de Castro, whom he understood had joined with Pedro
Aluaaez^ and Alonso de Aluarado, and was coming the way of Xauxa to meet
with him.

In all ^his journey Pauloz brother to Inga served Do^ Diego, who Don Diego de
Almagro the elder now deceassed, had instituted Inga, whose aid was of great
importance: Because always he went before the Camp. And although he had but
few Indians in company, yet all the Provinces in the land had respect unto
him, and for his sake they provided both victuals and Indians to carry the
fardage, and other necessary things.

How Vaca de Castro departed from the city of the Kings to Xauxa, and what
his doings were whilst he he abode there. Chapt. 15.
AFter that Vaca de Castro came to the city of the kings, he caused many
Hargabuzes to be made having at that instant many connyng masters fit for the
purpose. He furnished him also of all other necessaries, for the provision
whereof, he borrowed of marchantes the sum of 60000. poizes of gold, because
Don Diego had spent all the kings treasure, before his coming. When all
things were in a readiness, Vaca de Castro left in the city of the Kings
for his Lieutenant Francisco de Barrio Nueuo, and Ihon Perez de Gueuarra for
captain of the Nanie, and then he took his journey wi^h all his power toward
Xauxa, leaving order in the city: that if Don Diego should happen to come upon
the city, by any other way not expected, as some did imagine that he would,
that then all the Citezens with their wives, children, families, and goods,
should go about the ships, v^till such time as he with his army should
follow him, to give him battle. At his coming to Xauxa, he found Pedro
Aluarez abidyng his coming with all his men of war, which he there furnished
with Armor, Pikes, and gunpowder, that there he had caused to be made. Then
Vaca de Castra divided the horsemen, which he had brought with him, between
Pedro Aluarez, Pedro Ausuerez, and Garcilaso de la Vega, whom he ordained
captains of the horsemen, and part of the footmen he commended to Pedro de
Vargas, and Nunio de Castro, who were appointed, for captains of infauterie.
He like wise, ordeines other two companies, the one of horsemen, which he
assigned to Gomes de Aluarado, and the other of hargabuziers which he appointed
to the Bachellier Iuan Velez de Gueuara, who although he were a Lawier, yet he
was an excellent good soldier, and of an excedyng good industry: For he it
was, that devised to make the Hargabuzes, for the souldiars of his company,
and nevertheless did exercise also his vocation toward the law. For it did
appear that he was in those days appointed Judge, which office he did use in
the fore noone of every day, and at the after noone he apparelled him self as
a good Soldier, in hose and dublet of colors, enbrodred with gold, which
becam him exceeding well, with his Ierken and plume of feathers, with his
Hargabuze on his shulder, excercisyng both him and his men, in the practice of
their pieces.

In this form Vaca de Castro ordained his host, the which were in number 700
men, whereof were 370 horsemen, a 170 Hargabuziers, and the residue were
footeme^. He appointed for cheef sariant of the Camp, Francisco de Carauajall,
who after ward was camp master to Gonsalo Pisarro. By whose order the whole
hoaste was governed, because he was expert in the wars, and had exercised
the experie^ces of a soldier above xl. years, he had likewise borne office of
liutenant, or captain in Italy.

In this mean while came messengers to Vaca de Castro, from Gonsalo Pisarro,
who had returned unto Quito, from the discovery of the land of Zinamon, as
before has been declared by the said messengers: he signified unto him how he
meant ^o aid him with all his force. Unto whom Vaca de Castra wrote, giuyng him
most hearty thanks, for his gentle offer: praiyng him, that he would not
trouble him self, but rather at that present abide in Quito, because, quod he,
I hope to come to some good end with Do^ Diego, and that he will submit him
self to his majesty's service. This answer he made, thinkyng to bridle the
presumption of Gonsalo Pisarro, and also he likewise, imagined that his coming
would hinder the agreement with Don Diego, because Pisarro might hope of some
revenge, and for that consideration also, Don Diego would fear to yield him
self. Others held opinion, that if Gonsalo Pisarro should happen to come to
the Camp, that then he would presume to take upon him the office of General,
being a man so well beloved among the Commonaltie, al^ these things
considered, Vaca de Castro commanded that the Lord Marquis his children
should remain in the custody, and charge of their Tutors, in the Cities of
saint Mighell and Trugillio, and in nowise come to the City of the Kings,
until other order should be taken: because the security of their persons was
there more certain, then in Lynia.

How Vaca de Castro proceeded with his host from Xauxa to Guamanga, and what
passed between him and Don Diego. Chapt. 16.
WHen Vaca de Castro, had set in order his army in Xauxa, he proceeded toward
Guamanga, in which journey he had understanding how Don Diego was coming
toward him, and either to take the Town, or else to plant him self with his
power to hinder his passage at a River, which of force he should pass, so
that in the taking of either of them, the anoiance should have been great to
the enemy: because the town is environed with valleies of great depth,
which did excedingly fortify. But Captain Diego de Rojas, who with his
company led the way, forsawe those dangers, who also had knowledge of the
pretense of Don Diego, and thereupon in short space built there a Tower, to
abide the coming of Vaca de Castro, who having intelligence thereof, made the
more haste, sendyng before Captain Castro, with certain hargubuzers ^o
fortify another evil piece of way, which stood not far ^ro^ Guama^ga
called the hill of Parcas. When Vaca de Castro, on an euenyng came within two
Leagues of Guamanga, he was advised that the same night, Don Diego meant to
enter into the Town, this news contented him not, because a great part of
his army were far behind, so that Alonso de Aluarado was forced to return
to gather them together, and when he had so done, he came with them in good
order, although some had iourneyed the same day more then five Leagues, armed,
with great pain and travail, by reason that the way was asperous with Rocks
and Creckes descendyng between hills, so that at length they passed by the
town, and lodged all that night on the other side in their armor, because
they had no certain news from their enemies, until the next day that the
Camp was assured by the scoutes, who had discovered more then six Leagues of
ground, and brought likewise advertisement, how Don Diego was at the least nine
Leagues from their Camp. Whereupon Vaca de Castro, wrote unto him by Francisco
Diaquez, brother unto Alonso Diaquez secretary to his Majesty, who was come
from Don Dieg^ his Camp, to pray and require him on the behalf of his
Majesty, that he would accept and come to yield him self under the royal
standarde, and in so doing and also in dischargyng his army, he should be
pardoned of all his former doings: but if he refused his merciful offer, that
then he would proceed against him with all rigor of justice, as against a
traitor, rebel, and disloyal subject to his Prince.

Whilst this messenger was going on his affairs, he sent a footeman by
another way, clothed in the Indians attire, with sundry letters to many
Gentlemen which were with Do^ Diego. But this footema^ could not pass so
secretly, for by the print of his feet passing through the snoe he was known,
and also taken prisoner, who as soon as he was brought before Do^ Diego, was
forthwith commanded to be hanged, and likewise Don Diego found him self
greatly agreeued with the subtle policy and cautell of Vaca de Castro,
considering that one way he dealt for peace, and contrariwise he sent to sow
mutynie in his Ca^p.

Whereupon in presence of the messenger, he ordained al his Captains and men
of war, thoroughly furnished to give the battle, and proclaimed also, that
who soever should kill any Citizen, both the wife and Indians of the dead,
should be given unto him: this done, he sent answer to Vaca de Castro, by the
same messenger, and by Diego de Mercado yt in no wise he would yield any
obedience unto him, whilst his enemies were in his company, who were, Pedro
Aluarez Holguin, and Alonso de Aluarado with their consorts, and likewise he
meant not to discharge his army, until he saw pardon from his Majesty, firmed
with his royal hand: for (quod he) I give small credit to the authority of
father Garcia de Loaysa Cardinal of Civil, whom I know not for governor, nor
yet to have sufficient power in his Majesty's absence, for any cause
appertaining to India. And where he thought through his subtle practice, that
the Gentlemen of his army would pass unto him, he was therein deceived. But
rather that he should think, that with great courage they all expected the
battle, and would defend the Country against all the world, as by
experience he should find, if he durst abide the same: and now (quod he) I am
on my way to se^ke him.

How Vaca de Castro brought into the field, his whole power to stand to
battle, and what happened unto him. Chap. 17.
WHen Vaca de Castro, had heard the embassage came from Don Diego, and also
considered his pertinacie, he marched with his whole power into a plain called
Chupas, which stood without the bounds of Guamanga, which place was very unfit
or asperous to fight a battle in. In this plain of Chupas he abode three
days, in which space, it ceased not from rainyng, because it was the^ the
midst of winter, and the soldiers a^tended always armed, because ye enemies
were at hand, so that hap, what hap might, he determined to abide the
battle, seeing that no other mean could be had, he also stood in doubt of
some of his men, who had been tofore in the battle of Salinas, saying that
his Majesty had not accepted of their doings, considering that Hernando
Pisarro, as yet remained prisoner.

But now to justify his doings, he pronounced sentence openly against Don
Diego, wherein he condemned him for a Traitor and Rebel, and to suffer pains
of death and loss of goods, with like penalty to all his retinewe, with this
judgment and sentence he required all the Captains to aid and assist him, to
execute the same.

The next day in the morning, the skoutes gave warning to prepare for
battle, affirming that the enemies were at hand, who had lodged the same
night before, but only two Leagues from their Camp, and now came marching on
their left hand to escape certain bogges, for to attain unto a plain that
stood upon a loine of hills, which were in f^ent of the Camp of Vaca de
Castro, meaning to take the Town of Guamanga, before the battle should be
given, deeming the victory to be sure on his side, by reason of the great
force of artillery which he brought with him.

But when they came so nigh together, yt the skoutes might talk one with an
other, Vaca de Castro sent Captain Castro with fifty hargubuzers to skirmishe
with the enemy, whilst the Ensigns might pass certain hills, which of
force they should go with great perrill, for if at that instant Don Diego had
encountered them, their damage had bin great, by mean of the Ordnaunce which
would have made a marvelous spoil among the footmen, so that to avoid this
peril and to come to the top of the hill with great expedition. Francisco de
Carauaiall, who then was chief Sariant, ordained that each Ensign without
respect of warlike order, should make all speed possible to get up to the hill
top, fearing the danger that might have happened with the prolongyng the way.

This counsel was obaied and followed, and whilst the hargubuzers of captain
Castro were skirmishyng, the footmen came to the hill top. In this sort the
whole force of his army atchiued their purpose, and planted them selves in
order of battle upon the said hill.

How Vaca de Castro set forward his Squadrons against Don Pedro, for to give
the battle. Chapt. 18.
AFter that Vaca de Castro, saw all his army on the top of the hille, he
commanded the Cheef Seriant, that he should ordeine the Squadrons, the which
accordyngly was done. Vaca de Castro, said unto them: That first they should
consider who they were, from whence they came, and for whom they should fight,
and likewise to consider, that at that instante the whole force of that
Country and Empire, was only in the strength of their arms. And more over,
if it should please God that they should be overcome, that then death was the
equal reward for them all. But if, quod he, the victory be ours, we shall
not only show our selves loyal, and faithful Subjects to our Prince, but
also remain Lords over the lands and treasure, which our enemies now
possess, and I for my part, by the authority which I have from his
Majesty, and in his royal name, do assure ye all the same. For, said he,
our sovereign desires this land, for no other purpose, but only to
remunerate all such, which faithfully shall serve his Majesty, and I also
know, that I need not, to exhort and persuade you to this enterprise, being
Gentlemen of noble parentage, for your valliaunt^ hearts, and commendable
courage, has always showed your true and faithful meaning. An now I my self
will be, by Gods help, your leader, to break the first lance.

When the General Vaca de Castro had made an end of his breef Oration: They
answered with one voice and great c^urage, that they were all ready to obaye
his commandment, and that by the help of God, they would rather be cut in
pieces, then to be overcome, because quod they, each of us do take this
war in hand, as proper to every of us. This done, the Captains besought
Vaca de Castro, not ^o enter into the Uantgard^ for quod they, in no wise we
will consent thereto. But rather we beseech you to abide with the Reregard with
thirty horsemenne, for to succor where greatest need shall require. And when
he had heard their importunate suit, he granted their request. And also
considering that the day was spent, and that only one hour and a half
remained of the day, the night was so nigh at hand, he would gladly have
delaied the battle till the next day.

But Captain Alonso de Aluarado said unto him: sir, if this night the
battle be not fought, we shall al perish: and since the hearts of your men
are already determined, stay you not for an other consultation. Vaca de Castro
liked well his counsel, but yet he feared the want of the day light, saying:
Oh would to God, that now I had the power of Iosue, to stay the Sun. In the
mean while, Don Diego began to shote his artillarie, because, for to join
battle, the contrary side could not come down the hille, without great
danger of the men, even as a plain mark to be shot at.

But the cheef Seriant and Alonso de Aluarado, sought out on the left hand a
sure entry, which descended into a valley, where they might at will set
upon their enemies, without peril of the Ordinance, which shot passed
clean over their heds, so that the Squadrons came down in order, in this wise.

The right hand, had Alonso de Aluarado, who with his company attended on the
royal Standarde: of which, was Alferez, Christoual de Barrientos borne in the
City, called Ciudad Rodrigo, and now was a citezen of the City of Trugillio:
The left side was commended to these four captains, Pedro Aluarez Holgui,
Gomes de Aluarado, Garcilaso de la Vega Pedro Ansuerez, each of them carriyng
in good order their standards, and companies, and they the^ selves went in the
first ro^es. And in the midest of the horsemen went the Captains Pedro de
Vergara, and ^uan Velez de Gueuara, with the Infauterie, and Nunio de Castro
went the Hargabuziers, in the foremoste front to begin with skirmish, and to
retire to their Squadron, when time should require.

Vaca de Castro aboade in the reregarde with his thirty horsemen, somewhat a
far of from the power of the battle, so that always he might succor where
he should see greatest need, as in effect he did.

How the bartaile of Chupas was fought. Chapt. 19.
Whilst the Army of Vaca de Castro marched toward the enemy, who ceased
not in shootyng of his Ordinance: which shot passed on high, clean over
the army of Vaca de Castro. Whereupon Don Diego suspected, that Candia who was
Master Gunner, had been suborned, and that therefore willyngly, he discharged
his ordinance in such sort: so that without any further hearing of the
matter, he slew the Gonner with his own hands, and when he had so done, he
him self shot of a piece of Ordinance which e^tred into one of the
Squadrons, and slew many of the^.

When Captain Carauajall considered, that their Artillarie could not be
brought with such speed, as time required: he determined with his company to
leave it behind them, and to enter the battle without any longer delay, or
benefit of their Ordenaunce.

At this instant Don Diego and his Captains Iuan Balsa, Iuan Tellio, Diego
Mendez, Diego de Hoces, Martyn de Bilbao, Iuan de Ollo, and the residue: had
placed their horsemen in two Squadrons, and between them the Squadron of the
Infauterie, and their great Ordinance in fr^nt, toward the place, where Vaca
de Castro was thought to give the onsette, And demyng it a cowardie, to stay
any longer, the Squadro^s marched on with the Artillarie, toward the face of
the force of Vaca de Castro, clean against the will, and opinion of Pedro
Suarez cheef Seriant of his Army, who being a man expert in the wars,
liked not their doings: for as soon as he saw the setting forward of the
Ordenaunce, he judged the feeld to be lost. Because in the place where before
the Camp was pitched, there was space sufficient for the Artillarie, to
offend at will, before the enemy might come nere, and with proceadyng
torwarde, they of force lost their benefit of the Ordenaunce, and so came
without discretion upon the power of their adversaries. When Pedro Suarez saw
that they would not accept and follow his counsel: he set spurs to his
horse, and fled to the part of Vaca de Castro.

In this mean while, Paulo, brother unto Lynga encountered with Vaca de Castro
on the left hand of his army, with a great company of Indian Souldiars, who
shot with darts and throwyng of stones with slings and other engines. But the
hargubuzers which were placed for time of need, set upon them and slew many:
whereupon they began to flee, in whose place entered Martin Cote, Captain of
the hargubuzers of Don Diego, who began to skirmish with the company of
captain Castro, and the Squadro^s proceeded by the sound of their drums,
till they came to the place where they abode, whilst the Ordnaunce was shot
of: which was done with such fury that they could not break so sone as they
would: and although they were within shot, yet they received thereby no damage,
saving the company of footmen which were placed on high ground, so that the
Ordnaunce made a great spoil among them, and forced the Squadron to open: yet
notwithstanding, the Captains with great diligence caused them to join
again.

In this mean while, Francisco de Carauajall chief Sariant, stated the
Captains of his side, until all the Ordnaunce was discharged, and then the
horsemen going up a little plot of high ground, met with the hargubuziers of
Don Diego, who at this instant slew Pedro Aluarez Holguin, and Gruiez de
Tordoya with two bullets, and wounded many others. When Captain Pedro de
Vergara felt him self hurt with the shot of a hargubuze, he began to cry unto
the Squadrons of horsemen to break, for if (quod he) ye delaie any longer all
your footmen will be spoiled. Whereupon the Trumpets sounded to break, and
immediately the horsemen of Vaca de Castro, encountered with the horsemen of Don
Diego with great courage, in such wise that they brake on both sides almost
all their lances, and many were slain and unhorsed on each side: when their
lances failed, they joined with force of sword and battle axe, in such
wise, that they fought with many a bloody stroke, till they were well nigh
brethlesse, and thereupon forced to rest a while.

The Captains of the footmen of Vaca de Castro his side, began also to
encounter with those of Don Diego, having no fear or respect of the
Ordnaunce, by mean of Captain Carauajall, who valiantly encouraged them,
saying, fear ye not the shot more the^ I do, for ye see (quod he) I am a
gross and a fat man, and a better mark to be shot at then ye are, and because
ye shall not think that I trust in my armor, behold my doing, and thereupon
he put of a coat of maile which he had on him, and also his hedpeece,
remainyng in his dublet and hose, and in this sort he led his company on the
face of the artillery, who followed with such courage, that in short space
they won it, and slew many of those that had the charge thereof, and then
joined in battle with the contrary side so valiantly, that the victory was
only attributed unto him.

At this instant, the night approached and began to wax dark, so that skarcely
one knew an other, but only by their watch word. The horsemen likewise
began their fight a fresh, so that then the victory began to appear on the
behalf of Vaca de Castro, who with his thirty Horsemen gave the onset on the
left hand, where were two firm Ensigns of Don Diego, who cried victory on
their side: Notwithstanding, all the other Ensigns of Don Diego began to
retire as overcome, and Vaca de Castro breakyng in among them, there began a
whot fight, in the which, some of those thirty horsemen were wounded and
unhorsed. And also Captain Ximenez, Nicholas Montaluo, and other Gentlemen
were slain. But Vaca de Castro striuyng for victory with so noble a courage,
Don Diego and his men began to turn their backs and flee, and Vaca de
Castro and his company followed, among whom he made a great slaughter and
wounded many.

When Captain Bilbao and Cristoual de Sosa, who served under Don Diego, saw
their side to flee, they received so great grief, that like desperate men
they entered into the thronge of their enemies, saying each of them, I am he
that slew the Lord Marquis, and in this order they fought till they were both
cut in pieces.

Many of Don Diego, his side, escaped through the darkness of the night, and
also with taking from the dead their conisance, for Vaca de Castro gave unto
his men red skarfes, and Don Diego gave unto his white skarfes: in this sort
the victory was manifestly known to be for Vaca de Castro: notwithstanding at
the beginning of the battle, Vaca de Castro lost many of his men, in so much
that the victory was then thought to be on Don Diego his side. But now in ye
flight of those which were overcome, they fled from one peril and fell into an
other: which was, as they escaped passing down into a Ualley, the Indian
enemies slew a great number of them, and likewise a hundred and fifty
horsemen which fled to the Town of Guamanga, which stood distant two leagues
from the place where the battle was fought. And there they were unarmed, and
taken prisoners by those few Tounes men, which abode behind to keep the
Town.

Don Diego, and Diego Mendez fled to Cusco, where they were apprehended by
Rodrigo de Salazar, who was his own Lieutenant, and Antonio Ruiz de Gueuara
Shriefe of the (...).

In this sort finished the auctorit^e and government o^ Don Diego, who in one
day saw him sel^ Lord and Princ^ ou^r all Peru, and on an other day
(likewise) saw him self prisoner by his own officers. This battle was fought
the sixtene day of September. Anno.1542.

How Vaca de Castro gave thanks unto his Soldiers, for the victory which God
had given them. Chap. 20.
THe greatest part of the night was spent in gatheryng the Soldiers together,
who had been occupied in the spoil of Don Diego his tents, where they found
a great treasure of gold and silver, and slew some which they found hidden,
and wounded. When they were all gathered together, thinking that Don Diego
would renew his army, all the footmen attended in a readiness, and likewise
the hor^emen.

Vaca de Castro spent the most part of the night in the commendation of his
Soldiers, and generally (also) his whole army, and gave particular thanks to
every of them for their valiant service. In this battle were many Captains
and soldiers, which singulerly did show the valor of their noble hearts:
especially, Don Diego hopyng to have the victory, and also iudgyng his cause
to ^e just, since his quarrel was to revenge his fathers death: yea, he took
more pains then his age required: for at that instant he was but two and
twenty years old. There were also many of his army that showed them selves
valiant warriers: Likewise many that were with Vaca de Castro, showed in this
exploite their noble minds, and especially to revenge the Lord Marquis his
death, who so entirely they loved

I^ this battle were slain on both sides to the number of three hundred
men, among whom were many Captains and men of estimation, especially Pedro
Aluarez Holguin, and Gomez de Tordoya, who pretending to get honor, and to be
singular i^ this battle, were apparelled in white velvet, besett with buttons
of gold, which attire was worn upon their armor, by mean whereof they were
known, and the sooner slain by the hargubuziers, as before has been declared.
Likewise Alonso de Aluarado, and Captain Carauajall who feared not the great
Ordenaunce, nor any other danger, where the bullets of ye hargubuziers rained
like hail: yea, it was thought a thing impossible for them to escape, so that
they dispising death, it seemed that death fled from them, as often it does
happen in all perilles, and the fearful to be soonest intrapped, as in this
battle did plainly appear: and especially, there was a young man who feared
to enter into the battle, hid himself behind a rock, where he thought not
only to be sure, but also should not hear the noise of the Ordnaunce, and yet
by chance there came a pellet from the great Ordnaunce, that brake the Rock
and slew him.

The principallest that showed their hautie courage, on the behalf of his
Majesty, besides those which has been rehearsed: were the Licenciat, Benito
de Carauajall, Iuan de Sayauedra, Lorenso Daldana, Francisco Godoy, Diego de
Aguilar, Bernaldino de Balderama, Nicolas de Ribera, Hieronimo de Al^aga, Iuan
de Barbaran, Michell de la Serna, Lope de Mendosa, Diego Centeno, Melchior
Verdugo, Fra^cisco de Barrio Nueuo, the Licenciat de la Gama, Gomez de
Aluarado, Gasper Rojas, Don Gomez de Luna, Paula de Meneses, Iuan Alo^so
Palomino, Pedro Alo^so Hinojosa, Do^ Pedro Puerto Carero, Captain Caceres,
Diego Ortiz de Guzman, Francisco de Ampuero, and many others which were in the
first rows of the Squadrons.

Of the justice which was executed upon those of the parcialitie of Don Diego.
Chap. 21.
THE night of the victory, happened an exceadyng great Froste, by reason
whereof many of the wounded men, died with cold, especially such as could not
come to the Camp, the Indians stripped them, and left them naked, without
respect either to their friends, or enemies. And this was the principallest
service, that the Indians used in these battles, for they did not only robb
and spoil the weak and wounded persons, but also maulled them with their
Clubbes. And through the darckenesse of the Night, the wounded creatures could
not be helped by their friends, saving Gomes de Tordoya, which was not
thoroughly dedde, and Pedro A^suerez obtained a Tent: and because the carriage
was not then come, the most of the Souldiars lay in the feeld without
Tententes or succor all that night.

It was a sorrowful sight to hear and see, the doleful cries and piteous
moan, which the wounded men did make, with the bitter pains of their
wounds. There were above four hundred persons wounded, who the next day
followyng. Vaca de Castro, caused to be cured, as well as he might, and the
principallest among the dedde were carried to be buried in the Town of
Guamanga. But chiefly he caused the bodies of Pedro Alu^res, and Gomes de
Tordoya to be buried with great pomp and solempnitie.

The same morning followyng, Vaca de Castro commanded certain of the
prisoners to be behedded, which had been accessaries to the Lord Marquis
death: and the next day when he came to Guamanga, he sound that Captain
Diego de Rojas, had behedded Iuan de Tellio, and other Captains of Don Diego.
Vaca de Castro committed the execution of Justice to the Lieutenant de la Gam,
who hanged and behedded forty persons of the cheifest offenders: others he
banished, a residue he pardoned, and also that the number of those which were
executed, amounted to three score persons. This done, he granted license to
all the Citezens to go to their houses: and Vaca de Castro went to the City
of Cusco, where he made new process against Don Diego, and after certain
days commanded him to be behedded. He likewise released out of prison Diego
Mendez, with other two prisoners, which had served against him, who as soon
as they were at liberty, went unto Inga into the Mountains called Andez,
which through the asperous entry, are inexpugnable.

Inga received them very joyfully, and showed great sorro^e for the death of
his friend Don Diego, whom he loved excedingly, as appeared: for when he passed
that way, he gave unto him many shortes of Maile and Corselettes, and other
sorts of armor which he had taken from the Christians, which he had overcome
and slain, when they went to aid Gonsalo Pisarro and Iuan Pisarro in Cusco,
sent by the Lord Marquis a^ here^ofore has been declared. He had also Indians
disguised at the battle, to bring him news of the success thereof.

How Vaca de Castro, sent to discover the Country, by diverse ways. Chap. 22.
THe battle against Don Diego being won, and the country pacified, Vaca
de Castro devised to divide his men of War: and not having wherewith to
gratify them all, except he should send them to conquer abrod in the
country: whereupon he commanded Captain Vergara, that with the company which
he had brought to serve his Majesty, he should return to his conquest, of
the Bracamoros: he sent also Captain Diego de Rojas, and Phillip Gutierez,
with 300. men^ Eastward, to discover that country, which afterward they did
inhabit, which country joins with the River of Plate.

With Captain Monroy, he sent succor to the Province of Chili, to Captain
Pedro de Valdiuia, he sent also Captain Iuan Perez de Gueuarra, to conquer
the Land of Mullobamba, which he tofore had discovered, and is a country
more hilly then plain: out of the side of which hills, springs two great
rivers, which falls into the Northen Sea: The one is called Maranion, of the
which heretofore we have spoken: and the other is called the river of Plate:
the natural people, of that country, are Cariues, which eats man's flesh.
The country is so hot, that the people go naked, sauinge light Mantels,
which they wrap about their bodies.

In this country, Iuan Perez had understanding of another great Land, which
stands beyond those Hills, toward the North, where are rich Mines of Gold,
and there brand^acute;edeth Cammels, and sundry sorts of Powltery, like unto
those of the new Spain, and also sheep, somewhat lesser then the Sheep of
Peru, and all their corn ground is watered with slewces, because there it
seldom rayneth: yet there is a maruailous great Lake, from the which issues
many rivers, on the borders whereof, are many villages, replenished with people.

In all those Rivers, are certain Fishes, like unto great Mastiffes, which
often times do bite the Indians, which enter into those Rivers, or pass
^longe the river sides, for they use to come many times out of the Rivers.

This country has the River of Maranion, on the Northside, and the country
of Brasill, on the East part, which the Portingals now possess: and the river
of Plate lies from thence Sowthward. The report was, that the Women, called
Amazons, dwell in that country.

Now Vaca de Castro, having dispatched his Captains and Soldiers, on these
discoueries, he abode in Cusco one year and a half, making reperticion of the
Indians, which were vacant, and putting things in order, in the country: He
likewise made Statutes, to the great vtillitie of the common Weal, and
conseruacion of the Indians: In this season, was discovered in the Comarkes, or
borders of Cusco, the richest mines of Gold, that unto this day, the like at
any time had not been seen: especially, in a river, called Carabaya, in which
Mines, one Indian has gathered 50. poyzes in one day: and all the country was
thoroughly quieted and the Indian people cherished and defended, from the great
wrongs which in former time they received.

At this time, came Gonsalo Pisarro to Cusco: for till now, he could not
obtain license so to do. And after that he had abode there certain days,
he went to Charcas, to deal in matters of his profit, and there remained,
till the Viceroy Blasco Nunez Vela, came into the country.

FINIS.
The discovery of the ritche Mines of Potosi, and how captain Carauajall took
it into his power.
THE RICH MINES OF POTOSSI.


FOrtune having showed her self so amiable to Captain Carauajall, it
appears yt now she has brought him to the top of the Hill of Prosperity.
It happened that after certain days, that the Indians and Anaconas of Iuan de
Villa Roell, Citizen of the Town of Plata, went travailing in the country,
about 18. leagues distant from the said Town, they chanced to come to a
high Hill, situated in a Plain, in the which, they found manifest tokens of
silver, whereupon they began to melte out of a vain which seemed rich.

The riches was so great which hear they found, that almost in every vain
where they made their ensay, they found the greatest part of Ewre to ^e fine
silver, and the basest Mines were by valuacion.480. ducats, in every hundred
weight of Ewre, which is the greatest riches, that ever has been seen or
written of. When the Justice of the town of Plate, had understanding of this
fortunate success, the Ruler of the said Town came and divided the said Mines
among the towns men, and each of them made his choice according to his lot.

The Indians and Anaconas, which came thither to work were many in number, in
such sort that in short time they built at the foot of the said hill, a
Town to dwell in, which multiplied in such wise, that there inhabited of
Indian workmen above.7000. persons, which did so well understand that
business, that they came to agreement with their masters, to allow unto them
a weekly pention: but their gain was twice so mutche as they paid unto their
masters.

The veins of these Mines is of such quality, that the Ewre will not melt
with ye wind of Bellows, as in other Mines are accustomed: but their meltyng
is in certain little Furnaces, called Guayras, wherein they use to melt with
coals and sheep dung, with the only force of the air, with out any other
instrument. These Mines are called Potosi, by reason that all the borders there
about are so called.

These Indian workmen are rich, for he that has but ^oure or five thousand
poyzes, is counted but poor: notwithstanding the great pension or tribute
which they pay unto their masters, and all such workmen, which come thither
to work, will not willingly depart from thence, by reason that their pains
and peril is not comparable to other Mines, by blowynge of the bellows, with
the great smoke of the ^oles: and likewise the Sulfer of the veins of Ewre.

When the reperticion of these Mines were made, they began to provide all
sorts of necessary Uictualles for the woorkemen, which was a thing very
difficil to do, consideringe y^ great number of Indians which daily came to
serve in those works, whereby victualles grew to such a dearth, that a bushel
of Maiz, came to be worth twenty castlins of Gold, and a bushel of Wheat as
much: and a Sack of the earbes, called Coca, was worth.30. poyzes, yea, and
afterward it came to be derer: yet through the great treasure which there was
found, all the other Mines were left uninhabited, and especially the Mines of
Porco, where Hernando Pisarro had a great portion of ground, out of the which
he gathered great riches.

The Mines also which gathered gold in Cambaya, and other rivers, left their
works and came to Potosi, because they found there greater profit without
comparison. They which understand in these works, hold opinion that by
manifest tokens these Mines are of perpetuity.

With this good success, Captain Carauajal began to gather great sums of
treasure, in such sort, yt he took possession of all the Indians and Anaconas,
of such Spaniards as were slain or fled, or had been against him in his former
war: so that in short time he obtained into his power, the sum of seven
hundred thousand poyzes, and would not there of aid his soldiers with any
thing, who had followed him in all his wars: whereupon they began to murmur
among them selves, and were minded to kill him.

The chief of this mutiny, were Luis pardomo, Alonso de Camargo, Diego de
Balmazeda, and Diego de Luxan: there were nere 30. persons, which determined to
execute the said pretense within one month after Carauajal was come to the town
of Plata: But through a mischance which happened, they deferred the matter til
another day. This practice was not so secretly wrought, but that Carauajal came
to knowledge thereof, whereupon he commanded Luis Pardomo, Camargo, Orbanej^^,
Balmaseda^ and other.10. or 12. persons of the principallest to be quartered,
and others banished: so yt with the execution of such cruel Justices, in
causes of Mutynies, the people were so feared, that they never durst at any
time after to deal in the like practices.

FINIS.
The Table of the Chapters contained in this present Book.
OF the notice had of Peru, and how the discovery was begun. ca. 1. fo. 1 How
Don Francisco Pisarro, abode in the I Will of Gorgona, and how with a small
company of men, he sailed beyond the Equinoctial Line. cap. 2. fo. 2 How Don
Francisco Pisarro came into Spain, to give knowledge of his travail, and
discovery of Peru to the Emperor his Majesty ca. 3 fo 4 Of the people which
inhabit under the Equinoctial Line, and other notable things which there are
found. cap. 4. fo 4. Of the veins of Pitche, which are found at the Cape,
called Destahelen^, and of the Giants, which sometime dwelt in those parts. ca.
5. fo. 5 Of the people and thing^s which are beyond the Equinoctial Line,
toward the South, alonge the Sea coaste. ca. 6. fo. 7. Of the ordenary wind,
which blows in the Playnes, and the reason of the drynes of that soil. cap.
7. fo. 9. Of the quality of the Mountains of Peru, and the habitacion of
Indians and Christians cap. 8. fo. 11. Of ye cities of Christians which are in
the mountains of Peru. ca. 9 fo. 13 Of ye opinion which ye Indians held,
touching their creacio^. ca. 10 fo. 16 Of the rites and sacrifice, which the
Indians used in Peru. cap. 11. fo. id. What the Indians opinion is, touching
the resurrection of the body. ca 12. fo. 17 Of the Origin of the Kings of Peru,
which were called Ingas. ca. 13 fo. id. Of the notable things which Guaynacaua
built in Peru cap. 14 fo. 19 Of the estate of the Wars in Peru, at the time
of the Spanyardes coming into that Country. cap. 15. fo. 22
The second Book.
OF the Conquest, atchiued by Don Francisco Pisarro, and his men in the
Province of Peru, cap. 1 fo. 25 Of things which happened to the Governor, in
the Island of Puna, and the conquest thereof. cap. 2. fo 26 How the Governor
went to Tumbez, and of the conquest which he there obtained, until he
inhabited the city of S. Mighell. ca. 3. fo. id How the governor went to
Caxamalca, and what there happened. ca. 4 fo. 28 How ye battle was fought with
Atabaliba, and he taken prisoner. ca. 5 fo. 29 How Atabaliba commanded his
Brother Guascar to be slain, and how Hernando Pisarro discovered in the
country. cap. 6 fo. 31 How Atabaliba was put to death upon surmise, that he
would have slain the Christians, and how Don Diego de Almagro went into Peru,
the second Journey. cap. 7 fo. 34 How Ruminagui, Captain to Atabaliba
rebelled, and made insurrec^ion in the land of Q^ito, and how the governor
passed to Cusco. ca. 8 fo 3^ How Captain Benalcasar went to the conquest of
Quito. cap. 9 fo 38 How Pedro de Aluarado came to Peru^ and what happened unto
him. ca. 10 f^ 39 How Don Diego de Almagro, met with Don pedro de Aluarado, and
what followed. cap. 11 fo. 41 How Don Diego de Almagro and Don pedro de
Aluarado, met with Captain Quixquix, and what passe^ between them. cap. 12
fo. 42 How the Governor paid to Don pedro, the 100000 poyzes, according to
agreemente, and how Don Diego would intrude into the government of Cusco. cap.
13 fo 44
The third Book.
HOw Don Diego de Almagro, took his journey toward Chili ca 1 fo 45 Of the
pains and troubles that Don Diego and his army passed in ye way toward Chili,
and of certain particularities of ye country. ca 2 fo. 4^ Of the return of
Hernando pisarro, into Peru, of the prouisi^ns which he brought with him, and
of the rebellion of the Indians. cap. 3 fo. 48 How Don Diego de Almagro,
beseeged Cusco, and took Hernando pisarro prisoner. cap. 4 fo. 49 How the
Indians slew many succors, which the Governor sent to aid his Brother in
Cusco. cap. 5 fo. 51 How the Marquis, sent to demand help, into diverse
parts, and how Captain Alonso de Aluarado came to aid him. cap 6 fo. 52 How
the Marquis went to Cusco, to succor his Brother, and by the way as he went,
hearing of the victory of Alonso de Aluarado, he returned to the City of
the Kings. cap. 7 fo. 54 How the Marquis gathered a new Army, and how Alonso
de Aluarado and Gonsalo Pisarro, brake out of Prison. cap. 8 for 55 How both
the Governors met, and how Hernando Pisarro was set at liberty. cap. 9 fo. 56
How ye Marquis proceeded against Don Diego, and how he retired to Cusco. cap
10 Eodem How Hernando Pisarro went toward Cusco, with his Army, and the
Battle of Salinas. cap. 11. fo. 57 What happened after the Battle of
Salinas was fought, and how Hernando Pisarro returned into Spain. cap. 12 fo
59 What happened to captain Valdiuia, in his voyage toward chili. ca. 13 f. 6^
The fourth Book.
HOw Gonsalo Pisarro prepared his Journey to the country of ^inamon cap. 1. fo.
^^ How Gonsalo pisarro departed from Quito, and came to the country of
Zinamon, and what happened in his way. cap. 2 fo Eodem Of the villages, and
countries, that Gonsalo pisarro passed, til he came to the place where he
built a Uergantine. cap. 3 fo. 63 How Francisco de Arellana fled with the
Uergantine, and what trouble happened by the want thereof. cap. 4 fo. 64 How
Gonsalo Pisarro returned to Quito, and what extremities he passed. c^p. 5 fo.
66 How the dwellers at Chili, procured the Marquis death. cap. 6 fo. 67 How ye
Marquis was auised of ye conspiracy pretended. cap. 7 fo. 68 Of the death of
the Marquis Don Francisco Pisarro. cap. 8 fo. 70 Of the natural condition,
custom, and quality, of the Lord Marquis, and also of Don Diego de Almagro.
cap. 9 fo. 72 How Don Diego de Almagro gathered an Army, and put certain
Gentlemen to death, and how Alonso de Aluarado rose on the behalf of his
Majesty. cap. 10 fo. 75 How the City of Cusco arose on the kings side, and
chose for their chief Captain, Pedro Aluarez Holguin, and what followed. ca.
11 fo. 76 How Don Diego went to seek Pedro Aluarez, and when he could not
overtake him, he passed to Cusco. cap. 12 fo. 77 How Vaca de Castro, came to
the Camp of Pedro Aluarez, and Alonso de Aluarado, who received him for their
Governor, and what followed. cap 13 fo. 79 How Don Diego, slew Garcia de
Aluarado in Cusco, and how he made all his power against Vaca de Castro. cap.
14 fo. 80 How Vaca de Castro departed from the City of the Kings, to Xauxa,
and what there was done. cap, 15 fo. 81 How Vaca de Castro went with his Host,
from Xauxa, to Guamanga, and what he passed with Don Diego. cap. 16 fo. 82 How
Vaca de Castro, brought his Army into the Feelde, to give the battle, and
what thereupon followed. cap. 17 fo. 83 How Vaca de Castro, moved forward his
squadrons, against Don Diego cap. 18 fo. 84 How the battle of Chpa as was
fought, cap, 19 fo. 85 How Vaca de Castro, gave unto his soldiers for the
victory. ca. 20 fo. 87 Of the Justice, which was executed upon ye offenders,
cap. 21 fo. 8^ How Vaca de Castro sent to discover the Country, into several
places. cap. 22 fo. Of the rich Mines of Potosi. cap. 23 fo.
FINIS.

