The account reckoning and confession of the faith of Huldrif Zwinglius bishop
of Zuryk the chief town of Heluetia, sent unto Charles the fyfte now
Emperor of Rome, holding a counsel with the most noble Princes, Estates and
learned men of Germany assembled together at Ausburgh. 1530. in the month of
July.

Math. 11. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refresh
you. 3. Esdr. 3. Above all things truth has the victory. Augustyne. Truth
may be oppressed for a time but it can not be overcome. Translated out of latin
by Thomas Cotsforde. And imprinted at Geneua. In April. 1555.

The contents of this hole book.
Of the unity and Trinity of God, and of Christ the son of God, and the
son of man. page 3. Of two Natures in one person, and that the distinct
properties and operations of the two natures in Christ divide not the person.
4. The weakness of man's Frewyl, and of Gods gracious providence. page 8. Of
man's creacion and of Gods goodness, mercy and ryghteousnes. page 9 Of
Christ's incarnacion page 10 The only medicin of the sick soul page 11 Christ
is the only way to reconciliacion and true felicity, and that iustificacion
of works, merits prayers and intercession of saints are confuted, and of the
condition of Gods eleccion page 12 Of original synn. page 13. 14 Sin is the
cause of man's myserye. page 15 The state of bondage spryngethth of the fault.
page 17 It is rasshnes to condemn infantes dyeng without baptyme of water.
page 18 Infantes of Christianes by the promise made unto their parents are
members of the church page 19. 20. Of the church of the Elect. page 21 The
felicity of faith is to be persuaded that he is the inheritoure of eternal
life page 22 Of the universal and sensible Church page 23 Euel as well as good
are contained in it page 24 The Christen fathers, mothers, Godfathers and
godmothers and the Church it self acknowledge their infantes to be members of
it page 26 Sacraments give not grace page 28 By Sacraments we witness to the
church, that we have received the grace of God. page 31 What a Sacrament is,
and that Sacraments represent the agreement done by the spirit. page 33 Of the
holy Supper of ye Lord page 35 Christ's body occupies place page 41 The only
spirit gives spiritual things page 43 Three arguments against the bodily
presence of Christ's natural body in the Supper page 45. 46. The old writers
spoke sacrame^tally when they reasoned of the fruit of eating Christ's body
in the Supper. page 49. Of Ceremonies, and that images ought to be taken away
if there be any peril of worshippynge them. page 51. Of Monstrouse mytred
bishops. page 53 Of the office of ye Magistrate page 54 Of the Popes
Purgatory page 55 Of Hell. page 56 The fruits of true doctrine. page 61 The
fruits of men's traditions. page 62. An Epistle declaryng the confession of
sins page 65 Of a general confession of sins. page 67 Confession of sins
unto God only page 69 Confession of sins before men page 72 Private
confession of sins is nedeful to many for knowledge, counsel and comfort page
74 How it is nedeful for knowledge page 74. 75. How it is nedeful for counsel
page 76 How a sinner shall recover gods favor. page 80 Nine preservatives
from whordom page 81. 82. Private confession is nedeful for comfort page 82 To
whom chefly one ought to confess his sins page 86 What is true absolucion
of sins page 86 Of confession of reco^ciliacion page 87. An open confession
to the church page 89 Abuses of ear confession. page 90 91. 62. 93 The
error of the Nouacions and Anabaptists page 96 Three sorts of sins, one is
called sin, an other blasphemye, the third, blasphemye against the spirit
or sin against the holy ghost. page 110 What is Sin. page 111 What is
blasphemye page 111. 112. 113 What is the sin against the holy ghost. page
114. Daniels prayer in Meter. page 116
Fautes escaped.
Gentle reader before thou read it over with thy pen mende the fautes
escaped, beginning with the ciphers on the top of the pages. thus:

Next after the page. 91. me^de the ciphers of three pages immediately following
thus: 92. 93. 94. and so following from 95. unto the end of the book.

Page. 29. line. 13. read brought

Page. 39. line. 5. read after

Page. 51. in the margin, read it thus Images ought to be taken away if there.
etc.

Page. 57. the first word of the first line read: believe.

Page. 77. line. 26, read publicanes

Page. 80. last line scrape out ye first word (he)

Page. 81. line. 14. read: avoid.

Page. 91. line. 13. read: for they think

Page. 97. line. 22. read: of the wicked

To all his faithful brethren and systers other willyngly fled or tyrannously
exyled out of England for Christ's Gospel sake, Thomas Cotsforde wyssheth from
God the father through our Lord Jesus Christ much increase of faith, godly
knowledge and constancy in Christ's holy religion.
DEarly beloved, when I with a lamentable heart consider with my self the
miserable stare of England my native cu^treye, and the great overthrow of
Christ's pure religion there, sithe ye most dolorouse death of our most godly
and virtuous prince, King Edward the syxt: and again remembrynge how
Idolatry, supersticion, Papistrie, and al kinds of false worshippinge of God
has in so short time ouerflowed so noble a realm: and what an infinite
nombre (which within these two years past bare a fair face toward true
religion) are now suddenly turned back to worship the beast, that is, to
enbrace the Babilonicall strumpet, and to taste again of the cup of her
abhominacions, I can scantlye refrain mine heart from sobbing, and mine eyes
from distillynge of tears. Alas for pytie, what a great no^bre of Gods
people is this day within England, that in their hertes do deteste and abhor
that false worshippinge and great dishonourynge of God now violently (I will
not say tyrannously) thrust into every church and chapel, and would with all
their hertes (if they knew which way to bring it to pass) fly out of that
Babylon now the great city of sin and confusion? And contrary wise it would
pytie any true christen man's heart to remember how many there are within that
realm (which are fully persuaded in their consciences concerning true
religion) that might well enough escape and come away, and yet will not: but some
of them had rather with most manifest and shameful ydolatrie pollute both
their souls and their bodies, than they would forsake the pa^parynge of their
paunches, and their best beloved God the wicked Ma^mon. Other there be that
stand in defense that they may tarry well enoughe and co^mu^nicate with the
ydolatrers: but I marvel with what consciences they can other read or hear
these and such like places of scripture here followynge:

2. Cor. 6.
Bear not a strange yoke (says saint Paul) with the unbelievers: for What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteous? What company has light with
darkness? What co^corde has Christ with Belial? etc. How agrees the
temple of God with images? And it follows: Come away out from among them,
and separate your selves (says the Lord) and touch none unclean thing,
so will I receive you. etc. Doutlesse me think that this text rehearsed should
sore nyppe their consciences co^sydering that the Lord himself speaks it.

Apoc. 18.
Let them weye also this scripture: Come away my people from Babylon (that is,
from that city, realm, town, village, house, family and company, which
openly dishonors God by ydolatrie, supersticion and false worshippyng) that
ye be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not of there plages.

Again, let them remember this saying of the prophet Elias: 3. Reg. 18.
Why halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be the true God follow him? But
if Baal be he, than follow him. An excuse
But many excuse them selves by a book made and compiled by a great clerk that
dyed with in these five years past: which book (as they say) makes much for
their purpose, that is, for going to the wicked Mass. etc. But surely, if
they weye that book well, it makes nothing for them at al: for he wrote that
part of his book for them that were but yonglynges in the true knowledge and
understanding of the mysteries of Christ's religion, and dwelt in such a
realm or cuntreye that were clean overwhelmed with Papistrie, and not well
reformed as was England. He wrote not that for them that had been already well
nuseled and exercised in true religion many years (as some of these excusers
have) and are fullye persuaded already in the greatest mysteries of pure
religion. I dare say, if he were alive he would not iustifye, neither bear
with these men, to who^e God has given so plenty of true knowledge, and that
so many years ago, but would most sharply rebuke them and tell them plainly,
that their accompaniyng and fellouship in false worshipping with ydolatrers
should

But the sorest grefe of al unto mine heart (were it not that their bold
confession of their faith and stout standing and constant perseuering in the
same unto the death comfort me again) is the tyrannical slaughter and
butcherlike murder of the saints, which were the true servants of God, the
sincere preachers of the way of salvation, the very martyrs, true witnesses
and constant confessoures of the true faith of Jesus Christ, which of late in
England have bestowed their very lives for ye testimony of that truth, which
they have in times past so faithfully preached to many thousands of Christen
souls with in that realm.

O England, England, what a sore buffet has God now given thee: Partlye, by
restorynge that bloudsuckyng bishop the Romyshe Antichrist to his former
usurped authority in that goodly realm, contrary to Gods word, contrary
to thine own laws, and contrary unto al your oaths, faith and fydelitie, to
thy perpetual shame so long as the world shall endure: And partly, by taking
away from thee such notable Instruments, by whose mouths thou have
abu^dantly herd God speak unto thee, and most louyngly showed thee how thou
might be saved, and in stead of them in his heavy displeasure now suffers
thy shameless shepherdes out of al pulpettes to feed the with too shameful
lies? And why? Doutlesse most worthily. Because, (as S. Paul says) thou
receauedst not the love of the truth (when thou myghtest have had it) that
thou myghtest have been saved: 2. Tess. 2.
and therefore God shall send thee strong delusio^, that thou should believe
lies. But take heed. For prate they never so monstrouse lies, glorious Gardener
and butcherlyke Boner with other of that ruflynge route of Romyshe rutters,
shall set such a glysterynge gloss upon them, and with such counterfeted
colors set the^ forth and paynt them, that thou shalt think them to be
most certain and Evangelical truths, and shalt be brought into such
dotage and so be bewitched, that thou shall think, that chese is chalk, and
chalk chese. Sweet is sour, and sour sweet, good is euel, Esa. 5.
and euel good, and consequently, that truth is lies, and lies are truths. And
yet to say the truth it is marvel, that other the Pope, the Queen, the
Nobility and commons of England, or any other body else where, should or can
credit or believe such wethercockes and dubblefaced dreamers of myschefe as
Gardener and Boner are. Whose wrytynges against the wicked and usurped
authority of their loving father now the Romyshe bishop, and the unlawful
marriage of the Queen's mother with king Henry the eight (for so they called
them both than) shall to both their perpetual shames remain, when they are
both gone to the deuel, except they earnestly repent in time, and ratify
again that, that they truly wrote than. For if their wrytinges were than
false, why did they (if it were but for shame of the world) affirm any
falshed, and cause it to be written and printed, except they would openly
show them selves to be the very children of the deuell the father of al lies
and falshed? If those things that they wrote than were true, why do they now
so shamefully deny them in all their wicked doings? why do they not now stick
unto the truth of them eue^ unto the death? Unto death quod he? Nay. whoo
there my friend. For both they have always ben most tenderly brought up, and
their flesh is to fine, delicate, nyce and to tender to suffer either
imprisonment or death for the truth sake. Yea they had rather put five
hundredth to death for affirmyng the truth (as they have done many already in
their time) than they would either stick to it them selves, or suffer other
godly persons to live, that would with tothe and nail stick unto it. But
here I will let pass these open enemies both to God, to the truth, and to all
true Christianes inhabitinge the realm of England, and commit them to the
unsearchable judgment of him, which knows best how to use both them, and
al other his creatures to the setting forth of his glory, and will now
proceed to my matter.

When I had in latin red the notable confession of the faith of that excellent
learned man Huldrik Zwinglius, I co^sydered (if it were turned into English)
that it would be both profitable and confortable to a great multitude of my
country folk, namely to them that are but yongelinges and weak in knowledge of
true religion, whereof some perchance are in prison already for the gospel
sake, and some shall hereafter be called before the Magistrates to give a
rekening of their faith: A christian ought plai^ly and openly to confess with
his mouth, the right belefe of his heart. 2. Cor. 4.
whereunto if they shall be required, there is no remedy, but openly and plainly to
confess with their mouths, what they believe with their hertes, unless they
will forsake Christ and his open truth, and so (which God forbid) run into
the hasarde of eternal damnacio^. Therefore they must unfeignedly say with S.
Paul: I believe, and therefore I speak. For undoubtedly, if ever we look to be
saved, the plain and open confession of the mouth must necessarelye go with
the right belefe of the heart, though dredful death should immediatli follow.
Do believe with the heart justifies (says S. Romans 10.
Paul) but to knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe. S. Peter likewise
voucheth the same, saying:

1. Pet. 3.
Be ready always to give a rekening or an answer to every man that asks you
a reason of the hope that is in you, and that with meknesse and fear, having a
good conscience.

By these and such like authorities and examples of Gods holy word it
does plainly appear: that if the Magistrate or tyrau^t demand of any a
reckoning of their belefe, they must in any wise boldly and constantly declare
it, though they se even death before their eyes.

It is therefore no less but plain hypocrisy, dissimulacion and half a
denial of the faith of Christ, to believe ryghtly with the heart, and for fear,
flatery, lucre or worldly gain to say or do the contrary. God grant us all
therefore to do as Jesus the son of Syrack says:

Strive thou for the truth (says he) unto death, Eccle. 4.
and God shall fight for thee against thine enemies.

But here one of good knowledge will say. Objection.
Sir I am not yet come unto that perfeccion to dye for my faith sake: neither
to forsake my cu^trey, and therefore I will abide by it and tarry here still.

I answer: Answer
then I will advise thee who soever thou art, to make thy rekenyng with thy
self before, Examyne thine own heart and consider well: whether thou do
unfeignedly feel in thy self such a strong and stout stomach, that thou
can be content boldly to confess and bide by thy faith: and for the truth
sake wyllyngly and gladly forsake father, mother, sister, brother, wife
children, and al worldly pleasures, and further suffer therefore shame, rebuke,
loss of all thy lands, goods, and promocions, forsakyng of thy kynsfolke and
friends, long imprisonment, tyrannical torments, and finally most shameful
death: If thou (I say) unfeignedly feel in thy self such a lusty courage
that thou can constantlye and with a joyful heart do al these things for the
love of thy Lord, and for the truth sake, than on gods name stand unto it
and abide all sharp storms and tempests, Eccle. 4 ^
and God shall (as Syrak says) fight for thee against thine enemies. And so
in all thy greatest trouble thou shalt glorify God.

But contrary wife if thou feel in thy self weakness, and art affrayed
that thou art not able to suffer all these things, doutynge that thou can not
stand stably in the open confession of thy right faith and believe, and
patiently suffer all the before named torments: Than I will advise the in any
wise to follow Christ's advertisement and commandment, Math. 10.
saying: wha^ they persecute you in one city (wherein is understood village,
town, country or region) fly unto an other. For if thou feeling in thy self
such weakness wilt adventure to tarry still, than beware of these terrible
threatenings of Christ, saying: who so ever shall deny me before men, Math. 10.
him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven. Marc. 10.
Again, who so ever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this aduoutrouse
and sinful generacio^: of him also shall the son of man be ashamed wha^ he
comes in the glory of his father with the holy Angels. Come away therefore
spedely, and prevent these great dangers of denial of Christ, and of his
known truth.

But this my poor and simple advice good brethren and systers touches
nothing at al any of us that are already come away for the gospel sake. For
(God be praised therefore) we have obeyed Christ's voice both speaking in S.
John and in S. Paul. In S. John's Reuelacion thus says Christ: Apoc, 18.
Come away my people from Babylon, that ye be not partakers of her sins, that
ye receive not of her plages. In S. Paul thus says the Lord: 2. Cor 6.
Come out from among them, and separate your selves from them (says the
Lord) and touch none unclean thing: so will I receive you, and will be a
father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
almyghtye.

Loo, these two scriptures I have rehearsed again, both for our singular
comfort, and for the comfortes of al them, that shall do the like that we have
done by coming away. And in wayinge of these two aforesaid scriptures I can
not but much rejoice and praise God on our behalf, and that for diverse
consyderacions followynge:



Mark that he calls the flyers from ydolatrie his people. Seeing tha^ in thus
flyinge away we are accounted by this place of scripture to be of Christ's
people, have we not much cause in our hertes to rejoice and gloritie God? I
think we have.

Deuteronomy. 28. Leui. 26.
The^ if we be partakers of Gods blessings, it is a plain assurance that
God is on our side. If God be on our side, who tha^ can finally prevail
against us? Doutlesse, neither Reyser, King, Queen tyrant, deuel, death nor
hell.

of God, and not to be partakers of them and other abhominacyons, which now
ouerflowe that noble realm of England: by reason whereof we shall and that most
fortunatly avoid and escape such great plages as now ha^ge over it. For
which cause let us daily more and more study to be thanckful unto the Lord.



These sweet promeses and spiritual confortatiues let us be myndful of both
when we lay us down to rest, and when we rise up again. And give God most
hertie thanckes both for them, and for that grace that he gave us to leave our
country, livings and promocyons and come away.

But here a papist will say that I am out of my wit, Objection
to say that we are fortunate with coming away, now suffering greuouse
exyle, dispatched of our lyuinges, forsaken of our kynsfolke, and out of the
Queen's favor. This (will he say) is to come out of Gods blessyng into a
warm son.

Answer.
I answer: The fleassh and carnal reason will judge no less. But if we judge
after the rule of holy scripture, it is qwyte contrary: For all Christ's
scholars must suffer trouble in this world. As S. Paul affirms, 2. Tim. 3.
saying: Al they which will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecucion.
This exile therefore is our cross, which we must esteem to be sweet unto us
for Christ's sake, Mat. 10.
because he says: he that takes not his cross and follows me, is not
worthy of me. And: if a man come to me, and hate not his father and mother,
and wife and children, Luce. 14.
and brethren and systers, yea and his own life also, he can not be my
disciple.

And touching our persecucion and exile let us patiently bear it. For Christ
suffered much more persecucion for us. And was compelled in his infancy (king
Herod seeking to destroy him) to fly away out of his own native country
into a strange land, Matthew. ^2
and there to tarry a long time till the death of his persecutour.

As for the Queen's displeasure toward us (though perchance so me other
causes are pretended) it is doutles for ye gospel sake. Therefore let us
strongly bear it, and commit our hole cause unto God, and let him alone with
the redress thereof, and daily pray for her true conversion unto ye enbracynge
of Christ's true religion.

But concerning the spoil of your lands, goods and possessions, and the
lawles robbery of our lyuynges and benefices, let us gladlye commit them
into the hands of God, and he will most surely (wha^ he sees convenient time)
recompense every penny to the vttermoste, other one way, or else an other: other
spiritually, or bodily, or both. Let us trust surly to Christ's, payment.
Let us trust surely to Christ's recompensacion, which promyseth to us (I
say to us) repayment, saying:

Matthew. 19
Every one that forsakes house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or land for my names sake, shall receive an hundredth
fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Lo here Christ says: Every one.
which considered, than say I, that he does not except us, nether any that
has done as we have done. For his promise is universal. The promise is
universal.
And as the promise is universal, so is also the perfourmance thereof, if man
continues faithful in his calling.

Luc. 18.
Saint Luke rehersyng this saying of Christ, says thus. Verelye I say unto
you: There is no man that has forsaken house, either father or mother, either
brethren or wife, or children (for the kingdom of gods sake) which shall
not receive much more in this world, and in the world to come life
everlasting. As though Christ should thus say: No man for my cause shall suffer
damage here, but shall enjoy much more again for it, both in this life, and
in the life to come.

Marc, 10.
S. Mark tells Christ's tale after this sort: Verily I say unto you: There
is no man that has forsaken house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the gospels, but he
shall receive an hundredth fold now in this life, houses and brethren, and
systers, and mothers, and children, and lands with persecucions, and in the
world to come eternal life. Hundredth fold.


This hundrethfolde signifies a mind much better content and satisfied with
that portion be it never so little that God shall give one toward his fyndyng
in his exyle and adversity, than with that great abu^daunce had in time of
prosperity.

Christianes for Gods glory forsaking their houses and goods, for one house
forsaken shall be many times most hertely welcome to many godly men's houses.
Yea the faithful shall so gladlye receive the^ and charitably entreat them, that
they shall think them selves fortunate to have in their houses such
strangers and geastes. Act. 10.


So thought Simon the Ta^ner that lodged Peter, and likewise Cornelius the
captain.

Act. 16.
So were Paulus and Sylas at Philippos most gladly taken to lodging with godly
Lydia the seller of purple, which said unto them: If ye think that I believe on
the Lord, come into mine house and abide there. I could here bring you
exemples of Abraham, Job and David, which for their patient sufferyng exyle,
spoil, and loss of land and country, were much more abu^dantly enriched of
God afterward, than they were before.

But here my good brethren and systers, Iouianus and Valentinianus.
I pray you mark the examples of two noble gentlemen, the one named Iouianus
and ye other Vale^tinianus, being both of the in high favor and authority,
and were Capitaynes of a thousand men a piece under Iulianus the Emperor,
which in the beginning professed Christ but afterward forsook him, and
persecutyng the Christianes became a plain Apostata. This wicked Emperor by a
law commanded al his men of war under pain of losing their promocions to
do sacrifice unto his false Gods. In histo. Tripar. lib. 7. ca. 1 Es
Theodoricut. li. 4. cap. 1.
Iouianus notwythsta^dyng rather than he would obey a wicked commandment of a
wicked Emperor, and so deny and sclau^der the profession of his faith in
Christ, chose utterly to forsake and depart from his great promocion. For
which cause Christ well recompensed him. For after the worthy cruel death of
that wicked Emperor, Iouianus was aduaunsed to be Emperor next after him.

So likewise the noble gentelma^ Valentinianus being a christian following his
master the said wicked Emperor Iulianus when he went to the Temple of his
false Gods, Theodoricus li. 4. ca 5. and Tripar. hist. li. 6. cap. 35.
was of the heythen Priest be sprincled with holy water. And being grieved
therwyth, for the zeal that he bare unto Christ, gave the priest a blow of
the ear, and boldlye said: So may one rightly say of the Papists holy water.
that with that water he was rather polluted than purged. For which thing, he
was first imprisoned, and than exiled and banyshed. Nevertheless for his
feruente zeal in gyuynge the heythen priest a blow, Christ afterward well
recompensed him. For next after the death of the said Emperor Iouianus, was he
exalted to be Emperor of Rome. So is it plain, yt for their great losses of
their promocions for the profession of their faith sake, Christ even in this
life recompensed either of them an hundredth fold. I could bring mo histories
to the confirmacion of this matter, but I will for this time content my self
with these. But yet one lesson derely beloved let every one of us learn of S.
Paul, and say with him even from the very heart thus: Philip. 4.
I have learned in what so ever state I am therewith to be content. I know how
to be low, and I know how to excede: Every where and in all things I am
instructed both to be full and to be hongrye, both to have plenty, and to
suffer need. I can do all things through Christ that strenghneth me.

Thus making an end of my long bablyng with you dearly beloved brethren and
systers, I here present unto you the notable confession of the faith of ye
great learned man Huldrik Zwinglius, which I have after my gross knowledge
lately translated out of laten for the instruccion and comfort of the true
Christianes of England. And wha^ I had translated it within less tha^ one
leaf of the last end, one of our brethren showed it to me translated already
many years ago and printed at Zurik. Which thing had almost caused me to
suppress my translacion: had not an other after that told me, that of the old
translacion there was but a small nombre printed, and many of them were lost.
In consyderacion whereof, he aduysed me and that earnestly to put forth this my
translacion, both for the profit of many of my Christian brethren which never
red the former translacion, and also for the reuiuyng of so worthy a
confession, and so have I done.

I have also added thereunto two little Epistles of mine own: the one conteynyng
my poor and simple judgment concerning the confession of sins, how far
the holy scripture will bear therwyth. And what I think touching ear
confession now reuyued again in England. The other Epistle is an answer to
the demand of a godly lady most insta^tly desyryng me to declare unto her
ye true meaning of an hard text of ye vi^cha of S. Paul's Epistle to the
Hebrews, and also what is the sin against the holy ghost, and how and wherein
it differreth from all other sins.

These things written after my rude manner and now put forth in printe I
beseech you take in good worth, and of your Charity remember me in your daily
prayers

We which preach the Gospel in cities, towns and villages, of christian
fellowship O Charles noble Emperor consecrated and holy appointed to equity
and ryghteousnes, have long desyrously loked-for when a rekenyng of our
faith, which both we have and profess, should be required of us. And while we
stand thus in a redynes, it is said, rather of common brute, then of any sure
and certain message or tidings, that many already have prepared and furnished
the order, sum and form of their faith and religion, which they may
spedely present unto you. And here are we in great doubt and perplexity, for
on the one part ye love of truth and great desire of common quietness pricketh
us forward to do the same our selves, that we se other do: And on the other
side, shortness of time afrayeth us, Partlye, for that we must do al things
to hastily, and pass them over to lightly, because of your great haste, (for
so the rumor goes that you will make haste from thense.) And partly, because
we which are preachers of gods word in cities, towns and villages are
placed farther abroad, than we can in so short a time assemble and take
aduiseme^t, what were most mete to writ unto your highness. Wherefore seeing
that we have already seen the confession of the faith of other, yea and also the
confutacion of their adversaries (which nevertheless seemed to be prepared
before any thing (touching that) was demanded of them) I thought it was not
vnmere if I also privately without the hynderau^ce of my contreyfolke should
forthwith declare a reason and rekenyng of my faith. For although other matters
require soft and easy haste, yet in this thing quick speed is to be made,
lest (ye matter slouthfully passed over) we should fall in danger other of
suspicious silence, or else of presumptuouse negligence. Lo therefore (O most
mighty Emperor) here I offer unto your majesty the sum of my faith on
this condition, that I may also witness thereby my self to commit and suffer
the judgment not only of these articles, but also of al other which I have
hertofore at any time written, or by the goodness of God hereafter shall wryt,
not to one only, neither yet to a few, but to the hole Church of Christ so
far as it pronounces by the rule and inspiracion of Gods word and spirit.

The first article.
First of al I both believe and know, His faith of the unity and trinity of
God.
that there is but one a lonly God, and that he is of nature good, true,
almighty, ryghteouse, wise and mercyful, the maker and governor of all things
visible and invisible. And that the Father, Son, and holy Ghost are three
persons, but the Essence and substance of them is simple, vnmixte and but one
alone. And concerning the Godhed and names or three persons I agree utterly in
opinion in all things with the declaracion of the Creed as well of Nicene as of
Athanasius.

I believe that the Son has taken to him flesh, His belefe of Christ the
son of God and the son of man.
understanding thereby, that he has verily and truly of Mary the undefiled and
perpetual virgin taken to him the nature of man, yea the hole man, which
consists of body and soul, and that after this manner: (...) the same hole
man is so taken into the unity of substance or person of the son of God, Of
two naures in one person
that man makes not a proper or special person, but is taken unto the
inseparable, indivisible, and vnlousable personage of the son of God. The
disti^cte properties and operations o the two natures in Christ divide not the
person.
And al be it that both natures, that is the Godhed and Manhed so keep still
their natures and properties, that both of the^ in him may truly and naturally
be known and perceived, yet nevertheless the distinct and several properties
and workinges of natures diuid not the unity of person. No more than in man
the soul and body make two persons. For as they are of most diverse and
contrary natures, so are they also of sundry properties and operacions. And yet
man which consysteth of them both is not two persons, but one: Even so God and
Man is one Christ: the perpetual son of God from everlasting, and the son
of Man from ye time appointed and determined. One person, one Christ, perfect
God, and perfect Man. Not that the one nature is made the other, or that they
are mixed, confounded or disordred among them selves, but that either of the^
abides still in his own property. And yet ye unity of person by these
sondrie properties is not disioyned. And thus one and ye same Christ touching
ye property of his manhed cried as a child, grew and waxed, incocased in
wysedo^e, ho^gred, thrysted, did eat, drink, sleep was hot cold, beaten, did
swet, was wounded, murdered, affrayed, was in heuinesse, and suffered other
things, which pertain unto the pain and punishment of sin, and yet was he
utterly gyltles and most estraunged from sin it self. But touching the
property of his Godhed, he with the Father and ye holy Ghost ordreth, goes
through, rules, sustayneth and nurrysheth all things both high and low, he
lyghtneth the blind, restores the lame, calls up the dead, with a little
word throws down his enemies, being dead he takes again to him life, he
ascends up to heaven, and sends down the holy Ghost as his own spirit.
And one and the same Christ abiding in one person of the son of God does
al these things, albeit they are contrary in nature and property, so that
eue^ those things, which belong properly to the Godhede, because of the
unity and perfeccio^ of person, are sometime ascrybed and imputed to the
Manhood: and contrary, those things which are proper to the Manhood, are
sometime spoken of the Godhede. Johan. 3.
He said: that he him self being the son of Man was in heaven, when he had
not yet in body ascended into heaven. 1. Petre. 2.
Peter also shows: that Christ suffered for us, when only his ma^hode could
suffer. But for unity of person it is truly said: both that the son of
God suffered, and that the son of man forgave sins. For both he which in
one person is the son of God, and the son of Man, touching the property
of his manhood, suffered: And he which in one person is the son of God, and
the son of Man, touching his Godhed, forgave sins. So we say: this man is
wise, when notwythstandynge he consysteth as well of body as of soul. And the
body is most estraunged from wysedom, yea it is a very poison and hyndrau^ce
of knowledge and understanding.

And again, we say: the same man is sore cut and wounded, when only the
body can receive wounds, and not the soul. Thus no man says. Of man there
is made two persons, when to either party his own property is attributed
and applied. And again no man says: that the natures are mixte, disordred
and confounded, when of the hole man that is said, which for the unity of
person pertayneth to the hole, but for the property of the parties belongs
only unto one. Paul says: 2. Cor. 12.
when I am weak, then am I strong. Who is it that is weak? Paul. who
ryghtly is also strong? Paul. But is not this saying contrary to reason,
unstable and intolerable? No. for Paul is not of one nature, albeit he is but
one person. Therefore when he says: I am weak, doutlesse that person
speaks which is Paul, but that that is said, is neither spoken nor
understood of both natures, but only of the weakness of the flesh. And when
he says, I am strong: Surely the person of Paul speaks it: but only his
spirit is understood. Even so, the son of God is dead: Doutlesse he
(which by unity and singleness of person is both God and Man) is dead,
but that is only touching his manhood. Thus therefore not only I think
concerning as well the Godhead and persons, as taking to the nature of man, but
so likewise have thought al they both old and new that are of right faith and
belefe. Yea and so think they also that even now acknowledge the truth
unfeignedly.

The second Article.
SEcondarely, I know and believe, Here falls man's free will.
that this most excellent majesty, which is my God, does frankely and without
co^straynt or let appoint and determine of al things, so that his counsel and
determinacion hangs of no cause or occasion of any creature, for that is the
property of the maimed wisdom of man, to judge and determine by conferring
and debatynge of natural reasons, or by exemple going before. But God (which
from everlasting unto for ever and ever with one only and simple lokynge upon
beholds al things) needs no account, Gods providence.
rekenyng, experience or proof of things that are done, but being on every
part wise, prudent, good etc. has frankly determined and set an order in all
things. For his own are al things that are. Hereof it is, that all be it
wyttingly and advisedly he in ye beginning would make man, Of man's creation.
which he knew perfectly would fall, yet nevertheless would as well determyne,
to cloth his son with man's nature, to repair and restore again the fall:
whereby his goodness on every part does appear. In Gods goodness is contained
mercy and righteounesse.
In which goodness is comprised both his mercy and ryghteousnes. His
ryghteousnes he put forth, when he cast the transgressors out of the pleasant
mansions of Paradyse: when he tied them in the prison of man's mysery, and
fettered them in the chains of sycknesses, and when he laid the law upon
them, which (albeit it was holy) they could never of their own power fulfill.
For here man being a dubble wretch learned, not only his body to have fallen
into mysery, but also his mind for fear of the law transgressed to be
tormented. For when after the spirit he saw that the law was holy, Roma. 7.
ryghteous and the messenger of Gods mind and will, as she which commanded
nothing but that-that right required, but yet also seeing that by deeds he
could not fulfill the mind of the law, he in his own judgment condemned
(the hope of attaynyng felicity cast away) going away desperate from the
sight of God, remembered nothing but that he should suffer the pain of eternal
torments. Thus far was Gods ryghteousnes made open.

Mercy.
After this when the time should come to utter his goodness, which from the
beginning he appointed to show as well as ryghteousnes, Christ's in carnation
he sent his son to take to him our nature on every part, except that that
is disposed and ready to sin, that he made a brother and like unto us, might
be a mediator, which for us by offering his innocent body unto death, might
satisfye Gods most vpryght justice, which behooved to continue holy, pure and
vncorrupt as well as his goodness, that the world might be throughlye assured
both of the recompensacion and satisfyeng of his ryghteousnes, and of his
present mercy to be offered unto us. For seeing he has to us and for us given
his own son, Roma. 8.
how shall he not to us give al things with him and for him? what is it that
we may not promise to our selves of him which has let down, abased and
humbled him self hither, to be not only like unto us, but also to be holly and
fully our own? who can marvel enough at the inestimable richesse and favor of
Gods goodness, Johan. 3. 1. Johan. 4
whereby he has so loved the world, that is, mankind, to give his own son
for ye life of it?

These lively fountaynes and sweet veins of ye Gospel I think are the only
and alone medicine of the sick soul, The only medicyn of the syck soul.
whereby she is restored both to God and to her own self. For nothing can
assure her of Gods favor, but God him self. And he so lyberally, so
abundauntly and so prudently has powered his loving kyndnes hollye upon us,
that now he has left nothing behind that we can desire, unless any durst
require any thing more then enough, and above the ouerflowynge habundaunce.

The third Article.
THyrdlye, I know there is no another Sacrifice of purgynge sin, but Christ
alone, 1. Cor. 3.
(for Paul truly was not crucified for us:) and that there is none so sure and
vndoutefull pledge of Gods goodness and mercy as is Christ (for there is
nothing so sure as God, Christ is the only way to reconciliation and
felicite. Act. 4. Justification of works and prayng unto Saints is here
dispatched. 1. Timo. 2 The elect are on this condition chose^, that by the
son they might be saved.
which affirms ye same) and that under the su^ne there is none other name but
the name of Jesus Christ, whereby we must be saved.

Here therefore (concerning the attaynynge of Gods goodness and mercy) are
refused as well the iustificacion and satisfaccion of our works, as the
merits, deservings, prayers, and intercessions of all saints, whether they
be in earth, or in heaven. For here is but that one alonly mediator betwixt
God and man, the God and man Jesus Christ. And Gods eleccion abides steadfast
and sure, for those that he has chosen before ye making of the world, he
has so chosen them, that he might chose them out to himself by his son. For
as he is gentel and mercyful, so is he holy and ryghteous. Al his works
therefore resemble of mercy and ryghteousnes. Wherefore ryghtly his eleccion
smells of them both. Of his goodness it was to have chosen whom he would, but
it was of ryghteousnes to purchase and join to him self them that are chosen
through his son made a sacrifice to recompense Gods ryghteousnes for us.

The fourth Article.
FOurthly, I know that that great graundfathers father, our first father Ada^
through self love, by the subtyle suggestion, wicked temptacion and envious
counsel of the deuel, was allured to this point, to covet to be made like unto
God. And when he had committed that sin, he tasted of the forbidden and most
dangerous fruit, Of original sin.
whereby he fell into ye fault and gyltinesse of most horrible death and
dampnacion, made thereby the stubburne adversary and enemy of his God.
Wherefore wha^ God might of equity and right have utterly destroyed him, yet
being most graciouse Lord unto him, he changed his everlasting pain and
punishment into a state, that is, to make him a bond servant, whom he might
have worthelye punyshed with everlasting death and utter destruction.

For as much than, as neither he, nor yet any that is borne of him can take
away this state and condition of bondage (for a bondsman can not but beget
another bond man) he has by the deadly tastyng of the forbydde^ fruit, They
are called bo^d that are saved, when of right they might have been killed by
their takers.
kest all his posterity into bondage. Now therefore touching original sin I
think thus:

That is truly called sin, which is committed against ye law: for where no
law is, there is no transgression. And where no transgression is, there is no
sin, as sin is properlye taken, that is, so far as sin is a deed, a
fault, an act or offense. Therefore I acknowledge that our first father sinned a
sin, that is sin in deed, that is to say, an act a fault, and a detestable
thing. But they that are borne of him have not sinned after that manner. For
which of us have bytten with our teeth and eaten the forbidden fruit in
Paradise? Wherefore will we nyl we, we are compelled to grant that original
sin as it is in the children of Adam, is not properly sin, as it is now
declared, for properly it is not an act or deed committed against the law.
But it may properly be called, a byrthsore, a natural sycknesse and disease,
and also it may be called a sinful state and condition. A disease it is, for as
he of self love fell, so we also fall It is also a synful state or condition: for
like as he by his sin was made bond and subject to death, so we also are
borne bond, the children of wrath, and subject to death. Al be it I pass
nothing if this disease and condition after Paul's manner be called syn, yea it
is such a sin, that who so ever are borne in it are the enemies and
adversaries of God: for hither the synful state of our birth draws us, and
not the actual co^mittynge of offense, except so far as our first parent
has committed it once. Therefore the very cause of enmity and death is the
sin and offente committed of Ada^, Sin is the cause of man's misery.
and that is verily sin. But this syn which cleaves to us in our concepcion
is verily a natural disease and a sinful state, yea a necessity of dyenge.
Notwythstandyng that never should have been by birth only, had not offense
first defiled the birth. Sin therefore is the cause of man's mysery, and not
the birth. But of birth it is none otherwise, than of it that follows of the
fou^tayne and principal cause. The confirmacion of this sentence is grounded
both upon authority and exe^ple, Roman. 5.
Paul speaks thus: If by the sin of one, Authority
death reigned by the means of one: much more they (which receive abundaunce
of grace, and of the gift of ryghteousnes) shall reign in life by the means
of one, that is to say, Jesus Christ. Here we se that sin is properly taken.
for this one, is Adam, through whose fall death ha^geth over our necks.
Again the same Paul says: All have sinned and have need of the glory,
Roman. 3.
that is, the goodness and lyberalytie of God. Here sin is taken for the
disease, state and birth, that we al are said to sin, yea before we are
powered out into this light, that is, we are in the state and condition of sin
and death, yea before we sin in act or deed, which sentence unavoidably is
again strengthened by these words: Roman. 5.
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also which had
not sinned with like transgression as did Ada^. Loo, death is upon us, albeit
we have not sinned like as Adam did. Wherefore? For he sinned in deed, but seeing
we have not sinned after ye manner, why does death devour us? For he is dead
because of sin, and being dead, that is, judged to death, he has begotten
us. Therefore we also dye, but through his fault, and by our own sinful state
and disease, or if thou wylt, by sin, but taken improperly. Exemple. The
state spri^gheth of the fawte.
The exe^ple is such: one taken prisoner in battle, by his untruth,
disloyalty and ennemitie has well deserved to be a bondma^. They that are
borne of him, that is, the bondmannes children are made bond, not by fault,
act or offense on their behalf, but by state and condition, which followed
the fault: for their father of whom they were begotten, had deserved that by
offense. The children have not ye offense, but the punishment and penalty of
the offense, that is, the state or condition, the bondage and prison. If ye
lust to call these things offense, because they are executed and ministered for
offense, I forbid you not. To be short.

I acknowledge this original sin by condicyon and infeccyo^ to spring in all
me^ which are begotten through the affectyon of man and woman.

And I know: Ephe. 2.
that we are by nature the children of wrath: but through grace, which by the
second Adam Christ has restored the fall, I dowt not to be received among the
children of God, and that after this manner that follows:

The.v. Article.
It is rasshnes to condemn infantes dyeng withowt baptym of water.
FYftly. Doutlesse this is evident: If in Christ the second Adam we are
restored unto life, like as in the first Ada^ we are given over to death, than
do we rashly co^dempne the children borne to christen parents, yea and the
children of the heythen also. For if Adam by synnynge could destroy all
mankind, and Christ by dyeng has not quickened and redeemed all mankind from
the great mysery brought in by him, then is not like the salvation restored by
Christ, and so (which God forbid) this scripture is not true: 1. Cor. 15. He
will not diffine of the infa^tes of the heythen.
As in Adam al dye, so in Christ are al restored to life.

But how so ever men determine of the infantes of the heythen, this certainly
we affirm, because of the power of salvation performed by Christ, that they
rashly give sentence without reasonable cause, that judges them to the
everlasting curse, partlye, for the said cause of restauracion by Christ, and
partly, for the free eleccion of God, which follows not faith, but faith it,
whereof I will speak more in the article following. For they which are chosen
from everlasting, doutlesse are chosen before they have faith. Therefore they
which for lack of age have not faith, ought not unadvisedly to be condemned
of us. For albeit they have it not yet, yet gods eleccio^ is hyd from us, of
who^ if they be elect, we judge to hastelye of things to us unknown.

Nevertheless touching the infa^tes of Christianes we diffine otherwise, that
is to say: He diffinyth of the infantes of christianes
that so many as are the infantes of Christianes are of the congregation of
Gods people, and parts and members of his church, which we prove of this
wise: By the witnesses almost of all the prophets it is promised that the
co^gregacio^ of ye heythe^ should be gathered together to the church of Gods
people. And Christ him self says: Many shall come from the East and from
the West and shall sytte with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven. Math. 8. Marc. 16.
And: Go ye into all the world and preach. etc. But to the church of the Jews
their infantes perteyned as well as the Jews them selves.

Therefore no less pertayne our infantes unto the church of Christ, than in
time past the infantes of the Jews. For if it were otherwise, Gene. 17.
then were not the promise performed and ratifyed: for than we should not
equally sytte with Abraham in Gods kingdom. Doutlesse he was nombred to the
church with them, which also after the flesh were borne of him. But if our
infantes be not so nombred with their parents, as were the infantes of the
Jews, tha^ were Christ not indifferent, but parcial and envious toward us,
denying to us that, that he had given to them of old. which were to much
wyckednes to affirm. For otherwise all the prophecies concerning ye calling of
the Ge^tyls should be made of none effect. Therefore, for as much as the
infa^tes of the Christianes are as well of the visible church of Christ, as are
their parents or other that be of age, it is evident that they are as well of
their number who^e we judge elect, as are their parents. For this cause it is,
that I judge them to do wyckedlye and presumptuously, which appoint to
condemnacyon the infantes of Christianes, seeing that so many plain witnesses
of scripture affirm the contrary. Which show that the church of the ge^tyles
shall not now be equal, but much mor large, than the church of the Jews. All
which things shall now be made plain, when we shall show our faith
concerning the Church

The.vi. Article.
SYxtlye, Concerning the church, thus we think: Of the church of the elect.
yt the Church in ye scriptures is diversely taken. First it is taken for those
chose^, which by ye will of God are appointed to eternal life. Of which Paul
speaks, saying: Ephe. 1.5.
that she has neither wrynkle nor spotte. This Church is known only unto God.
For he only (after the word of Solomon) has known the hertes of the children
of men. But nevertheless, 3. Reg. 8.
they that are members of this church know verily that they themselves are
elect, and are members of this first Church, because they have faith in
Christ. But they know none other me^bres thereof beside themselves, for so is it
written in the acres of the Apostles: Act. 13.
And they believed as many as were ordained to eternal life. Therefore they that
believe are ordained to eternal life. But who truly believes, no man knows but
he that believes. Ephe. 1.2. 2. Cor. 1.11 The felicity of faith is to know
that he is the inheritoure of eternal life.
He therefore now is sure that he is the chosen of God. For he (after the word
of the Apostle) has the earnest of the spirit, wherewith he being dispoused
and sealed, knows him self to be made, not bond, but verily free, and the
son of the family. For that spirit can not disceyue. Which, if he bear
record unto us and certifyeth our consciences, that God is our father, and
that we being sure and without fear do call him father, not doutyng but that
we shall go unto the everlasting inheritance, than is it certain that the
spirit of of the son of God is powered into our hertes. It is certain
therefore that he is elect which is so surely by faith persuaded. For they that
believe are ordained to eternal life. Act. 13.
But many in times past were, and many now are chosen, which yet have no
faith. The blessed mother of God,

John and Paul while they were yet but infantes and lytleones were they not
elect? and that before the creacyo^ of the world? but this they knew not in
their i^fa^cy another by faith nor reuelacyon. Matthew, Zacheus, ye righth and
thief, and Magdale^ were they not also elect before the world was made? and
yet they knew not that, till they were lyghtned by the spirit, and drawn of
the father unto Christ Hereof therefore it may be gathered, Ionh. 6.
that this first church is known only unto God, and that they only which
have a sure and an vnshake^ faith know them selves to be members of this
church.

Again the Church is taken universally for all that are rekened under the name
of Christ, that is, Of the vne^uersall and sensible Church.
which have given their names to Christ. Of which a great sort acknowledge
Christ sensibly by confession of faith, and use of Sacraments, and yet in
their hertes other they abhor him, or else know him not. Therefore we think,
that so many as acknowledge the name of Christ, In this church as well the euel
as the good are contained.
are of that Church. So was Judas of the church of Christ, and al they that
stepped back from Christ. For of the Apostles Judas was as well thought to be of
the church of Christ, as Peter or John, when he was nothing less. But Christ
knew who was his, and who was the deuelles. Of this known and sensible church
(albeit it agree not in this world) are all that with mouth confess Christ,
although there be many reprobates among them. Mat. 25.
For Christ paynteth out this church by a proper parabel of ten virgins, whereof
five were wise, and five folyshe. This church also sometime is called elect,
albeit it is not ye first church, which is with out spotte. but like as by the
judgment of men it is Gods church for the sensible confession of faith, so
by the same reason it is called elect. For we judge them both faithful and
chosen, which give their names to Christ. 1. Pet. 1.
So spoke Peter, saying: To the elect which are scattered through Pontus. etc.
where by the name of Elect he understands al them which were of the
co^gregacions, to the which he wrote, and not them only which properly are
chosen of the Lord. For as they were unknown unto Peter, so could he not
write unto them.

Finally, the Church is taken for every partyculer assemble, company and
congregation of this universal and sensible church, as: The church of Rome, the
Church of Ausbrough. The Church of Lyo^s. There are also other manner of
takynges of the Church, which I will pass over with silence at this time.

But here I believe that there is one Church of them, which have the same holy
spirit that certifyeth them, that they are the true children of the household
of God, and these are the first fruits of churches. That church I believe verily
can not err, namely in those chief foundacions of ye faith, wherein the chief
point of true religion consysteth.

I believe also that the universal and sensible congregation is one church, so
long as it holds this true confession of faith, whereof it is said already.
And I believe that al they are of ye church, which give their names to it
according to the rule and promise of Gods word. I believe also that the
infa^tes Isaac, Jacob, Judas and all that were of the sede of Abraham, and also
those children whose parents in the beginning of the church at the preachinge
of the Apostles came to take part with Christ, are of this Church. For if
Isaac and the residue had not been thereof, they had not received the badge of
the church. Seeing therefore they were of the church, the infantes and children
of the primative church were also thereof. And for that cause I believe and
know that they were marked with the Sacrament of Baptyme. The fathers and
mothers, godfathers and god mothers and the church it self acknowledge their
infantes to be of the church
by the recepte whereof, they were rekened to be of the nombre of the Church.
For so the very infantes acknowledge before the receyuynge of Baptyme by the
mouths of their parents, and of their godfathers and godmothers when they are
offered to the church, yea rather because the promise offers them which is
made no less unto our infantes, but much larger and more often than to the
infantes of the old Hebrews.

These are the foundacions of baptysynge infantes and commending them to the
church, against which all the craftye inuencions and subtle devices of the
Catabaptistes can do no thing. For not only they that believe are to be
baptized, but also they that acknowledge, and they that are of the church by
the promyses of Gods word. For otherwise utterly none of the Apostles should
have baptized any man or woman, because they were not thoroughly assured of the
faith of them that confessed and gave their names. Act. 8.5.
For Simon the iuggler and enchaunter, Ananias, Saphiras and Judas the
traytoure with many mo were baptized, when they gave their names to be
christianes, Genesis 17.
and yet they had no faith. Contrarywyse Isaac being an infant was
circumcised, when he proffered not his name neither believed, but the promise
gave the name. Then, seeing that our infantes are in the same state that ye
Jews children were, the promise both prefereth the name and acknowlegeth them
to pertayn to our church. Therefore baptyme (we speak of the Sacrament of
baptyme) as verily as Circumcision requires nothing but one of these, that
is, other confession or proferynge of the name: or else the covenant or
promise. Al which things shall be made more euidente by these that follow.

The seventh Article.
Sacraments give not grace.
Seventh. I believe, yea I know. yt al Sacraments are so far of from gyuyng of
grace, yt they do not so much as bring or ministre it. In which assercion
perchance (O most mighty Emperor) I shall be thought to malaperte. But thus
fast stands my judgment. For grace as it is wroughte and given to us of
Gods spirit (I speak after the facyon of latin, wha^ I use this word grace
for forgiveness of sins mercy and free benefyte) so does that gift pearce,
enter and attain to our only spirit. But a guide or chariote is not nedful to
ye spirit. For the spirit is a power and carriage whereby al things are
carried, neither have we read at any time in the holy scriptures, that
sensible things (as Sacraments are) could certainly bring with them the
spirit. But if at any time sensible things have been carried with the spirit,
then it was the spirit that carried, and not the sensible things.

So when the vehement wynd was brought, Act. 2.
by the power of the wind tongues were also brought, but the wynd was not
brought by the power of tongwes. Nume. 11.
So the wynd brought the quales, and carried away the locustes, but no quayles
or locustes at any time have been so swyfte to carry the wind.

So when the wynd being so great that it was albe to take away mountains,
passed by Elias, 3. Reg. 19. Johan. 3.
yet the Lord was not carried by the wynd. To by short: the wynd blows where
it will, that is, the wynd blows so as his nature is, and thou truly hear
the voice of it, but know not from whence it came, or where it stays. So
is every one that is borne of the spirit, that is, is lyghtned and drawn
inuisibly, and insensybly. Truth has spoken these things, therefore the grace
of the spirit nether is brought with that dyppinge in the water, another with
that bytte or drawght, another with that anoyntinge. For if it were so, than it
might be known, how, where, wherewith, by whom, and into whom the spirit were
brought. For if the present effect and strength of grace were tied unto the
Sacraments, tha^ wither they are brought, al things are gracyously wrought.
And where they are not ministered nor applied, al things are infeblysshed, that
is, than were all they graceless which had not received the Sacraments al be
it they be elect and chosen, Ephe. 1.
which election is by the grace of God in Christ. Nether is there cause, why
the diuynes should allege Materia or subiectum, the matter or subject, for
that the order and dispodisposicyon of it is before required, that is, that the
grace of baptyme or of thankesgyuyng (for so they speak) may be given to him,
that is first prepared thereunto. For he which (after their mind) receives
this grace by the Sacraments, other prepares his self thereunto, An argument.
or else he is prepared of the spirit. If he prepare him self, then have we
also some power of our selves, and so the preventing grace is nothing. If he
be prepared of the spirit to the recepte of grace, than I ask: whether yt
also be done by the Sacrament as a guide: A question.
or without the sacrement. If by the means of the sacrament, than by the
sacrament man is prepared unto the sacrament: And so the process shall be
endless, for always the sacrament shall be required to the preparacion of the
Sacrament. But if without the Sacrament we are prepared to the recept of the
sacrame^tal grace, then ye spirit is present by his bounteous liberality
before ye Sacrament, and likewise grace is there already present before ye
sacrament be brought. Sacrementes are witnesses wherewith we witness to the
church that we have received the gra and mercy of God
Of which things this is gathered, (which wyllyngly and gladly I allow in the
right use of sacraments) that the Sacraments are given for an open witness
of that grace, which first is present to every faithful particular man.

So is baptyme before the congregation given to him, which before he receive it
other has confessed the religion of Christ, or else has the word of promise,
whereby it is known, wen that he pertayneth to the churth For this cause it is,
that when we baptyse one of lawful age, we first ask him whether he believe.
And if he answer yea: than in conclusion he receaueth baptyme. Therefore faith
is confessed to be present, before he receive baptyme, and so faith is not
given in the recepte of baptyme.

But if an infant be offered to baptyme, tha^ it is asked: whether the chyldes
parents offer it to be baptized. And when it is answered by the witnesses that
they would have it baptized, tha^ by and by the infant is baptized.

And here the promise of God went before, that he as well estemeth our infantes
to be of the church, as were the children of the Hebrews. For wha^ they which
are of the church offer them, than the infant is baptized by this law, that
for as much as it is borne of christianes, it is by Gods promise reputed and
taken among the me^bres of the Church. Therefore by baptyme the church openly
receaueth him, which before is received by grace. So than, baptyme brings not
grace, but witnesses to the church, that grace is already given to him, to
whom baptyme is ministered.

I believe therefore O Emperor, that a Sacrament is a sign of an holy thing,
that is, What a sacrament is
of grace given already. I believe that it is a visible figure or form, of an
invisible grace. which by the fre gift of God is ministered and given.
Sacraments represe^t the agreement af a thing done by the spirit.
And that it is a visible example which nevertheless declares almost a
certain conueniencie, proporcion or agremente of a thing done by the spirit.
Moreover I believe that a Sacrament is an open witness of grace given: As wha^
we are baptized, the body is washed with a most pure Element: but thereby is
sygnifyed, that we through the grace of Gods goodness are chosen into the
company of the church and people of God, wherein we ought to live holely,
ryghteously and godly, for so Paul expounds the mystery. Romans 6.
Therefore he which receaueth baptyme witnesses thereby himself to be of Gods
church, which worshippeth here God in soundness of faith and pureness of
life. And for that cause the sacraments, Awsten upon John
which are holy Ceremonies (for the word comes to the Element and it is
made a Sacracrame^t) are devoutly to be reuere^ced, treaty. 80
that is, to be had in price and estimacion, and reuerentlye to be ministered
and used. For albeit they can not pardone us nor release us of our sins, yet
vysiblye they join us to the church, which first were inuisibly by the grace
of Eleccion received into the same, which thing seeing that in the ministracion
of them it is together pronounced and publyshed with the words of Gods
promise, it is with much deuocio^ to be had in estimacion. For if we think
otherwise of the Sacraments, namely that they being applied outwardly do purge
and cleanse inwardly, then plainly Iewyshnes were come home again, which with
diverse wasshynges, oyntementes, offerynges, sacrifyces and meats believed that
their sins were purged, and that grace by them were as it were purchased and
bought. Which thing nevertheless the prophets, and specially Esaias and
Ieremye did always most constantlye with sharp words shake up, teachinge
that the promyses and benefittes are given by the free liberalite of God, and
not for the regard of works, merits or outward ceremonies

I believe also that the Catabaptistes denyeng baptyme to the infantes of
christen men, do most shamefully err, not only therein, but also in many other
things, whereof now is no time to speak. And to beware and exchue whether ye
will the foolyshnesse or malice of them, through the help of God not without
peril I both taught and wrote first against them, that now through his
goodness that infeccion among us is greatly slackt, ceased, relinquyshed and
left of, so far is it of that I other have received, taught, or defended any
thing of this sedicious sect.

The eight Article.
Eight, I believe that in the holy Supper of thanks gyuing the very body of
Christ is present with the eye, Of the holy supper of the Lord.
contemplacion and beholding of faith: that is, that they which give thanks
to the Lord for the benefyte given to us in his son, acknowledge him to have
taken to him very flesh, in it verily to have suffered, and verily to have
washed away our sins in his blood, and so all the things done by Christ to
be made to them in the beholding of faith as it were present.

But that Christ's natural body by substance and really, that is, that his
natural body other is present in the Supper, or chued in our mouths and with
our teeth, as the Papists and certain that look back unto the pottes of
Egypt show and write, that truly we do not only deny, but constantly
affirm to be an error, which is contrary to Gods word.

Which thing O Emperor, by gods help I shall in few words make as plain
and evident to your majesty, as is the sun. First by bringing notable and
godly authorities of holy scripture. Then with arguments taken out of them as
it were with great pieces of ordinance encounteryng in battle against our
adversaries. And finally, in showing that the old doctors and divines were of
our mind, and stand fully with us.

A prayer
In the mean while come O thou holy spirit the creator, be present and
lyghten the minds of thine, fyl with grace and light the breasts which thou
haste made.

First Christ him self the mouth and wisdom of God says thus:

You shall always have poor folk with you, Mat. 26.
but me shall ye not always have. Lo here the only presence of his body is
denied. For according to his Godhede he is always present. For so is he always
every where, according to an other word of his: I will (says he) be with you
until the worlds end. That is, touching his Godhed, Mat. 28.
power, and goodness.

With us in declaryng this place agrees S. Aug, Awsten upon John's gosspel the
50 treaty.
upon John's Gospel the.l. treatye.

Neither is there cause why our adversaries should allege: that Christ's
manhed is, whersoeuer is his Godhed, otherwise the person is divided. For that
allegyng should take away the very manhed of Christ. For nothing but God can
be every where.

And the manhed to be in one place, but the Godhed to be every where does not
divide the person, no more then the son taking to him manhed, divides the
unity of substance. But mark this well. It should seem rather to divide the
unity of substance (but yet it does not) while one person takes to him a
creature, which the other two persons take not to the^ at all: than is, to
divide the person, the manhed to be in one place, but the Godhed to by every
where. For we may also se in creatures. That the bodies are tied to one place
only, but the power and virtue of them strayeth far abroad. As appears by
two examples following.

The Su^ne.
The sun is bodily placed but in one place: but his power and virtue works
in all places of this world.

Man's mind also surmounteth even the very stars and pearceth the very
helles, Man's mind.
and yet the body is but in one place only.

John. 16.
Christ also says thus: Again I leave the world and go to the father. Lo,
here is a word of forsaking, as before there was a word of having: because our
adversaries shall not be able to say: A Popisch gloss.
we have him not here visiblie. For when he speaks of the visible
wythdrawynge of his body, he says thus: A little while, and ye shall not se
me. etc. It were nothing but iugglyng if we should strive, that his natural
body were present here, John. 16.
but invisibly. For why should he, which yet were here, refuse to be seen,
which so often time afters his resurreccion showed himself to his disciples
most manyfestly.

Again Christ says: John. 16.
It is necessary for you that I go away. Mark that he says: that I go
away. But if he were here still, it were not necessary that we should not se
him, but rather confortable that we might se him. For he (as often as his
disciples were amassed and astonnyed at the beholdynge of him) showed himself
plainly and openly to them. And lest other their senses or their thoughts
should suffer any suspicion. Luc. 24.
He says unto them: Se my hands and my feet: for it is even I my self.
Touch me, and handle me.

And to Thomas he said: put thine hand into my side. John. 20.
And to Magdalene he showed himself vysiblye.

Again when he now even going away should commend his disciples unto his
father, he said:

Here after I will not be in the world. Here is used a Verb substantive, John.
17.
as well as in these words: this is my body, that the adversaries may not
here say, that there is a fyguratiue speech, seeing they deny that verbes
substantives receive any figure. But the thing has no need of these euasions,
For it follows in the text: But they are in the world. Which collacion
teaches manyfestly, that he touching his manhed is not in the world than,
wha^ his disciples were. And that we may know when he went away (not as they
rather feign than expound: Luc. 24.
wha^ he made himself invisible) so says Luke: And it happened, wha^ he
blessed them, he went away from them, and was carried up into heaven.

Loo, he says not: he vanyshed away: or made himself invisible.

Marc. 16.
And Mark adds: The Lord after he had spoken to them was taken up into
heaven, and sytteth on the right hand of God. He says not: He abides here
still, but has made his body invisible. In yt Acts: while they beheld he was
take up on hye: Act. 1.
And a cloud received hi^ out of their sight. A cloud covered him, which had been no need, if he had only taken away the sight of him self, and otherwise
had been present here still. Neither neded he then the taking up, Act. 1.
or lyftyng up on hye. And it follows there: The same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come eue^ as ye have seen him go into heaven.

What is clearer than this? he is taken away from you. Than he was not with
them another visiblie nor invisibly concerning his manhed. Wherefore, when we
shall se him come again, like as he went away, tha^ shall we know that he is
present. Or else touching his manhed, he sytteth at the right hand of the
father, till he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

But because there is some that do take away place from Christ's body, and
says that it is in no place: Let them take heed how openly they go against
the truth and shut their eyes wylfully. For they are not ignorant, Christ's
body occupies a place.
that his body was in the Maunger, in the Temple at Jerusalem wha^ his pare^tes
were in their journey. It was on the Cross, in the Grave, without the grave.
for the Angel said: he is ryson, he is not here. Lo the place where they laid
him. And that they should not say: that his body is every where, let them well
mark the Angel saying: He is not here. And this place: Jesus came when the
gates were shut and stood in the myddest of them. John. 20.
What need he to come, if his body be every where, but invisibly? It had been
enough not to come, but only to show him self, which was bodily there
present before. But away with so craftily alleged tryfles, which take from us
the truth as well of Christ's manhed, as of the holy scriptures. These
aforesaid places of scripture take away the presence of Christ's body every
where, except in heaven, speaking orderly and right after the rule of holy
scripture, that is, for so much as we are assured by the scripture touching
the nature and property of the body taken to him.

How much so ever contrary places constrayne us, (as when they tell us of
the myraculous power of God) yet what so ever we put forth touching the power
of God, Contrary places
never ought to be wrythe^ of us so far that we should believe God to do
contrary unto his word, for that were the property of feblenesse and not of
power.

That with our mouth ye natural body of Christ is not eaten, him self
showed, when he said unto ye Jews stryuynge for the bodily earynge of his
flesh: The flesh profits nothing. John. 6.
Namely to eat it naturallye, but to eat it spiritually profyteth much, for
it gives life.

That that is borne of fleashe, John. 3.
is fleashe. And that that is borne of ye spirit, is spirit.

If than the natural body of Christ be eaten with our mouth, what other
thing of fleashe naturally eaten can be made but fleashe? And lest it should be
thought of any man to be but an easy argument and a light reason let him here,
way and consider the other part. That that is borne of spirit, is spirit.
The only spirit gives spiritual things.


If than the fleashe of Christ be wholesome to the soul, it must spiritually
and not carnally be eaten. This also pertayneth unto the matter of Sacraments,
that the spirit is begotten by the spirit, and not by any bodily thing, as
we showed before.

Paul admonysheth, 2. Cor. 5
that if any have known Christ at any time after the fleashe, yet now he
should not know him after the fleashe.

By these and such like places are we compelled to acknowledge, yt these
words: this is my body must be taken not naturally, but figuratively: like as
these are: This is the Passover. For the Lamb which was year by year eaten in
that great solempnitie of holy days was not the natural Passover or pass by,
but did sygnifye it in times past to be done. To this end also agrees the
succession or exchange, because the Supper comes in the stead of the La^be,
which thing puts us in remembrance, ye Christ used like words. For the
succession keeps the imitacio^, that is, like manner of speech.

The time also agrees: for in the same supper the old passover is laid aparte
and abolyshed, and the new thankesgeuynge is begone and appointed.

The property of all the remembraunces do agree, which chalengeth to them
selves the name of it, whereof they make mention and remembrance. The
Athenienses.


So the people of Athens called a certain holy day that they had: The easment
of common debt, not for that the debt should yerly be discharged, but because
they with reverence perpetually kept that that Solon had ordained in time past,
and reverenced that their feast, with the name of the thing it self: So these
things, that is, the bread and wine of the supper, are called the body and
blood of Christ, which are tokens, signs and reme^braunces of his very body
and blood. Now follow the arguments.

Here follow three arguments.
The first. As the body can not be fed with a spiritual thing, so neither
ye soul with a bodily thing. And if the natural body of Christ be eaten. I
ask? whether does it feed the body or the soul? But it fedeth not the body,
tha^ of force it fedeth the soul. If it feed the soul, tha^ the soul eats
fleashe, and that were not true (which is most true) that the spirit only is
borne of the spirit.

Secondarely I ask this: what does the natural body of Christ eaten make
perfect? If the forgiveness of sins (as one sort affirm) than the
disciples had forgeuenes of their sins by the recept of the supper, and so
Christ dyed in vain. Again, if that that is eaten ministered the virtue of
Christ's passion and death (as ye same sort show) then the virtue of his
passion, death and redemption was distributed before it was begone. And if it
feed the body unto the resurreccion (as one certain man very unlearnedly
affirms) than much more it should heal the body and discharge it of
sycknesse. Ireneus
But Ireneus loves otherwise to be understood, when he writes: that our
bodies are nurryshed unto the resurreccion by the body of Christ. For he
shows: that the hope of our resurreccion is establyshed by the resurreccion
of Christ. Loo, this is a pleasant figurative speech.

Thyrdlye, if the natural body of Christ in the supper is given to the
disciples to eat, than it follows of necessity, that they have eaten it as
it was. But than it was passible (for it was not yet glorified) therefore they
have eaten his passible body. The objection of the aduersairies is prevented.


But they will say: They did eat the same body, but not as it was passible,
but the same after the manner and qualities that it had after his resurreccion.
And we say again: that tha^ other he had two bodies, one that was not yet
glorified, and the other that was glorified: Or else that one and the same body
was al at ones in the same time passible and impassible. And so by this means
forasmuch as he so greatly abhorred death, Doutlesse heretics would gather
that he suffered not ye pains of death, but that he used this gift of the
glorified body, whereby he was lackyng pain, and therefore will they say: that
he did not truly dye, but by dissimulacion. And thus by these blind busardes
the trade of Marcions heresy might be newly revived. Sex hundredth arguments O
Emperor, might be brought, but we will now be content with these. But that the
old writers are of our opinion (which shall be the last part of this article)
I will prove by two witnesses, which are of the chief.

By Ambrose which upon the first epistle to the Corinthes, Ambrose.
upon these words: Show the Lords death till he come etc. says thus.

Seeing that by the death of ye Lord we are delivered, being myndfull of this
thing, in eating and drinking we signifye the fleash and blood, which are
offered for us. etc. Ambrose speaks of the meat and drink of the supper, and
shows, that we signify these very things, which were offered for us.

By Awsten also, which in the thyrtie treaty upon John's Gospel affirms:
Awsten in the 30 treaty upon John's Gospel..
that Christ's body that rose from the dead must by but in one place. Where the
printed exemplares have (may) for (must) but coruptlye. For both in the Master
of sentence and in the Decrees (wherinto this sentence of Awsten is translated)
it is red must. Whereby we may openly see, that what so ever the old writters
spoke honorably of the supper, they did utterly understand it, not of the
natural eating of the body of Christ, but of the spiritual.

The same Awsten against Adimantus. Awsten against Adimantus,.12. chap.
12 chap. teaches: that these three sentences: the blood is the soul: this is
my body: and, the stone was Christ: are spoken sacramentally, that is, as he
speaks in a sign, and figuratively. And among many other things at length
he comes to these words: I may also interpret this commandment to be
put in a sign. For the Lord dowted not to say: This is my body, when he gave
a sign of his body. Thus says Awsten.

Loo, A keye.
here we have a keye wherewith we may open all the saynges of the old wrytters
towchyng this article of the supper: that that which only is the sign of the
body, he says is called the body.

Let them go now that will, and condemn us of heresye, so that they know
thereby also them selves against the Decrees of Bysshoppes to condemn the
chief pyllare and stay of divines.

Of these things it is made most manifest, The old writters spoke
sacrame^tally, when they reasoned of the fruit of eati^g Christ's body.
that the old wrytters al way spoke sacramentally, when they gave so much to
the eatinge of Christ's body in the supper, namly, that the sacramental
eatinge of Christ's body could not cleanse the soul, but faith in God through
Jesus Christ, which is the spiritual eatinge, whereof this outward eatinge,
is a token and shadow. For like as bread sustayneth the body, and wine
comfort, nurryssheth, quyckeneth, refreshes, and makes a man merry: Even so
it strengthens and susteyneth the sick soul, and assures it of the mercy of
God, because he has given to us his son: and so likewise it refressheth, and
makes merry ye mind, that our sins (wherewith it was vexed) are quenched in
his blessed blood.

At this time we will hold us content with these, albeit one might make hole
books to declare and prove that the old writers are of our opinion in this
matter. Neither let the little book of Eccius latly put forth touchi^g the
opinion of the old wrytters discorage any man, for shortly, by the grace of
God, we shall se the confutacion of it, by the great learned man our brother
Ecolampadius, whose labor has been from the beginning of this controuersye
to enserche and gather out the minds of the old writers touching the same.
But in this matter these things that may be required for the more fuller
declaracion hereof, or confutacion of our adversaries, we which are of this
opinion have (as I think) abundantly performed by many books written unto
diverse men.

The.ix. Article.
Nynth. I believe that the Ceremonies, Ceremonies.
which by supersticio^ are another contrary to faith, nor to the word of God,
(albeit I know not whether any such may be found) may thrughe charity be
suffered, til ye light of knowledge more and more shine upon us. But I believe
also (the same charity being mastres) that the said ceremonies (when without
great offense it may be done) are to be abolyshed, although the unfaithful
cry out never so much against it. Images owght to be atken away if there be
any peril of worshippi^ge them.


But I think that images, which are set up to be worshipped are not to be
accounted among ceremonies, but are of the nombre of those things which are
utterly contrary to Gods word. But those that are not set up to be
worshipped, or where there is no danger of worshippyng them here after, it is so
far of that I will condemn them, that I acknowledge both the paynters and
caruers craft to be ye gifts of God.

The.x. Article.
Tenth. I believe that the office of prophecy and of preaching Gods word is
an holy thing, and that among al offices it is most necessary. For to speak
directly after the rule of scripture, we se among al people that the outward
preaching of the Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops and Pastors went before
faith, which faith nevertheless we attribute unto the spirit only. For
(alas) we se very many which hear the outward preaching of the Gospel, but
they believe not, which happens for lack of the spirit. Whither so ever
therefore Prophets or Preachers of Gods word are sent, it is a singler token
of Gods fauore, that he will unto his elect open the knowledge of him self.
And contrary wise, to whom true preachers are denied, it is a token that Gods
wrath hangs over them. As we may gather of the Prophets and of the example
of S. Paul, which sometime was forbydde^ to go to certain, and sometime called
unto other. And truth it is, that both the laws them selves and the
Magistrates can by nothing more presently be furthered toward the defense of
public justice, than by the sincere preaching of Gods word. For in vain
is right and equity commanded, except it be to them, that both regard it
and love it. And thereunto the preachers as ministers prepare the minds, but
the spirit is the worker, as author both of the preacher and of the hearer. We
also acknowledge that kind of ministers, namely, which teaches, comforts,
affrayeth, cares for, and faithfully looks to the sauegarde of the people of
Christ. And also that, that baptiseth, that in the holy supper ministers the
body and blood of the Lord (for so we also figuratiuelye call the holy bread
and wine of the supper.) And further we acknowledge that sort of ministers,
that visits the sick: that ministers to the poor with the alms and in the
name of the co^gregacio^:

And finally ye, that in schools teaches, openly reads and interprets,
that other themselves or other may be instructed that hereafter they may have
rule of congregacions.

But that monstrouse mitred and crosyard kind of Papisticall bishops we
believe to be lordly loyterers, bastardes and unlawful children. And yt it is a
no^bre borne to consume vytayles, an unprofitable burden of the earth, and
finally to be utterly that thing in the body of the church, that byles,
botches, we^nes and impostumes are in man's body.

The.xi. Article.
Eleventh. I know that the Magistrate ryghtly chosen and admitted is Gods
lieutenaunt as well as the preacher. For as the preacher is the minister of the
heavenly wisdom and goodness, as he that faythfullye teaches and rebukes
sin and error: so the Magistrate is the minister of goodness and
ryghteousnes. Of goodness, that with faythfulnes and temperancie like unto God
he may both hear and se unto the causes, matters and busynesses of his people.
Of righteousness, that he may repress, hold down, break and punyshe the
boldness of the wicked: and support maintain and defend the innocents. If a
Prince have these gifts, I believe that his subjects need not be afraid of
his conscience. If he lack them, and yet for all that will show himself
terrible and to be feared, I believe that his conscience by no means ca^ be
discharged therefore, because he is ryghtly chosen and admytted. But yet also I
believe that a christen man ought to obey such a tyrant, unto such an
occasion as Paul speaks of: If thou may be fre, rather use it. Which
occasion nevertheless I believe to be showed of God only, 1. Cor. ^.
and not of man, and that not obscurely, but as openly as Saul was abiecte,
and David taken to be his successor. And as touching payeng of tribute and
custom for our defece, I utterly think as Paul does. Romans 13.

The.xii. Artitle.
Twelfte. I believe that that forged fable of the fire of Purgatory is as
blasphemouse a thing against the free rede^pcion purchased by Christ's blood,
as it has been gaynful to the authors, inuentours and mayntayners thereof. For
if it be necessary with pains and torments to wash away the deseruinges of
our sins, than shall Christ be dead in vain, and than is grace of none
effect. Tha^ which thing, what can be thought more wicked in the christen
commone welthe, state and condition? Or what manner of Christ have they, which
will themselves to be called christianes, and yet are afraid of this fire,
nay, no fire now, but a smoke?

Holl.
But as towchinge hell, where with Ixion and Tantalus the unfaithful,
disobedient and stubburne enemies of God are everlastingly punysshed, I do not
only believe that it is, but I verily know it. For when the truth it self
speaks of the universal iudgeme^te, he shows yt after that judgment
certain shall go into everlasting fire. John. 5.
Tha^ after ye universal judgment there shall be an everlasting fire. So yt ye
Anabaptists ca^ not colorably cloak their error, whereby they teach,

The Anabaptists error is confuted.
That Everlasting shall not continue after the general judgment. For here
Christ speaks of an everlasting fire after the judgment, which shall burn
and tormente the deuell with his angels, with the wicked that despise God,
with the Tyrau^tes which with lies oppress ye truth, and with the unmerciful,
which of tender compassyon and faith releue not ye necessytie of their
neighbor. These aforsayd artycles I stedfastlye believe, teach and defend,
not with mine own words, but with the notable sentences of Gods holy word.

And I promise and profess (God so wyllyng) to do the same so long as I live.
Except any man by the decrees of the very holy scriptures ryghtlye
understood can as plainly and openly (as we have done these) declare, prove
and confirm the contrary. Unto us doutlesse it is no less pleasant and
acceptable than right and lawful to submit our wrytynges and assercions to
the holy scriptures, and to the Church by the spirit iudginge the same. We
might have declared all these articles more plenteouslye and at length, but
seeing the time would not suffer us, we are content with these. Which we think
to be such, as me^ may easily pynche at (for so is the facio^ now a days)
but no man ca^ be able worthelye to confute and avoid them. Nevertheless if any
will assaye he shall (by Gods grace) not escape unanswered. For than
perchance we shall bring forth the resydue of our artillarie and ordenau^ce,
whereof we have good store and plentye behind but these are sufficient for this
time.

Wherefore most prudent Emperor, and ye other princes, lords of great power,
and nobles of high estate, and finally ye learned Embassadoures and heads of
common wealths, I pray and beseech you all, for Christ Jesus sake the Lord
and our brother: for his mercy and righteousness sake: for his judgment sake:
(before which, will ye nyl ye you must al come and give a rekening of your
procedynges) wherein he shall render unto every one according to their deserts:
from whom no counsel is hyd: which by the Prophet threatens woo to them
that say, Esa. 10.5.
good is evil and evil good: and to the makers of wicked laws: which
subuerteth and overthrows the devises and counsels of princes wickedly
deliberating and ungodly decreyng, Psalm. 33.
enacting, pronouncyng, establyshyng and co^mau^dynge any thing against Gods
will, yea (I say once again) I most humbly desire you all for his cause, that
aduaunceth the humble and casts down the proud, despise not the symplenesse
and bacenesse of me admonyshynge you so wise and learned men in the beginning.
For fools, Idiotes and simple men have often spoken many things in due
season. 1. Cor. 1.
And the truth it self has chosen to be publyshed and preached of men of
rude, simple and low estate.

Again, remember that ye your selves are men also, which both may disceaue
and be disceaued. Psalm. 116.
For every man is a liar, and unless he be otherwise taught by ye inspiracion
of God, than he him self other knows or desires, there is nothing to be
looked for of him, but by his own craft and counsel to hurl down him self.

For full truly said Ieremye the Prophet: Loo, they have refused the Lords
word, what wisdom than can remain in them selfus? Wherefore, forasmuch as
your selves are the prelates and ryngleaders of righteousness, no men ought
so much as you to have the sure and certain knowledge of the will of God.
which, from whence can it be fetched and required, than out of his holy
scriptures? Abhor not therefore their minds which lean holly to gods word.
For commonly we se it happen, that the more the adversaries strive against it,
so much the more a great deal it florysheth and comes to light, and error
and falshed is cast out of the doors. But if among you there be any (as I
know there is) that will stoutlye deminishe and diffame our learning unto you,
and will say: that we are ygnoraunt and lack knowledge, yea and that we are
maliciouse also, yet think this with your selves: First, whether we which
follow this manner of preaching the gospel, and the right use of ministracion of
the sacrament of thanks gyuyng, have at any time so ordered our lives, that
any good man has douted, whether we ought to be reputed and taken as good,
honest and faithful men? And again, whether even from our cradels we have been
so estraunged from wit and erudicion, that all hope of learning should
utterly be cast away from us? undoubtedly we glory of another of these,
seeing that Paul himself says: that what so ever he was, it was al of the
gift of God. Nevertheless, if our life have happened sometime (by the benefyte
of God) to be somewhat prosperous and pleasant, yet wholly was it never given
to riote, excess and fylthynes at any time, neither yet (God be praised
therefore) has degenerated into cruelnes, pride, and obstinacy, so that the
wytnes of our life (through Gods benefit) has many times stayed the devises
of our adversaries, and made them so astonyed, that they have retired back
again. And as for our learning, albeit it is greater then our adversaries
other can bear, withstand, or without conscience despise, yet is it far
less than they that tenderly love us, judge it to be. But yet to comme to our
purpose, we have so not a few years been sowldiars and students both in holy
scripture and in man's learning, that there is no cause why yt we should now
teach any thing rasshly. We may lawfully praise the grace and free gifts of
God so lyberaly distributed to our congregations. For out of al dowte so have
our congregacions (which here the Lord God by our ministry) received ye
word of truth, The fruits of the true doctrine of Gods words.
ye lyeng and untruth are shroncken: pride, ryote and excess are broken:
reuilynge, slau^derynge, chiding and dissencion are trudged away from among
us, which doutlesse, if they be not the fruits of ye holy spirit, what are
they else? Consider with your selves, O most mighty Emperor and all ye
princes and nobles, The fruits of man's traditions
what good fruit this vysar of man's doctrine has brought to you. The Masses
that are bought and sold, as they have increased the outrageous lust and
wantonness as well of princes as of the people, so have they brought in and
enlarged the fylthy lust and excessive pride of Popes, cardinals, and
bishops and the insatiable covetousness and gluttony of mercylesse
Massemo^gers What myscheue is it, that this mass mart, with choppinge,
chaunginge, byinge and sellinge thereof has not procured and set forward? who
is able to wast and scatter abroad the excedyng richesse that is heaped
together by massynge, except they be stopped and stra^gled even in the veins
and that in time? God therefore much better refourme these things than you
all, whom we gladly both call and believe to be the chief and most mighty here
in earth, and grant you grace to cut away the roots of that wicked Mass and
of al other errors in the church, and that you may bring o pass, that Proud
Rome with all her dirtie dregs, which she has thrusted into al
christendom, and specially into your Germany, may be utterly forsaken and
left. And as you tender your own saluacions, what power so ever you have
hitherto executed against the purity of Christ's Gospel, that you may have
grace now at the last wholly to bend the same against the wicked
inforceme^tes of the ungodly Papists, that true righteousness which through
your negligences is banyshed, and innocence, which is obscured with fained and
counterfeated colors, may be brought again unto us.

There is enough and to much cruelty executed already, except without a cause
and contrary to right to command, to condemn, to torment, yea to spoil,
bannyshe, and kyl be not tyrannouse or cruel.

Therefore, seeing it goes not well forward with your this way, you must surely
go an other way to work. If this counsel be of God, Act. 5.
strive not against God. If it be any otherwise, it will dowtlesse fall in the
own folysshnesse. Wherefore O sons of men who so ever ye be, suffer the word
of God freely to be spread abroad and to spring forth. Remember yt it lies not
in your power (if God will have it grow) to forbydde and let the grass yt it
grow not. Ye see ye this frut of ye gospel is abo^dau^tly watered with ye
heavenly showers, neither with any heat of me^ ca^ it be i^forced to wyther
and fade away. Consider not what ye most desire, but what in the matter of the
Gospel the world requires. what so ever this is, take it in good worth, and
by your counsels, devises and determinacyons, show your selves to be the
children of God.

At Zuryk the 3. day of July, in the year of our Lord. 1530. Unto your noble
Majesty and unto al faithful men, your most obedient subject Huldryk
Zwinglius by the grace, calling and sendyng of God, flockfeeder of the
congregation of Zuryk.

The copy of an Epistle written from Copyn haven in Denmark unto an English
Merchant dwelling at Wynchestre in England.
THe grace and peace of God be given unto you through Jesus Christ. etc. Where
as in your last letters to me most trustye and assured friend you instantlye
desired me to write unto you, what I have read and marked in holy scripture
touching the confession of sins. Truly sir this your reasonable request I
would, if I were able right gladly satisfye. But as you know I am yet but a
young lynge, and as one should say but a nouyce in the study of divinity, and
far unable to pen this matter according to the worthynesse thereof.
Nevertheless wha^ I consider with my self, how much I am bounden to you,
partly for your loving kyndnesse daily showed to my poor kynsfolke and
friends in Winchester, and partly for your lyberal gifts and charitable
exhibicion that I received from you when I was student at Oxforde, I can not
but think it to be my bounden duty somewhat to gratifye you again. And albeit
that ignorance, rudeness of style and lack of learning plucketh me back
from the ha^dlyng of this matter, yet the consyderacion of your great
discrecion and gentylnes prycketh me forward to atte^pte what I can do therein.
Certesse I nothing doure, but yt you will ge^tly accept my simple rudeness,
goodwyll and endeavor in this behalf, no less then if the matter were
gloriouslye garnyshed with eloquence and set forth with the most probable
persuasions of the freshest Philosopher or rethoricion in Oxforde. I trust you
will credit and embrace the truth though it be never so bacely and homly
written or declared unto you. For the truth shall abide and floryshe, when al
profane painted persuasions and fond Pharisaical fantasies shall vanysh away
and be scattered abroad as dry duste before a whyrle wind. Wherefore to keep
you no longer from this matter, I shall be Gods grace, so shortly as I can
declare unto you, what I have learned and marked in holy scripture concerning
this article of confession of sins. And that is this that follows.

Of Confession of sins.
THe holy Scripture does dyuersly in sundry places set forth and treat of the
confession of sins. A general confession.
In some places it makes mention of a general and solemn confession openly
made of all the people being assembled and gathered to gither at
thappointemente, calling and exhortacion of their high Magistrate, Bishop,
curate or publyke minister of Gods word. The cause thereof was commonly sum
great plage, vengeance or punysshement wherewith God scourged them for their
sinful, heynouse and abominable offenses committed and done by them and their
for fathers. example thereof we have in the second book of Esdras where it is
thus writtyn:

In the four and twenty day of this monech came the children of Israel Neem.
9.
to gether, with fasting and sack clothes and earth upon them, and separated
the sede of Israel from all the strange children, and stood and knowleged their
sins and the wyckednesses of their fathers, and stood up in their place and
read in the book of ye law of ye lord their God four times on the day. etc.
And after a solemn rehearsal of the judgments and great mercyfulnesse of
God declared in holy scripture, they conclude thus, saying: Thou (O God) art
ryghteous in all that thou haste brought upon us, for thou haste done right.
As for us, we have been ungodly, and our kings, princes, prestes and fathers
have not done after thy law, nor regarded thy commandments and thine
earnest exhortacio^s wherwyth thou have exhorted them, and have not served the
in thy kingdom and in thy great goods that thou gave the^. etc. and are not
converted from their wicked works. Behold therefore are we in bondage this
day. Yea even in the land that thou gave unto our fathers to enjoy the
fruits and goods thereof, behold there are we bo^dme^. etc.

Lo, here is a solemn open confession. Would God ye this example of publyke
confession of sins were well practiced through out all christendo^e, namely
at this day, seeing that the plages of God do daily increase more and more
upon us, our synful lives and abhominacions iustlye deseruynge the same and
much more.

Three mo sorts of confession of sins.
There are also three mo sorts of confession of sins declared in the holy
scriptures. The first is secret confession of sin only unto God.

The second is an open confession before men.

The third is a private and secret confession made unto man.

As touching the first, 1 Confessyo^ unto God only.
it is an humble and lowlye confession of sins made unto God even from the
very heart. As when a sinner examyneth his life by the commandments of God,
and so fyndeth his conscience burdened and accombred with sin, and feels
thereby what danger of damnacion that he is in: this feelynge of his sick
conscience will greatly move him to seek a phisicyon. And wha^ he perceaueth
that there is no medicyn will heal his disease but only the mercy of God, he
will not cease to make all the suit that he can to obtain it. He will withowt
any ^^laye prostrate him self before God, and with an humble, lowly and
contrite heart and mind acknowledge him ^^lfe grievously to have offended (...)
^ly majesty in thought, cons^ (...) ^tacyon, word and ded^. (...) leave of
his lamentable suit and faithful prayer and request of this his bountiful
mercy, till he obteyn it. The swellinge rage of his putrifyed conscience will
never be assuaged, till the precyouse oil of Gods mercy have suppled it,
mitigated it, quieted it, and utterly cured and healed it. Of this manner of
confession the holy scripture does many times treat, does by plain authority
and examples (...) authority. Authority. 1. John. 1.
If we knowledge our sins (says S. John) God is faithful and just to
forgive us owr sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Example.
Examples there be many. Of which I will at this time content my self with two
or three. King David feeling the intolerable burden of his sins, cried out,
saying: David.


Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness. Psalm. 51.
And according unto thy great mercies, do away mine offenses. Wash me again
from my wyckednes, and cleanse me from my sin. For I knowledge my fautes, and
my sin is ever before me. Psalm. 24.
Against the only, against the have I sinned, for thy names sake (O Lord) be
merciful unto my sin, for it is great. The publicane. Luc. 18.


The Publicane also says: be merciful (O God) to me a sinner.

This confession and knowleging of our sins unto God if with a co^trite and
sorrowful heart it be done in faith, God (which knows the secrets of every
man's mind) will accept and allow though the repe^tau^t sinner utters not one
word with his mouth

Exemple of the synful woman, The synful woman. Luc. 7.
that came unto Christ. She spoke nothing, but wept, and lowlye fell down at
Christ's feet, and washed the^ with the tears of her eyes, and dried them
with the heeres of her head, and anointed them with oyntmente.

All which things were evident witnesses of her true and unfeigned repe^tau^ce
of her sins and fruits of her sure faith that she had in Christ's goodness.
For whose comfort Christ said: thy sins are forgeuen thee. thy faith has
saved thee: go thy way in peace. This earneste confession of sins unto god
should every christian daily practyse and exercise unfeignedly.

Of this aforesaid confession to God spryngeth out the confession of our own
sinfulness before men. 2 Confession of symnes before men.
For he that has felt a taste af the mercy of God as he shall se occasion to
glorify God by his example will not be ashamed other privately before one man,
or openly before many men, yea though all the whole world were present, to
confess him self to have been an horrible transgressoure of Gods holy
commandments. He will nothing dowte, but that he with this his meke
confession shall much glorify God, and move the hearers by his example to
abhor sin and change their euel life. Of this we have an evident example
in Gods chosen vessel S. Paul, which after his conuersyon unto the faith of
Christ was not ashamed many times Act 22.26
openly to confess before men, what an vnmercyful tyrant and ungracious
grafte he was against the holy congregation of Christ, before his conversion to
the faith. This thing also ashamed he not to write and set forth to the hole
world, saying: I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 1. Timo. 1.
because I persecuted the congregation of God. And in an other place he says:
I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and a tyrant. etc. And after: Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of who^ I am chief.

This example of S. Paul very few of the Papists in England have followed,
Few of the papists of England followed this example.
unless it were by constraint for fear of bodily punyshme^t And therefore for
my part I suspecte the^ to remain Papists still in their hertes. For if they
had unfeignedly abhorred papistrie, they would after this example of S. Paul
with al their hertes have confessed them selves to have been disceyued, and
also to have with false doctrine disceyued the people, and therefore have openly
and hertely asked them mercy for the same: by doing whereof doutlesse they
should very much have glorified God.

The third manner of confession 3
of sins is a private confession to man. And yt is of two sorts. The first
is for the direccion, establyshment and comfort of a man's own conscience
toward God. The other is touching the reco^ciliation and confession of a
man's faut and trespace to his neighbor whom he has offended. Private
co^fessyon of sin is nedfull to many forknowlege, counsel and conforte.
And as touching ye first way of private confession unto man, I think it is a
good and wholesome manner and facion convenient and nedeful to be used and
observed of many of Gods people for three causes, that is, for knowledge,
counsel and for comfort.

First for knowledge: As wha^ a simple man or woman that has herd little or no
preaching of Gods word, For knowledge.
by reason whereof they have almost no knowledge of God or his commandments,
neither of the profession of baptime, neither of faith, neither have they in a
manner any knowledge at al of the way of salvation by Christ's death. Is it not
nedeful (think you) for such ignorant persons to hunt and seek out some
discrete and learned minister of gods word, and to knowledge unto him their
great ignorance, and to require at his mouth ye knowledge of the law of the
Lord and of the way of salvation? Malac. 2.
Is it not written, that the prestes lyppes should be sure of knowledge, that men
may seek the law at his mouth, for he is a messenger of the Lord of
hoostes? It is mete therefore ye prestes should have good knowledge in gods
holy word, for they are appointed to be shepeherdes over the flock of Christ,
to feed the souls of gods people with ye delicate fode of gods word, and
specially with that holy bread of life Christ Jesus, that ca^e down from
heaven to save al his people from their sins. But alas for pity, the
spiritual shepherdes into many places of the world and specially in England
are very rude, unlearned and unable to teach other me^, because they
themselves lack the knowledge and right understanding of the holy scriptures.
For how should they teach other being unlearned their selves? Doutlesse it
has been herd of in not a few places of England, It is very strange that the
sheep should have more wit and learning than the shepperd.
that the parishoner has be^ better learned in holy scripture than ye parson or
vicare, which thing is much to be lamented. Is it not a great shame, yea is it
not utterly against nature; that the sheep should be wyser and better learned
than the shepeherde. But no men are so much in this bebalfe to be blamed, as
the Babilonical bishops, partly for admittyng such doltysh dodipoles to the
office of presthed: and partlye for the institutynge to fat benefyces and to
the cure and charge of christen souls so many unlearned idiotes, which another
ca^ nor will feed them with the spiritual food of Gods word. Our Lord
redress this matter. Amen.

For counsel
Secondarely, this private confessiu^ is very nedfull for counsel, specially for
such persons, whose consciences are accumbred with scrupulouse supersticio^
of meats, vows, or with perpleexd doutes in causes of matrimonye, of
restitutio^ of wrong gotten or wytholden goods, of reconciliacion, and such
other: Or else, if they before assaulted with diverse temptacions of their gostly
enemy the deuel, and know no remedies how to avoid them. In all these and
such like doutful cases, whom ought they rather to go unto and ask
counsel, then of the heardman of their souls? In worldly affairs and
busynesses which way a man may defend his right title of enheritau^ce, and
how he may overthrow his aduersarye that would do him wrong, me^ will spare
for no labor nor cost, but will retain of their counsel ye best learned me^
of law that they can get: Much more in spiritual matters for the souls
health ought every true christian to seek for the best learned and discretest
ministers of gods word, to satisfye their consciences in doutful causes, and
to show them apt remedies for the auoidinge of their sundry temptacions of
their gostly enemy the deuel. For if he be a good spiritual physician, he will
minister unto the patient a convenient medicine for the healyng of his
spiritual sycknesse and disease. And the patientes duty (if he will recover
his health) is no less than tha^kfully and obediently to embrace and receive
the wholesome counsel of his spiritual physician. For the wise man says: Pro.
12. Mat. 3.
He that is wise will be cou^selled. Wha^ John the Baptist preached in the
disert, the people came unto him from Jerusalem, and all the regions round about
Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. And the
puplicanes came also to be baptized, Luc. 3.
and said unto him: Master, what shall we do? Loo here the publicanes, which
were very extorcioners and brybers, ar ye preachi^g of John the baptist came
unto repentance, and calling him master asked him counsel how they should
order their lives. Than he like a discrete gostly father said unto them thus:
Require no more than is appointed you As though he should say: for as much as
heretofore you have been extorcioners and very caterpillars and brybers, and
have taken more of the poor people for task, tribute and custom then you
ought to have done: Now seeing you are converted and become the disciples of
the heavenly doctrine, you must with all diligence change your euel life into
a better, and oppress the people no le^ger, but take your appointed duties and
no more. So likewise the soldiers also asked him and said: what shall we do
than? And he said unto them: Do no man violence nor wrong, and be content with
your wages, etc.

If the same trade were likewise had in use among us that are now living, so
that when so ever we were encombred with any greuouse te^ptacion, or entangled
or overthrown in the same, if we even than as soon as we could possible would
consult with our souls physician, to know which way we might best avoid the
temptacion hereafter, were it not a godly fasshio^ and worthy praise and
co^me^dacio^?

Exemple: An example.
If a young man being sore tempted unto whordome, and many times overcome of
his temptacio^, has yelden and given him self over unto the deuell for that
time, co^mittynge the very act of fylthy whordo^e and adultery: If he (I say)
upon the consideracion of his own damnable stare that he stands in, would go
unto a discrete, godly and well learned preacher of Gods word, and plainly
utter unto him his abominable deeds in general words, and ask his best
counsel and advise therein. Truly this preacher would first declare unto him by
gods word, what great danger of eternal damnacion that he than stood in,
and plainly tell him that God says in the holy scripture: that another
whoremongers nor adulterers shall enherit the kingdom of God: And that God
threatens to judge and co^dempne both adulterers and fornicatours. And so
groundynge himself upon these scriptures and such like, thereby beating into
his conscience the fear of God, he would bydde him in any wise earnestlye
repent himself of his great sin, and commit him self by earnest,
faithful and continual prayer to the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. And in any
wise without any delay refuse that fylthy and detestable fasshyon of living,
or else, though he seemed never so much outwardly in this miserable world to
floryshe, yet should he continually live without the favor of God, and under
his great wrath and vengeance, not being in that state the servant of God,
but the deuels slave and bondsman, owe of Gods kingdom, and subject to
eternal death and damnacyon.

This thing earnestly herd, dyligently weyed, and deply from the ye very heart
considered: If this sinner were one of Gods flock, How a great sinner should
use him self to recover the favor of God.
at the hearing of this terryble sentence of the law, he would tremble and
quake for fear, weep, wayle and lament his horrible and detestable state, cry
and call incessauntly for the unspeakable mercy of God in Christ Jesus,
trusti^ge by his only means to obteyn and get again the favor of God, which
through his careless disobedience he he had lost. And further he would humbly
desire counsel, which way he might best here after avoid that horrible crime
of fylthy whordome and adultery.

Then his discrete gostlye father would exhort him, in any wise with all his
due diligence daily and continually to practice these wholesome preservatives
and most present remedies against whordo^e. that is to say. Preservatives
from whordom.


First, to exchue ydelnesse and always

Than, to auayde all occasions of

Again, to beware of fylthy communicacion,

Further, to use sobriety and temperaunce in the use of meat, drink,

Moreover, to be daily conuersau^t

Beside that, to remember daily

To consider also the certainty and 1 Cor. 7.
and every woman her own husband.

Thyrdlye, this private confession is chefly nedeful to them that are tormented
in their consciences, For comfort.
and are not fully pursuaded that their sins are forgiven them, by reason
whereof they are half in desperacion. These I say have much need of a discrete
spiritual physician to comfort them. For unless their weak faith be stayed
and lyfted up by some comfortable restoratiues of the sweet promises of grace
and mercy in Christ Jesus, it is to be feared, that their gostly enemy Satan
will shortly bring them to desperacion, and finally to everlasting damnacion.
Therefore here the discret soul physician will labor with tothe and nail to
beat into this spiritual patientes mind and remembrance the most sweet,
plain and evident promyses of Gods aid and assistence to be always ready to
them that ask it in faithful prayer. Wherefore it is very nedeful to such
weaklynges in the faith, that are so sore brosed in conscience, to make all the
haste that they can possible to the heardman of their souls, and plainly to
open and acknowledge their grefe unto him, desiring to hear of his mouth the
comfortable promises of grace in Christ Jesus, to stay and lift up their weak
and feeble consciences. S. James says: James 5.
Pray one for an other, yt ye may be healed. For (says he) the fervent
prayer of a righteous man avails much. If the prayer of one godly person be
of much value, the^ is ye prayers of two good christianes agreyng together i^
prayer for any godly purpose, of more value. Math. 18
For Christ says: If two of you shall agree upon earth (for what thing so
ever it be that they would desire) they shall have it of my father which is in
heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the myddest among them. Mark that Christ says: If two of you shall agree
upon earth etc. And where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I present among them. And I pray you is not this weak faythed person and
his curate consultyng of these matters gathered together in Christ's name? If
they be (as undoubtedly they are) then is Christ in company with them, by
thassistence of his grace and presence of his godhed. Again if they two thus
assembled do agree to pray together to God, for thencreace and establyshment of
the faith of this spiritual paciente, than says Christ unto them thus: If
two of you shall agree upon earth (for what thing so ever it be that they would
desire) they shall have it of my father which is in heaven. Good Lord what a
comfortable place of scripture is this? For we may learn by it, that if there
be but two persons gathered together in Christ's name for any good and godly
purpose, then is Christ present with them. And if they agree to ask any godly
request of God, they shall have it granted, what thing so ever it be (says
Christ) so it be a godly request contained within the limittes of faith and
charity, and agreynge unto the will of God. 1. John. 5.
For S. John says: If we shall ask any thing according to his will, he hears
us.

But here one will say: Objection.
Sir me think ye take the scriptures to straytly, if you would bynd us to
confess our fautes only to a priest, or only to our own curate. For albeit S.
James says: James. 5.
Knowledge your fautes one unto an other, yet he says not one lay man unto a
priest, nor one parishoner unto his one curate and to no another: but he says
generally one unto a another. Therefore I think that I may as well make my
co^fessyon to any other man as unto a priest, or unto mine one curate.

Truth it is, that thou may frelye chose any discrete christen man that is
well learned in holy scripture, Answer.
and resort to him for learning, counsel and comfort: but yet for all that,
there is none so mete for thy purpose in that behalf as thine own curate (if
he be no papist, neither of corrupt judgment in the scriptures, but be
honest, discrete and well exercised in gods holy word.) For he is appointed
of God to be herdman of thy soul, at whose mouth thou may lawfully require
learning, counsel and comfort, yea he is called and appointed of God to preach
unto the, and to al other his parishoners both privately and apertly, secretly
and openly the gospel of Christ to comfort thy soul wha^ need is. Which
preaching of gods mercy frelye given to the faithful for Christ's sake, what
is the true absolution.
what other thing is it than the true absolucion of their sins? For what
other thing is the private absolucion of the priest, but a private or secret
preachinge of Christ's gospel? what can the pressed more promise the sinner by
his absolucio^, but there by to declare unto him, that if he repent him of his
sinful life, and unfeignedly purpose to amend, reposyng his hole faith, trust
and confidence in the promyses of grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, yt tha^
gods truth shall save him for Christ's sake? Can he promise ye sinner any
other thing than to be saved, if he from the heart do repent, believe, and
purpose to walk i^ a new life? I thi^ck not. Resort therefore to thi^ one curat
(if he be honest, discret and well learned, as I said before) and think him to
be that person that is appointed of God, to minister Christ's Gospel and his
sacraments unto the, at such convenient times, as shall be nedeful to the
comfort of thy troubled conscience.

There is also an other kind of private confession, Confessyo^ of recociliation.
which may aptlye be called, the confession of reconciliacio^. As when I have
offended my christen brother, and have provoked him to anger. It is my bounden
duty to reconcile my self unto him, and to knowledge my fault, and desire of
him forgiveness thereof. This confession is no less than comau^ded of Christ
to be done, and he estemeth it so necessary to be done, yt he proferreth it,
and will have it done, before we do any outward service, sacrifice, honor or
worship unto himself For thus he says: If thou offerest thy gift at the
Altar, Math. 5. Job. 42.
and there reme^brest that thy brother has ought against thee leave there thyn
offering before the altar, and go thy way first, and reconcile thy self to
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

Loo, here may we se that Christ so much regards the atonement of them
that are at variance, and the mutual redress of charity, unity, peace, and
concord between them, that he will have that done before we shall be allowed of
him to do any acceptable service or outward worship unto him. And truly I am
much afraid that the transgressynge of this commandment of Christ, will
condemn all most all the hole world, becaufe there is so much breach of
charity, and so little regard of mutual reconciliacion and atonement. How
be it they that are of God, regenerated by his holy spirit, will be very
circumspect and take good head that they give no just occasion of anger unto
their neighbor. But if they chaunse at any time (as al men are frail) by
their occasion to offend and grieve their even christian, yet they will seek al
means to their possible power, and with all the speed that they can, to be
reconcyled again unto them. For who knowing that he can by no means obtain
gods favor, unless he be at one with his neighbor, will not in this point
lay al worldly shame apart, and (submittynge his obedience unto the
commandment of Christ) go to his neighbor, knowledge his fault unto him,
and humbly desire the forgiveness of his trespace? Truly he that unfeignedly
fears God, and intends earnestly to avoid his displeasure, will not stycke
to do this godly work, but will be glad to do it and much more.

Beside al these former sorts of confession, there was also used in the
primative church an open confession, An open confession.
which they that had been excommunicated for great and haynouse sins, made
before the hole congregation at such time as they were restored again to the
same. But because this is now out of use (it is the more to be lamented) I will
here speak no more of it.

Thus have I declared unto you after my sclender gift of knowledge what I have
read and marked in holy scripture touching the confession of sins. But where
as in the latter end of your letters you i^sta^tly desired me to write unto
you, what I think of the ear confession that is now straightly commanded with
you in England. Truly to utter my conscience plainly unto you in few words,
I think it brings many a simple soul to the hasarde of da^nacion. Abuses of
^are confession.
For doutles there are many shameful abuses therein, of which I will (by the
grace of God) rehearse two or three which are intolerable.

First, it is commanded of necessity. by the swet promyses of grace in
Christ) will doutlesse drive them to desperacion.

Secondarely, It is no small bondage in their tender consciences, estemyng the
breach of them to be a greater offense, then Idolatry, blasphemy, perjury,
theft, slander or any transgression of Gods holy commandments. Which
thing ought to make all the Babilonicall bishops ashamed (but that they are
past al shame already) because they suffer Gods people to be so drowned in
ignorance, yt they ca^ not discern the commandments of God, from the
dirtie dregs of Papistical tradicions. And albeit the holy scripture allows
these sorts of confession that I have spoken of before in this Epistle, yet
for all that the proudest papist of the^ al can not find in holy scripture
these words or sentences: To his own curate what so ever he is: Al sins
particularly: all circumstau^ces: and such like trash. For all these are
nothing else, but pedlarie patches of Papistrie. Which I pray God may be
purged again and bannyshed out of England, and that shortly.

Finally, beside the foresaid abuses of ear confession the common sort of
people are therwyth two manner of ways disceyued. First, because they think,
that their confession is the cause of forgyuenesse of their sins, by reason
whereof they blotte out the blessed benefit of the passion and death of
Christ, which is the only obteyner of grace and mercy for the sins of all
mankind. Seco^darely, because they are fully persuaded, that the penance, yt
is, ye fasting, prayer or alms enjoined the^ of their goostly father is the
due satisfaccion and full recompensacion to God, equivalent for their sins
past, which they have confessed to the pressed: And so for lack of knowledge and
instruccio^ they are theri^ utterly disceiued. For sure it is, yt to god no man
is able to satisfye for si^ne: for that satisfaccion has only our savior
Christ wrought in his painful passion and death. I could here speak of many
mo abuses of ear confession, but I will at this time pass them over with
silence.

Thus much have I written unto you of confession of sins, to declare unto
you my conscience and simple judgment therein, according to your request in
your last letters written to me by Nicolas Nerin from Rone in Fraunte the.8,
day of January in the year of our Lord. 1555. And if you accept this my
rude writing and colleccio^ in this matter. I shall by the grace of God do mine
endeavor likewise in other matters of holy scripture to show you hereafter my
small and sclender knowledge and judgment. Thus the living God increase in you
daily more and mor faith, charity, meekness, godliness and patience. etc.

From Copyn haven in Denmark the.3. of Februarye. If you write again to me
write to Geneua for thetherwardes by Gods grace I intend to go so shortly as
I can.


By the rudehande of Your poor loving friend Thomas Cottesforde.

An Epistle written to a good Lady / for the comfort of a friend of hers,
wherein the Nouations error now revived by the Anabaptists is confuted, and
the sin against the holy Ghost plainly declared.
MAdame, where as it pleased your good Ladyshippe to require me to write unto
you my mind concerning the true sense and meaning of this place of S. Paul
in his Epistle to the Hebrews: Hebr^. 6.
It can not be that they which were once lyghtned and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were become partetakers of the holy Gooste, and have tasted
of the good word of God, and of the power of the world to comme if they fall
away (and as concerning them selves, crucify the son of God a fresshe, and
make a mock of him) that they should be renewed again by repentance.

Madame, Many in time past, and at this present day mystakyng this text and
not truly understanding it, The error of the Nouatianes and now of the
Anabaptists.
both have been and are encombred with the Nouacyons error, which is. That
after man by baptyme and the holy Ghost is regenerated, and has tasted of the
grace of God, and has enbraced Christ and his holy word, if he fall to sin
again, he is without remedy of salvation.

Undoubtedly this is a very damnable error, enoughe to bring all them that
are infected therewith to desperacion. But albeit they ground this their
error upon this before alleged text of S. Paul, and certain other textes:
yet they mysse the cussion, because they take this scripture to straytly, not
referryng it to many other places of scripture, which plainly show: That when
soever and how often so ever a sinner repe^teth him truly of his sins, and
commits himself with a sure faith unto ye mercy of God through Christ, God
receives him again to grace and salvation.

Doutlesse no prophecy in the scripture has any private interpretacio^, 2
Petri. 1.
but must needs be expounded according to the general articles of the
Christen faith and agreeable to other textes of holy scripture, and so must this
text be also.

Now truth it is: that there is almost innumerable textes in holy scripture,
that most plainly do declare: that when so over a true repentau^t si^ner by
unfeigned faith returns unto god, and asks mercy for christ's sake, he shall
vndoutly have it. And albeit ye holy scripture is full of such places, yet here
by Gods grace, I will show and rehearse to you some of them, to give you
occasion to mark them and such like places as you shall find almost in every
leaffe of the Bible.

A just man falls seven times, and ryseth up again. Pro. 24.
Mark the scripture says: he ryseth up again.

The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him, Ezech. 33.
when so ever he conuerteth. Note that it says: when so ever he conuerteth.

Let the ungodly man forsake his own way, Esa. 55.
and the unrighteous his own imaginacions and turn again unto the Lord, so
shall he be mercyful unto him.

Thou disobedience Israel turn again (says the Lord) and I will not let my
wrath fall upon you. Iere. 3


Iere. 8
Thus says the Lord: do men fall so, that they rise not up again? Or if Israel
do repent, will not God turn again to them?

Zacha. 1.
Turn you unto me (says the Lord God of hoostes) and I will turn me unto you.

Apoc. 2.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and do the first works.

Luc. 15.
Mark in the gospel of Luke the example of the unthrifty son.

Luc. 22.
Also Christ said unto Peter: Peter I have prayed for the, that thy faith fail
not, and when thou art converted, strength thy brethern. Mark, he says: when
thou art converted. Loo, if you weye these places of scripture before alleged,
and almost innumerable mo of the same sort, you shall perceive euidentlye, that
though a christian have si^ned never so often (as who does not daily offend God)
yet when so ever he returns unto God by true repentance (which consists of
inward contricyon and a sure faith in Christ Jesus) he is assured by the word
of God to recover and receive again the grace, favor and mercy of God, which
through his disobedience he had worthily lost, and immediately to enioyeful,
absolute and perfect remissyon and forgiveness of al his sins through Jesus
Christ, in whom he reposeth al his faith, trust and confidence of salvation.
John. 3.
The gospel assures him no less saying: So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, that who so ever believes in him should not
perysh, but have everlasting life.

More over, if you mark well the examples of godly men, which are registered in
holy scripture, you shall plainly perceive, that albeit they were hyghly in
Gods favor, yet for all that, many of them had great falls, and committed
very heynouse offenses, but they did rise up again returninge to Gods mercy
by true repentance and faith, and so recovered again their former grace,
which they through their own folly had lost.

Aaron was so much favored of god, yt by Gods calli^g he was made the high
bishop and curate over his people. Aaron.
And yet at the light request of the Israelites, he let them make and worship
the golden Calfe contrary to his conscience, by reason whereof both he and they
committed that most detestable sin of Idolatry, and yet he by true
repentance and faith returning to grace was saved.

David..
David Gods dear dearlyng, after that he had ye knowledge of God, and had
much tasted of his grace, being endued abundantly with the holy ghost and
gracious gifts from above, fell both into the sin of adultery and murder.
And yet by true and unfeigned repentance, returnyng to Gods mercy was
accepted and received again into Gods favor.

Manasses.
Manasses also contrary unto his conscience fell wyllyngly to Idolatry but yet
he rose again by true repentance and faith, and recovered again the grace of
God.

The synful Corinthian. 1. Cor. 5.
So likewise that wicked man of the city of Corinthus who^ S. Paul straytly
charged the Corinthians to excommunicate and exclude out of ye holy
congregation of Christen men, and that they should neither eat nor drink with
him, because of his open and abominable crime of inceste and outragiouse
whordome: and yet wha^ he declared himself to be truly repentaunt for his
great and infamouse sin. S. Paul admonished them with al gentleness and
christen charity to receive him again into the congregation as a christian
brother, 2. Cor. ^.
and so to esteem him and take him.

What shall I say of Peter Christ's Apostle? Peter.
had not he a sure knowledge of Christ, confessyng him openly before all the
Apostles to be very Christ the son of the living God? was not he even than
endued with the holy ghost and grace from above, unto whom Jesus Christ said:
Mat. 16.
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
opened that unto thee, but my father which is in heaven? And yet after al this
he had such a fall, that contrary to his own conscience, willynglye without
any co^pulsion, threats, or imprisonment, he did most cowardly and shamefully
forsake and deny Christ, not without blasphemye, sweryng that he never knew
him, cursyng and co^myttyng him self to the deuel if ever he had to do with
him.

What would the Nouacian and Anabaptiste say unto this? was it not a fall? could
there be any greater sin than this? was it not done of knowledge? was it not
done wyllyngly? was it not against his own conscience? Yes doutlesse, it was
no less but against his own conscience. But yet thanckes be unto almyghtie
God, it was not ye sin of blasphemy against the holy ghost, neither the sin
unto death, 1. John. 5.
the which S John speaks of, for he continued not there in unto his end, but
immediately he went furthe of the bishops house and wept bytterly, very much
lame^ting his heynouse offense, and by faith he returned again unto Christ,
knowing his mercy to be infinite and with out measure, Math. 26.
and so he was accepted unto grace again, and Christ appeared unto him (to his
great comfort) after he arose again from death to life, and afterward
sendynge down his holy spirit, endued him with wonderful gifts of grace
from above. And than Peter becamme a strong champyon, setting forth Christ
to be the only sauyoure of the whole world, preaching and openly confessing
him before al men, without any fear other of the scribes phariseis or
Magistrates.

Now good Madame, lay this example of S. Peter to this text of S.

If a man would apply the aforsayd example of S. Peter unto this text of S.
Paul, he would think that Peter should utterly have been cast away from Gods
favor mercy and grace. For first it ca^ not be denied, but that for fleashe
and blood (that is man) showed thee not that, but my father which is in
heaven. Which was, by the inspiracion of his holy spirit. Mat, 17.
and John the Evangelist also. Wherein the presence of them all Christ was
transfygured and showed himself unto them in the form of a glorified body,
so that his face did shine as the Sun, and his clothes appeared as whyt as
the light. There appeared also among the^ Moses and Elias. And even there the
clear voice of God the father of heaven was plainly herd among the^ out of
the cloud, saying upon Christ. This is my dearly beloved son, in whom I
delight. Hear him.

Loo, al this and much more Peter both herd and saw, being almost continually
in Christ's company, eating and drynkyng with him, hearing daily his
heavenly doctrine, preaching and teaching, seeing every where (as occasion
served) his great and wonderful miracles. And yet for all this, what a great
fall Peter had, it appears plainly by his denial of Christ his loving
master and savior, and by the circumstances thereof, which I touched before.
But yet to make Peter's fall more horrible, Christ said unto him and unto all the
other his Apostles, when he sent the^ forth to preach the Gospel of salvation:
He that denies me before men, Mat. 10.
I shall deny him also before my father. Alas good Peter, what case stand
thou in now? How does this saying of Christ touch the? Remembringe this
saying of Christ, art thou not utterly at thy wits end? Is it not most
certain and true, yt thou have to horribly fallen after that thou had
tasted of al these gracious gifts before rehearsed? Have thou not contrary to
thine own conscience most shamefully denied thy master and savior Christ
before me^? Ah good soul what shall beco^e of thee? how will thou answer for
thy self? For it seems here plainly, that both S. Paul in the before alleged
place to the Hebr. and also Christ himself in the scripture before rehearsed
have given sentence of conde^nacio^ against the. Wherefore, both the Nouacion
and the Anabaptist grou^dyng them selves upon these two places of holy
scripture, will plainly pronounce the to be a reprobat, and that thou art
dispatched and utterly cast away from al hope of salvation. But here let us not
to lightly pass over, but earnestly way and depely consider, what may be said
in this matter on Peter's behalf. And first it may be ryghtly answered, that
that place of S. Paul unto the Hebrews, Heb. 6.
makes nothing against S. Peter, neither yet against any christen man, how
grievously or how often so ever he has sinned, so that he has not utterly
forsaken Christ and fallen clean away from him. For S. Paul says: It can
not be that they which were once lyghtned. etc. If they fall away. etc. yt they
should be renewed by repentance.

Mark here diligently, that S. Paul says: It is not al one thing to fall,
and to fall away. A proverb.
if they fall away. He says not: If they fall. But: if they fall away. For it
is not al one thing to fall, and: to fall away. For Peter did fall, but he did
not fall away from Christ, but returned unto him again An old proverb it
is: A man runs very far, that never returns again. Al we christianes do
daily fall, for we daily break Gods commandments, but yet we do not fall
away from Christ, neither refuse we him to be our savior, but acknowleging our
manyfolde sins and offenses we daily return unto him again, by true
repentance, faith and amendment of life, nothing doutyng of his great and
unmeasurable mercy toward us.

They fall away from Christ that utterly forsake him and refuse him to be their
savior, who falls away from Christ
and never returns unto him again to obtain his mercy, but are become
plain apostataes, utterly forsakynge the christen faith, making but a mock of
Christ, perseueryng in their obstinate apostasye and unbelieve even till their
lives end: 1. Timo. 1. 2. Tim. 4.
As did Judas the traitor Iulianus apostata, Simon Magus, Porphirius, Hymeneus
and Alexander the Copersmyth.

Secondarely, Math. 10.
As touching that saying and threatnynge of Christ, saying: He that denies me
before men, A good and general rule to be noted.
I shall deny him before my father. etc. It is to be considered, that all the
terrible threatenings that are in ye holy scripture threatened against great
sinners are threatened condicionally, A good and general rule to be noted.
that is to say: if the sinners do not truly repe^te and return unto God by
faith and amendment of life, this plage and punyshement or that, shall light
upon them. But if they at the preaching, reading or hearing of Gods holy
word do repent and return unto God, by faith and godly life, than that plage
threatened shall not once touch them. Example by the Ninevites upon whom Jonas
Gods ministre and preacher (or rather God by him) pronounced this terrible
judgment, Ione. 3.
saying: there are yet fortye days, and the^ shall Niniue be overthrown. But
there as the scripture says: the people of Niniue believed God and earnestly
repented them of their great sins, and so was the sentence of God retracted,
and the city saved and not overthrown. So likewise this terrible sentence of
Christ: He that denies me before men, I shall deny him before my father. must
needs have this condicyo^ joined with it: A condition.
If he does not repent, neither return again: But Peter did both repence and
return again unto Christ. For all be it his faith was weak and faint (as was
the faith of all the Apostles) yet it was not utterly extincte. Luce. 22.
For Christ had said unto him before: Simon. I have prayed for the, that thy
faith fail not. And in any wise take heed, and note this well: Christ said
not: He that denies me, I shall deny him, though he repent and return. But
remember well that Christ said: I camme not to call the righteouse but sinners
unto repentance. Mat. 9.
Peter therefore repented, and returned unto Christ again, and so was received
unto grace and was saved.

Wherefore good Madame, in this hard text of S. Paul unto the Hebrews, way
well this condition: (If they fall away.) For they only fall away, which
commit that most horrible crime, which is called in the holy scripture, the
sin unto death, blasphemye against the spirit, and the si^ne against the
holy ghost, which never shall be forgeuen, neither in this world neither in the
world to come.

But here it might be demanded, Question.
what ye sin against the holy ghost is, and wherein it differs from al other
greuouse sins. Whereunto I answer. Answer.
That there is difference in sins, it may clearly be gathered of Christ's
words, Math. 12.
saying: I say unto you. Al sin and blasphemy shall be forgyuen unto men,
but the blasphemy against the spirit shall not be forgyuen unto men.

Loo, here is the matter plainly opened by our savior Christ what kind of
sins shall be forgeuen, and what never forgyuen. Blasphemy against the
spirit shall never be forgyuen: al other sin and blasphemy shall be
forgyuen. And Christ in saying: All sin shall be forgyuen, compriseth both
original sin, Three sorts of sins. Sin. Blasphemy Blasphemi against the
spirit.
and also actual sin. Moreover Christ speaks here of three sorts of
sins. The first he calls sin, the second blasphemy, and the third,
blasphemye against the spirit. Which the scripture also calls: the sin
unto death, and the sin against the holy ghost. These three kinds of sins,
and the difference of every of the^ I intend by gods help severally to
declare unto you so shortly as I ca^, and so for this time commit you unto
god. And first consider well what sin is.

Sin is every wylful disobedience, act or deed, 1 Sin.
that is done contrary unto the law and commau^deme^tes of God, without
murmur, grudge or euel speaking other against the law, commandments or God
him self yt is the maker and giver of the law. As is Idolatry, supersticion,
perjury, swerynge unadvisedly, breakyng of the holy day, dishonoryng father
and mother, murder, malice, hatred, envy, wrath, strife, treason, sedicio^,
sclau^der, whordome, theft and such like.

Al these and such other are called, and are in deed sin, so long as the
doers of them do neither murmur, repyne, grudge nor speak euel agai^ste God or
his holy law, neither allow in their conscience the thing and euel yt they do,
but rather do utterly disalowe, accuse and co^de^pne in their own conscience
those their own damnable acts as euel and detestable. The second kind of
sin is Blasphemye, mark it well, and consider how it differs first from
sin, and tha^ from the sin against ye holy ghost

Blasphemy is more heinouse tha^ is sin alone, for all blasphemy is syn, 2
Blasphem.
but all sin is not blasphemy. For truth it is that blasphemy co^priseth in
it self both sin, and also a murmr, grudge, reuylynge, euel speaki^g,
sclau^der and reproach of god and godlynes, but it is always coupled with
ignorance and unbelief, and proceeds not of such obstinate malice as
continues to the end of the life, as does the sin against the holy ghost.
In this sin of blasphemy S. Paul offended before his conversion unto the
faith of Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 1
For thus he speaks of him self: Before, I was a blasphemer, and a
persecutour and a tyrant, but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in
unbelieve. Loo, here is it plain and evident, that this blasphemy though it be
a great offense, yet it is remissible and forgyueable, and is not excluded from
grace and mercy, because it proceeds of ignorance and not of knowledge, nor of
obstinate malice that does endure to the lives end. Neither is it the sin
unto death, and therefore we may lawfully pray for such blasphemers. 1. John.
5.
As S. John says: If any man se his brother sin a sin not unto death, let
him ask, and he shall give him life.

In this simple blasphemy (for so we may call it) many of the Jews offended,
taking Christ to be nothing less, than the son of David, or Messiah,
because his parents were very poor, and himself supposed to be but a poor
carpenters son, which bare but a simple port in the world. Yea and some of
them that crucified Christ were overwhelmed in this simple blasphemy. And
therefore Christ prayed for them saying: Luc. 23.
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. So Peter in his sermon
excused ye crucifiers of Christ, saying. Act. 3.
Now dear brethren I know that you have done it through ignorance. etc.
Repent you therefore and return, that your sins may be done away. So did
S. Steven also pray for his persecutours, Act. 7.
whom before he called styfnecked, adversaries of the holy ghost, traitors
and murderers of Christ. Doutlesse he would not have prayed for them so
earnestly, unless their sins had been forgeueable. And therefore their sin
and offense was no more but simple blasphemy.

The third kind of Sin, is blasphemy against the spirit.

3 Blasphemy against the spirit.
They commit blasphemy against the spirit, or sin against the holy ghost,
which willyngly, upon knowledge, and advisedly, contrary to their own
conscience do deny, forsake, impugn, sclau^der, revile, and persecute the
plain, open, manifest and known truth, styfly, maliciouslye and obduratly
perseueri^g and co^tinui^g without unfeigned repentance in that their wylfull
blyndnesse and obstinate malice so long as they live in this world. As did
Pharao, Saul, Herod, Judas the traitor, Iulianus apostata, Porphirius,
Hymeneus and Alexander the Copersmyth with other.

But mark this diligently: that we can not (as far as I can perceive)
certaynlye judge of these blasphemers against the spirit, before the time of
their departure out of this present life: because we can not certainly know,
whether at the end of their life they can repent and by faith return and take
hold of the mercy of God, Conictures are uncertain. Luc. 23.
or not.

We may conjecture, but we can not (as I suppose) certainly diffine of them.
Let us consider, that the these that hang on ye right hand of Christ, even at
the last hour repented, and with a strong and faithful prayer committed him
self wholly unto the mercy of Christ, and was saved. In consideracion whereof,
let us think it to be our bounden duty (as the prophets, Christ and his
Apostles did) to revoke and call back again open sinners and blasphemers to
earnest repentance for their own sinfulness, and to have a sure trust in
the mercy of God, and in the merit of Christ's passion and death, though
they be even at the departure out of this present life. For it is never to late
so long as life lasts. Let us therefore with al feruentnesse call upon them
and exhort them in any wise, with a good courage and a sure and vndoutful faith
ask, call and cry for Gods mercy, for his sweet son our savior Jesus
Christ's sake, and undoubtedly they shall have it. For sith the beginning of the
world hitherto was there never one that in faith asked mercy hertely, but he
had it, through the graciouse goodness of our aforesaid most merciful
Savior Jesus Christ, unto whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all
honor, laud and praise world with out end. Amen.

Yours at commandment to al his simple power Thomas Cottesforde.

1 Timothy 1.
Give all the honor laud and praise to God only. The prayer of Daniel turned
into meter and applied unto our time. Daniel. ix.
O Lord thou high and fearful God
By who^e al things does move
Thy mercyes great are sure to such
As thy precepts does love.
We sinful men have sore tra^sgrest
Against thy laws divine
Full frowardly we have fled back
From these precepts of thine.
Thy prophets dear to speak were
In setting forth thy name.
Both rych and poor as bold were bent pressed
For to gaynsaye the same.
To the therefore you Lord of hoostes
All justice does belong
To pour on us such shame and grefe
In this we have no wrong.
Our shame is great and due to al
Our flight is but in vain.
To tread strange lands our syn has sought
Our shame does still remain.
But though such shame a reward just
To al in common be
Yet mercy Lord and to forgive
Does still belong to thee.
In deed (o Lord) as for our selves
No less confess we can.
But that thy laws we set at naught
Much less have kept them than
Thy prophets spoke we would not hear
Ne of thee stand in awe
Strange plages from time to time we felt
For breaking of thy law,
The sorce whereof so fearsly bent
Was such as has not ben.
For all the plages in Moses law
Fell on this realm for sin.
And yet to the who made his suit
His path way so to gyde?
That flyeng vice might learn thy law
And therein to abide.
Wherefore thou saw al would not help
And could not hold thyn hand
But haste thy curse which now does fall.
Upon this synful land.
For as thou art a ryghteous God
Thy works do so appear
Co^sumyng such as scorn does take
Thy lovely voice to hear.
But yet (o lord) ye broughtest forth
Thy flock from Egypt land
Whereby thy name was largely spreb
So now stretch forth thine hand
But we have sinned more the^ they
Oh Lord yet stay thy rodd
As for this land was sometime thyn
And thou also our God.
Our sins and eke our fathers faults
This day to pass has brought
That al which border us about
They set us clean at naught.
Now tha^ (o Lord) hyd not thy face
Oh hear thy servants cry.
Behold thine house sometime full rich
How wast it does now lie.
Thy truth is fled, thy flock fast bound
As sheep led to be slain.
Thy fooes prevail and prosper much
Though myschefe they maintain.
And wylt not thou thy fooes confou^d
That thus thy works reprove?
At least yet for thy names sake
Their vile intentes remove.
For why, as for our own deserts
We can no such thing have.
It is for thy great mercies sake
That we such things do crave.
Forgive us Lord entreated be
To hear us make no stay
We bear thy name, it is thy cause
Oh Lord make no delay.
FINIS.

